As you can see the the the names
are still the same we're gonna
try to adjust those getting
feedback from folks at really
quick we're gonna have
introductions from members will
push until tomorrow along with
staffed is given that we're
starting a little bit late
that's okay
but we do have our budget books
this is something these state
here if you want to bring them
back if you want to take them
with you have to bring him back
and of course we have our
Our.
Sheets and slides in these are
for you to sort of take with you
with that let's go ahead
we're gonna go ahead and start
for our General Fund just
minutes.
with Mister Owen props the
cabinet secretary designate for
the department of finance
administration and as there are
questions that come up we'll
wait until the presenters have
have gone through their
presentations it'll be a lot of
information that's okay please
ask questions and we'll go
through things okay.
Mr secretary designate.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee and I apologize
if you can that microphone is
sometimes hard to pick up.
It's
on ever yeah.
We go up so I guess a little bit
on please speak up thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee as you know I'm going
Propst on the secretary
designate for the department of
finance and administration
twelve days on to the to on the
job it's a pleasure to be here
with you today and look forward
to working with each of you
throughout the upcoming.
session as I understand Mr
chairman you want us to begin
with the general fund of over
here which I believe begins on
page.
Getting in this.
Okay yes.
Thank you madam Mr chair and
members of the committee it's
pleasure to be here with you I'm
Stephanie Schardin Clarke and
the secretary of the taxation
and revenue department and
coming up I'm very proud to be
coming up on a four year
anniversary there and it's gone
by so fast so the outline for
the executive presentation that
secretary designate Propst and I
will be going through is on site
to I will be covering the
macroeconomic outlook for the US
and the New Mexico economies and
then just hitting a few quick
highlights about some of our
main revenue sources and then
I'll turn it over to secretary
designate props for the general
fund overview so you can think
of this presentation is sort of
what's going on in the macros
economy and how that then
results in the amount of revenue
that we forecast to have for the
state budget so just as a
reminder on slide three you can
see that this consensus revenue
forecast is the work product of
career economists classified
employees and four agencies of
of the state that's the
department of finance
administration taxation and
revenue department
transportation and the
legislative finance committee I
really just want to take a
moment to thank the members of
the consensus group for their
hard work on this testament
slide for has just some overview
information about what is
included in the baseline
forecasts that that went into
this estimate we subscribe as
the state's many Persico
subscription data services
including moody's analytics and
I. H. S. Markit and the
assumptions that come out of
their forecasts inform our
estimate just some high level
moody is when it comes to
interest rates the anticipated a
fifty basis point increase to
the federal funds rate in
December twenty twenty two and
that did occur they also
estimate another fifty twenty
five basis point increase in
January and of course that's the
fed using monetary policy to try
to cool the economy and prevent
a U. S. and global recession
let's see another high point
about the moody's forecast is
that it does not include a
recession in the US economy but
rather it include slower but
continued positive economic
growth you can contrast that
with IHS Markit on the bottom of
slide for I. H. S. markets
baseline forecast did include a
two quarter of mild US recession
so it's interesting that the two
main forecasting services for
the U. S. economy were split
about that one included a
recession when did not.
I decide I you can just see I'll
go through some of the state of
pretty quickly but I'm happy to
see to go back to it or slow
down for any questions you might
have
you can see on slide five a
snapshot of the U. S. GDP
history and projection can see
that the US economy emerged from
the deep dive it took at the
onset of the U. S. the pandemic
and there hasn't been a lot of
revisions since the July
forecast for from July to the
end of December the green and
the gray dotted lines are the
comparison of the two forecasts
and not much change there on the
next slide you can see the New
Mexico version of GDP with state
gross product and here there was
a large fairly large downward
shift in the forecast from July
to November but that wasn't the
that wasn't a result of
underlying weakness in the New
Mexico economy rather it was a
data revision made by the bureau
of economic analysis so that's
more just a data revision made
by federal agency that it is a
change in what's expected for
the New Mexico economy next
turning to employment on slide
seven you can see what's been
happening in what's projected to
occur with the U. S. non farm
employment again not much change
to that since the August
forecast the grey and green
lines overlap the U. S. economy
it exceeded pre pandemic
employment levels in quarter
three calendar year twenty two
and those job reports a job
growth reports continue to
exceed expectations every month
on the next slide slide eight
you can see the same data but
for New Mexico New Mexico it's
non farm employment growth
averaged just over two thousand
jobs two thousand ninety jobs in
calendar year twenty two per
month and is expected to grow by
two point eight percent in
calendar year twenty two then
tapering off somewhat to growth
of point eight percent in
calendar year twenty three and
twenty four
and again it's it's pretty
consistent with the last
forecast for.
A sign on slide nine we'll go
through this in detail but you
can see year over year
employment growth by sector in
the New Mexico economy in total
we added twenty five thousand
two hundred jobs from October
twenty one to October twenty two
and those employment gains were
across almost all sectors but
there were significant
employment gains in mining
construction leisure and
hospitality.
On slide ten we shift our
attention to unemployment rate
and you can see that the US
unemployment rate in blue there
peaked at a much higher level at
the onset of the Covid pandemic
but then came down pretty
dramatically and is nearing full
employment it was at three point
seven percent in November twenty
twenty two The New Mexico right
also was at four point three
percent those are both
like I said near full employment
and can and expected to remain
relatively stable over the
forecast period on slide eleven
we present data related to
inflation of course the fed has
taken a hawkish monetary policy
of increasing on the fed funds
rate which increases all
interest rates throughout the
economy to try to control
inflation and inflation does
seem to have peaked at about
nine percent coming down the
seven point eight percent at the
time the forecast was made and
it's continued it's it's
expected to continue to taper
down to about the two percent
range.
On the next slide slide twelve
you can kind of see the
different components of
inflation energy price inflation
has eased
food inflation continues to be a
driver but energy is is down
this detail there if you'd like
it now shifting to oil and
natural gas which of course is
the major driver of New Mexico's
revenue.
Ask it oil prices and the the
expectation for oil prices in
the forecast period are shown on
slide fourteen
these are of course inherently
volatile due to things that are
outside of New Mexicos control
oil prices are affected by
global demand US demand
decisions that are made by OPEC
participants hurricanes things
like that so but the the price
for oil is expected to come down
by about the for in the December
twenty twenty two estimate came
down by nearly five dollars per
barrel over the August estimate
so one of the highlights and one
of the big picture things to
consider is everything I've been
saying so far about the macro
economy is that I think changed
that much between August and
December.
Now I'm saying oil prices have
come down in a moment all state
oil production volumes are
coming up that is that's what's
driving the forecast change
versus August so while oil price
forecast is predicted to come
down by five point fifty per
barrel in FY twenty three and
two dollars per barrel in twenty
four we will see in a moment the
production is is at historic
levels and it is offsetting that
reduction in price.
So I'm to slide fifteen we again
we show oil prices up previously
now production so at the bottom
left hand table of of slide
fifteen you can see the revision
to the production forecast this
is an billion barrels so for FY
twenty for the budget year that
estimate was raised from six
hundred forty to six hundred and
sixty million barrels of New
Mexico oil production
reached five hundred and thirty
one million barrels in FY twenty
two which was the state record
the recount has consistently
been over a hundred barrels at
the time of this forecast I
think it was a hundred and four
it's been hovering around a
hundred of course the number of
rigs is a leading indicator of
future production.
I think I'll go to the next
slide but there's more detail
there You Like It
slide sixteen we turn our
attention to natural gas which
of course is another important
determinant of revenue natural
gas production increased to a
high of two thousand five
hundred eighty five B. C. F. for
FY twenty two and that was that
are very high average price of
seven dollars and three cents
per MCF
prices are expected to remain
elevated as is production.
next inside eighteen we'll talk
about what's going on with our
personal income tax based
another major contributor to
general fund revenue on the left
hand side you can we're
presenting quarterly year over
year comparison of withholding
withholding of course is an
important indicator because it's
a it's a indicator of salaries
that are actually going out to
workers week by week as their
employers remit withholding that
it's a great early indicator of
what's going on with personal
income tax revenue and of course
that's been rising significantly
over the the last four years FY
twenty three we just had quarter
one at the time the forecast is
made and and it was kind of off
the charts compared to the last
four years so withholding is
growing strongly
see I think I can skip over.
the other two charts on slide
eighteen there there there for
your reference
I can skip slide nineteen I
believe.
but it provides you some
information by sector
as for slide twenty week shift
to the forecast the outlook for
personal income tax in FY twenty
three rate is expected to grow
by three percent and that's
despite legislated income tax
cuts so that that three percent
growth would have actually been
stronger law had been the same
and so that's incredibly strong
growth
the forecast was increased a
hundred and five million over
the August twenty twenty two
forecast in FY twenty four it's
expected to contract by three
percent again that's not a
reflection of underlying
weakness in the New Mexico
economy it has to do with
implementation of legislative
tax cuts the working families
tax credit is increasing again
it's scheduled to be phased in
and then we have new exemptions
for social security and military
retirement benefits so those are
those are
contributing to that three
percent contraction and pet.
On slide twenty two we'll turn
our attention to gross receipts
tax from enrollment
again we have considerable
strength across the board in
this broad based tax
let's see internet sales have
have expanded the tax base in
recent years and continue to
push growth higher
we've are gross receipts tax
bases now again higher than it
was pre pandemic and the
revenues are can continue to be
positive despite the first.
Cut to the statewide G. R. T.
right in over forty years that
went into effect July first.
That of course is just driven by
strong retail demand yes
consumer demand savings
household savings being high and
slide twenty three there's a
snapshot for you of where our
our match to taxable gross
receipts that's our taxable
gross receipts base basically
I'm you can see where they are
by industry in which sectors are
contributing the highest amounts
I will go through that in detail
though.
slide twenty four gives you of a
snapshot of this important
relationship between the taxable
gross receipts tax base in Eddy
and Lea counties which of course
are the Permian basin and a
recount and and what's going on
with oil prices and really just
to emphasize the Tate
relationship changes to oil
price contribute to changes and
RigCount and then changes in
RigCount basically result in
taxable activity under the G. R.
T..
And as of the most recent data
Eddy and Lea counties are making
up now twenty two percent of the
state's total gross receipts tax
base which is much higher than
and not in past decades of the
gross receipts tax outlook as
shown on slide twenty five you
can see that the August twenty
two forecast had a significant
upward revision from August and
again the macroeconomic
conditions didn't change very
much but expectations for oil
production did and that is
leading to an increase in that
in the G. R. T. estimate so in
FY twenty three we expect here
T. to increase by eight point
seven percent I'm having to do
with continued strength in oil
and natural gas as long as as
well as recovery in the retail
sector and this again is despite
a one eighth percent cut to the
statewide tax rate we expect FY
twenty four to show a slight
decline
we do expect a mild that mild
contraction in G. R. T. to be
short lived and part of that is
the second one eighth percent
cut that's been enacted to the
statewide G. R. T. right.
Okay now turn our attention to
severance taxes and rents and
royalties all this energy
related revenue so it's like
twenty seven basically the take
away from this is as I'm sure
you're all familiar with these
five year averaging mechanisms
that are enacted in statute that
take windfall revenue when the
revenue this year exceeds the
five year average we
automatically take that windfall
take it out of the general fund
and put it in either the early
childhood education trust fund
or the tax stabilization reserve
to kind of save it for a rainy
day and try to keep a more
control of rate of growth in
general fund availability
basically you can see that we're
we're forecasting to get to a
point where the five year
average includes five years of
whom oil revenue and so those
mechanisms will no longer be
shifting significant amounts of
revenue from the general fund so
you can see that in these charts
the orange is the windfall to
coming off the top of the
General Fund going away and all
of the revenue staying in the
general fund.
On slide twenty eight just kind
of looking at that in a in
another way
during the forecast period the
emphasis is that those five year
averages
year after year they get a pre
boom here gets replaced with a
bit more and so the amounts that
will be taken off the top and
put in reserves of the trust
fund will be coming down.
And then last just to work on
the land grant permanent fund on
slide thirty
basically the land grant
permanent fund
is benefiting starting in FY
twenty four with this
constitutional amendment that
was enacted it increases the
distribution to the general fund
from the land grant permanent
fund by one point two five
percent of the L. G. P. F. five
year market value and so
LG PF transfers are estimated to
grow to eight hundred seventy
five million in FY twenty three
and then all the way to one
point one seven billion in FY
twenty four that's a as a result
not just of management of the
fund corpus an investment of it
but also that constitutional
amendment.
And with that I'll turn it over
to secretary does not Propst
Mr remembers a committee Emma
talk a little bit about the
change in our revenue forecasts
also talk briefly about our
reserve levels and then conclude
my part of this presentation
talking some about the stress
testing that we do as part of
this process starting on page
thirty two Mr chairman and
members of the committee this
information that you received
before and certainly has been
widely reported but the December
two thousand twenty two
consensus general fund forecast
has improved over the August
twenty two forecast by nine
hundred twenty eight million in
FY twenty three one point one
billion in FY twenty four and
one point two billion in FY
twenty five that's indicated by
the the charge right above the
bullet points in FY twenty three
to increase over August fourth
over the August forecast is
driven primarily by general
sales and income taxes while oil
and gas revenues are captured by
the excess transfers and for FY
twenty four the increase over
the August forecasts is driven
equally by general sales income
taxes and oil and gas revenues
the increased land grant
permanent fund transfer.
On page thirty three Mr Chairman
just a highlight a couple of
items on this order total
recurring you'll see that over
FY twenty three the total
recurring revenue increased by
eleven point four percent FY
twenty four eleven point three
percent average projected at
eleven point three percent and
FY twenty five a projected eight
point one percent and then all
the last two bullet points on
the slide Mr chairman I'll cover
in December in the December
twenty two forecast FY twenty
three over FY twenty to sixty
percent sixty six percent of the
recurring general fund revenue
increase comes from direct oil
and gas revenue and in the
December twenty two forecast FY
twenty four and twenty three
over twenty three sixty percent
of that recurring general fund
revenue increase comes from
direct oil and gas revenues.
On page the slide thirty four Mr
chairman and members of the
committee you'll see that
it in FY twenty two general fund
recurring revenue increased by
nineteen point one percent over
FY twenty one.
And in that period in FY twenty
two general fund reserves were
estimated at three point two
percent to billion or forty
three point three percent that's
the reserve number Mr Chairman
FY twenty three the recurring
revenues is estimated to
increase by eleven point four
percent or one point one billion
over FY twenty two and the
reserves are estimated at five
roughly five billion dollars or
sixty percent sixty point five
percent of recurring
appropriations of course this is
not taken into account any
actions that you'll take during
the upcoming legislative session
and finally in FY twenty four
the general fund recurring
revenue is forecasted to grow by
eleven point three percent or
one point two billion verses FY
twenty three that leaving the
the big number that we've all
been thinking and talking about
of the projected three point six
billion in new money for FY
twenty four I would know Mr
chairman members of the
committee that the executive has
recommended a thirty five
percent reserve figure for FY
twenty four.
FY I to slide twenty five
generally covers some of the
information previous slide so I
don't don't think I'll spend a
lot of time on this and I'll go
ahead and talk a little bit as I
mentioned about reserves and can
cover this in a slightly for
slightly but you'll see the the
graph of indicating of the the
reserves FY twenty two general
fund reserve balances are three
point two billion or as I
mentioned forty three point
three percent of recurring
appropriations and again
estimated FY twenty three
general fund reserve balances
are five billion dollars is
sixty point five percent of
recurring appropriations.
Course Mr chairman and members
of the committee we are all
familiar that there are risks to
any.
Forecast
in a previous job I had serving
as executive director of public
employees retirement association
we often came before this
committee with actuarial
projections and I always said
that the one thing you can be
sure about any actuarial
projections that is going to be
wrong that is probably true
about any forecast we may can
certainly new forecast goes out
but we do know that there are
risks to the numbers that we are
providing to you today there are
of course geopolitical risks
such as the Ukraine Russian
conflict Services secretary
Schardin Clarke mentioned with
the feds policy on interest
rates there are there is a risk
that perhaps they will step to
firmly on the break which could
result in economic consequences
including a recession of course
we all are aware well aware of
the volatility of oil prices and
and need to be cognizant of that
but they're also upsides
Mr chairman and members of the
committee that we should also
please be aware of the labor
market is performing a to a
large extent better than
expected
we've seen some softening of
inflation over the last couple
of months
and there is are there are some
who believe that it is possible
that the fed could still
engineer what is referred to as
a soft landing.
On page
thirty eight again
from moody's there are some of
the things that could go wrong
I'm not going to spend too much
time on this because I prefer to
focus on things the possibly
could go right but we do a fair
amount of stress testing as I
mentioned throughout this
process I think it's very
important for us to look at
scenarios that are both positive
and negative and that is
reflected on on slide thirty
nine we have three scenarios an
upside scenario a moderate
recession scenario and a low oil
price scenario I believe the low
oil price and there is is based
roughly on oil being in the mid
thirties a lot of recession
scenario as I understand it is
because based on the oil being
in the mid sixties this stress
test illustrates how far
revenues could fall under
prolonged economic downturn.
Under the low oil price scenario
the general fund revenues could
fall from the baseline of three
hundred ninety nine million in
FY twenty three.
and one point six billion in FY
twenty for procurement of the
losses of two billion dollars
through FY twenty four again
that's on the low price
scenario of course New Mexico
revenue as sensitivity to an
energy downturn a national
recession events highlight the
need for the state to maintain a
healthy reserve levels.
General fund trends on slide
forty Mr chairman and members of
the committee the trend the
streamlined illustrated here
straits how far revenues have
deviated from the ten year
trend.
For FY twenty three general fund
revenues are above the ten year
trend by one point six billion
for the budget year FY twenty
four they're above they deviate
from the trend by two point five
billion and New Mexico's general
fund revenue average growth rate
is a six Mexico's overall
general fund growth rate is six
percent from two thousand and
thirteen to two thousand twenty
two C. really see that the
deviation in the coming years of
forecast.
Of slide forty one I think is
pretty much covered and with
that Mr chairman I think I'll
I'll stop there and
We can proceed from there thank
you very much it is a profs Mr
thought as our chief economist
and members of the committee
I'll be speaking to this brief
has money matters at the top and
there's two of them I'll speak
to the one that says general
fund consensus revenue estimate.
And I know we are running a
little behind on time and
secretaries did a great job of
covering much of the material so
I'll be brief starting on page
one as a secretary designate
property mentioned that the
bottom line of these revenue
estimates are shown in the table
here at the top of this page in
that ten color so nine point six
seven billion in twenty two ten
point seven seven in twenty
three and almost twelve billion
in FY twenty four I think you
could be helpful to provide a
little context as to what's
driving the growth in these
revenue numbers and so to do
that if I could draw your
attention to the graph at the
bottom right hand corner of this
page and their two columns here
this is representing the
contributions to the growth in
any given fiscal year so in FY
twenty three the growth over
twenty two in FY twenty for the
growth over twenty three and
starting that FY twenty three
growth column you'll notice
pretty quickly here that the
largest contributors are the red
and purple bars those
Representative severance taxes
and rents and royalties or oil
and gas related revenues that
makes up well over half of the
growth in FY twenty three and
another big chunk there is gross
receipts tax in the dark blue
gross receipts tax is highly
correlated with and driven by
oil and gas activity in Eddy and
Lea counties so we know that the
gross receipts tax just like
those severance taxes and rents
and royalties is is a reliance
revenue for the state of the
industry and highly volatile so
combined we know that about more
than eighty percent of our
revenue growth in FY twenty
three is being driven from
volatile revenue sources and we
see a similar story in FY twenty
four again the red and purple
bars there severance taxes rents
royalties either oil gas oil and
gas related revenues but the
green bar here contributing to
growth in FY twenty four is in
the interest or investments that
the state makes a large chunk of
that as a secretaries mention is
coming from the early childhood
amendment the additional one
point two five percent
distribution from the land grant
permanent fund and the remainder
there is actually coming from
intricate increased investment
returns from the state
treasurer's office assuming that
the.
Interested buyer maybe hold
state so this is another
volatile revenue sources if the
fed changes directions we could
see this revenue changes well so
again over eighty percent of our
revenue growth in FY twenty four
coming from pretty volatile
sources.
If you'll turn I'll skip over
some of this
if you'll turn to page three.
This is something that we also
have a close eye on as the
consensus revenue estimating
group and especially at LFC The
New Mexico labor force
participation rate this is the
graph at the bottom here you can
see that New Mexico's labor
force participation hasn't
really picked up to its pre
pandemic levels even or
employment has
New Mexico's labor force
participation rate as sitting
around fifty six percent
significantly lower than the
national rate of sixty two
percent and still almost two and
a half percent below our pre
pandemic level so we have fewer
people re entering the workforce
than before and our employment
is surging in and that's
creating a really tight labor
market here in New Mexico and
contributing to to growing wages
which is also contributing to
higher personal income tax
collections.
If you'll turn to the next page
Talk a little bit about oil and
gas the chart here the graph in
the middle on the left here is
really what I'd like to point
out to you all this is the
fortunate position in New Mexico
finds itself in being the only
major oil producing state in the
country that has not only
recovered to its pre pandemic
levels but is growing work over
forty percent from our pre
pandemic levels of oil
production in the state Texas is
still down five and a half in
North Dakota over a quarter.
Now for those of you who were
there in December you'll
remember I mentioned that oil
and gas prices were my biggest
concern out of that revenue
estimate because of the
fluctuations in the volatility
we've seen involved mainly
natural gas at the time I
believe twenty twenty two is the
highest year on record for
volatility when it comes to
natural gas prices we've seen
that continue in the first part
of this year with natural gas
prices plummeting significantly
and all again get into that here
shortly but as secretary
Schardin Clarke mentioned prices
have remained pretty stable for
oil natural gas on the other
hand we had estimated a an
average annual price of about
seven dollars and twenty three
FY twenty three and I sixteen FY
twenty four we're seeing those
come down from those levels that
we expected in December.
Alternatively though if you turn
to the next page this is oil and
gas production as secretary
Schardin Clarke mention our
production continues to beat our
expectations as I mentioned in
December of we have some
analysis suggesting that about
eighty right active rigs in New
Mexico will lead to increased
production we've maintained over
a hundred so our production
levels are continuing to rise
you know as that analysis would
suggest.
call quickly move on the gross
receipts tax here that's also
exhibiting a lot of volatility.
In the first quarter of FY
twenty three we saw gross
receipts tax growth almost
twenty one percent year over
year so significant growth in
gross receipts tax if you turn
to page six.
there's a table here in the
middle of the page showing
what's contributing to that
growth in gross receipts tax and
of course you see at the top of
this table here's mining oil and
gas extraction that's the
largest contributor to gross
receipts tax the year over year.
And another way to cut that or
to slice it is to look at these
pie charts here at the bottom of
the page on page six in FY
twenty three we estimate two
thirds of our gross receipts tax
growth will be coming from Eddy
and Lea counties by FY twenty
four we expect that to be almost
three quarters or almost seventy
five percent.
So as that industry goes so does
R. G. R. T. so word of caution
there if you'll turn to page
seven.
These are another way to depict
the five year average is the
secretary Schardin Clarke was
mentioning hi I would like to
draw your attention to the graph
at the bottom here this is New
Mexico oil production by land
ownership and we've seen a
dramatic rise in the federal
share of New Mexicos oil
production and that actually
means more revenues into the
general fund because of
production on state land or in
the state royalty and that goes
to the land grant permanent fund
unlike that production on
federal land is a royalty that
ends up in the general fund so
that increases our general fund
exposure to oil and gas
production swings so that's
something to note.
If you'll turn all skip here.
To page nine.
something that the secretaries
didn't cover is the general fund
reversions here at the top of
page nine.
So I general fund reversion
isn't as you all know is when it
appropriation is may twenty ten
C. in general anything that is
not spent is reverted to the
general fund.
Prior to twenty seventeen we
might have expected that to be
around fifty million dollars a
year more recently since twenty
nineteen maybe seventy five
million dollars a year but in FY
twenty two we saw reversions
page three hundred and ten
million dollars which is you
know significant growth in a
large chunk of that is coming
from one time federal funds but
when you take that out we we
estimate that the general fund
reversions about two hundred and
seventy million dollars a still
significant growth over the
previous years and that
indicates to us that agencies
may have had some difficulty in
ramping up spending with the
increases in appropriations that
you all have made so this is
something that the group is
going to watch closely going
forward.
if if we'll turn to page eleven.
I just want to point out another
no.
Secretary designate props to
mention the stress testing which
of course we spend a lot of time
on and we see the upside there
up to six hundred million in six
hundred fifty million in one
year and the downside two point
five billion the real risk here
coming from low oil prices
although I will mention that a
lot of our national forecasters
are signaling that a recession
has a growing probability so
that's certainly a possible
outcome as well and you can see
that Representative in the S.
three economic downside column
in the middle of the table on
this page I do want to point out
that as secretary designate
props mentioned the general fund
difference from the baseline
this is the light blue line at
the top of this table has about
four hundred million dollars to
two point seven billion dollars
in potential decreases the
Revenue should a low oil price
scenario occur that's only to
the general fund as secretary
Schardin Clarke mention those
five year averages are shrinking
and those protect us in the in
the event of a downturn and as
those shrink over time will
expect that the protection is
going to shrink as well so
you'll see that seventy percent
of the losses in FY twenty three
or actually experienced by a
decrease transfer don't reach
the general fund in other words
so over time is that five year
average shrinks that protection
will shrink as well and the
stress test will get bigger and
bigger and and I don't suggest
you know higher reserves over
time.
help with the move on here to.
let's see here what's another.
To cover all I'll cover on page
twenty one.
Just skip ahead with me.
I just want to point out both of
these charts the general fund
revenue in appropriation growth
you can see the roller coaster
ride that we've been on over the
last twenty years but you can
also see the growing reliance of
the general fund on the oil and
gas industry in the chart at the
bottom the dotted line shows how
reliant the general fund would
be if there were no transfers
from the five year average the
secretary Schardin Clarke
mentioned and as you can see
that's diminishing as well as
solid red line shows where the
general fund's reliance is
currently at that's growing to
almost forty percent by FY
twenty four.
Okay that covers that brief but
I do want to speak a little bit
and quickly to the second money
matters brief it has the title
of the top general fund revenue
tracking report.
And we're between revenue
estimates right now we did one
in December and we're currently
working on one now but in
between these revenue estimates
we don't want to leave you on
the dark as to where what's
happening with the revenues and
so all three of our agencies
actually produce these revenue
tracking reports and we take
monthly account of the incomes
that that's coming into the
state and you can find us on our
website of course we're happy to
provide this to you individually
as well there's a lot of good
narrative in here that provides
context as to what's happening
with revenues but I'd really
like to draw your attention to
page three.
I'm sorry page for.
In on page four here we see if
oil and gas.
Price and production tracking we
try to include these in our
monthly revenue reports as
they're obviously very relevant
to the discussion the blue line
shows where we'd estimate oil
production would be in December
you can see those last couple of
months are well over that are
exceeding those production
estimates and I'm speaking to
the top to drugs there so both
oil and gas exceeding our
December expectations for
production but if you look at
the gas prices and oil prices in
the chart below again those
solid lines where we thought we
do in December the dotted lines
were currently tracking you can
see gas well below where we
thought in December so it would
be
easy to assume and and a valid
assumption that these are sort
of offsetting in revenues as
production climbs would have
higher revenues but as prices
fall those offset to some
degree.
And if you'll turn to the last
page of this hand out it looks
like this table right here it
kind of makes your eyes cross so
we help you or give you some
hints as to how you can read
this more effectively the column
on the far right says dollar
difference and what this is a
calculating for you is the
current revenues and whether
they're above or below where we
thought we would be in December
so if you go line by line here
in that last call you'll see
gross receipts tax nineteen
point one million so are Chris
receipts tax collections are
currently nineteen million
dollars higher than where we
thought we'd be in December and
all on down the line so you know
insurance is low a personal
income taxes much higher than
where we thought we being in
December corporate income is low
you'll see oil and gas is about
on track and and the bottom line
their in the pink where we think
we are compared to December more
or less within a percent.
And so if you all ever have
questions on this or or would
like us to talk to you more
about it I'm sure anyone of us
would be happy to.
With that ladies question Mr
chair thank you very much thank
you to the three of you you went
through quickly but I think very
with great detail let's go
straight to committee questions
we're gonna start with
Representative Chatfield.
Here.
Thank you Mr I'd like to go back
to the first presentation I
think of consensus digit general
fund revenue outlook.
And on pages seven eight nine.
I'm just I'm just looking at the
employment numbers but it's easy
for me to understand when you go
to zero and your rate of growth.
Can be pretty pretty good pretty
fast
it's also easy for me to
understand that unemployment
rates who at a certain point one
persons no longer looking for a
job your unemployment rates all
automatically drop off but what
I'm looking one of these pages
show that we had total
employment that exceeded pre
pandemic levels.
And
So I I know that almost every
restaurant you go to they're
they're looking for workers they
can they have no one working in
there is a lot of them cut their
hours because they don't have
workers some of them have closed
their doors because they don't
have workers one of my children
has a construction building
company he can't find workers I
know this shows a demand for
labor but I don't know whether
I'm confused for their working
mothers working in the oil
industry and then I I looked
also at the
workforce.
Participating right in it it
shows to be in down so the
participation rate is down but
the total numbers of people
working is up just your thoughts
on that and had and help help me
get my mind around a little bit.
Mr chair and representative
Chatfield I'll happily take a
stab at it and and if Mr Taurus
wants to add to that's great
you're exactly right that you
know the unemployment rate as a
percentage excludes those who
have fallen out of the workforce
because they're no longer
participating and as Mr Taurus
highlighted New Mexico's labor
force participation rate is
still lower than pre pandemic
and tends to be lower than the
national average in general and
it is a tight labor market
between health concerns and
child care of inviolability and
off a whole host of reasons that
are keeping people out of the
work force that's not just in
New Mexico problem but it it's
national and it's here and I
think that goes for a lot of
industry you mentioned you know
where the workers working where
the jobs created
this is the state is getting a
little outdated but on slide
nine you can see year over year
from October twenty twenty one
to twenty two
let's say we created in total
twenty five thousand two hundred
jobs in New Mexico of those
twenty seven hundred were in
mining fifty eight hundred
construction and you know you
can see exactly where they were
and we can update the state of
for the committee by a couple
months of that be helpful
because it it's fair to say that
a good number of those workers
are actually in the oil industry
coal and gas industry when you
say mining arts.
That's all and gas that's
correct and.
The last question is
New Mexico is forty seven
percent public land or photo you
know federal and state land not
necessarily public land
So I know where the state the
Representative oil and gas
revenue from State Land goes and
we kind of deal that process all
time what percentage of the
federal revenues.
Comes in back to the general
fund.
From the fifth Mr Chairman
representative Jack fields up
fifty percent so revenues
generated on federal land or
split when the productions in
New Mexico for royalty for
example fifty about fifty
percent of the state.
Thank you Mr that's the.
As a good answer there you thank
you very much Representative
Chatfield next we're gonna go to
representative on to.
Thank you Mr chairman several
questions you mentioned the.
Tax revenue going off I thought
I read somewhere to where the
population is decreasing our
state that's making up for that
revenue going up is that the oil
and gas or what is it.
Mr chair and representative
Sanchez that's correct I haven't
looked at the the population
growth estimate for this
estimate but it's it's in the
appendices but yeah population
is is not growing significantly
but it's and and oil prices are
down but oil production is up
that's the main driver to the
money that's been added to this
forecast.
Yeah that's what my second
question Mr chairman
you mentioned that prices are
going down but productions going
up so the net is higher my next
question I think we heard about
G. R. T. cuts.
what about the long term
forecasts for oil and gas how
are you seeing in the two if we
do make those costs.
Thank you for calling Mr chair
Representative Sweetser in the
LFC brief the thicker one if
you'll turn to page fourteen.
The
second.
Fourteen.
Have a oil and gas outlook.
And the consensus revenue
estimating group conducted a
long term outlook in I believe
June of last year this is what
the analysis suggested and and
what a lot of national
forecasters that we consult with
suggest the graph here at the
top shows that we expect those
revenues will climb in the near
term will plateau in the medium
term before declining in the
long term.
Mr Chairman all what tax
changes.
The rate beneficial for small
business that we're talking
about and economic development.
I have I start Mr chairman and
Representative Sweetser so it's
it's certainly business friendly
but also consumer friendly that
we've cut the statewide G. R. T.
for the first time and and as I
said before over forty years we
had a twenty percent cut go into
effect July first twenty twenty
two another one percent cut is
taking effect July first twenty
twenty three and I know when we
talk and an eighth of a percent
it doesn't sound like much but
there's there's no getting
around each eighth percent find
about a hundred and five million
dollars a tax relief that shared
by all New Mexico businesses and
consumers and I I certainly
think will be looking at
proposals to further reduce the
statewide G. R. T. right this
session but a more targeted tax
relief that that is is exciting
that is very business friendly
is the pyramid in reduction
proposal that the governor
outlined in her state of the
state address this is a business
to business services deduction
that would basically remove
pyramid ng on services New
Mexico is gross receipts tax one
of the things that makes us
unique and and not a good way is
a you know compared to other
states have a sales tax the
sales tax is mostly just tax
goods not services but because
we're taxing Services on one
hand it's a very good thing we
have a broader base that makes
our our tax more stable but we
can pyramid and Tax upon a tax
upon a tax when businesses sell
services to one another so that
we between those two proposals
in the G. R. T. that's what I
would highlight.
All up there with a few
questions about how we're Mr
chairman please
One of the largest tax
expenditures in law what do you.
What's affecting us on to grow
our economy and working families
to have the jobs like I know
we're talking about
Spending this excess money we
have how is that gonna help
Go jobs and the economy
I'm Mr chairman and
representative I can find your
tax expenditure report as soon
as I get back to my office today
but the biggest tax expenditures
are
Are ones that there are very
strong cases to have in the
books in New Mexico and my
opinion you know we always hear
this this tagline in New
Mexico's tax code is like Swiss
cheese right it's full of holes
we should melted down and get
rid of those but when you
actually look at the tax
expenditures that for go of
significant amount of revenue
we're talking about the food tax
deduction you know whether or
not to tax prescription drugs in
oxygen
the film tax credit is there at
the working families tax credit
in the low income comprehensive
tax credit those are incredible
poverty reduction tools that are
putting money back in the
pockets of our lowest income
working families so when you
look at where the real money is
if we wanted to raise revenue by
Rick you know getting rid of tax
expenditures there's not a lot
on that list another one is the
exemption of G. R. T. for
nonprofits you know it's there's
another good I would say Public
Service argument by not charging
the G. R. T. and then those are
the ones that are the largest Mr
Chairman representative I just.
People with the binding on page
yeah Spiegel into the yes I
thank you Mr chair
representative such as in your
LFC find it following three page
seven has all the tax
expenditures from the tax
expenditure report.
And.
That's right there page seven
has the mall they're listed for
you in order of cost by five
year average and just you know
food and medical deduction is
always the highest license
hospital fifty percent your
deduction the film tax credit
and so on.
Representative at the.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
room Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
the presentation as we've been
going to the internment and
getting update on everything
receipts of the what changes
I just want to go back and it
might touch on some of the
things that Representative
Sanchez is talking about
we're getting these updates Mr
chair we're talking about.
The salary growth.
and and the sectors that it's
there are affected there and
then we're talking about of
reference back to Representative
Chatfield and some of the
sectors and industries that we
see with it we don't have.
The jobs are being filled and
yet we're looking at and we look
at government.
Positions and jobs and we're not
able to fill those jobs what is
that what what what what what is
the driver to those to us trying
to.
Find help for our state for
state government or local
governments in filling those
jobs and those wages are going
up and we don't have a minimum
wage that's that some high
enough to keep those government
professionals.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and and Representative
You know I think that after the
COVID pandemic in so many ways
we see that our economy is
searching for equilibrium again
in the labor market is is
certainly not immune to that
we've got inflation rising the
costs to live we've got
inflation you know of wages
trying to keep pace
We cannot find it labor force
equilibrium until the wages
match you know how people value
their own time and so I think I
think we're so we're naturally
seeing wages come up whether it
be in you know fast food or
public sector or in any any any
secretary and it's just taking
time for that to reach the
collaboration but.
When at the all actually a
little bit Mr chair
representative you know we just
rising is secretary Schardin
Clarke mentioned are really at a
function of supply and demand
and and our labor force
participation is low so the
supply of labor is low the
demand for labour's hi and
that's causing those increase
prices and so there's a couple
ways to resolve that the federal
reserve attempting to do so
through the demand side raising
interest rates to cool demand to
lower wages or to lower wage
growth F. but the supply side
you know there's no silver
bullet there but if you can
encourage more people to to
rejoin the labor force certainly
that could help as well.
Thank you Mr and then I'll go
back to the point where our
population growth is is in
effect as well with all this and
how we're putting this all
together I mean this this is
actually the functionality of
what we're trying to do as
provided legislators with this
bucket of money so to speak of
what we have right now these
revenues and then I'm going to
reference page nine.
And the.
The money matters report this.
And we're looking at FY twenty
two and the amount of money that
was.
I mean these things are adding
up so to speak Mr chair making
our job now making me and should
make all this question how we
are going to be appropriating
And spending money in this this
year's budget this this fiscal
year's budget I I just I'm just
trying to put this all together
our spring food for thought out
there like this this to me is a
huge determine determinant of
what we're doing right now and
through the purpose of the funds
and everything that we're
creating right now so I just I
know it's more of a COVID Mr
chair but this this this as a
lot right here and I just want
to thank you for all your work
and and
This just this is makes it a
little harder for us we're going
to look at legislation we are
looking at minimum wage
increases and we're putting all
this together we're gonna look
for you to for that some of
those answers and that helps
appreciate the time thank you Mr
chair thank you very much of
them hunt Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman under
stress test on page thirty nine.
The question is from the worst
scenarios to the to this
scenario them and thousand
twenty three.
The fifty four percent
difference on the best to the
worst of people that number.
Mr chairman and members the
committee and representative
Garcia eight upon us but I think
I will to is the since it was
more involved with or for up to
and I'm sorry Mr chairman I
didn't introduce our the state's
economist Dr Lee they'll gado
who also participates in the
consensus revenue group and M.
and R. is the ability to better
answer.
Mr does and then drive to a Mr
Chairman representative Garcia
we use these alternate scenarios
provided by moody's specifically
but we also use some other we
also consult with rice and other
industry groups the I'm not sure
which one you're referencing but
Milton done two thousand twenty
three from it is twenty four
percent on proposing twenty
three and put down twenty five
seventy eight percent of the
fifty four percent different
that's right thank you my
question is how can we come up
with such a disparity from.
One twenty next from the final
questionnaire over to this
scenario there's a big disparity
how can we adjust for that if it
does happen.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia it's a little confusing
here that's not actually the
difference from the general fund
those percent that you're
looking at is the amount of the
change that is absorbed by the
transfer to the early childhood
Trust Fund so you so you're the
gap on the general fund is going
to be small a lot smaller than
that but you're right you you
all in hopes of preparing for
every scenario the reserves are
really your best tool I mean all
thanks for that answer Mr chair
but you know it's.
What I'm reading is what I'm
reading in all that's what you
put in the paper here that's a
fifty four percent of change and
if you look at the all three of
them.
At the end of the day if the
forty two percent different time
on all three of them.
And you can answer the question
Mr chair of the two more
questions
W. you mentioned a plus or minus
on forecast what about plus or
minus how much is a plus how
much of the money on on on the
revenues coming in.
Mr secretary the can you give it
thank you and thank you great
questions of some Garcia at
secretary doesn't produce if you
can sort of talk about the
upside and the downside that you
went through in a little bit
more detail please and you don't
have to get a lot of people is
one of basically we're out on
this because.
That's Mr chairman again if I
may allow doctors out of.
Walking through this chart I
think it's in this chart is
information Representative is
looking for.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman and representative
Garcia that some a great
question and just to get back
real quick on the prior answer
the answer is you gave you on
those percentages that's the
share of
those transfers so is an answer
was spot on just to confirm that
real quick and now in in regards
to the scenarios these are
alternative scenarios provided
by moody's analytics and so we
based our baseline forecast on
their baseline scenario which
they describe as.
The most likely outcome for the
economy the upside the the
Science Center presented here
would be scenario in which the
national economy and the state
economy performs slightly better
than the baseline the moderate
recession scenario and the low
oil price scenario have certain
conditions where moody's
analytics constructed those
hypothetical scenarios in the
moderate recession scenario the
decline employment the reduce of
gross domestic product consumer
spending as well as decreasing
the employment and increasing
the unemployment rate and that's
that's some of the at a high
level some of the major inputs
that are changed to construct
these alternative scenarios for
the low oil price scenario that
one specifically moody's shocks
a lot of the Energy variables as
secretary probes mentioned.
In a low oil price near moody's
depresses prices oil prices down
to the mid thirty dollars per
barrel for a significant period
of time and so some of the some
some of those I hope at context
your question in terms of what
the upside the moderate and low
oil price scenario are in the
stress test Mr chair it does you
know I'd like to sit down with
you.
In order to of respect for time
into a little more detail so I
can understand what's going on
was a big hello my question Mr
chair of perfume madam
secretary.
How much is your outstanding G.
R. tease of their the have been
collected on.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia I'm not I want to
clarify.
To clarify the question are use
sort of talking about the tax
gap of what might be owed versus
what's been collected is how
well how much money is rolled to
the state of New Mexico from
people not being objective right
yeah
our accounts receivable balance
I'll have to get back to an
exact number I it's over a
billion dollars that doesn't
that's across all tax program so
not just G. R. T.
and that doesn't necessarily.
To put that number in context I
want to say that are we have an
audit function that makes
assessments of tax do and we
have a collection function that
collect on that and the tax due
and technologically our audit
function is much more efficient
and automated and but it's more
mature technology so taxed Rev
right now is more mature and
making assessments than we are
at making collections and our
our collection staff has also
been of sideline to doing things
like issuing rebates and and
things like that so the accounts
receivable balance does continue
to grow I could try to break out
how much of that is in G. R. T.
versus other programs but.
The quick answer tributary one
of of more of more of COVID than
anything else why does the state
of New Mexico way five or six
years to collect money from
people in rules Mr Dees but then
they collected the interest in
the judicial high can
participate in.
Then you can answer the question
you streamline it down by
technology but that's that's a
big issue.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia I'm not sure that I can I
don't know that I can agree with
the premise of the question I I
don't know that we do wait five
or six years there is certain
programs like the property tax
for example we get the
delinquent property tax rules
three years after they're done
and that's when we statutorily
can begin collecting but I
assure you that we work with
taxpayers as much as we can to
voluntarily and collect from
them and collect the hard way if
that's the path they choose to
the best of our ability I don't
know that we ever do really wait
five or six years but the thank
you Mr chair another secretary I
could show you proof of that if
you need you know what what I
want to agree to disagree or
anything at this point here but
those are issues that are there
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I forgot
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
making all this complicated
stuff so translated bull and
just a salute to a state
economist's it's just incredible
so thank you every department
has incredible kind of just one
quick question when you look at
the percentage you say the lower
percentage entering the labor
force how much do we know about
people choosing to go
entrepreneurial get the consider
Education Committee were
starting to stress more that
entrepreneurial aspect the self
employment are you able to look
at that accurately.
Or estimated accurately.
One of the.
Mr chair and representative Gary
if they are self employed they
are captured as being
participating in the labor force
they would be counted even
potentially as an employee.
Okay thank you.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Garrett next to
Representative.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for this presentation.
Chairman I think I want to go
back over a couple of the other
questions of the board of
finance and at with respect to
permitting.
Can we talk about what the
potential revenue impact would
be.
Your many bills to be passed
sure
Mr chair and representative had
a group
I'm working on with staff an
update to the pyramid in bill
right now that reflects the
December estimate the August
estimate of the cost of that
bill would be seventy two
million dollar impact to the
state and about forty nine
million to local revenue but
that should grow somewhat
because as you just saw the G.
R. T. estimate has grown over
the August estimate so round up
a bit from those figures and
we're working on the FIR for
that bill currently.
Thank you very much chairman
thank you very much Secretary
for that answer I I I am excited
to look at with the permitting
bill looks like and then it's
been being pushed for
Republicans on and off for over
ten years now so I'm glad the
governors on board with that.
Chairman and.
in anybody will take this one.
With respect to gas prices being
as volatile as of this.
What would your production B.
and stabilizing some of those
prices within.
And I understand we look at the
global market on a whole bunch
of this.
This natural gas was was defined
as a renewable.
How would that stabilize.
Gas prices.
And solidify.
So will solidify the production
of that.
Well I'll take a first stab at
it but I'd love to hear from the
two chief economist that are
here today Mr chairman and
Representative Pettigrew
natural gas although it is
impacted by global markets
especially with liquid natural
gas and the potential for
shipping and things like that
that's come into play in the
last years it is more of a
regionally priced commodity you
know it's affected by things
like pipeline capacity and with
the oil boom that we're seeing
in the Permian basin natural gas
to sort of automatically comes
up when you produce oil and so
the where it used to be that
there was oil production and
there was natural gas in
different parts of the state
really a lot of what's driving
natural gas now is also oil and
so I I don't know if a short of
like commodity hedging or things
like that I don't know that
there's anything we can do to
stabilize the production it's
always going to be affected by
things outside of the state's
control but what we should be
looking to do is look at ways to
transform that volatile revenue
stream into a more manageable
you know like we've done with
these five year average is that
I think those of left the state
in a much stronger position than
we were a decade ago and we
should continue to look for
things that can make today money
transform it into tomorrow money
as well.
Chairman thank you and thank you
secretary for that answer I
think you just hit on exactly
what I was trying to drive drive
to with respect to that.
Making natural gas which is
burning fuel.
I wouldn't consider renewable
that would change its value in
the marketplace I'm not
suggesting in any way that we're
going to be able to control
production I get that we know
that the San Juan basin those
major natural gas we know that
there's areas within the Permian
depending on which chef here and
Where you're at
you get a certain amount of of
natural gas with with each
barrel of oil.
So with respect to that I'm not
I'm not even talking about the
production side I'm talking
about setting a standard that
makes it a purchasable and
usable.
Value when you're looking at
your carbon for.
Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew that that's an
interesting question I by
definition because the commodity
that severed from
the land I'm not sure about re
classifying as the renewable for
value purposes but we we could
look into that.
Mr chair.
When understanding the question
is by allowing it to be
considered renewable maybe there
would be additional demand for
that in the production of
electricity or so forth if I
understand the question
correctly I don't know that
there is sufficient demand in
New Mexico already as a state
that is a major energy exporter
that that could make a
significant impact on prices but
as a chief of all the mentioned
would be happy to look into that
for the chairman and and.
Our presenters I appreciate that
I'd be interested to see.
If on a regional basis that had
any impact when in California
maybe that natural gas
renewable.
And so I appreciate that and
I'll continue to look at that as
well.
Seven of the form we talk of a
gentleman we talked about New
Mexico oil and gas production by
land ownership we see the rise
from twenty.
From twenty nineteen through
twenty twenty two with respect
to federal use versus state.
Here is the full value of like
to speak to the difficulty
that's happened over the last
two years almost three now with
respect to state permitting.
First system rural fermenting
and if you really feel like are
we it.
Is that to driving for force in
your opinion or is there another
driving force because the
timeline to get a state permit
the substantial compared to
where it was three years ago.
Not as hard as what it is on the
federal which is substantial
already as it is to.
Mr chairman Representative
Pettigrew that that's a good
question and the timeline and
the return for permits would
certainly have an impact on on
on our producers choices
With with respect to the federal
and
there there is a a bit of a
shift in terms of producers
producing more on federal land
which is why you see the shares
increasing here but the I would
say there are multiple factors
that influence that there's the
well economics the it creates
that the producers are already
developing in New in addition to
the timelines for the.
and lastly we we've recently
consulted with rice that energy
an energy analytics firm
and there.
the the they've cited some of
the reporting where producers
have a still a pretty
substantial inventory of permits
both overall both on federal and
state and state owned.
Thank you very much chairman
thank you for the right after I
just know that yes we have
permits outstanding we have
opportunities for.
For really no on state land
there it's getting to.
The tender forty acre parcels
that makes it difficult to so I
was just curious and quick sorry
Representative Lujan just a
quick note I know we have a
couple more folks on on the
list.
okay I have to two more
questions chairman I appreciate
that
On page eighteen of of.
The consensus report.
We talked about withholding to
increasing.
And I'm curious
As that withholding increase
compared to the number of people
that are actually.
Participating in the withholding
year over year so is a disk
decreasing our the with our the
withholding is increasing well
the number of people actually
withholding are decreasing so
are we taking a bigger share
from fewer people or.
What's what's the true analysis
on that
Mr chairman and Representative
Pettigrew I'll have to get with
taxed Representative chief
economist to dig into that data
a little bit more but what I
expect will find is that the New
Mexicos marginal personal income
tax brackets don't adjust for
inflation and that's actually
one thing I think we'll look at
coming up the session so they
have been stuck where they are
in nominal terms since two
thousand seven and so as
inflation occurs naturally and
then it at the exacerbated
levels that we've experienced
the last year there's bracket
creep more of you know people
are moving up through those
personal income tax brackets
that's causing a higher
effective tax rate on average
and so I think part of this at
least is driven by inflation and
part of it is a concentration of
withholding with you know
potentially fewer workers like I
think you're suggesting but I
would like to go back to the
data and just find out how many
withholding
Employees are how many employees
there that are being withheld
for we can make that we can
discuss that offline I was just
kind of curious what those
curious on page fifteen we
talked about prices of oil going
down production going up and and
I.
Personally not fill the that we
have the reverse on this one we
have with holdings going up but
we have number of members
actually participating going
down and and so.
As we're all aware we had a
position last year we're we're
more the majority of our state
doesn't
in order it.
If you had another question as
well.
Yeah I was trying to get to a
point.
With so.
We'll skip we'll have that
conversation offline
Mr chair my final question.
Of.
Playing off of another one when
we're talking about the labor
force I'm curious.
What our presenters would say is
you know if we go back to the
may report where a family of
four taking care of all taking
advantage of all federal and
state subsidies would have.
General income of somewhere
around a hundred four thousand
eight hundred Bucks.
Since the.
LFC report from last may.
If we started taking the
subsidies away what do you think
this the increase would be in
our workforce where we start to
see the reversal of our
workforce where we made it.
We made it enticing for people
to come back to work because we
started taking away the
subsidies the only forty four
percent of the state are paying.
Of my final question with your
answers will call you back.
Madam secretary for it please
enter sound Mr chair the
question was in response to LESC
report to go to.
Mr chair representative we
haven't done that specific
analysis to see what the impact
could be I know that we've
looked at research in general on
the impacts of of.
Social support programs.
And of course as you might
expect the findings can be mixed
so I had LFC we haven't in that
specific analysis thank.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next to
represent her.
Thank you very much Mr chair
family members I'm looking at
the money matters of documents.
And specifically I'm looking at
page of fourteen under general
fund financial summary and so
the two questions that I have
with regard to information
that's provided there the first
one has to do with the tobacco
settlement permanent fund this
is a W. nine able to of to
disperse this fund because I
have a treatments that station
so have we done so well and
getting people off of tobacco
that now you can't spend the
money Mr Chairman representative
printed up.
Good catch on the on the
discussion there the tobacco
settlement permanent fund the
point that we're trying to make
here is that the tobacco
settlement permanent fund is
currently classified as a
reserve fund of the state and in
part that classification
prevents the state investment
council who manages that fund
from earning a higher return on
that funds balance and currently
the balance is not large enough
to begin disbursements for
treatment for cessation for
prevention because the balances
are still too low so it must
reach a certain threshold in
size before disbursements can
begin and one of the LFC
sponsored bills is to remove the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund from the reserve so that it
could be invested potentially
with great return so that
disbursements could begin.
Thank you for that clarification
and then the second item is
referring to
the.
Amount of funds that were not
requested by agencies so we're
right now you mentioned four
hundred and fifty million in FY
twenty two is that because they
were they were required to have
a flat budget are where they
actually reducing the services
that they should be requiring of
providing to our citizens.
Mr chair and representative her
name you're certainly getting to
to the detail level here.
When special appropriations are
made by you all they are made
available in the current budget
year so for example you all will
make a nonrecurring
appropriations in this session
and it will be available now
it's up to the agencies to
request that money from the
department of finance and
administration before they can
begin spending it if they do not
request that money before the
turn of the next fiscal year we
can have some shifting going on
where there some unspent
appropriations that make it into
the next fiscal year when it
comes to accounting purposes so
this four hundred fifty million
you're referring to is the
shifting that we saw we saw that
agencies had forty fifty million
available to them that they did
not request in FY twenty two but
that they will still have
available to them in FY twenty
three.
And I've that they requested in
FY twenty three Mr chair
representative her name I would
expect the majority of them will
be but of course we'll have to
see by the end of fiscal year
well I just wanted to say Mr
chair of panelists the reason I
ask that question is that look
at the place and look at that
part of our conversation like
the access to justice commission
which ran out of money and it
providing so many services to
the judicial system and access
to justice but we have the extra
money that people aren't using
I'm just wondering.
If we are we directing it in the
right place.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
thanks for the question thanks
committee for for thank you
panel thanks committee for
excellent questions I just have
a couple of things to touch on
first sort of going back to
Representative Garcia
the this short term sort of
downside.
Verses upside that we have is
that it's a little bit more on
the down side than on the upside
is representative Garcia pointed
out is that accurate.
Great and and thank you for that
the two were very grateful for
the stress testing and the work
that's been done there and so
really appreciate sort of the
focus there is the if we go to
page fourteen on money matters
The.
It really is in some ways of
foot presents sort of almost a
an extraordinary potential
plateau.
So even though there's more
short term downside here between
starting FY twenty for an on
we're not projected to sort of
reach our peak
Revenue connected to oil and gas
when is that madam secretary Mr
Fotis if you could share their
there's a couple ways to look at
it for when the plak tow begins
that might be something like FY
twenty seven and that's really
because of price declines even
though production may not be at
its peak production level just
just quite yet but it's yeah I
could I could get back with you
to be certain but that the
actual peak which might not be
very far from the FY twenty
seven levels maybe somewhere
between twenty and thirty two.
Thank you very much you Mr Fotis
so I
That's really helpful as we also
to wrestle with David ****
questions and as the panelists I
think to a panelists have
pointed out
the fact that those continue to
rise does not mean just smooth
sailing ahead it actually with
the volatility that's going to
only increase.
Were we not to make any changes
the volatility what we we will
be more exposed than ever before
I don't have.
This is a great introduction at
one quick question
if we see significant
changes from the consensus
revenue estimating group those
will be brought before the body
before we conclude with house
bill two correct.
I believe that if they are
scheduled for February tenth
around there.
Okay thank you and I again just
want to think members for
excellent questions and the the
withholding question the
Pettigrew really appreciate that
question sort of drilling into
the numbers to try and learn a
little bit more as members of
done sort of with workforce and
a number of other areas okay
panelists do we.
We have a quick presentation on
the budget recommendations.
Yeah we're we're kind of rattled
yeah.
We're for sixty days it seems
like it seems like a consensus
that will go ahead and move
those will ask for the budget
presentations and maybe we.
This
staff here in the city.
Program.
That's appreciated.
Please.
That sounds great.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity.
Very pleased to
Work with some extraordinarily
talented people in our state
budget division and throughout
the US but I'll need to do so
quickly I wanted to do Simon
Miller of Mr Probst can you
oriented bring the.
For.
Mr chairman I'd like to
introduce Simon Miller among the
other departments and Simon is
responsible for his possible for
the public education department
a nickel Misia's as a principal
analyst is responsible for the
higher education department and
higher education institutions
Mary Beth tends more has it easy
agencies are HSD and apartment
of health among others early
childhood education and care as
well so you'll be hearing from
much from her this.
This is keep.
Lori us yok is a senior analyst
she handles aging long term
services the office of African
American affairs in the state
fair among others Mario Segovia
is a analysts of handles most of
our courts system including New
Mexico courts district attorneys
in the public defender attorney
general's office Diego Mendez is
a analysts the handles the
corrections department
department public safety and the
public regulation commission
among others Brian Chavis is a
senior analyst who handles our
energy portfolio to a large
extent energy minerals and
natural resources state engineer
and a state Stream Commission
and Environment Department
Simon already did Simon Miller
he's honor twice Sydney Montoya
let me go to
It Santo as a team lead and
principal analyst as well for
general governance government
team a daughter of there is a
senior analyst she handles of
the board of nursing livestock
board gaming control board
Cecilia.
More matter this is a senior
analyst handling are taxed
Revolut right right Revenue
Department Department of
information technology and
department of workforce
solutions since the Martinez is
the W. is a director of our
state budget division and deputy
secretary department of finance
and administration she will be
my security blanket throughout
the next sixty days
Dr Andrew Miner is a deputy
budget director handles cultural
affairs a governor's office we
have our capital outlay bureau
as well as added by Wesley
Billingsley I hope you get to
know Leslie if you don't know
him he knows everything you need
to know about capital outlay and
will be available to you at any
time Sarinana the hell is a
senior analyst handling the
retiree health care of forty
educational retirement board and
the public employees retirement
association I think I've covered
everybody but since the who did
I send it out for anybody.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you very much.
And would you like to please go
ahead if you want to give sort
of the the overview for.
Mr members the committee and try
to do this and and five minutes
it's a it is a pleasure to
present the executive budget
right budget recommendation or
you've heard about it to you
read about it and you will be
spending a large products The.
A few weeks are going agency by
agency through it it's a
pleasure to be here with my
friend and colleague David David
Abbey
it's a little bit daunting to be
sitting next to David because in
terms of knowledge of the state
budget he is the IBM
supercomputer and and and I am
the cliff notes.
Mr chairman of the executive
budget recommendation I think
they rigor this overall the the
general fund recommendation for
state agencies is very close the
executive budgets as I mentioned
in the previous a presentation
on does set reserves of
approximately thirty five
percent actually eight thirty
four point nine percent increase
in recurring spending of eleven
point nine percent it is a total
of nine point four percent and
the total FY FY twenty two
Ending general reserve balances
and I'm on I think I'm on page
three of our presentation also
noted in the previous
presentation three point two
percent or forty three point
three percent and I can go
through these Mr chairman we
have the general fund high level
on slide five you'll see that K.
twelve through education is
funded at three point nine
billion dollars public safety at
five hundred twenty four
million.
Slide
Slides six we find information
on early childhood development
and of one of the governor's
priorities for this upcoming
session is extending and in
class learning and you see that
a twenty two hundred twenty
point one million dollars higher
education against the governor's
priority for this session is
expanding the highly successful
opportunity scholarship a
program with the estimated cost
of a hundred and fifty seven
point four million dollars.
Health and Human Services
Medicare Medicaid provider
reimbursement rate increases
again a high priority for the
executive comes at sixty seven
point eight million of public
safety
the executive budget does create
I believe for the first time in
the state's history to hot shot
forced fire crews and funds that
at two point two million dollars
some additional funding for the
state so new forensic
laboratory as well and our
compensation Mr chairman members
of the committee I see that the
two you've heard that the
governor is proposing a four
percent salary increase for
state employees as well as a
four percent employed or
increase for public school
personnel the governor governor
is also recommending that we
cover health insurance for a
public school a person and the
FY twenty four budget.
Nonrecurring General Fund Madam
Mr chair and members of the
committee General Fund non right
recurring and executive budget
is at two million dollars with
hundred forty million from the
art of funds
the governor has also closed a
land of enchantment legacy fund
some tax rebates that you've
heard of with a price tag of
over one billion dollars but
also some of other tax reform
that the secretary secretary
Schardin Clarke discussed
briefly in her in her
presentation I'm sure she'll
talk to you more as a session
goes along for public safety no
an additional hundred dollars
hundred million dollars for law
enforcement a request for the
the law enforcement recruitment
fund
some of the four million dollars
for law enforcement and
firefighters survivor benefits
and a five hundred thousand
dollars.
appropriation for honor guard
distributions that would be
available statewide housing and
another issue that you heard the
governor's but a lot of time on
in her state of the state
address yesterday you'll see the
allocations there and finally
for Health Mona Fund about
health and Human Services you'll
see the rural health health care
delivery fund appropriation of
two hundred million
K. to twelfth extended learning
of fifty million
community school initiatives
eight point five million.
And finally I believe finally on
higher education the the non for
school of medicine faculty at
the university of New Mexico at
thirty two point five million
the last two bullets on the
slide Mr chairman and members
the committee I apologize for
this last table it should have
been actually on slide sixteen
so just note that know that
correction for you and with that
Mr chairman I still I stayed
close to five minutes.
That thank you very much
Secretary Disney we're not gonna
have any questions on these just
informational Mr Abbey please.
So.
Federal freshman orientation and
a little remedial I can benefit
from medial instructions so it
starts tomorrow morning at seven
with public at a it will quit
promptly at eight because
members have to go to committees
and there's always something new
to learn
You have three volumes of the
LFC budget recommendations
employing one is what we call a
policy document with topics like
economic development health and
Human Services and performance
data report covers all the key
agencies and.
Your own green on how agency to
doing that doesn't mean they're
failing Representative means
they need more work of need to
make more effort so we really
use this a lot to look at third
grade reading and math
proficiency repeat well
treatment for children so
performance is us that LFC in
volume one volume two so I have
is a threat to read this in the
next week maybe.
Volume two don't rated.
But using this this is the
there's a story about every
single agency on what they're
statutes are what they do with
their missions are and then LFC
analyst analysis of what some of
the problems they're having what
they need to work and then the
budget recommendations and
performance data for all the
smaller agencies that aren't
covered otherwise ability one
million three chart for
statistics and I think again and
again you find somebody wants to
know from.
About this thing and finding out
about workforce performance or
unemployment trust fund or
square feet per student at
universities or enrollment
growth at universities or the
cash balances in many for so
this this'll be handing in your
our analyst will help you and I
think you'll be surprised how
often you can find stuff in
there that that I would expect
you to provide water analyst for
help to find
Also on the then I'll turn to
this package.
Which is what we are calling a
high level comparison of the
executive and the LESC
recommendation on the last page
these are analyst assignments
and we have fourteen analyst
kind of kids of course PFA and I
have one manager see here of Mr
solely the W. for the budget
analyst.
John Courtney Dr John Courtney
release a performance evaluation
team Fisher works with job some
some really nice work on housing
for example it's been discussed
this week.
The LFC.
Recommendation.
And the Executive
recommendations over the coming
thirty days you're going to
build a budget you're gonna pass
the General Appropration Act by
hearing side by side the two
analysts to get in here what we
call different sheets which are
documented we like to talk about
a performance but at the end of
the day almost necessarily it's
incremental budgeting and so
this is the first cut that what
you're need to work on for
incremental budgeting to
reconcile the differences
between the executive
recommendation the LFC
recommendation and I generate I
think LESC is a strong
recommendation but I think HSC
will have a better
recommendation the LFC by
benefit of a lot of a lot more
analysis of what we're thinking
and apart from the executive
branch
So just a few tables to look at
you know the first few pages
summarizing Tax pretty dense
text this page I just this.
This is the.
I would suggest starting this
one you know when talked about
some of the key differences only
online thirteen only forty
million dollars difference
between the executive and the
LESC you know half a percent
that's a good thing the closer
they are the easier your job if
if and the safety in numbers if
we both are saying something
similar maybe you know we're in
the ballpark
Point seven the LA dejected of
has five hundred million to
procure current tax changes
proposed the LFC had a billion
although didn't recommend
specific settle be left to the
house tax and revenue in all the
legislature will think about it
Wayne talked appropriately
online thirty three this is a
big deal nonrecurring special
appropriations the special
appropriation is from one time
non recurring funds in the in
the so called back of the bill
for most of your next thirty
days you're going to be hearing
recurring budgets and usually
special and nonrecurring are
done at the last minute and
they're fifty or a hundred
million years executive with
the right request up to billion
in LFC with the billion because
of the extraordinary revenue
situation so I think on both
sides Senate finance and house
appropriations our suggestion to
spend more time than usual
getting in into the into some of
those nonrecurring special
supplemental recurring
appropriation capital outlay on
one thirty five the governor's
recommending a billion of
capital outlay the two fifty in
the seven fifty and LESC one
thirty five and thirty six a six
hundred fifty million.
It is very important to see what
the governor recommends for
capital outlay you can hardly do
specials nonrecurring until you
see what they want out of
capital so hopefully they'll be
forthcoming
LFC in line.
Thirty nine recommended the
billion dollar transfer to the
severance tax permanent fund
this is a thing we talk a lot
about how do we convert now
money to future money when we
get I'm so glad you settle for
more time looking at page
fourteen that that green peak.
Seven to ten years there's we're
going to do better and better
with a lot of all the total of
the but in the long run the
world wants to carbonization
don't they they want to to use
less oil and gas and that means
less demand for not probably we
have the resources but the
expectation is that a
decarbonisation world more
electric vehicles more batteries
more solar mean less demand for
natural gas that's that's a long
term future and end up.
Then on page six we we compare
the differences what we call a
high level of recurring
comparing the between the
biggest budgets there's a
hundred of them but this is the
top twenty or so and you know
schools isn't that far apart a
higher there's a big difference
in the opportunity scholarship
Early childhood there's a big
difference because of the use of
non recurring versus recurring
funding but interestingly the
dollars are within a million of
the state the the dip the uses
are a little bit different and
then of CYFD and health there is
differences in the tens of
millions but a lot of that has
to do with
different uses of other state
funds are federal funds so they
do that it probably will be
easier to reconcile but those
that it looks so this is a
helpful chart and as HSD meets
you're gonna have a new column
saying HFC.
And that's where the committee
is heading in the course of all
these hearing.
And for the next few pages show
that detailed comparisons by
agency on page eleven.
This report is highlighting all
the differences for
recommendations over five
billion for the one time monies
the two billion in the executive
versus the billion of the LFC
and and so these this is where
you're going to want to spend
much more time than usual
looking at some of these larger
programs and
How's that for five minutes or
so Mr chair rector I wasn't
timing because we were.
Four and a half our our office
so thank you.
Thank you director thank you
Secretary designate a giant
thank you to the staff from both
the executive and the LESC and a
big thank you members for really
dive in and today even though we
got started a little late
excellent questions thank you
for taking the time that'll wrap
us up for today we'll see
everybody at one thirty tomorrow
thank.
Our that's right
to think that quick.
As ranking member Armstrong
pointed out and as director
Abbey talked about there is a
seven AM training here in this
room tomorrow it's actually
gonna be on public schools which
will be the topic of our hearing
at one thirty so it's an
excellent opportunity thank you
Ricky member for pointing it out
and Mr Chairman you're almost
guaranteed Britos are a pretty
good breakfast there you go.
