Yeah.
And we'll just wait a couple of
seconds as we get the
presentation upon
Upon the screen.
Uh, Mr Gray. As we sort of do,
we'll start off with the lfc.
Please feel free to introduce
your colleagues. Madame
Treasurer. When we get to you
please feel free to introduce
your team. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chair Committee
members. My name is Brendan
Gray. I'm, an economist at
Legislative Finance Committee.
Today. We're gonna be talking
about the state treasurer's
office. That's agency code 394.
It's going to be behind have
three of your binders.
If you'd like to follow along
with the LFC Volume two. You can
do so on page 149.
Enjoying today, Um, at the
podium here with J. R Real, the
deputy state treasurer and the
state treasurer, Laura Montoya,
as well as UM, same in Miller,
the DFA budget analyst.
LFC recommendation for the state
treasurer's office increased
General fund revenues by 2.1%
over FY 24.
The executive recommendation.
Increased General fund revenues
by 9.8% over FY 24.
The LFC recommendation primarily
increased the two hundred's
category, the personnel category
to adjust the state treasurers
salary as well as required by
legislation passed last year.
The executive recommendation
increased the personnel category
by 8%.
And the other category by 16%
over FY 24.
Ah L F C and D F to have reached
a consensus on performance
measures. And with that, Mr
Chair, I'll pass it over to my
colleague Simon Miller.
Thanks, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee again. My name is
Simon Miller and I'm, an analyst
at D. F a
Ah!
Brendan covered. The difference
is, uh, pretty well there, um
As he indicated that the biggest
difference between the two
recommendations is in the
personnel category with the
executive recommendation being
about $230,000 higher in the
personnel category, Um, the
state treasurer has 35
authorized FTE.
Of those 35 about 28 of them are
funded in the current year, so
seven of them are unfunded.
The executive recommendation.
Funds about 31 of those FTE in
FY 25, whereas the LFC
recommendation funds about 29 of
those 35 FTE
Um, so that
That's that's really the biggest
difference here between the two
recommendations. There's also a
difference in the other
category.
Uh, I
Where the executive provides a
bit more funding for, um,
investment accounting software
licenses as well as some
inflationary growth in some of
the fixed costs.
So with that I will turn it over
to our state Treasurer Laura
Montoya. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. I am so
happy to be first, so that we
could start your day with a lot
of money And a lot of good news
and a blissed you so if you look
at this the presentation which
there's a lot of love and
thought into it, um, that my
staff really worked on this last
couple of weeks to give you a
really good picture of what's
going on in the treasurer's
office, so
If I could please first
introduced my amazing team. Some
of them are here today we have
again. Deputy State Treasurer Jr
of I l We have our cash manager
Steve Marsico.
We have our director of programs
and outreach very modest.
We have our general counsel John
Cream Camp. Director of special
projects. Christina Naya, Our
chief investment officer, the
famous Vicky Hentges, Our
executive assistant, Mary
Blanco, and I want to introduce
the newest member of our team,
our chief finance officer. Many
of you might know her she's had
over 20 years of government
experience.
In high positions at DFA, TRD
and M F a Miss Lizzie Ratna
Rajah.
Um, So I'm very grateful to be
before you today to talk about
the treasurer's office. I wanted
to start off on Page two with
our core functions for me when
people ask at the dinner table.
What is it that you guys
actually do? Instead of getting
into the details? We usually say
we protect your money we
collected. We invested. We
distribute it. We report it.
And we help as many not only
state agencies, but our
county's our cities, our local
governments, um and so we'll go
through that breakdown.
One thing that many don't know.
Um, but it's really an amazing
thought process that the
Legislature had with the
sponsorship from Senator
Gonzalez many many moons ago is
that the treasurer's office
helped purchase the geo bonds
and the educational technology
notes for school districts This
last year, we saved schools over
half a million dollars just in
this last fiscal year.
By being able to do that service
for them. And, um you know, I
was rain at the Las Vegas many
moons ago. But now we have a
running, Uh, joke that I'm the
board queen of New Mexico. I sit
on 15 boards, councils and
commissions. And for me, I think
that's a great opportunity to
know where we're at today. What
the vision is for each one of
those boards as to where we're
going. And then how do I
incorporate all of them to be
able to work together instead of
reinventing the will?
I'm so we're going to look at,
um our fiscal year. 2023
highlights as on both Brandon
and Simon mentioned to you.
There's a very big difference in
what's the proposed budget in
front of you. One is a flat
budget and one has some thought
process into the demands of
And of the necessity to provide
safety, liquidity and yield and
be able to start the vision of
how we see this treasurer's
office helping more new
Mexicans. So, um, this will be
the snapshot of where we're at
today. And then as we go through
the journey of the treasurer's
office, I thought it would be
fair to give you a comparable
from last year or maybe even,
um, a couple of years ago, so we
managed $17 billion
Our local government investment
pool is at its highest mark at
1.5 billion.
We have our state State General
fund investment pool at 290
Million in earnings. Um, yeah.
Donuts. Um, that's a great
number, and we'll go into that
soon. Agencies that we serve as
140. We have over 1040 bank
accounts and trade volume is
26.3 billion. That's a $16
billion increase from last year.
So today we're gonna talk
predominantly about 34
divisions. We'll start with cash
management. Um
We oversee fiscal and we're on
Page four. We oversee fiscal
activity of $88 billion. That's
an increase of over 16 billion
since last year. If you look at
the graph to the right, you will
see the increase. Um, that's
been dramatic throughout each
year. We process all of the
payments and collections for
state agencies.
And there's over 6 million
transactions, which is a 40%
increase from last year.
We also have to make sure that
we comply with a CH and also
also not to requirements this
year. Um, my cash management
team has, uh, asked us to be
thoughtful about a cash flow
data and forecasting model for
our system, which will be about
$100,000 for the initiation and
about 50 to 80,000 each year
recurring.
What That does is that allows us
to stop being manual on how we
pay our bills and instead be
able to utilize a system that
both cash management and in our
investment division can utilize
to make sure that we're making
the best amount of money in
return, where we have it
located, but we still have
enough to make sure we are
paying the bills on time.
12, our investment division.
We basically have four primary
investment funds, and I would
say our investment division is
three people. It's our chief
investment officer. Vicky, who's
sitting behind me. Anna Murphy,
who's our portfolio manager. I'm
very proud that our office is
the only office in the state of
New Mexico and one of the few in
the nation that has two females
running our state investments in
the treasurer's office, and then
we have Frank.
Who assist in that team as well.
The fund's remaining our general
fund, liquidity, severance tax
bond and overnight. Um, if you
go to Page six, the breakdown of
that 17 billion is that 15
billion is within the state. And
then there's close to 1.7
billion in the local government
investment pool, and I'm gonna
pivot for just one moment
because all of you represent
County cities. Tribal entities
throughout
New Mexico water associations.
Schools. All of those entities
have the opportunity to utilize
the local government investment
pool for only five basis points.
It allows them to diversify
their portfolio. It allows them
to have the expertise of my
office. It allows them to have
liquidity where a county
commission can decide to move
that money within one day to
2024 to 48 hours without any
type of penalty in that process.
And they're making a great
return on money right now based
on the current market.
If you move to page seven.
Fiscal year. 23 revenues show
continued strength. The strength
is shared across revenue income
tax, grocery seats, tax
selective sales, tax and
investment income. And if you
look at between on the right
hand side just on the general
fund investment pool, we are at
now, 289.
Uh, basically $290 million of
earnings. If you look at last
year, earnings was only 54
million. That is a significant
jump. And I know 24 looks like
it's low, but that 207 million
is only for six months. We
haven't even put in the other
six months of that, So, um, the
team is doing significantly.
Well, Some people will say,
Well, you know, it's the market.
Yes, Also the market.
But when you compare what we're
allowed to invest in, and what
our team has been able to do in
this market compared to the
national average, we surpass it.
I'm really proud of them. Um,
we're gonna move on to a
division that is one of those
heartstrings. It's not the
constitutional requirements of
the treasurer's office. But it's
a way that we're able to give
back to our state.
So we have a program that we
just launched a new logo. For
many of you knew it as able. We
now call it stable. We added
some stability and a lot more
accounts. It's the state
treasurers, achieving a better
life experience. This program
helps our disability community.
and this year you're going to
see representative lifts list
Thompson's legislation.
Which is House Bill 98.
Alliance, New Mexico with
federal law, and it raises the
age of honesty of disability
from age 26 to 46. What that
does is that allows more people
including in the military, and I
know we have some veterans on
this on this committee.
Will help a lot of our veterans
that come back who might have a
disability that they didn't have
before to be able to utilize
this program. Anyone who has
let's say, for example, your
Social Security disability, you
have to use it or lose it in
this case, you don't you can put
it in this account. It's really
an investment account. It's a
partnership with the treasurer
in Ohio, many of our state's
partner because it makes it
cheaper for everyone.
And what we do is we invest
their money. They make more
money off of it, and when they
need it, they can use it.
You will see, um that the
increase in the stable accounts
is significant just in this last
year, and we've increased nearly
3.9 million. Um, just in one
year, and that
It is.
I have to tell you this because
it's awesome.
It surpasses the number of
accounts in several other
states, and it's a nearly 35%
increase in assets managed.
Moving on to Page nine.
I think most of you know me and
Financial literacy for me, is a
game changer. And I think that
that helps not only our economy,
but it helps our Children and
our Children's Children to have
a better opportunity to make
good choices in their life so
that they can be more successful
as adults.
One of the programs that we are
launching its a pilot program,
so it's free this year, um, is
called New Mexico Enrich
Financial wellness platform,
offering it to all state
employees. It will be free.
We're working with state
personnel and with others to be
able to launch this, and it
gives people an opportunity to
work on their own finances at
their own time and the
particular subject matter in
finances.
That they really care to want to
learn about and it starts. Um
and it's, uh, a fun process of
being able to do it.
On another end, We're working
with our public education
department secretary. We've
reached out He's excited to go
on the road with me to have an
opportunity to talk to people in
different schools while we are
on the road this year. We're
also going to talk to a lot of
our bankers and make sure that
they know that the treasurer's
office is opened to bank and to
serve and to help, especially a
lot of our rural banks. So if
you have friends
In your community that are
bankers and that would like to
be involved in the treasurer's
office. And when we or another,
we open that door to be able to
do that.
We also have written a letter to
the governor requesting for
financial literacy to be on the
call for this year to add as a
high school requirement.
I wish it would be an all
schools at all times.
If I would have known then what
I know now I would have made a
lot less mistakes and I was in
calculus. I was very good in
math. I loved it.
But I didn't know how to balance
a checkbook. I didn't know.
The concepts of being able to
buy a house or even a car. And
what that looks like property
taxes, insurances, and I think
that if we were to be a little
bit more helpful in our schools
to do that, we can set people up
to make better choices when
they're looking at their
financial structure for
themselves and their families,
and it goes a long way because
it also helps there.
Abalos and their parents as
well, Um, to be able to make
good choices to, um, so that's
one of the things down the paper
line. Another one that's coming
up is baby bonds. I love baby
bonds, and I want all of you to
love baby bonds. If you don't
know what those are, what it is,
is a game changer for New
Mexico. It gives every kid an
opportunity to have a trust fund
to be a trust fund, baby.
We get the money we invested
within the time that they're 18
will have already made enough to
put back into our fund and be
able to utilize that for people
to have an opportunity to go
into the trades to have a
business account for a proposal
that they want in their own
personal business. They can go
to college. There's certain
things that you the body.
Can decide that would be
acceptable in 20 years for them
to be set up to have that
opportunity. And so we're
looking at that we're going to
ask for, um, a committee this
next year to look at it and
hopefully get that to you next
year.
And right now we're going to go
into the fun, exciting part. So
I'm going to give that part Two
Jr. Which will be our budget
recommendations, and then I'll
close
Thank you. Treasure. Montoya,
Mr. Chair members of the
committee. If you turn to page
11 of your presentation, you'll
see before you a graph
illustrating the original budget
request by this office. Uh and
then in comparison to the LFC
and DFS recommendations
originally when we submitted our
budget request earlier last
fall, we were
Shooting for the stars about
what this office really needs
for long term success, and that
includes a lot of investment in
technology and staffing needs.
Um it was a hefty price tag and
came around 26.9% increase, but
after we received the
recommendations from LFC and D F
a. We met internally with our
staff to determine really, what
are the priorities that we need
to get by?
For this next fiscal year, and
that became, uh thank you.
Treasure. It became evident that
we need to invest in our
staffing resources and resources
that they needed to carry out
the increased demand with high
high revenues that are coming
into the state. So if you'll
turn to the next page on page 12
We revised our budget request
and putting this before you for
consideration.
It's about a near $900,000
reduction from our original
budget request. Some of the
biggest items that we have
removed from that would be about
390,000, foreign investment,
accounting and portfolio
management software that we
currently do not have.
Um, right now we rely on staff
expertise who have been there
for many, many years. You know
how to do their job effectively
and efficiently.
And that's something that will
come back to this committee in
the future to determine what's
best for longevity of the state
and appropriate controls. But we
did take that off the plate this
year, and so as you'll see,
we're really close now to the
recommendation. I think they
were close to 9%. This revised
and amended budget before you is
at 10%. I'd like to go over some
of the importance of why we feel
we really needed this amount of
money in order to be effective
to manage the high increased
demand of this office.
In our 200 category is is Simon
previously mentioned? We have 35
FTE s allocated to the office
but about 28 are funded.
Um, since we got into office
last year, it was very evident
that we have staff that are
working. Not 40 hours, but often
times 60 on average every single
week.
Ah, it was really interesting
for me to observe for the first
time at the week between
Christmas and New Year while
majority of us are taking that
opportunity to relax and kind of
reset our minds and prepare for
the new year, our staff was
working beginning at five in the
morning to 1130 at night to meet
demands that that that the state
could not function without that
includes wire transfers.
That includes liquidation of
portfolios to meet the state's
obligations that includes
ensuring that we meet our
Debt service obligations. And
while I appreciate the staff's
hard work that they put in
during those times, it's not
necessarily a model that we
think is successful and
efficient, moving forward. If we
were to lose one of those staff
members that would be
detrimental to the state, so
we're asking for an increased
staffing budget to appropriately
staff recruit and retain those
individuals that we have
currently
Um and ar 300 category. The
biggest difference would be, uh,
some I t services that we need
in preparation for onboarding,
the investment, accounting
software and trading platform
system. We have a lot of, uh, as
the years have gone by
everything has gone to digital.
Uh, environment. And so this is
something that we feel as a good
investment right now. So we are
better prepared for any new
software that we can take
advantage of and benefit the
state in the future.
And then lastly, within our 400
get category again. This is very
staffs and centric. Um, we do
need some additional licensing
for Bloomberg. JPMorgan to
provide our staff the resources
so they can carry out daily
trade activity. Compliance risk
management right now.
We're limited in our licenses.
They are costly, and so we have
to have some of them borrow or
share a license and so that that
also reduces the efficiency that
they're able to carry out every
day.
Um And then, as as, uh, a Simon
mentioned with inflation and
rising, we have seen some
increased fixed costs. Last
thing I would ask that we
continue to support would be our
training budget. When we first
came into office, there was no
there wasn't a training budget
that existed.
Um
Are the financial industry is
changing every single day. We
now have seen the introduction
of artificial intelligence into
the financial services realm.
Um, we are consistently having
to maintain and update our
knowledge and expertise on
federal banking regulations to
include a CH compliance.
The federal government is
actually going to be starting a
new phase on enforcement of
compliance in our office is
responsible, not only for
ensuring that the bank itself is
is compliant, but that state
agencies are educated, informed
and aware of what they need to
comply with.
Um, I think if we turn to the
next page, you'll see a
consistent theme that the
treasurer mentioned. Um we're
pumping out a lot of work at the
state treasurer's office. And
while it's really good that we
have the amount of money coming
into the state that we that we
currently have. It also has
drastically increased the
workload of the personnel. And
as I mentioned that week between
Christmas and Thanksgiving, it
was a real eye opener for me.
How hard our staff are really
working just to meet the daily
obligations of the office on the
top left hand corner of the
slide, you'll see our accounts
payable transactions increased
over a five year period.
From fiscal year 19 to fiscal
year 23.
We've seen an 89% increase in
transactions that includes state
agencies needing to pay their
bills through a CH checks. Um,
wire transfers are offices is
the office that conducts wire
transfers throughout the entire
state. We load all a ch files to
ensure that the state's bills
and agency bills are paid timely
and if there is an issue on the
back end, they call her office
to to fix that for them.
And so that has increased by
89%. Our agency. Bank deposits
have also increased by 77%.
While it might seem like, okay,
well, you have more money coming
in. It's just a higher amount of
dollars. That's not necessarily
the case because we have to take
into consideration the amount of
problems that occur on the back
end. If you think about it with
your bank every now and then you
might there might be an error.
In a deposit that you need to
call your bank and fix what
we're here to provide the
services those services to state
agencies, in addition to bank
requirements were also
responsible for ensuring
appropriate collateral for that.
Those
Those public monies and that
that requires consistent
analysis and working with our
banking partners.
Um, at the very bottom that's
related to our trading activity
and and the amount of money that
we are dealing with their trade
volume, you'll see 179% increase
over the same time period.
And to the right of that That
graph illustrates the assets
under management. We've seen
263% increase over that same
time period.
Uh And that is the the staffing
that we have today. We have 35
FTE allocated, however, were
only able to afford about 28 at
this time is as same as
mentioned right now. We are
actively
Recruiting two positions and
anticipate feeling to positions
within this first quarter of the
year and then looking forward to
how we can continue to hire
extra subject matter. Experts in
banking investing in compliance
with that treasure, I would
just, um thank you, Jericho. I
would just mention a couple of
things. I think the biggest the
biggest end all is that
We need our positions and we
need them to be fully funded. I
looked at previous years and
2018 sort of stuck out to us
because we had data up to 2018
for sure on every single one of
these graphs, so you could see
that comparison. So we're
comparing apples to apples at
the same time, everything that
Jr said to what Simon said, Um
2035 full time positions with 28
funded just in 2018. There were
40 positions in the treasurer's
office, with only $10 billion.
And they have 31 employees that
were fully funded working in
that office. We have almost 20
billion double with
Less staff only 28. So we got to
put that in perspective in
perspective. If we are a
business that we have a
responsibility for safety,
liquidity, T and yield by
statute, and we are supposed to
be the fiduciary for all funds.
It is easier to pay less than
half a day of the interest I
earned for you this year with my
team.
Than to be able to put ourselves
in a predicament. Where let's
say something doesn't go in on
time. It's 200 basis points,
Then you're paying costs on
things that you don't need to
are unnecessary back, Um in high
school or middle school. I
remember I didn't like history
class and my uncle was like this
is such a waste of time. Why do
we care about what happened in
the past like Let's move
forward.
And he was very wise. And he
said, If you don't know where
you've been, then it's hard to
know where you're going, and
it's hard not to make the same
mistakes. We've made a lot of
mistakes in the treasurer's
office Throughout the years, I
was there as the secretary
almost two decades ago. We had
40 employees in We have almost
half of that. Now we need your
help to be able to do our jobs
and to provide that safety,
liquidity and yield. And so
we're asking for the
Executive. Plus some chump
change, maybe $60,000 more, but
it will help us to get to that
point and also as the new
treasure last year, I lived with
the budget that we had. I didn't
have anything to do with it. One
thing that Jr mentioned on
training we were in a covid area
People were working for days
from home. We're not doing that
anymore, and we need to stay
ahead of the game so that we can
make sure and protect your
money.
And also our local government,
So we would just humbly ask you
to be very considerate of us in
this year's budget. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Treasure. We're going to go
straight to questions first with
representing Luhan represented
Ella Cruz. That's yours.
Good morning. Um
Adam Treasurer, staff and
everybody in the room today. Um
Mhm.
I have stated before I was HR.
Director for
The state treasurer's office
before I took on this role.
And, um, so I understand.
The funded, um
Personnel request and what the
office is capable of doing and
all the things that
Encompasses our office. I'm just
going to start off Mr Chair with
one of my my main concern being
Um, with what's brought forward
about the limited, Um, state
licenses in the sharing. It was
licenses. This is our state
treasurer.
Treasury.
I think that that is something
that's probably stands out the
most for me to be quite honest
with you. Um as far as your FTE
s it looks you know if I can get
some
Clarification here.
As I'm looking at our
difference, worksheet.
It says that you
You have the 35 permanent.
Um F T E s
But there's no discrepancy as
far as the funding here. Can you
maybe elaborate on that? Is this
indicating that they're fully
funded or not?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative. So if you're
looking at the personal services
and employee benefit, calculated
worksheet assume you are 35
authorized position.
Positions. 24 of those are
filled and there's about 11%
funded vacancy rates. Probably
three positions are funded but
unfilled, meaning that there are
of between five and six
unfunded. Um
Sadness. Visions is a little bit
different numbers there. Thank
you for clarifying that with me,
So I think that, um I don't know
what those three funded are as
they can be exempt or they can
be.
Classified, but you do have
that's a pretty
Decent ratio. I think right
there just
Just from an HR perspective.
Um
The other thing I want to look
at as I'm looking at the
transfers out of the personnel
services, employee benefits
category and revisions.
And it says here that you have
moved, Um 4% of
That funny the operational
funding into other for contracts
or other things. Can you explain
that a little bit to me, please?
Yes, Representative John. Thank
you for the question. Um, as you
are aware, we came into office
on January 1, and that's when
our transition fully took
effect. And so we spent the
first couple of weeks one
meeting our staff and
understanding the core functions
that they do meeting asking them
what their needs were and then
launching straight into
legislative session.
Um, the bar that was requested
in May was to to utilize vacancy
savings that had been built up
over the entire fiscal year to
try to take care of some
security needs that we had
security cameras was was
probably the largest issue that
we needed to address at that
point.
And then a couple of other items
Ultimately, we didn't end up
using that money because the
request for the bar was doing
May 18th. And I think it was
maybe in the beginning of June
that we actually got authority
and approval for that bar. At
that point, it was too late for
any kind of procurement time to
to procure those services.
Appreciate that explanation.
Thank you. Is there anything
else from lfc that
You wanted to add Mr Chair,
Representative Noh. The bar
transfer from personnel was 100.
138,000 great.
Under 38,000.
So which brings me to as I'm
looking at a reversion there's
126,000. It was reverted back to
the General fund was up to take
the place of that. Or can you
explain that Mr Chair?
Mr Chair, Representative Luhan?
Yes, I stated, we were unable to
procure the items that we needed
before the fiscal year ended as
we got that permission, so we
reverted about 125,000 and that
if you look at it is the
equivalent of one staff member.
Um, however, hiring a personnel
as you all are aware as a fixed
long term costs that we need to
take into consideration and so
We wanted to spend that money
wisely within the time period
that we did. Ultimately,
procurement timing didn't allow
us to do so.
Appreciate it.
So I'm going to zero down into
some information. I've been
sorry I didn't get to have a
discussion with you earlier, but
I did talk to you during the
interim regarding your programs
and and one being that since
statue, I believe is the work
and save
And that's some legislation that
I have zeroed in on and actually
gave you some funding for that,
Can you update me on that?
Because I am looking to
introduce that to get a message
from the governor to bring that
back onto, um, interception
intercession. Excuse me. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Absolutely. Mr.
Chair, Representative Luhan.
Yes, we The work and save board
was created by this body.
And it was administratively
attached to the office of the
state treasurer. Um, the board
experience. I think a little bit
of turnover, and so they became,
They lost a couple of members.
They also lost their executive
director in May of last year,
she resigned, retired to the
moved on, Um, as as you may be
aware of being administratively
attached is a little bit
different of a relationship
between
Our agency in that office. They
have a fully functioning board
that this body has provided the
authority to carry out the
initiatives and the intention of
that statute. Our offices here
to facilitate and administer
funds and provides support where
necessary and ensure that
they're meeting all state laws
and regulations. Um
Since since the loss of their
executive director, The board
has not hired an executive
director, representative John
thank you for providing junior
Bill money last fiscal year. We
do have that and we have
informed the board of that money
and how they can utilize it. We
have offered and continue to
offer our services to the board
while until they find an
executive director to carry out
the mission.
Of that statue. Um as of yet,
that we have not heard back from
them, but we stand ready and
able to support them.
Mr Chair representative. The
only thing I'll add to that is
in 2023. The Legislature
extended $400,000 appropriation
to the office and re
appropriated that money to be
used in the contractual services
category. About 60% of that
appropriation remains about
$231,000 so
Funding isn't an issue for this
program. Mr Chair. Is that
correct? Mr Chairman? That's
that is actually not correct.
There is no money in the program
other than the 75,000 that you
gave for this last fiscal year.
I just contacted one of the
members this last week and said,
We still have that 75,000.
You're running out of time. What
do you want to utilize it for?
We're happy to have very modest
the director of programs and
outreach
Send out you know the oma
requirements and do the minutes
for you if you guys meet, and so
that's where we're at today, Mr
Chair. If I may, you took some
of that funding that was
initiated initially for this
program and read we We funded
some other program. Can you tell
me what happened? Thank you, Mr
Chair representative. That's
correct in HB two last year was
re authorized for use in the
agency in the 300 the contracts.
For contracts. Mr. Chair,
representative Luhan. It was the
re appropriate reallocation of
that appropriation as specific
language that it's not to be
used for work and safe. Um, it's
meant for other operational
needs of the agency. So when we
became came before the this body
last year, asking for our
budget, um that was a
compromise. I think that this
this body made and moved that
money.
To be utilized for operational
needs. So it is. It is clearly
spelled out in the statute an HB
two
How those funds can be utilized.
Understood but intention had
intention was for something
else. I just want to point that
out.
Um so I'm very happy that you're
moving on to other programs and
everything, but I think you, um
my recommendation for you for
this agency is to to come back
and I've offered myself to be of
help with this. I think this is
one of the most essential things
When you're talking about
financial literacy that we don't
have in place.
Um with work and save Mr Chair.
We have over 62% of our, um,
workforce that works with
private industry that doesn't
have any savings from age 18 to
64. I think that these are some
of the and there are even more
severe or drastic statistics
there. But this is something
that if you're going to really
focus in on
Building our future. Um
And giving them some, um
Somewhere leaf with savings when
they retire, and those sort of
things this is something that's
really essential to me and to
and they're not here today. But
AARP who is really championing
this initiative
And I just wanted to put it
there because there have been
put there have been put a lot of
There's a lot of effort and a
lot of revenue that's been put
towards this program and I don't
want to see I don't want to see
it go away.
And you are tasked with the
responsibility. I get that it
wasn't your administration that
came into except that but it is
in statue and I want to really
be here to help you with that,
and whatever way I can, And if
we don't know if we have any
board members here, But if they
are here, or if they're
listening, I would like to have
a meeting with him and and get
some things, um, understood or
straightened out. If you will,
Mr Chair.
I appreciate the time but I
still want to. I want to focus
in on this, Um
This three versions and these
things and very clear on my end
that it was just the change of
administration and all the
things that came along with that
that puts you in a predicament
where you had to make some of
these decisions. Is that
correct? Mr. Chair
Representative on Yes, that's
correct. Thank you.
Appreciate the time. Thank you
for seven day like Cruz.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Madame treasurer. You know the
treasurer's office off taken for
granted Very often, There's
always an assumption that things
are going to be done well.
And unfortunately that doesn't
always occur as you referenced
earlier.
The the notion the standard of
safety, liquidity and yield.
What is your philosophy around
those areas because that really
is the basis of foundation for
does the financial security that
the state will enjoy?
Or not. Thank you, Chairman and
representative. I appreciate
that. You mentioned that because
that's the foundation of our
administration and statute and
our responsibility as a
fiduciary. We're supposed to be
prudent in what we're doing. I
think this office has been used
to now making a dollar out of 15
cents when it comes to
The 200 category.
And they really have reaped.
The benefits of their history
and the staff that's been there.
Some of them have been there for
almost 20 years. We have quite a
few that are retiring. My
concern is that we don't have
enough incoming staff to learn
from those that have been doing
this process manually for the
last 1020 years, and I also
don't want to lose them and
their expertise because the
workload is just overwhelming.
When we're looking at risk
assessment. I am very concerned
not only on the requirements
from the federal banking and and
nacho to, but I'm also concerned
about us staying updated on any
type of fraud and also making
sure that we have enough people
with checks and balances to
handle our debt service
payments. Just keep continuing
to help our schools at such a
low cost for them.
To be able to continue to make
governments. Local governments
feel comfortable and and that
their money is safe to be able
to invest with us in the local
government investment pool. So
for us, that's why I say I need
your help. I need to at least
get to that minimum to keep us
above water. I almost feel it's
like this cup.
And we're putting our fingers
everywhere and then Jr is
putting his toes in one place
and another and if someone just
decides to leave, or something
just happened, We're going to
have the floodgates open and and
that's what I fear happening
because we're not taking
preventative action to be
thoughtful about what we need in
order to keep doing this awesome
work.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I appreciate that, uh, that you
have that philosophy, which it's
always assumed as a natural
consequence of being the
treasurer, which is not
necessarily, uh, you may
recollect that a few years ago,
the Berliner County treasure
sought yield over
Liquidity. Mhm and so
Consequently, the county lost
about $30 million. Now, The
county's budget certainly isn't
as large as the state of
Mexico's, and so that that
notion is critical to the
operations of treasurer's
office.
That's more of a statement. Mr
Mr Chair, but just Lastly, I
want to applaud you for the the
thinking out of the box when it
comes to
Financial literacy, particularly
for Children as a former parts
professional. We used to really,
really do our best to fill that
gap that the schools often
didn't when it came around just
life skills, critical life
skills, and so I really hope
that that the Department of
Education
Really understand what you're
trying to do, and there's some
cooperative I can't think of a
more well suited operation and
the Treasury Office to work with
with financial literacy, not
only with Children, obviously,
but also with our with our state
employees. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you.
Representative accrues. Next we
have represent Brown and ranking
member. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Good morning.
Madame Treasurer. Thank you so
much for all the good work that
you're doing.
I want to start with Mr
Chairman, Page eight of your
presentation.
Just a question on that.
So on Page eight. Mr Chairman,
we see this legislation.
About aligning New Mexico law
with the federal Able Age
Adjustment Act of 2022.
So I'm a little confused here.
It says the idea here is to
raise the age of onset of
disability from age 26 to aged
46. And to me, it should be just
the opposite if we want to help
more people.
And if the current age is 46,
and I don't know why we wouldn't
drop it to 26 to achieve this,
so
Am I? I just need to have this
explained to me, I guess mr
Chair
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
Thank you for the question. Um,
I'll ask Jerry modest to to
clarify if something I state is
incorrect. So moving the age
from 26 to 46 isn't limiting its
increasing the age that you can
apply. So right now, the cut off
is if you do not have a
qualifying disability at age 26,
you cannot participate in this
program.
Um, as we have seen, and as a
nation is studying some
disabilities have a longer
onset so they don't they don't
identify that They have a
disability until after that age,
so this is actually increasing
the ability for individuals with
disabilities to participate in
this program. Can I just add one
more thing? Because I think this
is important because I know all
of you love veterans.
And New Mexico has more veterans
per capita than anywhere else in
the United States. The bill also
expands eligibility for
inclusiveness of disabled
veterans and individuals who
become disabled disabled in life
later, this is going to be from
a national perspective, an
increase of 6 to 8 million
Americans eligible for able
programs nationwide, including 1
Million military veterans.
Okay, Mr Chairman. Thank that's
a that's I understand. Now.
Thank you for that, Mr Chair, I
would next like to turn to page
and this is where we learn about
some of your initiatives that
you're pursuing. And I, Mr Troy,
I want to thank the treasurer.
Once again. You've been a
constant advocate for financial
literacy for high school
students.
I agree with you that is
absolutely vital, Crucial
subject for our students and
when they step out of high
school into the rest of their
lives, they need to know what
they're getting into. And how to
make sense. So, Mr Chair and, um
Madame treasurer.
The holdup on this. I've I've
carried legislation on this
quite a few times now. And it
seems that the
The blockage is that the chair
of the House Education Committee
Does not want this to be a
freestanding course. My proposal
has been that it be a half a
unit.
His position is that financial
literacy is covered in
economics.
But in fact when you blend it in
with other concepts, I don't
think our students are getting
the focus on the subject that
they really need and I think to
do justice. It needs to be a
half unit course. And it should
be required for graduation. So I
thank you for getting a request
to the governor for a message on
this that as well and I hope we
can get this done. So thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, I just make one comment. Mr
Chairman Quick.
This year. We added our
relationship with our banks and
both bank associations have also
written letters as to why this
is important on their end for
our tellers for grocery store
everyone who deals with cash.
they need these employees in New
Mexico just as much as
everywhere else. And we have an
op ed that we've collaborated
with sink New Mexico that will
be coming out this Sunday.
Hopefully, you can share it with
those. That may be naysayers
when you were proposed the bill
and hopefully we can get this
across the finish line when we
look at all of the other states
are neighbors. Red blue. It
doesn't matter. We have 26
states that have already
increased to financial literacy
compared to six states. Just a
few years ago. We need to add
ourselves on that list.
Mr Chair and Madam secretary.
Polls are showing consistently
that
Um 85%, or more people agree
with the position required.
So it's a very needed subject
matter and the public again. I
hope we can get it done.
I want to ask a quick question,
Mr Chair about the baby bonds,
and I hate to be the lawyer on
the panel. Who brings us up, But
I wonder if giving every child
born into poverty is what it
says here, a publicly funded
bond trust account at birth.
Would that not violate the anti
chairman? No. Um, so actually,
the state of Connecticut just
passed it the first state in the
United States.
We have about 25 other treasures
that are looking at it in the
legislation this next year. What
we're doing is we're putting it
into a bond that money stays
there and solvent when a child
gets born in Connecticut,
They're only doing it for
Children that are Medicaid
recipients. Um, so anyone who's
on Medicaid they have $3000
saved for them. It's a total
lump sum that they're investing
as they go, so by the time they
turn 18 or 19 years old
They'll be able to utilize it,
but the way that utilizes not
just I'm going to give Nathan
this month, Mr Chairman, this
money it's gonna be where he has
to put in an invoice from the
school that he's going to the
school gives us the invoice and
then DFA or another agency will
be the one to pay out the check.
So you're setting them up not
only for success by having the
money but being able to make
sure that there's accountability
along the way, and they also
will have to take an educational
training so it will not
interfere with the anti donation
class. And a lot of
The states are looking at it
from getting the unclaimed
property monies and investing
those and putting the investment
money into that bond.
And Mr Chairman and Madame
treasurer, So I don't know if
Connecticut has an anti donation
clause, but we do
And our state Constitution of
tells us that these
These transfers of money cannot
be given to a private
individual.
Um I, um I think there you know,
there are several exceptions
listed to the anti donation
cause, and we need to be sure
that we fit into one of those
exceptions, and so I just raised
it as a question.
And then, um, I understand, Mr
Chair and Madam Secretary that
Uh, Treasurer that, um
You know that this money could
potentially be used for
purchasing a home.
Paying for higher education
things that those are all very
noble goals. And I like the fact
that you're restricting the use
of my can't just go out and buy
whatever
But again, I think we need to
really look at that anti
donation claws and get a legal
opinion on that from someone in
our state government.
Thank you very much. Um, And
then, finally, um
Mr Chairman and Madame
treasurer. I did want to ask a
little bit about the local
government investment pool.
Um, in your presentation. It
says that 123 local governments
participate. How many do not
Participate. Lot more, Mr
Chairman, then there should be
so we're actually as we go on
the road this year, going to
work and and speak to a lot more
folks. We have a couple of
meetings set up with our new
governors public governors
because there has not been any
pueblo. Um, that has ever
participated in algae. I p
Rehm, a novel from the Navajo
Nation has in years past. We
want to make sure that if they
don't have an investment advisor
within their small town village,
you know, Water association and
they have a little bit of money
that they know that this is a
tool that they can utilize for
that diversity, liquidity and
expertise. So we're trying to
spread the word, but that's why
I sort of pivoted and said, Hey,
I'm pivoting to all of you
because I know people trust you
within your local communities.
And if you can help spread the
word will be happy to talk to
them about the details, But let
them know that they don't have
to just put it in the CD. We can
help them to diversify that.
Okay. And then a little fine
point here, Mr Chair and Madam
Treasurer.
Can you do a comparison for us
of what say if the local
government puts money in a local
bank, which I think probably a
lot of them do as opposed to the
this fund.
What's the difference in rate of
return returned? So it depends
on your contract. Mr Chairman,
representative. It depends on
your contract negotiations with
your bank. You have your cash
deposits, and you should be
making some type of earnings
within that, and it should be in
in in in, um, in line with what
the border finance has approved
each year, which just happened
this last month.
But in addition to that, right
now, we're making over 5%, and
it's in Treasuries Agencies
Mortgage backed securities
commercial paper, supra,
Everything that's in vanilla in
6 1010 that allows them to have
the expertise that Vicky and
Anna have so that they don't
have to do that part of it,
because you know, as a county
treasurer, City treasurer,
you're busy doing a lot of other
things. They do it for you. They
send you your statements.
Then you can put them into your
council meeting minutes or or
your treasurer's report, and it
allows you to have a way higher
earning than what you would with
the C D. The other big
difference is that on the CD,
you can't get it out until it
matures. Unless you get it out
of fee with us. You can call us
and within 24 to 48 hours,
depending on the time of the day
that you call us. We can give
you that money with no type of
penalty to that, and it's as low
as five basis points.
Which, if you had the money is
to get an RFP to get a financial
advisor. It would probably mean
a lot more than five basis
points for people who have a lot
smaller of an investment
portfolio. Mr Chair that is a
very attractive feature, so I
imagine a lot of people would
be seriously looking into this
now. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much Represent
Brown. Remember Armstrong?
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation, and,
um, I'm excited for you to go on
the road and tell all of these
entities about exactly what you
and representative ground. We're
just talking about. I would
also, um
Represent Brown brought up the
the anti donation part of it,
and so I'm I'm curious about
that as well and also to make
sure if it if we can do it that
we include C t e and other
things, not just, um, any kind
of higher education, but
certificates and things of that
nature, So I would appreciate
that.
Um and Mr chairman as far as
financial literacy. Um, I I know
we have champions in this
legislature that want that done.
And I think it's part of life
skills.
Um, for the for all of New
Mexico, and not just in schools,
but in others, So I appreciate
you being open to do that.
Um, as far as the work and save
act, um, the legislation is in
place the problem becomes when
we mandate it.
I sat
And others sat in a room at the
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce
with people in this room and
we're promised it would never be
mandated and to mandate it is a
problem.
It's a problem for the Mexico
state businesses.
That are in place already.
Ah!
And
I am all about helping
individuals save money work. Um
I personally have several
businesses where we encourage
financial. We teach financial
literacy for free.
And we encourage people to say.
And we give them lots of avenues
but to mandate
On a business in the state of
New Mexico.
Yeah, is is not the way to go
Mentorship is much better way.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you. Member.
I'm strong next week. Another
representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Madam Treasure.
Good to see you there. My
question is on Page three. The
trade volume 26 point
3,000,000,016 billion increase
over the year.
I mean, would be indicative of
why you really do need more
Staff. Can you just elaborate a
little bit about how that 16
billion increase came about?
Well, Mr Chairman and
representative with the influx
of more money coming in. We have
a lot more that needs to be done
in detail on the trade volume
within those funds. We also have
a lot more funds that both the
Legislature put into effect this
last year and is thinking of
putting into effect this year as
well as a lot more bond payments
and debt service that needs to
be done so within that.
Is the
Making of the sausage, which is
the trade volume.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative Eric.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions. Really want to thank
the committee for Great
questions, Madame Treasurer to
you and your team. Thank you
Think what we heard today.
Madame Treasurer is in the
interest in some of your
initiatives.
I think there's a curiosity
around sort of the increased
volume of management and sort of
the question that was just
posed.
How does that impact with
staffing and so I think we're
going to ask for the LFC
recommendation. I would ask Mr
Gray and the analyst, Mr Miller
to work with you to understand
in more detail how the increased
response actually what you're
managing along with some of the
committee's interest in areas
that you are helping to lead
with local governments.
Some of these areas. What
potential increase in staffing
that might merit this budget,
Madame Treasurer continues sort
of the past few years. Practice
of 2 to 3% increase, so it's not
flat, but it's not. It's not a
big jump for sure. So if we
could ask the analysts to go
back to work with you, thank you
for the presentations.
Thank you for your time and your
indulgence. I greatly appreciate
you and thank you for your
service.
Mr Chair, I would move that the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation. Okay, It's been
moved in second. And is there
any opposition to that motion?
See none. Okay, thank you very
much, Madam Treasure.
Okay, We're gonna ask our
tourism
All right. Great to see you.
Thank you for being here. Miss
Rodriguez, please. Uh, once
we're ready,
We can get started off.
Um
We'll go through the LSC and
then the D F a analyst and then
um, please feel free to
introduce the members of your
team.
Please. Absolutely. Take your
turn.
Lesser supersensitive. Yeah,
and, uh, sort of a note of
caution. The mics, particularly
at the table. There are very
sensitive.
Sort of in try to keep only one
on
And, uh, as we're sort of
getting everything together
members if he can turn the
agency code for 18. I see. Many
have already
I'm sorry. I can't find my dip.
She packed it. No, no, I just
had it. Let's get an extra one.
Mr Terror. I'm sorry. My
apologies.
Um good morning. My name is
Julissa and I'm, the LFC
analyst for the Tourism
Department. Um, as a chair said,
we are referring to documents
under Tab four and that's agency
code for 18.
With me. Today I have acting
Secretary Atlantic atoms, ASD
director Jennifer Saavedra and
the D. F. Fe budget analyst
Monica Tapia.
So I'm gonna kick us off with
the total overall
recommendations from the LFC and
the executive so
The executive recommended 794.1
more general fund revenue than
the LFC.
Overall, the executive increased
general fund revenue by 7.6%
While the LFC increased general
fund revenue by 4.3%. The main
differences in the revenue are
in the tourism Department, as
well as the marketing and
promotions programs.
In the base. The executive
recommended roughly 300,000 more
for personnel and 400,000 more
and other services.
The executive also recommended
94.5000 for an expansion while
the LFC did not, and I will now
pass it over to Monica for the
next program.
Thank you to Lisa. Mr Terra
members of the committee, the
executive recommendation
includes $299.6000 for personal
services and employee benefits
to provide a 6.6 agency wide
vacancy rate with a one FTE
increase. I will now pass it
over to Julissa for the
differences in the first week.
Mr Chair, starting off with
program code 456, and that's the
New Mexico magazine, and you can
refer to page four in your
document. The New Mexico
magazine does not receive any
general fund revenue and is
fully funded by revenue from
circulation, advertising and
other product sales.
The LFC needs executive
recommendations were aligned in
overall revenue, and they both
decrease the revenue by 310,000.
The executive in the LFC, but
also aligned and spending for
personnel, contractual services
and other services.
Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee for P 547 programs
support in revenue, the
executive recommend.
26.4000 less in general fund
support for program support than
the LFC. LFC recommends the
General fund increase of 12.2%.
Well, the executive recommends
an increase of 10.9%.
For the base while both
recommendations increasing
funding for personnel. The LFC
included 26.4000 more than the
executive LFC recommendation.
Increased personnel by 243.3000
or 12.3%.
For the transfer of two FTE from
the Tourism development
Executive recommendation for
216.9000 provides programs
support a funded vacancy rate of
4.8%.
For performance analysis have
come to a consensus on the
performance measure and target
and inspect expansions. Neither
of the executive northern LFC
recommended the expansion for
additional technical step.
Mr. Chair, Moving along to Page
seven. We're now on program code
548. This is for the tourism
development program.
For this program. Both
recommendations decrease the
General Fund while the
executive actually, um
recommended a 202 102,000 more
than the lfc recommendations
also increased other revenue. Um
In terms of spending. The
Executive increased personnel by
202,000 more than the lfc and
this accounts for the decrease
of the transfer to the other
program, as well as an increase
for funding for personnel.
The executive takes into account
vacant positions.
And both. Both analysts came to
a consensus on the performance
measure.
Madam chair and members of the
Committee for P 549 marketing
and promotion in revenue. The
executive recommendation is
about 618.5000 more General fund
than the LFC.
The executive recommendation
increases the General fund by
8.2%.
Well, LFC increases the General
fund by 5.2%.
Both the LFC and the executive
recommended decreasing other
revenue by 500,000 would take
which takes into account
What the agency actually
generates from its enterprise
sources.
For the base. Both
recommendations increased
personnel with the executive
recommending 124,000 more than
the LFC.
The executive recommends
increasing personnel to fill
vacant positions by 218.5000.
Lfc recommends increasing it by
94.5000.
The executive recommends 400,000
more and other services than the
LFC executive recommendation
increases funding to the tourism
event Growth and sustainability
Program by 1 Million, while the
LFC increasing it by 900,000.
The executive also recommends
increasing funding to the travel
trade program by 400,000.
Well, the LFC recommends an
increase of 100,000.
Performance analysis have come
to a consensus and all
performance measures and
targets.
And expansions. The executive
recommendation includes a one
FTE expansion for travel trade,
while the LFC did not
However, the LSE recommendation
does increase personal funding
in the base, which could part
partially on the expansion
request.
Now for special appropriations.
This is Madame terror members of
the committee. I would not like
to briefly go through the
differences in special
appropriations.
For the destination Forward
program for grants to tribal and
local governments. The executive
recommendation is 3 million.
Well, the LFC recommendation is
1.5 million.
The Marketing Excellence Bureau
for centralized State Agency
marketing campaigns. Exactly
different Emanation is 2
million, while the LFC did not
recommend it.
For national advertising for
national marketing and
advertising. The executive and
the LFC recommendation is 15
million.
The route 66 revitalization to
enhance and increased route 66
terrorism and to match federal
grant opportunities.
The executive recommendation is
2.5 million.
Which LFC did not recommend.
For Special Olympics to contract
service.
Two services was not an agency
request. This wasn't lfc,
adding, which is why you will
see an LFC recommended amount of
300,000 and nothing from the
executive.
For this eight unification for
beautification and litter
control efforts. Is it 2 million
that Alessi did not recommend
it.
There is only one language
difference for the national
advertising special.
The executive recommendation is
shortened to broaden the use of
funds. The LSE recommended the
agency's requested language
executive recommendation did not
include language for special
Olympics as it was an LFC Edin
and not requested by the agency.
I will now pass it on to
secretary acting secretary
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. It's great to
be here in front of you all
today. Wanted to first. Thank
you, Lisa. Thank Monica for all
their assistance working through
this process, I know there's
there's just so much involved in
it. I also want to take take
some time to recognize our
staff. That's in the room today.
So Jensen Vedra is RSD director.
We also have enough you could
just raise your hand or stand up
Isabel Lopez, who's our CFO? We
have Raelian Subeih, who's our
chief procurement officer.
Novellus. Al Assad is our
general counsel.
Victoria. Greg is our research
director.
Erin Lad is our marketing
director.
Cody Johnson.
Is our communications director.
Redgrave's is the CEO of New
Mexico magazine, Holly Kelley.
Is our tourism development
director.
Nolita. Greg goes here. She's
our co op program manager and
Sonia Rivera, who's our
executive assistant here. Um so
thanks for them being here. They
do all the hard work.
Um so I'll try to be efficient
here with time. I know that we
You know, we want to have time
for questions, but I just want
to make sure I'm educating this
this group on all the things
that we're doing, and you know
what's at play now and then into
the future, so I won't get into
too much of the agency at a
glance because a lot of that was
discussed, but just
Our vision of the department is
to be the primary destination
for venturesome travelers. Uh
Secretary. Is there a handout?
Is there a presentation? Yes, it
should have been provided to
everyone in advance given
yesterday yesterday afternoon.
Give us just a moment. It looks
like this. Sorry about that
Yeah, yesterday, right?
Did you by chance? Also email
the electronic correct
We're gonna try to put it on the
screen. Okay. Members considered
Yeah, we can take
These are this is the hand of
delivered yesterday.
Perfect. Okay. We have it on at
least on one screen.
We're gonna get it to, um and on
the other, Okay, if you want to
go ahead and get started.
Trying to save paper anyway, so
we know there's the paper, okay?
Madam chair. Would you like me
to continue?
Please do. Thank you so much.
Thank you. So now that you're
getting these past down front
and thank you, Lisa for helping
with this So again, our vision
is to be the primary destination
for venture some travelers. Our
mission is to grow New Mexico's
economy through tourism. We went
through. You know some of the
divisions which I'll go through
in this presentation, but New
Mexico magazine.
Program support, tourism
development and marketing and
promotions as something I wanted
to highlight on this, uh or two
things I wanted to highlight on
this At a glance first, whether
FY 24 budget and the recurring
of 24.4 million and the non
recurring of 18.7.
We're incredibly appreciative to
this body for the support that
we have received over the past
years. Um, and I think that as
you'll see in this presentation,
we've demonstrated a lot of
success in terms of our return
on investment.
I also wanted to highlight our
versions were less than a
percent of our General fund for
fiscal year. 13. So, um, I think
you know the money is is getting
out the door and is doing great
things for the department.
So moving on. I would just
wanted to touch really quickly
on Arpaio because I know this is
something that's been a big
deal, Uh, ensuring that we're
spending our federal dollars so
just to provide some context
here we've received through AARP
about 38.5 million total.
That money has gone towards
national advertising. New Mexico
True campaigns. It's also
supported some of our event
promotion and some of our
tourism development efforts from
the 38.5 million. We currently
have 25.5 million that has been
spent 12.9 that's obligated and
which is 0.012%.
Um, so I think that in terms of
Getting the money again out the
door, demonstrating that we're
we're able to do that.
Turning to where we're at from a
visitation perspective, So we
talk about the increases in the
budget that we've been afforded,
but I wanted want to just show
how that's translating in terms
of visitation, So we're seeing
strong visitation. We continue
to have record breaking numbers.
Um in 2022. We saw 4.7%.
Um, increase over 2021.
In total trips, but I think
what's more important is that
9.3% from 2019, so we're not,
you know.
We want to put the pandemic
behind us, but we're just
really, really moving in that
trajectory, um up, even even pre
pandemic.
And we're starting to see
business travel pick up, I think
which is really encouraging for
a lot of our markets and GMOs.
We're seeing the average length
of state increase, which
obviously translates to
additional dollars and one thing
that I think is important to
highlight. 49% of overnight
visits included a cultural
activity versus 29% of the US
average. Why That's important is
because we lied in very hard on
On sort of cultural promotion
within all of our advertising
because it resonates with our
travelers.
So, um, going to slide five just
wanted to give a longer timeline
here. So nearly 12 years of of
success that we've had with the
New Mexico True campaign. Proud
to say I was I was with the
department when we first
launched this and happy to be
back stewarding it along, but if
you were to average it out about
37.7 million
Um, annual visits about some 0.1
billion in annual visitor
spending again. That's average
were surpassing that this year.
We continue to have more
communities by in and we
continue to look at research to
drive our decision making.
So moving on to slide six. This
is something that my
predecessor, Secretary Schreier
had worked on. And I think it's
really important because it
really sets the stage as to the
entire ecosystem of what we do
with the department.
Obviously on the left side drive
demand that really focuses on a
lot of our marketing efforts to
bring people to New Mexico.
Um, but of equal importance, and
I think we're really building
things to build the capacity to
grow our tourism development
because we have to drive the
demand and then
When visitors are here. We have
to make sure that they have the
best experience possible by
making sure that we have great
events that are supported. We
have infrastructure. We have
amenities. We have places that
we can be proud of. So that's
equally important to us.
Moving on to slide seven. You'll
kind of see her in parallel.
Just these two different
complementary missions. So
tourism marketing makes a
promise.
Of adventure steeped in culture,
tourism development delivers on
that promise through quality and
then amenities, attractions and
access.
So to go, Um, first through some
of the programs that we're
working on in our tourism
development division.
So the right side of that
infinity symbol.
We have our tourism event Growth
and sustainability program. We
are in our second year of this
very excited about this program.
Um, this is open to all eligible
entities that have events that
drive out of state visitation.
Drive in state travel that
results in overnight stays so it
can be some sort of regional as
long as it has that piece to it
and provide an experience
aligned with what we're doing
here with the New Mexico True
campaign. Our initial year we
had
We had 182,000 that that went
out and to 17 events of this
year. We've increased that
significantly to 462,006 9234
events around around the state.
And so what? I would
Um
Ask you in your packet, too, is
there's actually
Hand out if you want to see the
events that have been supported,
Um, through this program, I
would recommend you take a look
at this handout because it has
has everything there and also,
um, Obviously, this map kind of
just shows the distribution of
where we've seen all of those
activities.
This is just something for you
to look at it. You know, I think
this is a good success story
about how our event program has
worked. There's three tracks to
it and accelerator as you know,
Coop and a sponsorship.
Um And I think the Bernalillo
Indian arts festivals, really an
example of a group that we
worked with.
We were able to support them and
standing up an online store,
improving their website so that
now we can work with Coop to
drive.
Traffic from potential visitors
to their website to get
interested in that event. We're
seeing some success there, so I
would encourage you to take a
look at that.
So from events to
infrastructure, another really
important piece of the
development picture.
Uh, three years ago, we began a
process with the councils of
governments to identify tourism
related infrastructure projects
in the I C i P around the state.
Um, that were of high priority.
So we're talking about what is
tourism related infrastructure?
I would think of anything from,
uh, renovations of historic
theaters to signage and way
finding to visitor center
improvements to rodeo ground
improvements, which we've seen a
lot of investment towards events
centers, outdoor recreation
infrastructure, Really all of
those things that
That we can build that make
these places that people whether
they're visitors or residents
want to be and recreate.
So through that process, we
developed a dashboard of all
the existing projects within
kind of state government had
encourage you to check this QR
code out so you can see within
your community.
Um you know which projects are
our priorities? That was the
genesis to what we have built
this year, which is the
destination Forward program,
which is a dedicated program.
That can support tourism
infrastructure. So before we
were really working sort of as a
Parker partner and a broker to
work with other state agencies
like E d, d through their
trails, Plus or D s a to the
recreation quality of life grant
to try to get projects to have
some visibility. But what I
think with this is provided for
us as an actual dedicated
funding source.
So this year we have 10 projects
that have been funded through
this and I would encourage you
to take a look in your packet.
There's this spreadsheets of the
spreadsheet will have all of the
destination forward. Uh,
Projects and we're really
excited to keep that going. Your
As was discussed. There's I
appreciate on both the LFC and
the executive side that there
are some recommendations to
continue that program.
And it's just another little
snapshot of how those awards
have been distributed.
Um, so clean and beautiful. So
this is a program that is I'm
very proud of. We've we continue
to grow it. This is a program
that
That supports communities that
sort of that community level.
Uh, in terms of their efforts to
end littering, reduce waste
beautify their communities and
power their youth and increase
their program capacity.
From last year to this year, we
went from 45 to 59 partners. We
went from 790,906, or almost
907,000, with 75% of those
partners being rural. This these
are dollars that go into
community cleanups that go into
education and outreach efforts.
Um, and I think that this is
something we'll discuss this
with the request of 2 million
that
It's just very much needed right
now to make sure that we're not
only cleaning up our highways
and byways, but within our
communities that we have safe
communities that we can be proud
of.
So just wanted to provide this
for some context when we're
talking about the request for
the 2 million
You know, we, uh this clean and
beautiful fund is typically is
funded through registration
vehicle registrations, so it's
pretty much capped the
distribution that we receive.
Um we're really are trying to be
more deliberate and moving as
much money as we can towards
grants. But as you can see from
the 2.4 million requested to the
907 awarded there's a lot of
demand out there. And I think
that it's just some
Work that can be that's that's
that's desperately needed in a
lot of communities.
So shifting from the right side
to the left side of that
infinity sip signal symbol we're
talking about driving demand. So
our marketing efforts and and
bringing people to the state
So our marketing uses data to
target the most valuable and
most likely travelers to ensure
New Mexico is the primary as a
primary domestic destination.
That is our goal for that
division.
You'll see and slide 18. These
are our current domestic markets
that we are in marketing for
with our new Mexico true
advertisements. Um, so we have
three that are currently in
market for a winter campaign.
Um, we also thanks to all of the
support from this body, the
Legislature and the executive.
We were able to expand.
With the additional dollars that
we received to the San Francisco
Uh, market so, really, thank you
for that support.
So to get into a little more
about why San Francisco why
California and we're very much
Informed by data and in 2023.
Um, you know, evaluating this
this data
Essentially, Californians are
staying longer and spending more
money.
It's what the data showing.
We're seeing it in the Bay Area.
We're seeing it in Southern
California. And so you know it
was a deliberate decision to try
to
To try to increase our presence
there because I don't think that
we've met any any point of
diminishing returns in terms of
our ability to impact that
market.
So thank you again for for the
resources that have allowed us
to do that.
Wanted to shift to another piece
of our sort of our advertising.
I consider New Mexico magazine
and a lot of ways to be one of
our best advertisements in the
sense that, um the content is
incredible. We have great staff
that produced just
Incredible content. I was in New
Hampshire for for Christmas.
seeing my my father, and he was
so excited because they had New
Mexico magazine at the Barnes
Noble in Manchester, New
Hampshire, and so I mean, it's
just it's It's really, um it's
just a special special
magazines, the oldest state
publication in the country, and
we also have
Tourism adventure guy to travel
adventure guide that we co
author with the magazine. That's
also I think a really, um
Just a really important tool for
marketing the state.
Try to speed up a little bit.
All right, um, so in FY 24. This
is another important marketing
tool. We have one of, I think
Incredible importance to to the
state is our co op program.
We've undergone some recent
improvements and changes to that
program. It's it's now at a 2 to
1 match. It wasn't a wonder one
match.
Um, we have received additional
dollars for that program. So
again. Thank you to this body
for your your investment in that
the 2 to 1 matches really
increase the participation and
increase the partition.
participation among our rural
partners. So we're getting we've
gotten a lot of positive
feedback from that, and I think
it's been really helpful to our
communities.
Surrounding out on the marketing
side.
So I want to make sure that we
mentioned are earned media team.
We obviously talked about the
paid media. We're here to talk
about in a lot of ways to paid
media. But there's there's so
much that gets done between Cody
Johnson and his team.
To tell the story of New Mexico
two to the right people so that
we can have stories in The New
York Times and an outside
magazine and these publications
and I think that really
Uh,
It's something that you look at
the dollar amount that that
translates to in terms of R R O.
I
And just from the kind of the
sweat equity and the hard work
that goes into making that
happen, Um
And we just have an incredible
product to sell.
In New Mexico, which makes it
easier.
So just to go into results, Um
In your packet.
There is a
A news article just from the
journal.
That was sort of a celebration
of
Um
Of the visitor spending numbers
that we received through our
economic impact study. Every
year. We do a visitation and an
economic impact study.
And 8.3 billion of direct
visitor spending another record.
Um
We
I intend to continue to grow
that we as the next slide will
show where we continue to be on
a positive trajectory, and I
don't know if in your packets I
know there was kind of a packet
snafu. We did provide someone
pagers that do have great that
do have kind of within the
community. What that economic
impact looks like
Um, our research division,
Victoria, Greg and her her team
just do an incredible job and we
take this very serious. So any
questions on data always always
open to that, but very strong.
Very strong, um, movement in the
tourism economy.
So just showing the trajectory
again. Um we continue to grow so
as those investments have come
in which we appreciate we will
continue to return dollars to
the tax base through G R T
through lodgers tax. The local
communities, Um, we're primed to
continue our success there.
Just to finalize with a few
initiatives and then they just
get into the budget and just
some of the differences.
So, um, you'll see it with for
route 66.
Um
Just to kind of give where we've
been. There was a national
commission.
That was formed by Congress to
begin planning to celebrate the
2026 centennial of route 66.
Um, the eight states involved
were all convened. Um, they
As part of their work. M O U. S
for signed with the sort of that
designates states in Mexico
being one of them.
One of those requirements was
that we, you know, we have a
working group within the state
to start to work towards, uh
towards what that's gonna mean.
And when I say what is that
going to mean Event promotions,
commemorative items? Um, you
know, infrastructure and product
development.
Productions, all of those things
that we're going to need to
think about
How are we gonna start to plan
for that? So we, um so there was
an executive order that was
formed that was convened, Um, to
begin planning that we had our
first meeting.
Last month.
Um And so as part of that
What I want to make sure is that
we're not flat footed on this
and we're in a position that we
have dedicated funding to go
towards these efforts. Because
this is, um you know, once in
100 year type of thing, it's a
big deal. I think there's going
to be a lot of fanfare about it.
and I just think it's important,
not understanding totally what
the federal picture looks like
with respect to funding.
That we sort of look to control
our own destiny here. I think we
have incredible communities. Uh,
in new Mexico that that deserve
this and deserve to to have this
celebration positively impact
their communities so small but
expensive Typo here. So are the
requested the executive records.
2.5. Not too that will be in the
later so we're actually
requesting 2.5.
A million. And so, um and when,
when we go through the
The budgets all kind of go
through that nuance, but I think
it will be an opportunity for
us.
We have, uh, some time to get
there. And so, um
So I I just think it would be a
great use of resources to to
support the state.
Last new initiative Marketing
Center of Excellence. So, as you
all know, House Bill 233 past
that does, um
Sort of opened up this marketing
Center of excellence idea in
which through the department is
responsible for for carrying
this out.
And for coordinating messaging
across state agencies under a
unified voice. I mean, think
about all the campaigns that
might involve the different
agencies for environment,
economic development, rld us and
they're all kind of in sometimes
doing doing different things.
And so it's a matter of of
really.
Working on the successes that
we've had leveraging that to
support state agencies. The
issue is, if we don't have
funding for it, it will have to
come out of our existing
resources. And so that is why we
are requesting to see some money
into that rounding off on the
request here, just a couple of
differences and just want to say
thank you. We're very
appreciative for for for each
request.
Which is to get into some of the
nuance So 7.6% recurring is what
we are. We are requesting
believe it's 4.3 or 4.4
recurring. That's in the LFC
wreck, So we're getting close.
But you know with that.
With those dollars. What we
intend to do is 459,700 increase
for our two hundreds, which is
to reduce our vacancies and also
to hire for a travel trade
position.
Somebody to represent us at
trade shows and to to sell the
state.
And then a million dollars to
make sure we can keep our coop
attitude, A one match to make
sure we can keep our events
program where it needs to be.
And then $400,000 to support
that travel trade programs. So
again, we can have that presence
at trade shows that so that New
Mexico can be part of the
discussion when international
trade operators are looking for
products and looking for what to
sell the consumers.
Special appropriations again.
Very there's a lot of
similarity.
Just a little bit of the nuance
The LFC recommendation has 15
million for national advertising
and for route 66 and for the
celebration is this Cobra?
Respectfully, the executive as
15 million specific for the
Nationals, which would be the
same as the current year to keep
us in San Francisco and our
fourth season.
And then we have again that two
And then we have again that 2.5
million for route 66 dedicated
where we would use our existing
programs but have us a specific
part of monies for route 66
projects and potentially some
enhancements to those programs
to to allow for for better
participation from route 66
communities and, as was stated
marketing Center of Excellence
is not included in the LSC
wreck.
Um, And with that clean and
beautiful request of 2 million
of General fund, too.
To sort of enhance and augment
our sort of our vehicle
registration distribution that
we get.
I think it's needed. Think it's
time that we really look at at
cleaning up our communities.
This is a proven program.
There's a lot of demand for it,
so I would respectfully request
your support of that.
And lastly, we have a nice
little dashboard data dashboard
that if you want to follow this
QR code to our teams worked
really hard to put together.
Um so please peruse that at your
leisure. And with that
Madam chair.
Stanford questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Um
Analysts and secretary. Um we do
have some questions from
committee members were going to
start with representative
Chatfield and then go to
representative dela Cruz.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr Secretary. Thank
you all for the good job. You do
We really appreciate you. And I
think you're getting the getting
the word out about, uh, a little
normal treasure in the United
States, and that is New Mexico.
Ah!
Clayton, Beautiful Grant.
In my district. There's a place
where you can stand and look
And you can see far enough that
you can see the curvature of the
earth. Unfortunately, if you
turn around and look at the
cliff behind you, you see
graffiti that every people
Some people go on vacation with
a spray can in their suitcase.
I'm not too sure why they want
to do that. But sometimes they
did.
We have sandblasted that it's
all right. You know, the highway
comes through there.
We have sandblasted and cleaned
it up. I think
They probably have gotten a
grant from y'all. Maybe once
before the Harding County to
clean that up.
Um, my question is
You know a person like me. I
can't go put a sign in on the
highway. It it is a
Felony.
Two. If you do enough, Chrissy
if it costs a certain amount to
clean that graffiti up.
Would there be a possibility of
getting a sign? Can you all do
that? Can you put a sign up?
It costs a lot of money for for
us to try to clean that up.
Well, we need a
We need to clean it up and we
need to put a sign that tells
people the gravity of
Uh, doing that, but
That we've got people doing it
so
Madam Chair, representative
Chatfield. Thank you for the
question. Um
Absolutely the clean and
beautiful program has supported
signage in the past.
I think it would just be a
discussion on right away. You
know where the sign exists, and
if if it's appropriate, but
We have done that. We've done
anti literal um, you know,
signage specific to whatever the
community call out is going to
be summer nicer. Some are a
little bit more harsh in terms
of messaging, but we have done
that through our cleaning
beautiful program, and we'd be
happy to have a discussion about
Doing that through through the
county application or anything
like that. So
I'm Chairman Secretary. I would
love to talk to you about that.
Later on.
When we're sitting back, you're
shuffling papers were looking at
various things. And and one of
the things I was looking at is
In. Uh, is this smiling one? I
think. Volume three.
And I see a reversion actually a
transfer of 1 million and
$67,700 out of personal services
and employee benefits.
Um, just wondered about that.
That's
The chairman, I'll defer to Ras
director
Sorry, madam Chair
representative, Um so we
actually have a, uh
Dispute that amount and we're
working with our LFC analysts to
go over that amount. What I can
tell you. Our records show is
that we bargain about 1.1
million from our 400 into our
two hundreds. Um, a net last
year of we look at just general
funds, not other state funds. We
needed a total of 400.
Sorry. Get you the 418,000. So
that was like, kind of the net
amount that we needed in R four
and R 200. So we actually took
money from our 200 stuff went
our for two fund are two
hundreds to find our personnel
services. If you look at others,
all funds, including other state
funds, we barred a total of
500,000.
Um
From our 400 into our two
hundreds, So we're not sure
where that number came from. But
we are working closely with our
lfc analyst. You look, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
believe that's it.
Thank you, representative dela
Cruz, then Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Once
upon a time I was the deputy
director of the Albuquerque
solid Waste department and we
were beneficiaries of the Keep.
Albuquerque, Clean New Mexico
clean.
I'm curious how and who
qualifies for applying for those
those grants funds.
Madam share representative of so
clean and beautiful is eligible
to to any local government,
entity or tribal entity.
Um, so whether it's County City
village or tribal entity, we we
have a match requirement, but in
kind is is actually acceptable
for that match requirement,
which I think is helpful to a
lot of communities. So those are
the eligible entities and and as
we've demonstrated, we we've
increased that significantly.
In terms of our partners from
last year to this year, and we
intend to keep doing that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I I know
that, uh, the promotion around
anti littering or artillery
educating Children as important.
Do you have any type of Children
programs at all?
Madam Chair representative. It's
actually a really important part
of the program itself. Its goal
for is as youth empowerment of
five goals within that program,
so a lot of the work that gets
done through clean and beautiful
actually happens through youth
volunteers and youth groups. Um,
so absolutely I think that
there's the educational piece,
but there's also just
Um, the work that's that's
that's occurring and who's you
know who's participating in it?
Um, youth involvement is key.
Thank you, Madam Chair just
offline. If I could get a little
more information, I appreciate
it. Thank you.
Thank you, representative
representative Luhan and then
Representative Brown. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you for being here today.
I think that it's it's always
good to hear from you and
everything you're doing for our
state and and just highlighting
everything. I think that
Yep. Chatfield said it all like
you're you're bringing your
Highlighting, Um, the state of
New Mexico on the map.
Is we still go places and they
still don't know that we're part
of the United States.
Happens. Um, but we're putting
us on the map, literally. Um,
And in that that weight my
question is about the route. 66
and tenure. Um, 2.5 million
you're asking for
And
Some people don't know where you
know Route 66 is and we have it
all over. We have to see knows
named after it. Ah, la, and it
actually coincides with the
centennial for something that's
happening here in Santa Fe czar
says Obra Festival if you will,
but sponsored by the Qantas
club, and I think that, um
Jennifer knows, Um, Miss Madam
Chair. Um
So
And I'm looking at some of the
things you're highlighting. I
don't know if we've reached out
enough to you about that here in
Santa Fe for this is Obra. Maybe
Kind of partnering with that
centennial type of theme. Can
you speak to that madam chair?
Madam Chair or Mr Chairman, Uh,
representative. Absolutely. We
were actually supporting is over
this year with the sponsorship
for their 100 years, so we're
really excited to work with them
on that.
In terms of the route 66 and how
that that configures from our
last meeting or are first in the
last. I guess you would say
meeting with the route 66
coordination group. There is
interest in making sure we
celebrate all of route 66.
whether it's the sort of new
configuration or the old
configuration. Um, just to
really celebrate that larger,
larger history. So yes and yes.
Perfect. That's you nailed it.
That was my question, because
historically Santa Fe, um
Was part of route 66 and you
know all roads lead to Santa Fe
Guessing RCR Capital City. So
thank you. I really appreciate
that, Um
And can you What is there in the
budget, and I'm sorry? Because
I've been in and out, but the
2.5 is the executive asked. And
what is the lfc on that?
Mr. Chair representative. The
LFC does not recommend the
standalone like item for the
route 66, but it does include it
in the overall marketing and
marketing and advertising for 15
million. Thank you. I really
appreciate that. That's all I
really have. I just want to say
thank you again for all the
work, hard work and everything
you highlight for our state and
I have traveled quite a bit in
these last couple of years and I
see us at the airports. I see
it, I think
Uh, is it Dallas Airport? Madam
Chair? If you haven't been there
were everywhere. I mean, there's
videos of our flamenco dancers.
There's there's videos of our
beautiful scenery. Um, and I
believe also in Arizona and
there. I think it's just it's
daunting to see it in a sense,
but then it's like it's it's
warming to know that that's
what's going and we're
We're seeing those dollars being
spent in that way and bringing
people here and I just last
question, actually.
When we're bringing all this
tourism, uh, these dollars and
folks here is that translating
to people moving here, Madam
Chair.
Mr Chairman, Representative, if
we do it the right way. I think
so. Um, you know, I think that's
why tourism development so
important. I think it's we have
a beautiful product to sell. We
have beautiful landscapes, but I
think it is incumbent on us to
make sure that we have the
amenities and the access to
those amenities to really build
that quality life because again,
I think
If you're building places that
people want to be whether
they're visitors or residents,
you know they they're they're
enjoying their time there and
To your question, You know,
Hopefully that is a motivation
to move here. Thank you. Are you
measuring that, anyway, Madam
Chair?
Mr Chair Representative. Not
directly. However, I can speak
with our research team and we
can see what we can come up with
to maybe get you some more
information. It's an important
question. It's an important
question. You have one of the
best research teams in the state
in in the measures and and
And you're focused on everything
that relates to thank you. I'll
look forward to that
information. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you very much for saying
Thank you. Van Advice chair.
We're going to go next door
percent Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
And you are acting Secretary
Adams. Is that correct? Yes, Mr
Chairman representatives
Correct. Lansing Adams. Thank
you. Thank you very much. Mr
Chair and acting Director acting
Secretary secretary. Okay. Got
to get it right here.
Um, I noticed that the sports
authority that's a program code
550 has been zeroed out.
Could you explain to us why that
is, is it that mission was
accomplished or it's no longer
needed. Um, why? Why is that
going away? Um
Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, Representative.
Thanks for that question. Um,
sports authority has been. I
think the the idea behind it is
in the vision behind it is
still. Um you know very much
important to us in terms of
improving New Mexico is a sports
destination.
Just to provide some history. We
did receive some funding for
sports authority, Um, believers
in fiscal year 2023.
Um, we received some money for a
staff person and then to do
essentially a study of this the
environment and unfortunately we
weren't able to to hire anyone
at the salary and we weren't
able to to get anyone to respond
to the RFP. Um so we really had
to go back to the drawing board
on that. Um, I am, um
You know, I think that there are
things that the tourism
Department is doing through our
events program right now and
potentially through co op that
they do support a sports, but
that sports authority is
something that I think we have
an interest and figuring out a
path forward for how that's
gonna gonna look.
Um, I, You know, I think it's
just been there's been some
hiccups in terms of getting that
to where to where it needs to
be, But But in this position,
it's it's important and it's
something that will will work
towards. Um you know, figuring
out the right way to execute
that program. We're just not
there at this point. And so, Mr
Chair and secretary
Do I? I'm trying to remember
what the amount was
appropriated. Was it about a
million dollars or little less
than that? Originally?
Mr Chair representative. No,
that's not correct to the the
sports Authority. We received
$100,000 for to hire.
Personnel and junior money that
was at a junior money and then
we received $100,000, which we
tried to do the RFP to do the
study that was in FY 2324, the
executive did recommend, uh,
that we receive funds for that
program. The LFC did not. And so
I think that's what the acting
secretaries mentioning. I think
right now we're looking at what
is the best way to move forward.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, Mr Chairman, Um, I want to
ask a little bit about the clean
and beautiful program. I know
that the Department of
Transportation here in New
Mexico has a litter cleanup
program.
I think it used to be right
around a million and it might
have increased a little bit from
there. Um, is your agency
coordinating it all with the
Department of Transportation in
terms of which
Areas to clean up.
And and the reason I bring this
up, Mr Chair, um, is
We? What I have noticed in my
area is the litter cleanup
doesn't occur before the mowers
get out to mow the grass.
Either in the media inside, so
they're just chewing up the
litter that's already there and
making it seem worse. So if
there were some coordination
with dot maybe we could avoid
that.
Happening, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, representative. I'm
sorry to hear that That's
happening. We do We do
Coordinate with with D O T and
secretary, sir not on their
efforts when it comes to again
the highways and byways that
there
Usually responsible for and then
the clean and beautiful, really
supporting that in community,
But from a timing perspective,
I'd be happy to have a
conversation. Maybe with you
offline about that situation,
and we can talk with
Um, Secretary Stern about how we
can improve, maybe the timing of
how we're rolling our programs
out together so that were better
coordinated. I think we can
improve.
Thank you for that. And Mr
Chairman, Mr Secretary.
Um
Litter is very bothersome to I
think all of us and it's not
always so much that someone's
tossing a soda. Count out the
car window. Sometimes it's just
that a load a truckload of some
kind of
Garbage isn't secured well
enough, and it's it's leaving
the truck. So, um
It's a It's a problem that
sometimes it feels like we can't
get a handle on it well enough.
But I think there's a role for
some creative work here. And I
want to bring up the example Mr
Chair of Spokane, Washington.
As a city park right down near
the river front there in
Spokane.
And the the park people. They're
created what they call it
garbage goat.
You know, we say goats eat
everything.
This little metal structure. It
looks just like a goat, but it
has a vacuum cleaner nozzle in
the mouth of the goat and so
Children actually want to find
litter to feed the goat.
And the back end of the goat.
It's kind of a wall of rocky
wall and behind that is the
infrastructure for backing out
the garbage and
In some ways, I'm ambivalent
because Mr Chair we don't really
want Children going to touch
litter without gloves or ripper
sticks or whatever.
But it really has been
effective and so if we can make
it fun.
And we're looking at Children
here primarily to be a part of
the solution. I think that's
helpful. There could be a
variation on a garbage goat. It
could be some other
Whatever.
So I just bring that up. And
then finally, Mr Chair. I do
have one
Comment about New Mexico
magazine. I love that magazine
and I have been a long term
subscriber.
But I'm going to say something,
and I don't want anybody to
consider this a criticism. But
it seems there's a lot of
sameness in the magazine.
And New Mexico is a whole lot
more.
Then what we tend to see from
issue to issue Now I love the
recipes and I try to recreate
them, so don't change that. But,
um I just feel like we're
missing some of New Mexico
because the focus really seems
to be more on northern New
Mexico.
So I just bring that up. It's my
wish that I see a little bit
more.
Expansive coverage, but I do
love the magazine and I think
it's it's It's really a gym. So
thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much Represent Brown. We'll
ask for any one of those recipes
here. Thank you. We'll go next
to represent Garcia then
represent period. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Thanks for the
presentation.
I think representative bound
custom little bit on working
with the D O T on trash
collection.
You're asking for $2 million for
beautification.
Have you people work with the
city of Albuquerque because
doesn't waste end of Alba Group
piece of my district. And I mean
that is the dirtiest place in
the state of New Mexico.
Your trash process go up and
down and they don't cover them
And have you reached out to them
on trying to control that piece
of litter.
Mr Chairman, representative. We
do have currently an award with
the city of Albuquerque for
cleanup. And those are
typically, uh, specific when
they do their grant as to where
they're going and which cleanup
activities they're having. So I
have to kind of look at Look at
that and see if, uh, if that
area is being mitigated by any
of their work, and if it's not
maybe we can
Have a discussion. Maybe either
if it's going to be through
Albuquerque is application or
maybe Bergoglio counties
application we have or or or
another counties application.
But we do have, um
I mean, we're open to
discussions about where the need
is and where we have to where we
have to do a better job. We
follow the lead of the community
typically, and if they send us a
An application and say Here are
hot spots that we really think
we need to target were
deferential to that.
Um, But if you're seeing things
that are an issue, and they're
not being address, let's let's
talk about it. And as far as the
OT goes, you know again. We we
do coordinate with them. We kind
of have complementary roles with
respect to the highways and
within communities, But I think
there's room for improvement
there.
And the reason I brought that up
representative can see the
curvature of the Earth where he
lives at when you look back, and
it doesn't look very pretty.
One of the most beautiful city
in the center, Mexico When you
drive into it coming out of it
is not too pretty good. It's
really crashed out on top of
you.
You know, we need to address
that and another thing.
Do, you could help small
communities with beautification
because, like coming out of
grand to throw Highway 66
And there's a lot of little
communities.
Along between there and
Albuquerque.
That I have graffiti all over
him and crashed all over. Uh,
And there are a million dollars
doesn't go very far, Mr Chair,
but yeah, help the small
communities Latino.
Thank you. And Mr Chairman,
representative of Ras de
director. I'm sorry to have
missed this in your packet.
There is also the clean and
beautiful programs. So these are
all the awards and the
communities that they have gone
to.
Um So thank you for reminding me
of that. But, um
Representative. Let's let's
Maybe some pet have discussions.
We want to make sure that we're
we're meeting the needs of your
constituents in your community.
Thank you for that. I would like
I would have to do that.
Especially in love. You know,
the might.
Is a concern.
Both new and album, cricket.
Rich, Really, Uh,
A big concern. Talking
represented cruise and he's a
rip in Albuquerque, and he
agrees 100% a whole bad.
The city of creaky looks on the
West side on interesting 40. We
have to. We have to do better,
Mr Chairman represented. We have
to do better when it comes to,
uh, not only the
Cleaning up litter, but also the
education and also just changing
behaviors. Um, you know, we've
got to prove and and it is
painful, You know, it's it's
It's a frustrating thing for us
to see and we
We really want to, um
To make a difference in the
right way here.
And then thank you don't know.
Well, closing, you know, biggest
city in the same in New Mexico,
You know, we have a balloon PS,
So we have gotten the nations
and people right to that highway
and it it's it's It's pretty
sad. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Represent Garcia and
actually represent Garrett
invites your Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Can you
More clearly state your name and
position again. I still didn't
hear it. It's sorry. My name is
Lansing like Lansing, Michigan,
Adams and I'm, the acting
Cabinet Secretary. Mexico
Tourist different name, So I
know we're all gonna remember
Lansing's Yeah, we want to
remember different just to
confuse everyone, even more your
name, and it's not on the You
have a nice thing that website
but we don't know who you are
taking us there.
Um, I have a question on the
budget. Uh, Mr Chair Line 29 Web
hosting maintenance has 172
1000, but
Did you get money for that?
Under marketing and promotion.
How's your funding for, um
Your website.
Mr. Chair representative.
Neither the LFC nor the
executive included the 172 for
the Web hosting and maintenance
and development.
Can you just elaborate? Mr Chair
in Mr Secretary in team about
your social media, and I say
that I'm sitting here
translating stuff into Korean. I
lived in Korea Korean. We love
New Mexico because there's
chilies every place in both
places, but
Social media so powerful because
you can change it. You don't
have to have a huge marketing
thing. You just need someone to
translate stuff and stick it on
the Web. So that's why I'm
curious about the website and
your social media.
Funding and staffing.
Mr Chairman, Representative, So
as far as our I t like
infrastructure, and and our
website goes, you know there's
no huge up upgrades or updates
that we're looking to do. So you
know, in terms of a special
request for that, I think we're
in a in a good spot, but to
answer your question about
social media just in general,
um, the way I would look at that
within our department is
Our marketing division is very
deliberate in terms of our staff
and our presence on social and
whether it's through our
cooperative marketing program or
through our events program or
any of our programs that exist.
They do have sort of that social
media wraparound to them.
Um, So I think that that
Obviously.
Social media, and that Avenue of
communication is so important
now, and it's changing all the
time, and we're always looking
at new ways to do things. So I
think that from a just a
capacity standpoint, with our I
T and our technology were
strong, and I think that a lot
of
A lot of those social media
marketing messages get executed
through our existing programs.
Mr Chairman was Mr
I'm just gonna call you, Mr.
Secretary. Um
Do you do Tiktok?
I finally broke down and made a
tiktok account.
It sounds like a stupid
question, but people
Yeah, millennials people with
money and time to travel. Go
there.
Mr Chairman, representative in
terms of a presence on Tiktok
might have to differ. I don't
Okay. I'm being told. Yes. I
don't have tiktok.
Um, so we do have a presence on
Tiktok and Aaron ladder
marketing directors here if you
want any more specifics on any
of the, um, sure, very fun
campaigns that were running
through tick, okay, because,
yeah.
They don't cause massive amounts
of money, so and you can
multitask your videos,
Everyplace. Second question. Mr
Chair is how do you collaborate
with D O T and the Cultural
Affairs Department to make our I
40 rest stops reflect tourism
opportunities.
So Mr Chairman representative of
the There are two visitors
centers along I 40 the Glen Rio
Visitor Center and the Manolito
Visitor center that are both
Owned by the Department of
Transportation but operated by
the Tourism department.
Um, you know, I think this
speaks to we're talking about
route 66 and some of the
opportunities for funding and to
support certain projects. I
think that our visitor centers
and I've had discussions with
Secretary started about this.
um, could use some help, and I
think in terms of the facades
and in terms of the outsides and
some of the
Yeah, And you know, I really do
think that
There is
There is a need there and I
think we've done a lot to try to
to improve them on the inside.
We have great staff. Incredible,
incredible staff that I best
things I get to do is just read
the emails from people where
they talk about our staff that
our visitor centers and how they
They're just they do incredible
things. So we really have a
special thing going, But I think
that
There's what there's more we can
do with D O T.
Um
On the probably the external.
Yeah. You know the facades and
the building maintenance. It is
difficult sometimes because
they're very rural and remote to
get some work done, But that's
certainly not an excuse. So as
far as the O T definitely a
partnership there with the CIA
and the visitor centers. That's
something I'll have to talk to
Secretary Garcia Griego about. I
haven't had any specific
conversations about DC with the
visitor centers, but
Um, I know that they do have
obviously museums and other
places that if it makes sense,
Absolutely, D C and the Tourism
department should be working
together.
Thank you And and Mr Chair. Will
we be able to get
Funding additional funding to
support that from that route, 66
and 10 Real
Mr Chairman, representative from
the federal government. I'm
uncertain and that is why again.
I think it's just to make sure
we're sort of controlling our
destiny here with with route 66
that we do have a dedicated
funding source for that
centennial event. Um, in lieu of
Federal funds. Now, if there are
federal funds, they're one of
the ideas here is that that can
that money can be made as
available as a match,
potentially, but we're kind of
waiting to see. But obviously
with this coming up
Um, We don't want to wait too
long. So
Kate. Thank you very much.
I certainly Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you. I have two areas of
questions. Thank you, Mr Chair.
First, the Marketing Excellence
Bureau. I've noticed as we've
had other, um smaller agencies
before us. They have asked for
funding for marketing. And I
just want to confirm that, um
Some of these smaller entities
are working with the tourism
Department and the Marketing
Excellence Bureau. Is that
correct?
Uh, Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair?
Uh, yes. There. There have been
conversations. I do want to call
into just the fact that that
legislation technically begins
in July of this year, so we're
kind of having the conversations
now and and getting the initial
infrastructure kind of built up
so that we're not starting from
zero on July. 1. We actually
have some
Infrastructure built out. Um,
but
That is the intention. The
intention is if there are
agencies that have have the
media context that have the
The amount of money and working
media to not it doesn't make
sense to leverage scale into a
larger pot of money. They're
fine. Maybe they're not so much
needing to be assisted or
served. But a lot of the smaller
agencies with smaller dollars
where they just literally have
to go out and do one by and they
don't have that larger pot of
money to to leverage. Um, those
are I think the agencies that
are going to be more impacted by
The marketing center of
Excellence would be my my guess.
Thank you, Mr Chair and acting
Secretary. And so, um, in terms
of
When they have, um, special
requests for marketing funds, or
they're building it into their
budget request.
The reason that I'm
Curious is because
Um, you have a special request
for funding for the marketing,
Um, Center of excellence. And so
I'm just what is the difference?
What is the $2 Million that you
have asked for
Going toward
That
Yeah, yeah.
Mr Chairman, Madam vice chair.
The purpose of that 2 million is
to cede a contract. Um, we'd
have to go to RFP at likely, but
we wanna We wanna make sure that
we have enough money to see the
contract that can actually
execute the media planning and
strategy and also the buys, and
so we need to
We need to have seed funding and
then I think there's
opportunities in the future with
when that legislation passed to
have more interagency, um, you
know
Kind of transfers and
involvement there, But I think
that we're looking to. We're
looking to seed a contract so
that we have a turnkey kind of
service that that could be ready
for state agencies. So that's
what that 2 million is desired
to be.
Thank you. Um, and my last sort
of
Comment, I think is for the
route 66 Centennial, the
district that I represent
includes tramway and central. So
right as you come into the city,
and like some of my colleagues,
it may not be the nicest
entrance into Albuquerque. So I
just hope that there is a lot of
work being done with the city
and county and other entities to
really make sure that we are
putting our best foot forward.
In 2026. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much. Vice chair.
Dixon. Okay. We don't see any
other questions. Thank you,
Acting Secretary Adams, please.
If you want to conclude Mr
Chairman real quick. I just
wanna acknowledge we have a lot
of supporters here that that
braved the weather and came
here, so I just wanted to say
thank you to all of them. That
actually came out to something.
If you're here today, please
raise your hand for on behalf of
the Department of Tourism.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you
all. Thank you very much. Acting
Secretary. Okay, We're gonna ask
for the L. C recommendation. I
know there's some differences
both on the recurring side and
particularly within some of the
special, uh, approaches, we'd
ask the analyst to bring back a
little bit more analysis on some
of those differences. And with
that we're going to ask the vice
chair for the motion.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Okay, It's been moved. Is there
a second?
Okay. It's been saying by
ranking member Armstrong Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion?
Seeing none. It's adapted. Thank
you very much acting Secretary.
Okay, Committee. We're going to
go on to Economic development
Department. Quick reminder. We
do have a hard stop today at
noon if there's public comment,
will have to probably take that
in the afternoon.
Um And that does mean that we're
going to have to move quickly
through our five.
In, please, let's quickly get
Get on up here.
Okay, Great to see you. Acting
Secretary Secretary designate Ms
Rodriguez. Please start us off
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Good morning. My name
is Julius and I'm the LLC
analyst for the Economic
Development Department.
For this agency. Please refer to
documents under tab floor and
it's agency code for 19. You
should also have the packet in
front of you. And it's blue.
So with me today is acting
Secretary Mark Proper and D. F,
a budget analyst Simon Miller.
So starting off with the overall
high level for the agency.
Overall, the
Executive is recommending a
budget increase of 8.7% while
the LFC is recommending a 5.3
increase. The majority of the
differences are for the economic
development program, film and
the creative industries.
As far as expenditures. The
executive recommends more across
all categories specifically in
contractual services and other
services. The executive does
include record does include
increases for the Media Academy
and New Mexico Partnerships
contract which the LFC did not.
Across the board. The analysts
have come to a consensus on all
the performance measures and
targets.
Additionally, the LFC does
include 100 and 5000 more in
expansions, then the executive
and that specifically for Main
Street.
I will not pass it over to Simon
Miller. Thanks, Mr Chair members
of the committee again. My name
is Simon Miller and I'm, an
analyst with the essay.
Um
This is a
Complicated budget, five
different programs, and I know
you all have a million budgets
to go through. So
Really the three big differences
here.
Are
What do you, Lisa said about the
media academy. The executive
recommendation includes a
$300,000 increase for E. D. D s
ongoing relationship with the
Media Academy.
Um so that that brings funding.
Recurring funding from 700,000
up to a million dollars or
$300,000 increase. Lfc leaves
that component flat at 700,000.
The second big difference is, um
For the New Mexico partnership.
The executive recommendation has
an increase of 100,000.
To bring that.
Um, that amount up to a million
dollars for their relationship
with the New Mexico partnership.
The LFC leaves that at 900,000.
And then the third difference is
with the new Creative Industries
division.
The executive recommendation has
about $300,000 more for, um, uh,
grants for industries in that
In the creative industries. Um
Uh, to support and expand those.
So, uh,
Anyways, we'll go through each
program, you know, program by
program, but those are the three
main differences between the two
recommendations in front of you
so turning to
Page number.
I'm not sure what page number
you have, but it's uh p 512.
It's the economic development
division.
Uh um, The LFC recommendation
provides a general fund increase
of about 500,000 in this
program, while the executive
recommendation provides an
increase of about 300,000, so
the LFC recommendation is about
$200,000 higher and the
difference is entirely in the
personnel category. The
executive
Ah supports 29.
Ft in this program, whereas the
LFC recommendation includes 31
FT.
So, with that old pass it back
to Julissa to go over the the
next program P 54.
Mr Chair, Moving to page six p.
code 514 for the film program.
Overall, the executive
recommends
471.9000 more than the LSC in
general fund.
The difference is primarily
associated with operational
costs for the media Academy and
for personnel.
Overall, the LFC recommends an
increase of 5.9% while the
executive recommends an increase
of 33.5%.
As I mentioned the differences
in funding, and the
recommendations are for
Personnel for the film academy
as well as 300,000 more for the
operations of the Media Academy,
which the executive is
recommending.
And the LoC is keeping
Contractual services and
personnel, um, services flat
compared to FY 24.
Um
The LFC and executive are both
recommending an expansion, but
it's slightly different amounts
with the LFC coming in at 99.5
and the executive coming in at
104.3000.
All right, Moving on to P 5 to
6.
Um, program support.
In this program, the executive
recommendation provides a
$200,000 increase over the
current year.
Lfc recommendation provides
$100,000 increase.
And the difference there is for,
uh,
The department's relationship
with the New Mexico partnership.
As as we discussed before the
New Mexico partnership helps the
state recruit businesses to New
Mexico. So the executive
Uh, increases the budget for
that by 100,000, whereas the LFC
recommendation leaves that
component flat, So that's the
difference in this program back
to Julissa.
Okay?
Mr Chair, Moving on to Page
nine and 10. This is for the
outdoor Recreation department.
code 7708 so
Overall, the LFC and the
executive recommendations for
the General Fund are pretty
similar with the executive
recommending $500 more in the
General fund. Both
recommendations increase other
transfers by 1.8 million, and
that's for the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund, which
the agency will be receiving for
the first time and therefore 25.
Um if the LCS recommendation is
adopted, DLC also recommends
moving.
That expenditure to the other
other services category instead
of leaving it as its own, which
is not standard powers, which,
since its, uh, standard category
Um, Additionally, the LFC
recommends adding languages
language to clarify that it's an
interagency transfer for the
outdoor recreation program from
the Land of Enchantment Legacy
Fund.
Alright and Mr Chair, finally,
uh P. 709 that creative
Industries division.
So this will be a new program
within the economic development
Department in FY 25.
It was created through house
Bill eight of 2023.
Purpose of this new division is
to support support and expand
creative industries in New
Mexico, which includes, um
See what I've got here
Performing Arts Museum and
gallery, professions, digital
media and crafts and artisan
professions, among others. It
does not include film and
television.
Um
Both the LFC and the executive
recommendations include one FTE
to manage and administer this
program. The difference here is
the executive recommendation
includes
Uh, 500,000 in total, which is
about 300,000 more than the lfc
for, um, financing opportunities
for businesses within the
creative industries sector so
that wraps up the recurring
Differences, Mr Chair.
And so, um
I was gonna go ahead and move us
to the differences in non
recurring recommendations. This
is really where you're going to
see some of the biggest
differences between the LFC
budget in the executive budget
is is in non recurring.
So
To start with the executive
recommendation includes, uh, $25
million for the leader fund.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
doesn't include any additional
funding for Lita.
Uh um.
The leader of fund
Has spent between 30 $40
million the last couple of
years.
Um, the department is projecting
that the fund will have a
balance of about $18 million to
end
This current year.
So, um
If that's the case without any
additional funding, Uh
The state would
Have to cut back on on leader
expenses from what the state has
been doing the last few years.
Um, So the executive, uh added
25 million to the fund to
Keep
Spending at the current rate out
of Lida that that we have been
The next difference is 4 million
for operations and management of
the new media Academy.
The executive recommendation.
Includes 4 Million in non
recurring startup costs down the
road. The department hopes, too,
that the media academy will be
self sustaining.
Uh um. But the executive
includes 4 million for
expenditure through fiscal year
2026 as the media academy
becomes fully operational and
and and grows
The third.
Big difference here is, um
you'll see a $20 million
recommendation from the
executive
But to serve as matching funds
for a National science
foundation grant.
That
Money is obviously contingent on
the New Mexico team being
awarded.
Uh, with that grant and we were
hoping to find out by the end of
the calendar year, but we didn't
find out
And so, um
Still waiting to hear on that,
But the executive included
funding Um
Which would serve as matching
for about $160 million in
federal funding if the New
Mexico team is awarded, then, um
The executive also includes $1
million for the Healthy Food
Financing Initiative.
This has been funded the past
two years as part of the
governor's food and hunger
initiative.
Uh, the funding is used in a
variety of ways as a financial
incentive to
Expand access to fresh and
healthy food options in food
deserts.
The department is indicated that
federal matching funds can be
made available to the state if
the state demonstrates
consistent financial commitment
to this initiative, so the
recommendation from the
executive includes 1 Million.
Uh,
For the third year of of this
program.
And finally
The executive. The executive
includes 1.5 Million for
business marketing that the LFC
Did not include, UM and that's
to recruit businesses nationally
and internationally, uh to the
state.
Which has been, uh
Priority of this administration
is international business
marketing.
And recruitment.
And finally, there's a $2
million request from our sorry
recommendation from the
executive
Uh huh.
It's for a pilot program to
launch new high technology
businesses in the state and
provide mentorship. So the
thought behind this is to try
and commercialize some science
and technology, Uh, products and
services being developed at our
universities. Um
By providing seed funding and
also providing, uh,
entrepreneurial consultation to
hopefully, um, grow.
Businesses out of, um
The, uh
Research being done at our
universities.
So with that, Mr Chair and
members of the committee, I will
turn it over to acting secretary
or in terms secretary. Now I'm
struggling with that, Uh,
Secretary Robert. Thank you.
Thank you, Simon. Thank you.
Thank you, ELISA.
Madam vice chair. Members of the
committee. Um
Before I just started. There's a
few people I have with me today.
We're kind of dividing and
conquering today.
Amber dots from my director of
film is is down the hall. It's
in finance as well as Daniel
with terrorist from my New
Mexico Main Street, But I do
have some people with me today
and I really want to
Introduce you to our new
director of outdoor Recreation
Division. I don't think many of
you have met her yet. So I would
like Karina Armijo to
To raise their hand there, and
so you can put a face to the
name.
Um, And then I would also like
to introduce behind me here.
Um Shaunie, Harvey.
Um, she is the director of the
greatest acronym and State
government, our justice, equity
and diversity and inclusion
department, also more
affectionately known as Jedi.
And Johnny is Shaunie is here
with us today, And finally, it's
a familiar face, but you're
probably not used to her being
in this department.
And that's Nora socket. She is
now our director of strategy and
science and technology. You
probably remember Nora from her
time in the governor's office,
but she is now leading our
strategy, Science and technology
team. And so thank you for being
here, Nora. Unfortunately, my
CFO is attending a funeral this
morning and won't be with us.
And I also have with us Bruce
cars now.
Ours. P I o
You should have a presentation
in front of you. It's blue. We
turn to page two, just real
quickly as the chair has
encouraged me to be quick, so I
will try to do that, as you can
see the monthly employment
index. Uh,
Over years has as moved
Um, pretty consistently across
the country and in an upward
pattern, and for many years New
Mexico, Uh
Followed those, although we had
a big downturn at one point
where we weren't quite keeping
up. But since Covid
You can see we've been ahead of
the national average
unemployment and I think that
does point to some of the
efforts that we've made.
And and growing and growing jobs
here in New Mexico.
I want to quickly turn to slide
three because this is brand new
data that was released earlier
this week.
New Mexico is number one.
And wage growth.
Number one in wage growth.
And I think it points to some of
the things that we've taken into
consideration during this during
this administration of improving
the wages, we've taken proactive
action to make sure that J tip
wages that we're incentivizing
quality wages, not just below
average wages and as you can see
on the chart
The JTF wage average has
dramatically increased during
this administration.
You can also look at the leader
average salary, although it has
it has a little bit of a dip in
FY 23. Overall, you can see that
our average salaries and leader
or are definitely on the upswing
and and we think that directly
equates to this great data point
of New Mexico being number one
number one in the nation.
In wage growth.
So investing in the strong
economy as Julissa and and Simon
went through here here or our
requests, and you can see the
difference.
Three. FT is in the economic
development division from the
executive to one from the LFC
budget.
Two and the film 11 F T and the
film budget from the LFC. We
have one in the Creative
Industries 300 K and Media Arts
Academy, 500 K and the Creative
Industries Grant and 100 K into
Restore the New Mexico
partnership Back up to $1
million
Remember to to F Y s back. The
partnership was cut 200 K from
1.1 million down to the current
$900,000.
And then Simon went through the
special requests. I don't I
don't think I need to reiterate
those FBO switch quickly to
slide five.
I want to spend some time on
this.
Because that zero in the LFC
recommendation.
Means no Maxie on solar that we
recently announced the largest
project in New Mexico in 40
years.
No Intel expansion.
And no assistance for things
like noisy water winery.
As we mentioned, our current
balance is 18 million. We
anticipate some reversion
quarterbacks coming back, but we
also anticipate some money going
out by the end of the fiscal
year.
So we do project an $18 million
balance By the end of the fiscal
year. We do have one project
that we're very active in. We
are in a knife fight with the
state of New York to land this
project.
And we currently have $12
million leader offer on the
table to that project if we
learned that in this fiscal
year, uh, we we will be very
happy is it will be the second
largest project into Mexico in
the last 40 years, so but and we
do it over and above that 12
million. I'm speaking to
We have about $65 Million in
projects leader dollars in
projects in our pipeline.
Huge switch to Page six. We
talked about Lita.
Everybody likes to talk about
jobs, and we like to talk about
jobs. We like to talk about the
wages of jobs that
I know this much humanity when
you look at when you look at
these things, you look at a cost
to the budget. What's the cost
of the budget?
And what? What I like to look at
on the leader and all incentives
is what's the return on
investment?
It's just like when you invest
in your 401k or make your other
investments as an individual as
a person. You're you're wanting
to see what that return is.
The leader of fiscal return, and
when we talk about fiscal
return, that is just money
that's coming back to the state
of New Mexico and pipe. It
C i T and G r t. Uh those are
those are the numbers we're
looking at. We're showing the
35% return to the state and lead
a R O. I
If we look at all incentives,
and that that would include high
wage jobs, tax, credit, rural
jobs, debt credit manufacturers
investment tax cut at Lida JTF.
We're still showing a 9% return
on investment of all incentives
on leader
That's to the state of New
Mexico. If we then look at the
overall public investment, those
numbers are dramatic. 320%
return on investment to all
public entities to the States
Cities counties that were
funding with leader projects and
232%.
On all the incentives just to
the city and county and state,
so as you can see a return on
investment.
I wish my 401k could do those
kind of numbers. I I really do
So it works. Uh and it does
bring money back.
To the state coffers. It doesn't
just cost the money costs the
state money out of the budget.
Quickly. I'm going to go through
a couple of success slides that
won't spend a lot of time on
these because the chairman has
urged me to be briefed.
But as you can see, we do have
an impact across the state and
we list on Page seven. Some
projects that have happened in
very rural spots in New Mexico.
To highlight this one. Our
coastal wind towers. It took
over what was a dormant facility
and Dylan. It is now a vibrant
wind tower manufacturer,
creating 250 new jobs in the
Berlin area. And as you can see
it very nice $314 million total
impact over
Over 10 years.
Uh, we were looking just real
Quick, Little Toad Creek on Page
nine New Brewery and distillery
in Silver City.
Franklin Mountain Packaging a
cardboard manufacturer that is
Incentive Teresa or border
region.
A partnership with our as we
move on to 11 with one of our
tribal entities, Tallis Pueblo,
and we helped we used leader to
help invest in their new
economic development Center
through the changes that the
Legislature made three years ago
to allow such investments.
We've also had some very good
global impact. Thus the reason
we're looking for the additional
funding there for marketing
outside of the borders of the
United States and taking
advantage of what the inflation
reduction Act has turned onto
the United States and making
sure new Mexico is the leader
there.
Australian hydrogen company.
I started saying Tiffy made the
announcement that they're coming
to New Mexico previously
mentioned Maxi on solar out of
Singapore.
MM Tex Antenna at a Germany and
and, uh hotel industrial hotel
industrial manufacturers. Car
transmissions for the majority
of major automobile
manufacturers. They're
headquartered in Taiwan, and
they have selected a location in
Senator Resa to continue their
manufacturing.
As you see, that's 350 new jobs
and an annual payroll in excess
of $18 million and and you can
see these as we as you flip
through them real quick. Uh,
I think my, um
My tombstone is gonna say Did
you hear about Maxie on the
largest product project and New
Mexico in the last 40 years? Uh,
but it is a huge impact. It is
until asking the impact that
it's going to have over the next
decade. As we get to slide 16.
We do talk about our budget
request. Simon and Julissa did a
very good job of going over
that.
I don't think I need to spend a
lot of time on on the
differences there.
On the healthy food financing as
we move to 17. I want to mention
that
That $1 million that was
previously in DFS budget last
year. Is this just a shift from
moving up from D F A s budget
into the economic development
budget, so it's not really a
total overall increase in budget
to the state, even though it's
showing is an increase to our
department.
And as you can see on our
healthy food financing
initiative, you can see the
number of applications and the
number of funding that we've
been able to do. It's been a
very successful program within
our department.
Simon outlined very well as you
move to slide 18 differences in
our film budget request and the
in the really, really big one is
the difference of the 300,004
standing. The media Academy of
the State has invested a lot of
money.
Into the media academy, uh or or
the media collective.
Now being the house didn't
Mexico State University and in
the rail yards and a partnership
with Central New Mexico?
We've invested a lot of capital
money to get those facilities
up.
And now we need now we need some
operational money to get it to
the point where they will become
self sufficient and self
supporting.
And again, I'm not going to
spend a lot of time online 19
page Slight 19 as Julissa.
And Simon did. He did a good job
about lining the differences and
we asked for your consideration
and support.
Uh, Karina got the gift of
coming in and being a division
director of getting a flat
budget. So there we are.
Creative industries was created
by the Legislature last year of
very new division to the
department. This year. We had
some money that we moved out the
door.
From a grant perspective that we
did with the existing staff.
This year. Both budgets align
and giving us one full time
person to be the director of
that new division. And the
difference is the amount of
other costs and there were
asking for half a million
dollars to continue the grant
program that we started last
year within the program.
Again. I went through a fairly
quickly. I thank you for your
time. I thank you for your
support, and I'm ready to stay.
Thank you. Thank you to our
analysts and to acting Secretary
Roper. We do have some
questions. We're going to start
with representative dela Cruz
and then go to representative
Luhan.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Maxi in
Is it a reality? It's a reality.
Yes, sir. It is located in Mesa.
Former Garcia's district. I
mean, former district of
representative Garcia, former
former river Yes, he's still a
rat, but he no longer has Mesa
Also correct. Curious so makes
it also is booming on multiple
levels, including housing
manufacturing film, etcetera.
Netflix is located there. Uh and
it is a an area that I used to
formally represent on the county
commission and
It's it's well, all of this is
happening.
Ingress and egress series just
so poor because there's really
only one way in
Are there. Is there anything
being done to remedy that?
Madam vice chair representative
crews, members of the committee.
Excellent question. We've all
been to concerts there,
etcetera, And you know what the
egress and
And he's like yes. In fact, they
are currently in the design
phase for an additional exit.
That will be south of the
current real Bravo exit.
And north of the has led an
exit, so it'll it'll be right in
between there. Their they're
currently in the divide design
stage. There is an MOU in place
between the Department of
Transportation and Mesa del. So
To get that additional exit.
Uh, that egress will then come
off of interstate 25 come up the
mesa and will actually extend
What is now Message also
Boulevard all the way out to the
interstate.
It will then also breed an
additional loop around the east
side of Mesa del sole, so that
we can divert of this industrial
traffic and whatnot and not have
it running through the minutes,
middle of City center and the
and the neighborhood. So yes,
it's under design.
It is recognized and there is a
plan in place. Um, Madam Chair,
a point.
I used to also represent a
slender pueblo or leader. At
least a portion of the state of
Puebla. I would encourage you to
try to keep them involved and
informed because one of their
peeves is that often the states
municipalities do things without
involving them, and it clearly
affects them and because they
don't Mr Butts against us later,
Pueblo, so I would really
encourage that.
Ah! Also, Madam Chair. Uh,
This area interests me because
many of the I like to reference
to his many of my constituents
as a worker bees of Albuquerque
and clearly of this area, So
this is intriguing. I would only
request that if I could offline
get with you, or at least get
some in for more information on
what's gonna be done related to
Penta ring and leaving missile
also, thank you, madam. Mature.
Thank you, representative,
representative Luhan.
Um
I just spilled some coffee so
Would you like? Do you want me
to come?
You okay? Okay. I think I got
it. It's just a little bit.
Thank you. Um, I appreciate the
time to speak. Uh,
And I was out just a little bit.
Um so I kind of want to focus in
on the leader, Um, business
incentive program, Madam chair,
so
And just after hearing your
presentation kinda wanna just
put this kind of together with
something I'm working on? Um,
but
You just mentioned there are a
number of
Clean energy type of industries
coming into our state. Do you
have a percentage on that? And
and how many of those industries
are here? Investing in our
state?
And how we are able. And how if
you would, if you have that how
we're investing and helping them
establish, um with our economy
here, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair.
Representative Luhan members,
members of the committee.
I don't have a percentage and
the number of clean energy
industries
But it has been it has been
substantial and there's a
there's a couple of really good
reasons behind that.
Ah, and probably the biggest
reason is is what our federal
partners did in the inflation
reduction Act.
In creating those huge
incentives.
To re sure and onshore. Uh,
those industries that have
traditionally been honestly in
China.
Uh, and there has been huge
activity across the United
States since the adoption of the
inflation Reduction Act.
The good news is is because of
New Mexico's policies as well as
its location in the Southwest.
We have become recognized as a
leader in that clean energy
sector. And so we are getting
the phone calls and we're
actually getting to compete with
with these companies, so leader
is a big tool.
Yeah. And and creating that
Maxie in itself is $18 million
in leader funds.
So it's it is it is a big tool,
but it's but in addition to
that, I mean, it's a combination
of leader. It's a combination of
Job training and sending program
it's in. It's a combination of
the high wage jobs tax credit
the manufacturers, investment
tax credit and also the
partnership with the local, uh
local communities and counties
with the industrial revenue
bonds. Sure, all part of the
incredible package that we can
put together in New Mexico
To help these companies to
locate and makes us competitive
with the people that were
competing.
Competing against but they're
they're all critical. We
couldn't do it without any of
them.
We need them all.
Madam Chair. Um um, Secretary.
Is there anything limiting and
the language and leader and with
any of
These incentive programs.
That we may look at or a man to
incorporate more these type of
industries in our state.
Madam Chair representative Lou
Hound members of the committee.
Excellent question.
Right now. The way leader is
structured as long as they are
in the manufacturing sector.
It's It's good to go. Uh,
there's there's no restrictive
language there at all so as long
as it's in the manufacturing
side, which is one of our main
focus is
It is it's It's good to go, so
there's no limiting factors
there. Um, and you know the
Legislature put in place. Very
good guardrails where we have to
have security in place for equal
to the ground. So if there is an
event of clawback that we're
that we're able to call that
money back. So at this point, I
don't see any language changes
needed to continue to be able to
utilize this.
For this particular industry
sector. So, Madam chair, maybe
not language changes. But maybe,
um, integrating new language to
expand. Maybe expansion is the
word madam chair.
Madam Chair representative Luhan
members of the committee. Uh,
the the will of the Legislature
If they see areas we're not
covering or want to put
additional resources in place
for a specific industry sector.
Uh, we would be open.
Thank you. That's a good answer.
Um, but what? And I'm It just
goes to the question, though,
that we had, um
Money in the programs.
And lead a program that hasn't
been spent. Is that changed from
the time that we've received
this data, Madam chair
Madam Chair representative Luhan
members of the committee. Um
I'm not sure what
Date of that data. Yes, uh, that
you're looking at. But as we
reported, our current
unencumbered balance
It is $18 million. That's
correct, madam. Sure. That's
what I'm looking at. Is that $18
million, so
I is. Are you looking or do you
have things in place to encumber
that funding Madam chair met
him chair members of the
committee. We we are actively
and in conversations with nearly
20 different projects at various
funding levels, probably as the
smallest one being about
150,000.
And the largest one being 12
million currently. So, uh
They do not get to pre
encumbered.
Stage until we've made a formal
offer to them.
And all of formal offer means is
that we will earmark money. And
if you successfully complete the
application of the public
process, then we will. We will
be in due diligence. Then the
money will be there for you.
We don't We don't fully encumber
the money.
Until such time as it has been
the formal application has been
completed. The project has been
vetted to financial review is
done, and the public processes
been completed through the local
government entity, and the
Intergovernmental Agreement has
been signed between the
government and Andy and the
state of New Mexico, as well as
the project participation
agreement.
Then we fully encumbered the
money at that point, appreciate
that explanation in detail.
Thank you so much, Um
And I think it's a really good
program, obviously, for good
reasons. Um
And just a couple more questions
are are we
From your agency. What part of
the IRA funding Have you been
able to?
Or have you
Been requested to use Madam
chair.
Madam Chair representative
members of the committee.
We have not yet access directly.
Any funding for my orry.
But we've been the direct
recipient of what the IRA is
bringing in the fact that Maxie
on has made the commitment to
New Mexico.
Thank you. I really appreciate I
like us to see Adam Sure how we
can leverage more of those
federal dollars, especially when
Everything that you said that
our state being recognized and
in the clean energy industry and
those sort of things sort of
things we need to really invest
in. And I think this is
something that we need to really
kind of focus in it.
And, um
Talk more about and I know that
Madam chair is is very
interested in this and we have
conversations.
You're looking at, Um
Some policy and
And information on that, too. I
also wanted to moving on a
little bit is with our base
expansion listening here with
our creative industries. It
looks like we are
Going to be, um Lfc has
recommended
What the agency has requested
that what 146.1
And I'm wondering there's
another line here, Madam Chair
for creative industries. Rep.
I'm sure Can you expand on why
that is necessary? And you? You
put in that request for that
position. Madam Chair
representative Han members,
members of the committee.
The New Mexico Legislature
created the Creative Industries
Division last year without any
funding for personnel. They did
give us a substantial sum of
money to move through grass.
This. This request is wholly and
solely to put a person in in
that division.
The recommendation is for a
division directors so they will
be a one man shop.
One woman shop person shop for
this fiscal year to stand up and
expand the greatest industries
and the vision that Mexico
Legislature had when they
instituted division manager ERA
I was I signed onto that bill
myself, and I'm just wondering
because this looks like the same
kind of, um, direction that we
took outdoor recreation.
Um, economy and and without a
directorship, and we're giving
you more money is what I see
here who would be responsible
for making sure that this
industry is going to be
successful out of your office?
Madam chair.
Madam Chair representative
members of the committee.
Um, last year.
Sean Lee Harvey got the great
job of
Pushing out the creative
industries.
Funds Mhm from her position from
her position with assistance
from the New Mexico Main Street.
We did it. We did it that way
because we didn't have enough T
fourth radium industry's Main
Street has great experience in
handling grant funds and moving
money out the door so and
working with that type of
industry, so we use their
expertise and the RFP side and
then we used Sean is work with
the justice, equity and
diversity.
And understanding that that's a
lot of the people that are going
to be a client playing for this,
and we
Resources and got the money out
the door and in a very timely
fashion. Thank you, Madam Chair,
But I also see that you're
asking for position for Main
Street as well. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative Alon?
Yes, that is that is correct.
And the this is mostly due to
the generosity of the New Mexico
Legislature.
We used to have in New Mexico
Main Street staff in place and
we get 750,000 in a good year
will get a million dollars in
capital outlay of funds to push
through our main street program.
Thankfully, the legislation has
been very generous. We've
received $10 million now, three
years in a row, and that's
really put it. I mean, we've
been on the job. We've moved the
money out the door, but it's
really put a stress on our
contract management side of the
main street committee. Uh, team
that we need that we're asking
for that additional position to
help move those contracts
through.
Thank you, madam. Sure. I
appreciate that. And then you're
being
You're encumbering the work for
for something else we gave you
as a legislature. And so I want
to thank you for all the work
that you've done and just how
efficiency have been about that.
Um, but I would like to just
maybe Look at that that part of
this budget a little bit more if
you if else you can
Tell us that that's going to be
spent somewhere else, or or
directed somewhere else. Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair representative. Yes.
So you're right for for the
creative industries, the lfc any
secular, both recommending the
same amount 146, and that's for
the creative industries Direct
director position.
Um and then moving up to the
main street online 14 that Lucy
does recommend 110,004 Main
street representatives to
support the agency with the
additional funny they've been
receiving.
So for Clark clarification. Did
you say that the e d d rep for
Creative Industries LLC is
giving a direct because that's
not what I'm seeing here. I'm
just saying for creative
Um, I'm looking at a director
versus the rep. Yes, Madam
Chair. Yes, You're correct. It's
lfc is recommending it for the
creative industries Director
okay for the main street
representatives, So it's two
different because I see that I
read that differently. I saw
that. But I appreciate that in
the work that we're going into
these these industries, and I
think that
You're doing a great job on this
And if we need to expand more,
which I think we will in the
future as these, these monies
get funded and we're giving you
the right amount of support here
because I think we're going to
have some other things that
we're going to add on to your
load, But we appreciate the
work. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Luhan.
Um, I just want to flag for
committee that it is 1056. We
have a hard stop today at 12
noon.
Um and we've got two other
members and two other
presentations. So if we can be
very short and sweet with our
questions and very short and
sweet with our answers, that
would be wonderful. Thank you so
much. Representative Garcia and
then representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
really quick. I don't have a
question. Uh, First of all,
congratulations on your
appointment. Thank you. I have
worked with you since 2016. I
think, Madam chair and what I
what I need from you. Mark is
you're going with an open mind
and open eyes because a lot of
communities are this fortunate
and others.
You're like Mrs orders in my
command my district there really
fortunate
No other hand have problems in
grants trying to get off the
ground. So if you keep that in
mind
To go out with you open an open
mind so we could help the less
fortunate really appreciate
that.
Madam Chair, representative
Garcia. Thank you for that. And
just for the benefit of the
seventh generation to Mexican. I
grew up in Raton.
My stepmother had a ranch and
Mills, New Mexico.
I know, I know less fortunate
prices and
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, representative.
Representative Garrett. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. Um,
I don't know what your interim
director master director
Roper. Um one question. I have
it that at the last LFC meeting
we talked about Heather nine
areas of economic growth and
just like a bicycle needs
somebody to drive him. We talked
about having ensuring that there
was a point person and each area
to drive that hub and
Economic development is that in
the budget where is it?
Um, is it lacking to budget all
nine areas? I, Madam Chair
represent your ill.
Oh, I answer and that of Julissa
needs to correct me.
Uh, she can
You're you're singing the song
that
Sure Dixon
was all the time.
Ah, so it is in the LFC
recommendation. It is not in the
administrative recommendation is
is a straightened, correct
answer.
And where is it, Madam Chair
Just
Madam Chair representative. It's
an economic development 512 if
you're looking at the high
level, it's uh
Line eight. It's 500,000 for
five FTE.
Got it. Thank you very much.
Alright, Wonderful. Thank you,
representative at this time.
I'm going to take a motion. Um
And as we normally do, we'll go
with the LFC recommendation. I
think there are a couple of
areas that have been
highlighted. Um, but just for
everyone's awareness tomorrow,
the committee is going to do a
first pass through of
understanding this specials and
we know that Lita is in the
specials, so I'm sure that will
be talked about tomorrow. Um,
but could I have a
Motion to
Okay, I've got representative
Luhan, making the motion and a
second from Representative
Garcia to accept the LFC
recommendation for this agency
today.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Next. We're going to go to
agency 690, which is Children,
youth and families and members
should have, um
A presentation is getting passed
out, uh, for our members, and
then you can also find the high
levels behind Tab number six.
Once again the agency is 690 and
I noticed that the the
secretary's presentation is very
short. Um, and so I hope we can
keep it short. So we've got lots
of time for questions. Um, thank
you so much.
And whenever you're ready to
start, uh, it goes off.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dr Rachel Garcia and
I'm the LFC analysts for the
Children, Youth and Families
Department.
Um, we'll be reviewing C. Y F D
s materials agency 690 behind
Tab six. And although we're
actually also going to talk
about the juvenile Public Safety
advisory board, um, that was
agency code 765. It's a program
that's administratively attached
to C Y F D. So you have both of
those materials.
In your packet, and you can find
more information about the LFC
recommendation in volume two
page 375.
I'm here with me at the table
today. Uh, is Cabinet Secretary
Theresa Cassatt owes of C Y D as
well as Mary Beth Densmore, the
D F A analyst also direct you to
the high level that you have in
your packets of, uh, the VFA
analyst and I will primarily be
walking through the different
sheets but because there's so
much movement in the two
different recommendations, I
recommend you keep that high
level next to you because you
can see on one page those
differences.
Um I'm gonna talk very high
level about the differences. And
then Mary Beth and I will
alternate between programs and
go a little bit deeper.
Um, overall, uh, the executive
recommendation is 26 million
higher than the LFC
recommendation and includes a
general fund appropriation.
That's 22 million more than the
LFC recommendation.
The LFC recommendation for the
operating budget is that 1%
increase from the General fund.
The executive recommendation is
about a 10% increase from the
General Fund.
But see where he is One of the
agencies you've been hearing
about this week. Where the LFC
recommendation moved a
significant portion of requests
into the accountability in
government trust fund, and so we
will talk about those things
throughout these presentations
and because the LFC
recommendation included, um 19.9
million in that trust fund to
expand evidence based prevention
intervention programs.
That is one of the biggest
differences between the two
budgets, both prioritize
prevention and early
intervention where, while the
executive recommendation put
those dollars into the operating
budget, the LFC recommendation
put dollars for prevention and
intervention expansion into
that that trust fund to pilot
and evaluate programs before
putting them into the operating
budget.
The second biggest difference
just for you all to know what a
high level between the
recommendations before we kind
of get into the weeds. Is that
the executive recommendation
included a reorganization of the
department. Um, and that
included the creation of a new
program called the Family
Services Division, and and the
LFC recommendation did not
include that reorganization of
the department. Which is why I
suggest you look at the high
level to reference because you
can see the movement between the
things
Um
Okay, so overall, I mentioned
the executive budget
recommendation is roughly a 10%
General fund budget increase.
Um, and in contrast, the LFC
recommendation to prioritize
prevention and intervention, but
moved those things into the new
proposed accountability in
Government Trust fund and
finally, the executive
recommendation includes 27.1
Million in General fund and
expansion programs or programs
Support protective services and
the proposed family service.
This is division.
While the LFC recommendation
only includes 576,000 and
expansion in the General Fund
for five tribal liaison
positions. But then, as I
mentioned also provided
additional dollars in the
expendable trust.
Overall as well. There are a few
key language differences at the
department level will highlight
before we go into the specific
programs.
And the executive recommendation
includes, uh in request bar
language that would give the
Asian C the authority to
transfer $5 million between
programs. And that is the level
of bar 30 that doesn't really
exist anywhere else in state
government currently, so we call
that out for you and the LFC
recommendation does not include
that language.
So that's kind of the big
picture differences between the
two recommendations, and Mary
Beth and I will now go into the
individual programs and kind of
point out the key differences.
Oh, jeez. Sorry.
Okay. Thank you, Rachel. Good
morning, madam. Chair members of
the committee. I'm just gonna
walk you through programs
support and some of the
differences in their which, um,
truly are related to the
reorganization of the agency
that the executive is
supporting, Um in revenue for
programs support. The executive
is about $4.7 million higher
than the LFC recommendation
overall.
And within that it's just about
3 million more. In general
funding the LFC recommendation.
In the base. The executive
recommends 5.1 billion more
again than LFC, and this
includes the agency's request
part of this reorganization to
move 31 FTE.
Along with this additional
funding from behavioral health
program.
In the juvenile justice
facilities into program support.
The other recommendation does
not support this transfer of FTE
and funding into programs
support. In addition, the
executive recommendation
includes an increase of 141,000
in the base budget to increase
vehicle lease expenses. It was
requested by the agency but is
not included in the LFC
recommendation.
Uh, for expansions. The agency
requested a total of 1.8
million and this includes 1.1
million for 16 new F T E and
these would be across the I T
human resources and the tribal
liaison office.
The executive recommendation
moves about 700,000 in general
fund.
And 370,000 in federal funds
from the expansion request into
the base to allow programs
support to use existing vacant
FTE to staff. The Office of
Tribal liaison and to provide
support for
Reduced vacancies in I T and N
H. R.
The LFC budget recommendation
includes $576,000 in the
expansion from the General Fund,
and this is just support five
tribal liaison FTE to help me
Kevin s settlement requires and
I believe that's it, Madam
Chair, I will turn it back over
to Rachel. All right.
We'll move to the juvenile
Justice Services program. Um,
the LFC recommendation Here is
12.9 million higher overall than
the executive recommendation
with 7.1 million more in General
fund again. This is because the
executive recommendation moved
resources from juvenile justice
into programs support and into
the proposed family services
division.
However, the LFC recommendation
for juvenile justice is flat
with the FY 24 operating budget,
and it includes the use of 5.7
million in fund balance from the
juvenile community corrections
find and the regional juvenile
Services Fund while the
executive recommends using those
fund balances to support the
proposed family services
division, and the LFC
recommendation highlights a
question about the alignment.
Um, with the statutory purpose
of those funds, And in addition,
the LFC recommendation includes
language that budget for the
Juvenile Public Safety Advisory
Board, which is administratively
attached to see why F D within
that juvenile justice program.
Historically, we've actually
included as its own budget. It
has its own hearing, and it's
$7000. And so, um, this just
moves moves that into the JJ
program.
Um And then, uh,
The dollar amounts. However, for
that program are the same. And
so that's sort of the summary of
the differences in juvenile
justice.
Great. Thanks again. Rachel.
Madam chair. I'm gonna take you
over to protective services.
Um, there are some differences
here, so we'll go through them
Overall. The LSC revenue
recommendation in protective
services is $14.3 million higher
than the executive
But the LFC recommendation
includes 2.99 million less in
general fund revenue than the
executive recommendation.
The executive recommendation
included this movement of
revenue from protective services
to the proposed Family Services
division, which again the LFC
recommendation is not include
because the LFC doesn't support
that move.
Recommendation and the executive
recommendation include Oh,
Excuse me. This is a point of
clarification. The LX see
Recommendation includes 1.6
million to replace Social
Security benefit payments
previously used to fund and
support. It says in your in your
print out that the executive has
this in there.
That is incorrect. Executive
does not. Ah
In the base in the FY 24
operating budget.
Prevention and intervention
services were housed within
protective services.
The executive recommendation
includes a base budget decrease.
37.2 million and this is a
result of transferring this
budget.
Contractual services and other
categories as well as 69 FTE.
Into this proposed family
services division. LFC does not
include the reorganization of
prevention and intervention
services into a new program.
And the FY 25 lfc recommendation
generally mirrors the 24
protective services operating
budget and includes an increase
of 1 million in federal tariff
revenue to support of
Excuse me for supportive housing
for youth aging out of foster
care.
There are some language
differences. Um
I won't read them.
Leave that to you. But there are
a couple from the lfc that are
not included in the executive.
Um they're they're basically
you're marking both general
funds and, uh and tan if federal
funds as to what the allowable
purposes are for those funding
sources
Um
Let's see expansions.
Okay. So for the expansion of
the agency request had 35.2
million, and this was to fund 70
additional caseworker F T E e
increases in the director's
office, increased care and
support payments, among other
requests. The executive
recommendation would include
23.9 million in these expansions
with 23.6 million supported by
General fund revenue.
The executive expansion includes
the following increases 7.7
million for falling colors.
4.5 million to increase foster
care and support 6.6 million to
increase the fostering
connections program.
Just under 3 million.
For placement and adoptions,
which does include funding for
two additional F T E.
Uh, a small amount 31.2000. This
supports the statewide central
intake system. And then finally,
the executive moved 2.6 million
in General fund.
Which was requested in the
expansion.
For those 70 additional F C E.
The executive moved that into
the base but expects that the
agency can reclassify vacant
positions as necessary. So does
not recommend these additional
70 F T E
Many of these items are not
truly an expansion of new
programs, but instead are
increases in existing programs
given actual spending patterns
in recent years, and large
agency re versions. The LFC
recommendation is not include
increasing funding for these
items.
Noting the agency can likely to
support increased costs at the
current operating budget level.
And Madam Cheryl, Turn it back
over to Rachel. Um, we're moving
to a family services. This is
the newly proposed program. The
executive recommendation
proposed the creation of a new
family services division to
oversee prevention and early
intervention programs. Um, and
recommends 51.1 million in total
revenue, including 24.7 million
in General fund for the program.
This is primarily the carve out
of resources from other programs
and movement into a new program
and division. The executive
allocates FTE and resources from
other programs, including 9.35
Million in personnel 38 million
in Contractual services and
209,000 in the other category.
And the LFC, in contrast,
maintains prevention and early
intervention programs within the
existing protective services
program.
And in addition, LFC
recommendation includes moving
the car, a program to the
Healthcare Authority. You all
heard this conversation in the
LFC program evaluation of that
program earlier this year, and
we will know that, um, last year
you all provided a million
dollars in opioid settlement
revenue for Kara, But it wasn't
in the Y F. D s based operating
budget. This was a back of the
bill appropriation and so
Oh, you don't see a net
decrease. Instead, it's a it's a
movement and you will see that
million dollars. Um, in the each
CAD budget.
Um, The executive recommendation
also includes 6.6 million in
program expansion with 3.4
million from the General Fund
for the expansion of community
based Prevention and
intervention programs as well as
the car a program
Um, the Alexi did not expand
prevention programs within the C
Y F D operating budget Instead,
this is one of the places where
you will see leveraging the
proposed accountability
Government trust fund. It was
me. I'm sorry. Um And so I'm in
your packet. You will have
special appropriations. I know
you all will go into detail
about that tomorrow. But what I
will highlight is that the LFC
provides $12 million.
Over four years, so 3 million a
year for the community based
prevention intervention
programs, specifically the
expansion of evidence based
programs and to prevent and
child abuse. One of the key
things all call out about why
the recommendation did it that
way is because many of these
services should be eligible for
title for E or Medicaid
reimbursement if we implement,
um evidence based programs
Abide by the federal government.
and if the agency's title for
the state's title for Prevention
program and and plan is approved
by the feds, and so those were
the two reasons one to pilot and
evaluate before putting into the
operating budget.
And two because these programs
could likely be picked up by
federal revenue over time that
you'll see that difference. In
addition, in those specials,
you'll see 5.6 million to expand
the state's differential or
alternative response program
statewide. That's 1.4 million
annually. And so those are the
key differences between the
family services and programs in
the budget recommended.
Thank you, Rachel. Mr Chair
Committee members. I will take
you to the last program
Behavioral Health services.
Um, overall in this program, the
LFC revenue recommendation was
2.6 million higher than the
executive and this includes a
1.4 million more amount from the
General Fund because the
executive recommendation
reallocates revenues from the
behavioral health program to
program support and the proposed
family Services division.
So again, as Rachel has been,
um, noting these differences and
behavioral health are primarily
because the executive made a
couple of moves out to support
the reorganization, while Lfc
left things as the status quo.
In addition, the LFC
recommendation includes an
increase of 300,000 in general
fund, and this is for domestic
violence programs to replace
lost federal revenue and revenue
collected from fees and fines.
The LFC based budget
recommendation is flat with FY
24 in all categories. The
executive budget recommendation
is 1.1 million less in
personnel.
And 1.5 million lesson.
contractual services because the
recommendation proposes
reorganizing the department and
these are the resources being
moved to other programs. Um, and
with that, I think we just have
the performance. Um, did you
want to speak to that? Rachel
share? Mary Beth, Mr Chair and
the only other thing I would
add is in that specialist
package. You will also see the
differences in this specialist
recommendation.
And so the LSC recommendation
includes a total of 20.1 million
in special appropriations of
that 19.9 million in that
accountability in government as
well as 200,001 time special to
provide technical assistance to
the department related to and
the title for E Plan. Um
And the executive recommendation
includes within specials, 20
million for legal settlements,
as well as 5 million for the
Children's Trust friend and
neither of these appropriations
requested in the agency's
request, but they are included
in the executive recommendation,
and analysts have reached
consensus on all of the
performance measure targets.
However, I will call out because
we have different organizations
of programs we place those
target.
Get into different p codes or
programs. But what the targets
are we have research consensus
about and that those are the big
differences and what we will
turn it over to the secretary.
And you all
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Secretary.
Good morning.
Good morning and thank you
members of the committee for
your time this morning. I do
appreciate it. Um, I recognized
the amount of time is limited.
And so I will keep my
presentation limited because I
would imagine that there will be
lots of questions and I want to
leave time for you guys to be
able to ask those questions of
me. Um, as you heard through
their presentation, there are a
lot of numbers.
You know there's deficits.
There's increases. There's
movements and that is really
because of all of the work that
is being done at C Y F D to make
sure that the agency is not
status quo. We heard you we
heard the community We've heard
loud and clear that continuing
to do the work that we do in the
same way that we do it. It's C Y
f D is not providing us the
outcomes that we are all looking
and expecting to receive for our
families and Children.
So we've been incredibly busy. I
didn't take it lightly. When I
was asked to take on the C Y F
I went over there as the interim
Cabinet secretary to really take
a look at their structure and
their foundation and help to
remove barriers so that they
could have a system to work
within.
As I started working through
that
I felt very confident that with
the staff that we have we're
assembling, um, and the skills
that I bring to the table that
collectively we could make that
difference for families and
Children in New Mexico and I had
planned to introduce to you my
staff, my executive staff, um in
the interest of time. I won't do
that. You have their information
in front of you with their email
and their phone numbers, and I
encourage you to reach out to
them and talk to them If you
have specific questions or
concerns or ideas, or
You know anything that you want
to share with us were available
to you, Um, those individuals
will be leading the staff that
we have across the state. You
have a very dedicated workforce
at C Y F D. There are people who
come in every day and do this
because they care.
And they want to do a good job.
Nobody comes into the office and
says, We want to make things
harder for families or Children.
Um, they are dedicated employees
working hard every day, and it's
up to me and my management team
to make sure that we're removing
those barriers so that they can
do exactly that.
We spent all last week on the
road 11 of us in a ban on
traveling to nine of our offices
across the state from farming
tonight through Gallop and
grants in Roswell and Ryudo so
and less. Cruces and Sakura and
Los Lunas and Albuquerque
visiting was probably 500 of our
staff.
Um, we took the time to listen
to them to listen with their
concerns. Are there barriers,
You know their successes? Um and
really figure out what do we
need to do to beat up do a
better job to support them so
that they can do a better job in
supporting our families. And so
this reorganization that we're
working on putting together
takes all of that into
consideration.
The first part of our
reorganization was really
Um, pulling things together for
our, um, administrative
services department or program
support, So we had individuals
in each of these areas in
behavioral health in protective
services in juvenile justice,
working on contracts working on,
um
Procurement, You know, working
on HR. Every department had
their own. So we pulled all of
that together and taking that
administrative burden and put it
on our program support so that
the employees who are doing
investigations or casework are
not now responsible for also
making sure payments to foster
families go out on time or
Um, you know, travel
reimbursements to staff get
processed.
Or a lot of duplication and
contracts was happening either
between behavioral health and
protective services or
behavioral health and J J or J.
J and protective services were
all contracting with the same
vendor.
Asking them to do basically the
same services just for different
populations. Now we're
consolidating that and we'll
hopefully streamline those
contracts and asked them to
provide services for families
and Children across the state.
regardless of where they fall
within our department, and so
streamlining their and
consolidating those services. We
have an incredibly strong
administrative services director
who I'm sure many of you know,
she came to us with experience
from D F A. And that's Cindy
Montoya.
And we're incredibly happy to
have her and under her
leadership really pull that
together. Um, the other major
consolidation that we're doing
or direction is our division of
family services. And so you
know, in 1992 c Y F D was
created to support Children,
youth and families in need in
such a manner as to remote self
sufficiency.
And to coordinate an integrated
system of care and services.
That is exactly language that
comes from the statute that
created C Y F D to create a
system of care. It doesn't say
only for kids who are being
investigated or in state custody
or are in the juvenile justice
system.
We're here to create systems of
care for families wherever they
are today, and whatever services
they need.
And we're here to do that
through our family services
because we also heard from you.
Nobody wants an investigator to
knock on your door and see I'm
here from C Y F D investigations
And I want to help strengthen
your family. What can I do to
help?
That's not gonna get us
anywhere. But if I can send
somebody from family services to
say, you know, we understand
your child hasn't been in
school. What are some of the
barriers? What do you need? You
have transportation. You have
child care issues. What can we
do to support you as a family so
that you and your Children can
thrive in New Mexico, and you
can do that without the fear of
us saying Oh, I'm glad you told
me all that. But now we're
taking your child away because
we don't feel it's a safe
environment.
So we heard that and we went
back to our rooms.
Which already had a department
in statute that is our
prevention and intervention
division. It is there. It's not
new. It's not a new program that
I'm creating. I'm going back to
what C y f d needs to be doing
to protect those families and to
support them and building out
our family services to take all
of that prevention and
intervention.
And put that in a separate area
where that is their main focus.
It's not a secondary focus
because they've gotten get an
investigation done today, and
then they'll think about
supporting the families that
they have on their caseload as
well.
It will be the primary focus of
what that division does.
And you know, even further in
that statute enabling statute
says that the secretary has the
duty and responsibility to
realign that agency to meet the
needs of the constituency that
it serves. So I respectfully
ask, although LFC doesn't
support this reorganization that
it is the responsibility and the
duty of the secretary leading
that department to determine
what is needed to support the
constituency that we serve.
So I won't go into the numbers.
It's not a huge increase in
budget to create these
divisions. I believe the major
increase that we're seeing as in
our protective services
division. Um
Everything else has just been
realigned and moved out of
different divisions to create
these without increase of budget
without increase of FTS, with
the exception of those that were
asking for for Kara and I
understand that the LFC also
does not recommend that C y f d,
um have Karen under its
supervision. That will also be
something that's in family
services where we will have
navigators that will go out.
some actual will be pure support
to go and work with those
families and make sure that
we're giving them
The support that they need.
And I've said this before, If C
y F D is only held responsible
for the cases that go wrong and
has no control over how those
families are dealt with from the
very moment that child is born,
and a drug exposed individual
It's recognized that a hospital
you know if we're turning it
back over to H S D.
What we're seeing is that we're
okay with the CEOs operating
that program until the time that
there's a fatality or a serious
incident, and then it's handed
over to see why F D H s d does
not provide direct services.
They are not going to take this
program and provide that
service. They will rely on the M
CEOs who are currently
responsible for those care
plans and that initial content
with those individuals
Um And I don't believe that from
my perspective, that is how we
need to run this program and I
don't believe from what I've
heard in speaking with
individuals of the legislative
body that that is, um something
that they believe is how that
program should be run as well.
So I am again requesting that
Keira B under C Y F D under
family services. Um, we asked
for very few positions and
Me. I believe it was $3.5
Million or $3 million to get
that program up and running and
staffed across the state that
will include training our
hospitals working with the
Macos, but us taking the lead in
those care plans and making sure
that they're being completed and
that there is follow through
with individuals with those
families.
Um
So I do request that that'd be
left with the way F d, um I know
that there was a lot of talk
about the accountability in
government trust fund. Um, and
the money that would be there.
if you take that amount and
divided over the four years the
way of do you would have about
$4 million per year to operate
with
That there thought that it would
be reimbursable through 40
funding and therefore we don't
need that in continuing revenue
tells us only that we want to be
able to provide services for
those individuals who are in
state custody for the funding
does not is not reimbursable for
families that are not in our
custody for Children that are
not in our custody.
So how do we establish programs
that support our families and
give them what they need to be
successful?
If we don't have the funding to
do that, and we only have the
funding to wait until they fall,
and they're down and we take
custody, and then we're going to
try to put them back together. I
truly believe that we should be
there to support them before
they fall. And that is really my
intent of the agency and how I
want to lead our staff to
provide services for them.
So what they're saying is that
for you, funding is available
for foster care eligible
Children.
But I don't want to just serve.
those are that are eligible for
foster care. We have some kids
who families who are just
struggling.
Right? We shouldn't. I mean,
they struggle. They maybe they
don't have food security and we
want to make sure that we're
providing prevention services
for them, or transportation or
childcare. So
I truly believe that there's
great intention and creating
that fun. I think accountability
is incredibly important. Um, I
don't believe that we are not
trying to be accountable. I have
committed that I will be
accountable for every dollar
that you give me. We did not
revert a lot of money. Last
year, it was $6 million, and it
was out of juvenile justice. So
the money that we received in
our protective services
department was spent.
Um and so
The the opportunity for us as we
right size the agency and
determine what needs to live
where and who needs to be
responsible for what I am asking
for Budget authority, and I know
that that's not given very
often. If ever, um and so I
realized that's a huge chance
for you to take on our agency,
But I can't move things around
and properly address the needs
and support our staff and
support our families.
With my hands are tied and money
is in one bucket and I need it
somewhere else. And so I am
asking for that. There still
will be oversight because I have
to submit those bars. Lfc still
has an opportunity to look at
them and ask those questions.
Um, but to be able to move that
throughout the programs as you
see, we're there's a lot of
movement, um, to make sure that
we're getting it right.
So those are my request that you
accept or adopt the executive
recommendation and give us the
ability to give you a better C Y
f D So with that also
Great. Thank you very much.
Madam Secretary. So, our
analysts, uh, I want to go first
to representative had a meal and
then we're gonna go to
representative Wuhan. And if we
need to
Does that order work?
Okay?
Okay?
This, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. Thank you for being
here. Um
I've had the pleasure during the
interim to attend, Um two
Children summits.
One round table discussion and
then uh, one more of a
presentation from C Y F d two to
the community. I appreciate, um,
what you're saying about
reorganization?
And, um
What I'm I'm not clear on is
what the reorganization will
look like. And, uh, as I sat
here, I I realized I had tons of
questions that we don't have
time for. So I think, just get
stalled of a statement might be
more important at this moment.
I come from a family where, um,
my parents adopted their
Children from C Y f D at the age
of 10.
As a child. I know Children who
have been in 30 foster homes
failed adoptions.
And we were the second adopted
family for those individuals.
I've watched my siblings
struggle with mental health.
Um, incarceration.
And I can tell you that although
I loved my siblings are
childhood had been quite
chaotic.
Um and I see them struggling
today in their thirties and
forties, but that spurred me to
work with Children in crisis to
work with families and foster
care and and for, um,
reunification.
I find every child really wants
to be with their parents. But
sometimes they can't like my
siblings couldn't
What I'm offering you today.
I'm begging
For you today.
Is to look at your community
members who have similar
experiences.
That just want to help.
There is an African proverb that
says when the elephants fight,
it is the grass that suffers.
And the grasses are Children,
and they are suffering.
I am humbly.
Begging you.
To allow us to give our
expertise.
To talk about what the issues
are My 30 years of working with
families and what the needs are
It is not to harm families. It
is not to harm C Y F D.
It is to help. Just like your
job is to help.
Many of us here would like to be
included in solving those
problems. Many of us would like
to know how this restructuring
will work.
I am curious to know Mr Chair.
What you feel about the new
proposal.
From Senator or TCP? No.
Me personally.
I believe that Mr Chair that is
taken a bulldozer to do surgery.
And I'm just not sure that
that's that's the best course
forward.
I want to help you.
Madam Secretary. I want to have
you please consider an OMs Bud
Hman that will help your agency
to identify what the concerns
are to deal with those concerns
and to report back to you what
those concerns are and recommend
policy, not punitively.
But as a support system for you
for families and for Children.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And Madam
Secretary. Thank you. Very much.
Representative had a meal. We're
gonna actually go next. Now, um
and well, thank you, Mr
Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary for your presentation.
Um, you know, we've
I feel a little bit like
representative Brown when she
said she's getting impatient
with ped. I'm getting impatient
with with C Y F D and, um
I
Truly I would not want your job.
So, with that being said
There's several of us as
representatives, Jaramillo said.
That would love to help.
You solve issues.
Um and and problems. Um, one of
the questions I have, Uh, Madam
Secretary is last, um
LSC meeting I brought up the
governor's executive order.
And have any of the things on
the governor's executive order
been
Changed since we last talked.
Um, Mr Chairman, House Majority
Caucus Chair. Armstrong. Yes,
thank you. For that. We have
appointed another one of the
members and are in the vetting
process of appointing a new
member to that committee. Um,
and we are in conversation with
an individual for bedding. There
has been other conversation. Um,
you know, to determine if we
expand that and change the scope
a little bit of what That
advisory council does to bring
on additional members with other
expertise to be able to create
sub come
Cities for them to be able to
working on some of those
specific issues. And so we are
working on that as
Right now, Since our last
conversation, I believe that we
are talking with individuals
about the review. Um there has
been some review There's review
that's done consistently of C Y
f d you know, including what I
believe to be the, um You know,
an oversight. I mean the
substitute Care Advisory
Council.
In their statutes specifically
is designed to provide oversight
and recommendations to C Y F D
And so, um, you know, figuring
out what that needs to look
like if that statute needs to
change or that oversight needs
to be done differently, because,
as I've said in previous
meetings, I'm not opposed to
oversight. Everybody should be
responsible and accountable for
the work that they're doing.
Um, I just want to make sure
that it's done in a way. That is
not punitive, because as of
right now there is so much
that's punitive about the
feedback that we get about C I f
d right, And so you know, we
have oversight. We have the
federal government that comes in
and monitors all of our federal
dollars. We have, um
We have oversight right now from
the Kevin s and the common
neutrals and the oversight that
they do in the report that they
give and that's on on going
basis, constantly them looking
at what's been provided within C
Y F T. Um and so I'm not opposed
to that. Um and I'm open to
conversation and feedback from
individuals. I welcome that.
I mean, my door is open. I'm
happy to set up a time to talk
individually or as a group to
really hear what those comments
are and how people can be
supportive and helping us to
change that. I can tell you from
myself and from all of the staff
at C Y f D. Nobody would turn
away. Um, assistance to make it
a better C Y F. D.
Would often happens is it's
just, you know.
We're not doing this right or
we're not doing that, or we
should do this differently. But
there's no um ideas on how we
can change it. And then we're
kind of just they're trying to.
Okay. You're right. You know, we
hear you. We mostly agree, but
now we've got to figure out how
to fix that, and I understand
the impede impatience. You know,
I've been there for seven months
now, and I'm growing impatient.
Um, with that, but you know, in
order to do it well and do
change that's going to be
significant and really have a
long term impact and effect.
Um, it does take really
thoughtful consideration. I've
made
Decisions that were reactionary
when I got there only to be the
wrong decision and have to undo
that and go down a different
way. And so, um, But I do
welcome your input and your
thoughts. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um, I
appreciate that. And and I have
a few more questions. I wonder
how many times has the advisory
council met?
Um, the advisory council meets
on a monthly basis, the second
Tuesday of every month.
There have been a couple. I
believe that we've rescheduled
and we're looking for a
different date because that's
also the same day of Cabinet the
second Tuesday of every month.
Um, so I would imagine maybe 56
times since they were
established.
Thank you. For that They were
the executive order was given on
August 11th 2021.
To be established so anyway.
That being said, I I do have a
couple of budget questions
between FY 21 and 24. C Y F D s
operating budget increased to
282.5 million
From that to 384.
About 36%. However, the agency
um has had significant
reversion. And can you talk to
me a little bit about the
reversion? I think it was a
little over 9. Million is what I
looked up this year.
And so I'm I'm just curious
about those reversion. And if
you have a some reasoning
Um
Um, yes, Mr Chair. Um
Representative Armstrong those
revisions. I believe we're out
of our JJ funding. Um, and it
was $6 million that we reverted
last year.
Um, I believe that was mostly
due to the fact that
Some of the money that was
allocated for contracts through
falling colors did not get
expended and in order to pull it
back in and re allocated it was
too late in the fiscal year to
be able to get that re allocated
for individuals to provide
contractual services. And so I
believe it was mostly out of the
contractual services area.
Okay. Thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr Chairman And then, um,
under prevention and
intervention between FY 18 in FY
23 c y f d spending on
prevention services increased
roughly tenfold, however, in 23
spending on prevention remained
less than 5% of the overall. Uh,
Um
Five less than 5% of overall
protective services spending. So
can you talk to me about
How you're going to make sure
these services
Um, get focused on
Mr Chairman, Representative
Armstrong. Absolutely. That will
really be the focus and
prevention and intervention on
our family Services division.
And so as I mentioned earlier,
it won't be the secondary
responsibility and some of those
larger divisions that have other
priorities, and it will be a
division director and deputy
overseen that and making sure
that that is really the focus
and we're getting those dollars
out the door and they're
monitoring when contracts are
going unspent and pulling that
money in early
Clear.
And redirecting it. I just want
to point out, though, that I
think some of the numbers that
have been reported there was
some discrepancy on what was
reported for prevention and
intervention. And, um as of
right now, for this fiscal year
we've spent about $12.7 million
and
Last year. What was budget is
about 24. So we're over halfway
spent with your allocated money.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. And and I want to
talk a minute about Kara.
Um, what is the difference
between New Mexico's Keira Act?
And, uh other and and the
federal
So my understanding and I have
my general counsel there and she
can correct me if I misspeak.
Um, my understanding from the
New Mexico law is that it is a
voluntary program that says an
individual may engage in
services in reviewing federal
law. We looked and it says that
an individual shall engage in
services and so as we're
developing the program now
Um, at the way of the we're
using the language shall because
it's stronger within the federal
guidelines that allows us to be
able to do that. So as we're
putting together a new care plan
and getting ready to train em
CEOs in hospitals, we will make
sure that any shall engage in a
care plan and we're also
strengthening the care plan. So
it has
Um, actual programming that is
relevant to providing services
for an individual. That's
Has a child who is born
substance exposed. Thank you for
that, Mr Chairman. Thank you for
the explanation, because, um, I
I've known that for several
years and I've run legislation
to change it from May to shall
With with lots of pushback on
that.
Um
As babies are being born one and
one of my county's at 32 weeks.
Ah!
Because of fentanyl.
Being airlifted. I mean, a lot
of this is is state.
At the cost of taxpayer dollars.
Um and
And there's no there's no shall
There's no shell that that
mother needs to seek help.
Um I don't know the where the
baby is now, but, um, I'm I'm
sure still at the hospital, uh,
being flown from
From one place to another. But
Uh, Mr Chairman. Enough's
enough, and I appreciate that
You're going to implement the
shout now we need to make sure
the hospitals
Are are doing their part as
well, Not saying they're not.
But we need to make sure that
they are because this is the
beginning of preventing those
Children from falling through
the cracks and and catching them
way after
They've they've hit the complete
ground.
So I appreciate that. I have a
lot of questions. A lot of
issues. Um
I would love
And ombudsman as well. So thank
you for your answers. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ranking member Armstrong. We're
gonna next go to represent
Montoya, then representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um and
Madam Secretary. I have 10
questions. I know we're short on
time, but I do have several
questions. First off. Um, I
appreciate your willingness to
take this job on.
Uh, you
This job right now.
Is under the microscope, not
just of this committee but of
the entire state.
Um And so I truly
I feel for you.
Um, however, as to the question
of oversight.
Unfortunately,
This right now is oversight.
This committee might be the only
committee
That has anything substantially
to do with with your department.
And and, frankly, um, I
appreciate you. You mentioned
Realignment or reorganization.
And streamlining and
consolidating services.
I don't have any problem with
streamlining and consolidating
services that makes a lot of
sense.
But some of the reorganization
Is saying.
And then we want to go and spend
more money on
Some type of early intervention,
which not really clear what that
is.
If what
If what Representative Armstrong
is what she discussed with you
is part of that.
I I I applaud that.
Making it the Children who are
born addicted.
Mandatory intervention.
That has to happen.
But
I have a hard time.
With
Giving more responsibility
expanding the mission even more
when, frankly,
Year after year after year. What
we've had is failure out of this
department.
I know there are extenuating
circumstances.
Um
Keeping people
Hard job keeping people
But
The reality is and it's unfair.
But you're facing a many members
are very, very unhappy. Some I
think have
Described it as angry.
Because that's what we're
getting from our constituents,
and it falls downhill on us. We
go home and we talk to them.
What did you do?
About C Y f D. What did you do?
So
Turning around and saying Well,
The secretary came in.
And she presented
A new option. Don't have all the
details.
And so we increased money.
To the department. Nobody
understands that.
Any. Anybody who has a child
who's given responsibility.
And they fell at that
responsibility, you know, then
go out there and give them more
responsibility, thinking that
that will change things.
And so that's what's facing.
That's that's what's going
through my mind.
Is
Before I want to entrust the
department with more
responsibility. I want to see
the department do what they're
supposed to be doing now.
Before then saying We also want
you to do this, and then you're
going to have less focus.
On protecting the Children that
are in your care right now.
So, uh,
One thing that came to my
attention was the number of
Children that have died this
last year while in the care
Or in the certain receiving
services.
From C Y F. D.
And that it is more than the
number of Children who have died
in New Mexico this last year
from gun violence.
We're not treating the to the
same.
What we're doing with the gun
violence is we're going and
trying to limit
Uh, the rights of law abiding
citizens.
And just take away.
I mean, the governor today just
listed a whole bunch of things,
which are
Gun control issues.
We're not treating C y f d in
the same way and once again to
be completely fair to you.
You've not been there.
I am trying to be fair.
I really am and everything that
you've said has been not
everything.
But the majority of what you
said I fully support
The thing that I have a hard
time with is
Expanding services.
Especially with the reversion
that have taken place over the
over the last couple of years.
I'd like to see
Uh huh.
The department expand those
dollars, especially in hiring.
I love the idea of taking away
Mr Chair, the administrative
responsibilities I love hearing
doing away with duplication so
that
For the case, Workers can deal
directly.
And just do that job.
As much as possible. Obviously,
there's some interaction there.
But as much as possible. I think
that is a great reform.
I applaud that.
But
The the circumstances, Mr
Chairman.
As well of the number of
adolescents who, for whatever
reason, this last year have been
Sleeping and see why FD offices
across the state.
I'm not sure what has happened.
To place so many of those
adolescents
And see why FD offices, but
that's got to be dealt with as
well.
And so all I'm saying all of
this, Um Madam Chair or Madam
secretary.
Because
I would love
To have heard from you today,
saying, we're not asking for an
increase.
We're not looking to spread
ourselves more thin with new
programming.
I'm coming in here to make what
is lacking.
Right?
Providing the services.
That we've been failing out.
Fixing those
Failing is a tough word. I
should not have used that word.
But not accomplishing. Let's say
that
So, Madam Chair. I think you
have our manufacturer. I think,
Mr Chairman. I think Secretary
like to respond. Yes.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Montoya. Um I absolutely agree
with you. And I just want to
make clear that I'm not asking
to expand the services that we
currently provide.
Everything that we're moving
into our family services
Division are services that we
already provide within the
agency. They're just provided
out of juvenile justice or out
of behavioral health or out of
protective services. So I'm not
adding additional work to what
we're already doing. I'm taking
the work.
In our families in need of
supervision. Or, um, you know
other programs that we already
do, and I'm realigning that
under a different division so
that the individuals who are
tasked with conducting
investigations or finding foster
families, or, um, you know,
supporting in that area, don't
also have to be responsible.
For doing the prevention and
intervention, So I'm not asking
to expand what we're already
doing. We have enough on our
plate right now, With the
exception of taking the care of
program, which I really believe
will help us, Um in the long run
to have more involvement with
those families early on and not
wait until somebody has called
in a case of abuse or neglect at
that point.
There's nothing that C y f do
can do for that family at that
point in time, and so, um
I just want to make clear that
I'm not asking for additional
responsibilities. So thank you,
Mr Chair. Care is what I was
responding specifically talking
about, plus
A couple of items that have been
moved over. Uh
Um by lfc staff, uh, items that
order
That you are tasked with that
the department had been tasked
with but had not been doing to
move that over to a
Pilot project. Um so I'm
actually in support very much of
the LFC budget.
Um, for those reasons.
But one last thing, Mr Chair and
I know there are others who want
to speak. Um so specific issue,
Madam Chair or Madam secretary.
That has, um
Come to my attention. Some folks
reached out to me.
And reached out to me in a way
that was very interesting.
Use somebody else's phone number
phone.
Any email that I got was from a
An account that really wasn't
theirs.
Because of fear of C Y F. D.
And in these couple of instances
that they reached out to me it
was because they have Children.
That
Uh, underaged while his Children
that are wanting to go through
gender reassignment.
And the interesting the two
folks, the two families that
reached out to me.
I would, they would describe
themselves as very liberal.
If not progressive in their
ideology.
And
The concern they had was not
that their child couldn't
Make that decision at some point
point on their own, but they
were very reluctant
In making that decision allowing
them to do that.
While they were in their
household.
Just encouraging them to wait
until they were 18 so they can
make the decision on their own
because they didn't want their
Children later on later on in
life.
To say how in the world did you
let me do this?
But
Reports ended up going somehow
to see why F D
I think, because in those
instances
Ah, they either threatened
suicide or something like that.
We'll see why FD caseworkers
came into those two different
homes.
And
There was a threat.
Placed over those families
because because they have other
Children in the home.
That if they did not allow the
child
To pursue gender reassignment
surgery.
That
This could be a household that
would be an unfit household.
And they can remove the other
Children.
I have no idea. I was not given
cases. Caseworkers names, I
think in particular because I
think they were afraid it could
be traced back to them in every
way. They were terrified of PFD.
That is not the role of C Y F D
terrorize parents so
Um, I would like to talk to you
offline about this.
But I think that's also needs to
be brought up in public.
Because this is an issue that
has to be dealt with.
Because because everything that
has been presented up to this
point by you and your mission
statement, essentially is we
want to help families.
And once again, these two
families are very, very
Progressive minded that if
that's what my child wants to
do, I don't want to make that
decision.
So, um, with that, Mr Chair, I
just those are just a couple of
issues, but I would love to see
Next year when you come back in
here for you to say
This is the success we had with
the mission we have and
particularly
In hiring enough people and
keeping them on
And doing the mission that
We're tasked with because once
again, Madam Chair and and a
Madam secretary, Mr Chair.
This.
Is the only real oversight we
represented. Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, Secretary
I'm looking at the governor's
budget.
Requests for special
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations, and, uh
Down towards the bottom. There's
a request for 20 million
To see why FD for settlement
costs. Uh, in normally those I
think are paid by GSD or
somebody. So can you talk to me
a little bit about
What it's for. White 20 million.
What doesn't come to the normal
channels?
Yes, Mr Chairman, Representative
Chatfield? Yes, most of the
settlement money that comes if a
case is settled.
Does come from the risk
management fund. But there are
times when there has to be.
There are specific circumstances
of a case that then see why FD
does have to contribute a
portion of a settlement fund.
And because this last fiscal
year we saw several cases that
had been brought, Um prior to,
um
Some prior to this
administration some early off
I got it.
Sorry I spilled my water. Um,
some early on in this
administration that we did
settle and had to use funds
within the department to be able
to do that. And so this is just
funding that we would have
available to us as we work our
way through some of those old
cases that are still pending.
Um, and we did run into a
situation this year where the
risk management fund did not
happening available.
I believe they depleted their
funds, and so I'm just making
sure that we have the
availability to work through
some of those cases.
So, Mr Chairman, That's that's a
lot of money and and it
My fear is it makes it pretty
easy to settle. If you just have
a
Kind of a free choice. Bottom
money there.
So I'm I'm a little
Hesitant about about 20 million
from a
I
Yeah, kind of
Bypasses the normal funding.
Um, Mr Chairman, Representative
Chatfield. It's still goes
through the same process at we
still have to work through risk
management. They still do their
diligence on the case to ensure
that it is something that should
be settled or if we need to move
forward through litigation, So
we're just not unilaterally
making those decisions at Seaway
Fdu. If we should settle a
lawsuit, we're still going
through that same process. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much
for percentage. Chatfield. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
Luhan, please.
Representative the hunt
represent Montoya.
Thanks, Representative Han,
please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair in. I think
we're at our time limit right
now, But I just wanted to say
quickly. Um, we're at we're
We're dealing with a lot and and
I was really going to just focus
and I can talk to you offline
Just about your personnel. And
just from the HR is your HR
department swing, so to speak.
You have everybody hired up and
how are they helping with
training, too?
Help, coordinate and and really
work on, you know the element of
Of the culture of the work
culture at the agency, Madam Mr
Chair, but we can talk offline.
I just wanted to bring that up
because it's a really important
place. Um, Mr Chair,
Representative Han. Thank you
very much. It's important to us
as well. And as I stated
earlier, we did a tour last
week. We talked with a lot of
employees. We heard a lot about
what needs to be worked on. Um
you know, morality way of D is
It is difficult. It's a hard
agency. And so we're looking at
that. Um and we're also looking
at changing. You know some of
the training that we do based on
a lot of the feedback that we've
gotten, so it is an area that
we're looking at. Melissa
Salazar came over. You might
have worked with her on boards
and commissions, and she is our
deputy secretary over program
support and training. Um, will
be worked on between her and
Also right now, Sarah.
Back there. Um, is working with
her on the training that we're
developing. And so that will
also be changing as we re
arguing, Look forward to
understanding what the trading
is especially with burnout types
of industry and heart. You know,
the hardships that we all have
to deal with in your employees,
But you're all champions for us.
You're all public servants just
as we are, And I want to say
thank you for all your working.
Just leave it right there. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much upset. Luhan, Vice chair,
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
I think that some of the
committee questions have really
demonstrated that, um
The committee has
Is not fully
Understanding the proposed
reorganization and the need for
it. And and all of that, Um, I
know I myself have a number of
questions, um, that I would need
answered and to, you know, feel
comfortable moving in that
direction. Um so
I think, Mr Chair if
Uh, working group can focus on
this committee that would be
very helpful.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
chair. Madam Secretary. I think,
uh, we're gonna wrap up there.
We, um we will ask for adoption
of the LSC recommendation. I
want to thank you. There's been
at more engagement and I think
we're seeing different, um,
steps forward together on some
areas, including his ranking in
some areas but is the vice chair
said
There is a great deal more that
this committee is very dedicated
to diving into. So we will be
doing that through a working
group. Um
So, Madam Secretary. Thank you
to you and your team. Please
expect to be swinging back by we
have a conference table back in
the office committee. We haven't
really done this before. I want
to hold up in the option that we
may need to address. Some of
these. There is sort of a
celebration of life that the
committee has to get.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for your
time, and I just want to
reiterate. You know, I'm happy
to have conversations with any
of you offline and my cellphone
numbers in that information and
so look forward to those
conversations. Thank you very
much. You very much, madam. Vice
chair. Thank you. Mr Chair of
the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Kate's been moved. Is there a
second?
Okay. It's been second and, uh,
like gentle ladies from county
and other counties. Is there any
objection to adopting that
saying that we've adapted that?
Okay, as I, uh, we're going to
move. Madam Secretary believe
you've been informed. We're
going to move our corrections
hearing that will kick off the
afternoon. Starting at 130.
We're going to break now There
will be opportunities for public
comment this afternoon. Um and I
appreciate everybody's time this
morning. We'll see everybody for
a very full afternoon shortly
beginning at 130.
