values such as integrity,
and respect.
Graduates of New Mexico Military
Institute often go on to excel
in military service, higher
education, and civilian careers.
We could not accomplish our
successes without the support of
the Mexico legislature and its
governance. In particular, we
would like to extend our
heartfelt thanks to the
committees and each of the
members were not overlooking us
in this very special state of
educational institutions.
We also extend our special
thanks to LFC analyst Connor
Jorgensen.
The HEB secretary.
And governor, as they give us
input and guidance.
The state of New Mexico Military
Institute.
We have provided the committee
information packets and
committee on information of New
Mexico Military Institute
programs and outcomes.
Uh, as well as to put a face on
it with names as we speak.
Some of our key points.
which we believe assure the
committee a good return on
investment.
Include Bernard not limited to
some of the rankings that the
school has achieved over the
past 2 years. Uh, in 24, 25, the
school was named the best
college by Stacker
Intelligent.com, academic
influence and biology evaluator.
Number 2, Best College by
College Factory.
Number 2, best salary potential
by pay scale.
#2 most popular by Research.com.
Number 2 most influential by
academic influence, and number
3, Best College by Nic.
Our operational requests.
From an operational and IG
standpoint, New Mexico Military
Institute.
Generally agrees with HED's
recommendation for the 3%
increase for FY 25 numbers.
We appreciate Secretary
Rodriguez's efforts to assist us
in this issue.
Legislators and actions that uh
address compensation shortfalls
associated with salary mandates
when they occur, and it was the
case in last year's 3% salary
increase.
One of our other issues is
athletic travel.
New Mexico Military Institute
continues to have concerns
regarding the increased cost of
athletic travel associated with
inflationary factors in
transportation and to our rural
location.
And, uh, contractors located in
southeastern New Mexico.
The last thing that I wanted to
address are a couple of
challenges.
Uh, we, what we face, online
education versus our boarding
school education that we
provide.
Academic rigor and a path for
New Mexican student success.
Economic matters.
And the percent of students who
choose this unique path to come
to New Mexico Military
Institute.
With that being said, I'll stand
for questions. Thank you. Thank
you very much, General. Thank
you uh and great to have your
team here. Uh, I'm gonna look
for any questions from members,
uh, going first to represent
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for being here so much. Am I
correct in understanding that
the military institute is
expanding to middle school.
So,
man, uh,
Chairman Small
Uh
Remember Garrett
Yes, the military institute has
already taken steps to expand
into middle school in the
Roswell area. So we are in our
2nd year.
Of middle school education, we
call it our intermediate
preparatory academy.
So, right now, the reason that
we have
Undertaken in this endeavor is
that
We find that when we accept
students that are local.
In in New Mexican that
What I've shown, what I've
talked about earlier is our high
academic ratings, and our
students from New Mexico
struggle.
When they come into our school.
Now
We took this upon ourselves to
try to write this.
Because in the funnel of
students coming to our school.
What we've tried to do is set up
our own curriculum, our own
education, where we can say that
these students will be
reasonably successful when they
come into New Mexico Military
Institute, because what's been
happening in the past is, yes,
we accept New Mexican students,
but what's happening is we have
a lot of attrition with them in
their first couple of years or
their first semesters in
transitioning. So we keep taking
those students, but what happens
is
We can't show.
A
Path to them successfully
completing the program.
So in order for us to give
everybody a better shot at doing
that, we decided to take up on
the mantle of running our own
middle school and potentially
expanding that across the state
as well.
Mr. Chair, so then, um, sir, you
will, um, currently then it's
non-residential, but that is a
poss a future possibility.
I'm
So we'll we'll follow it then.
Right, right, so it is not our
intent.
Or middle school to ever become
resident.
Thank you. And then, uh, just a
final question.
It says on page 33 of our
handout, the junior college
three-year athletic graduation
rate.
is basically about 62%.
Which is kind of below the state
average. Can you just comment on
the graduation rate for your
junior college, uh, division. OK
and thank you. So.
What's happening is our junior
college is, I would say 75%
athletes.
So those athletes wind up
transferring out of our school.
Um, it depending on the season
and, and what's going on and can
they get a scholarship somewhere
else. So I would say that that's
what attributes to that.
Thank you very much for the
clarification. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you Garrett. Next we go to
represent Eitta.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
would just uh like to commend,
um, um, the military institute
for your work on the
reindustrial fires. uh, this
last summer, if you could kind
of let people know all the work
that you did.
It's incredible. Sure, thank
you, ma'am. Uh.
I was just coming on board.
So what was happening is I was
actually getting
Situation reports from my chief
of staff. So what I'd like to do
is let my chief of staff address
it.
Colonel West.
Colonel West, come on it.
and
Mr. Chair, um,
Barrera.
Appreciate the, the commentary.
What happened is, literally, I
pulled up in my own driveway
about 7 p.m. Deputy Fire Chief
is standing in front of my
garage door won't let me in my
own house.
He says, we have a problem.
The problem was is we had
thousands of
Folks transferring down from
Riodoso.
The only way out of Riosa
couldn't go to Amogordo,
couldn't go to Capitan, etc.
Transferring to Roswell.
A number of our members of our
community and our fellow school
Eastern.
In Mexico, Roswell as well.
And we opened up facilities.
And a bunch of us just ran to
the dorms, grabbed.
Betting
And set up shop in the Godfrey
Athletic Center for hundreds of
our fellow citizens.
Maintain that facility for
About a week when the Red Cross
came in and I.
suggested that their job was to
get me fired as fast as they
could.
And which they did by that next
weekend and they maintained the
facility, in fact, in my hosted
the Red Cross Central, um.
Regional, you know, command
center there for that particular
issue.
So we're certainly
As unfortunate situation, as
we're all aware, but we're
certainly proud that we could
all stand up for our fellow
citizens and do that.
came very close to having to do
that again.
With the floods that followed in
in Roswell as well, so thank you
for that question.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair. I
just want, I want everybody to
know how these communities come
together and, and how New
Mexicans just help each other
out in times of crisis, and I
think it's good to recognize the
people who who uh stood up and
did the job. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Barrera.
Uh, I don't see any other
questions, uh, general, I just
have a couple of quick
questions. Uh, one, it's my
understanding, um, and there's a
we're proud of this, uh, that
New Mexico Military Institute is
actually one of the few
remaining uh military
institutes, military schools,
sort of publicly funded in the
West. Is that your
understanding?
Mr. Chair, yes, uh, there are 3
other schools that are
associated on the same tier as
we are.
Um, I think that what happens or
what has been happening over
time is that as demographics
change, and how
Generations change.
The
Way that education is carried
out in a military school.
Has to evolve and change.
So, that's one of the things
that Mexico military institute
has been able to do.
Whereas.
With the attrition of the other
schools, they, they may not have
been able to do as well as we've
been able to do, sir.
Thank you very much, and, and um
the uh
That,
yeah, thank you for that and
thank you for the context. Uh,
one other couple other quick
things, members, if you look on
the page, um, and Mr. Dorgeson,
perhaps you can explain that the
other revenues, a great deal of
that is from our land grant
permanent fund and this reflects
sort of the parcels that um that
support the New Mexico Military
Institute.
Uh, yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. So,
Page 29 is showing you only
general fund, and that's a
distinction I should have made,
page 30 is showing you um other
revenues and those other
revenues are uh primarily land
grant permanent revenues that
have a constitutional
distribution annually, um, to
all of the special schools,
including New Mexico Military
Institute.
Great. Uh, thank you very much,
Mr. Jorgensen and Mr. and I
think just good context for us.
Uh, and finally, uh, general, I,
I think we're excited, we're
excited overall with higher
education to see a higher LFC
recommendation around the ING
and with the instruction in
general. Um, one thing though,
and this will be by no means
sort of solely within uh New
Mexico Military Institute, I
think broadly we're investing
robustly in higher.
Education and uh at the same
time, sort of making sure that
we're asking for the greatest,
but sort of fidelity and
accountability for those funds,
and I'd be remiss, General, just
um asking if some of the
students' safety concerns that
have been there in the past, um.
I guess I would look forward
given your new leadership to
seeing how, as you sort of
describe in a in a evolving
culture, ensuring all students,
regardless of who they are,
understand there's a wide
variety of students who are on
campus in a residential setting.
I guess, are you confident that
uh that those students can be
kept safe.
I'm very, Mr. Chair, I am very
confident that those students
can be kept safe. Now, uh, one
of the things that, um, I have.
Initiated in coming into the
school is that.
We need to look at everything
that we do.
So
With our
We, we had a strategic plan that
in my estimation,
was out of date.
Because we can't
operate a school on a strategic
plan that evolves every decade.
So, one of my uh
Initial initiatives is something
that we're working on right now
is that we're going through.
A new strategic plan, and I
brought in all of my.
2nd and 3rd level.
Supervisors, directors as we
build this plan so that I can
listen to everything that's been
happening on campus and all of
the changes we need to make,
because there are some things
that we
Do
That we don't say.
And there are some things that
we say.
And it's not written in our
policy. So that is one of the
initial things that I've looked
at our own governance as we're
going forward. And one of the
other things that I've done
since I've came onto the campus
is just to increase
Uh, my visibility. And when I
say that I am an administrator
from schools and I have been
working in schools for about 20
years. So I am very comfortable
in classrooms and observing
classrooms and giving feedback
to teachers about what they're
doing and uh engaging with
students. So, uh, that's one of
the other things and
Also, within that,
Uh, I also noticed that there
was uh some stovepiping as far
as
Students
Cadets being able to share how
they feel about the school with
higher level leadership. So one
of the things that I did with
that was to
Set up a monthly meeting.
With cadet leadership.
Just to hear what's going on in
the school from them, and, and I
would have my commandant staff
actually be there to take notes
because I want to know, I want
them to understand that they
have an open door and that if
something is going on, it won't
be stifled at that level for us
to be able to communicate and to
make changes. Uh, I think that
any, uh, issues that have
happened in the past are long
behind New Mexico military.
and
we are, we have our eye toward
the future and with technology
and making sure that all of our
students get the best
opportunity that they can.
Great, uh thank you uh very
much, General, that, uh, I very
much appreciate that. I'm sure
we all do, and um thank you. Uh,
OK, we're, we'll now turn
perhaps uh representative
Pettigrew might want to move or
we're open for a motion to adopt
the LFC.
Um, regionally, I don't know
exactly who's I.
Representative Brown, there we
go.
The LFC
OK, it's been
moved by Representative Brown,
seconded by Representative
Pettigrew. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none that's adopted.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. OK, uh, now we're
gonna ask for the school for the
blind and visually handicapped.
Uh, great to see, uh,
Superintendent Miller.
Good afternoon, chair and
representatives. My name is
Heather Miller. I'm the
superintendent for the New
Mexico School for the Blind and
Visually impaired. Thank you for
the opportunity to speak to you
all this afternoon. I want to
share just a little bit of some
of the highlights and MSBBI has
had over the last few years and
a little bit of our background
in programming. We did start in
1903. We've been serving our
kiddos in the state, um, for
over 100 years now.
We last school year served 2,239
students in different capacities
with our programs with 1,649 of
those kiddos being through
direct services. We have
programming through our birth to
3 department, which has an
ongoing caseload of around 300
kiddos in the state as well as
screenings of around 1000 kiddos
every year.
We are one of the top programs
in the nation for early
identifications of babies with
visual impairments.
Our outreach department supports
school districts around the
state with completing
evaluations and direct services.
There are also a key component
of our NMSU NMSBI collaboration
program, which we have partnered
with NMSU to certify educators
as teachers of students with
visual impairments. It's one of
30 programs in the country that
does so.
And our outreach department
provides mentors to the folks
who are going through that
program.
We also through our outreach
department have our low vision
clinic, which provides clinics
around the state for free to
families so they can bring their
child in to see an
ophthalmologist and get an
updated eye report and
information on their child's
vision, and we have our
assistive technology department
that helps anyone around the
state who requests it. We
provide not only assistive
technology for them to try out,
um, that we lend out to them, we
also provide training on how to
utilize it both to teachers,
students, and um.
Parents who make that request of
us.
We have our instructional
resource center on our Almogordo
campus that provides specialized
learning materials to school
districts and students around
the state for free, and our
brail protection brail
production is housed out of
there, and school districts are
able to submit to us things like
assignments, testing materials,
and we produce those for them in
braille so that children have
our students have more access to
that.
We have 2 campuses, Alamo Bordo
is our residential campus and we
serve students from pre-K
through 12th or through high
school there. We also have a
post-secondary program and in
Almogordo we focus on combining
the core curriculum with the
expanded core curriculum, which
is a set of skills that's been
identified as important for
kiddos with vision loss to learn
because they haven't had the
opportunity to learn it through
their vision the same way as
sighted people have.
We also have our early childhood
program, which is in
Albuquerque, and that serves
kiddos ages 3 to 6, who have a
vision impairment that has been
identified as adversely
impactful to their ability to be
successful at that age in a
regular preschool classroom.
Some of the things that we've
been doing at NMSBVI is in the
state are one of our former
superintendents as well as
several of our staff members.
roped the braille standards,
which aligned Braille teaching
with the Common Core um English
language arts standards and also
produced a raille companion
guide, which we have begun
training all of our educators on
in the state are special ed
directors, or TBIs, special
educators who are interested in
it and the hope, of course, is
to make Brill more easily
accessible to kiddos out around
the state.
We participate in research, both
at the state, national, and
international levels. We have
ongoing studies with Russia, we
are preparing to do some
presentations in Italy to um an
international clinic for vision
loss, so we try, we strive to
not only impact New Mexico, but
to impact the whole field of
vision loss for every kiddo that
we can reach.
We also have staff that provide
training materials through the
American Printing House for the
blind, that provides they create
videos that are then provided
around the country to teach the
visually impaired or special
educators or anybody who wants
to gather more information on
certain eye conditions or ways
to provide, um, instruction,
especially focused on the
expanded core curriculum.
So with all of that, I would ask
that you adopt the.
Or consider adopting the LFC
recommendation for us, and I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Superintendent. We're gonna go
first to Representative Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Superintendent. Um, could
you tell me what, when you do
have to charge school districts.
What do you charge school
districts for?
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the only things
we charge school districts for
or if we do some direct
services, we do charge a
contracting fee for those direct
services through our outreach
department. We do strive to make
sure that those fees are lower
than what anybody else would
charge essentially just enough
to cover that cost. We do charge
for some of our braille
materials, not all, um, but it
depends on the size of the
materials that we are providing,
but beyond that, we provide
every other service.
For free. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you. Could you
give me like an average cost of
what a school district might be
charged if they need direct
services within an IEP. So we
charge approximately Mr. Chair
Representative, I apologies. We
uh charge approximately $75 an
hour. So depending on what the
IEP requirement is there.
Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that. Um, when you talk
about stipends and the the
stipends, what do those go for?
It, it says that your projection
does not include stipends of
$5000 to $10,000 for special
education teachers. Yes, um, Mr.
Chair and representative, what
that was was at the time the,
um, we were hearing a little bit
of rumblings that, um, special
education may be considering
ongoing stipends to special
education teachers, and since we
are a fully special education
school, that is what that is
referencing. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. And
on this,
When you talk about 1,649
students in New Mexico received
direct service from you. Is that
what you mean is that the $75 an
hour? No. um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, that the folks
that we charge are a minimal
part of that number, that number
is almost all of our birth to 3
kiddos, um, all the things we do
through outreach because our
birth to 3 does have such a
large caseload, um, but we also
serve.
56 school districts through our
outreach department where we do
not charge for many of our
services that we provide because
we do, um, not often have to
provide direct services as much
as we need to support the staff
in the district to be able to be
more informed to provide the
services. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and just final
question, am I understanding
correctly, so you have an
endowment, you're earning the
interest off your endowment.
Yes, you're serving these, all
of this inclusively for 22
million a year.
Mr. Chanpresentative, yes. Thank
you. And, and do you, what is
the balance of your, of your
permanent fund, your endowment
fund.
I do not know the exact number,
but I believe it is around 16
million currently thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, uh, down. We're gonna
go next to represent Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Superintendent on uh the follow
up on the stipends, the growth
fund.
I believe you apply for the
stipends, uh, because I'm
wondering why you would have a,
have you pursued
Um, getting the stipends from
the PED because it shouldn't
really.
Be a funding request if we
already have the stipend system
in place. So have you utilized
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so we included
that just to provide information
of if the stipends were ongoing.
I know the ones that were
provided now were through pet
and funded that way, but we did
not know if that would be the
ongoing case or if it would be
built into in the future, um,
there our budget that it would
be required and so that's,
that's the reason we referenced
it. It is not included in the
numbers on the back of that
page. It is only to provide that
reference point in case it did
come around.
in the future to be different.
OK, thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative. OK, I don't see
any other questions. We would
look for a motion.
Mr. Chair, I move that we adopt
the legislative proposal. Great.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Dao, seconded by
Representative Duncan, and
Representative Sara.
Uh, is there any opposition to
that motion? I don't see any
opposition. Uh, thank you, thank
you very much, Superintendent.
Thank you. OK, uh, and now we'll
uh ask the school for the deaf.
Um
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Or spending some time with us
today.
I'm Jennifer Herbel with a New
Mexico School for the Deaf.
I'm extremely proud of our
program.
I have worked here with New
Mexico School that up for 26
years, started as a middle
school teacher and worked my way
up through many positions over
the years. I've been told to
keep this short, so I will do
so.
Our enrollment numbers.
Continue to go up.
We directly serve, uh, well,
last year it was 207 students,
and that's for our all day
programs, our school
programming.
Our early intervention program
and our outreach programs.
Early intervention program
serves babies 0 through 6 and
outreach programs serve
children, school aged throughout
all of the districts in New
Mexico, providing training and
consultation for teachers of the
deaf, uh, supports for
interpreters working in those
districts for.
speech and language therapist,
etc.
We serve about 80% of the deaf
and hard of hearing students.
Who have an exceptionality as
Deborah Hard of hearing within
the state of New Mexico, and
that is a huge percent. I think,
I think it's actually the
largest percentage of any
program for the deaf in the
country.
And that's compared even to
California, who only is serving
5% of those statewide children.
And I do want to say that we're
never satisfied.
We know that the largest
predictor of a child's success
is early language.
And access to language. They
have to have full access and
rich language.
And that's not by mistake. Most
administrators, uh, people who
move up in the world, so to
speak, who are deaf, they come
from deaf families like myself,
but that is not because children
who come from deaf families are
smarter in any way. We are not
smarter.
We had early access to language,
and that's really the only
distinction.
And that's why one of the the
RPSP request for the $400,000
would be.
to support
$140,000 excuse me, that was an
interpreted error, was to
support the diagnostic
diagnosing around the state.
There are many rural areas
throughout New Mexico and
families who do not get to go to
those follow up tests, so then
they don't know their child is
deaf or hard of hearing, so they
can access our any services
until they're 2 or 3 years old
or later, and that puts the
child way behind.
We are, we have a fabulous tele
audiology, uh, system. Now we
have in Gallup and it's the most
ideal system possible where we
can diagnose them and identify
them within a couple of weeks.
Also, we are very proud of our
preschool in Albuquerque, which
is grown by just leaps and
bounds.
We've doubled in size.
So, we have some funding
requests uh with PSFA and
Capital Alay in the past, uh,
for an expansion of that
preschool in Albuquerque.
So with that,
The proposed salary increases,
uh, we of course want to remain
competitive with other school
districts around New Mexico.
With the salary increases and
the possible changes in the
minimum salaries for a licensed
teachers, uh, as with the
military institute, we are a
statewide agency and we travel
extensively and we've said this
before, we drive enough miles to
have driven to the moon and back
and around the earth once, and
that's every year. So we do a
lot of travel.
And we are there. We're
everywhere in every corner of
the state, and we'll continue to
do so, but obviously the travel
costs have also gone up.
We just had an elevator
breakdown where a panel broke
down and the cause to repair
that with $65,000 which is
crazy.
But with our for our children
who have multiple disabilities
and need the elevator, then of
course, that has to be repaired.
So the costs do add up. We would
respectively, respectfully ask
for the LFC.
Uh, recommendation. Thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you very much,
Superintendent, uh, Herbal,
we're gonna go straight to
questions starting with
Representative Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation,
Superintendent, um, I, I, I want
to know how many K-12 students
you're serving on campus.
On the Santa Fe campus.
Uh, about, uh, it ranges, you
know, of course it changes
yearly, but about 145 to 150.
And our Albuquerque campus.
It's not just K, it includes our
3 and 4 year olds as well. We're
right at around right now at
about 48 students.
Farmington, we have a preschool
setting there. We have 5
students.
It's not a campus. We have a
classroom.
And our Las Cruces,
unfortunately, we did have to
close down that program in the
classroom because our teacher
retired and we've been searching
a new teacher and haven't gotten
one yet, but there are some
babies identified during COVID,
uh, and the numbers are low, but
in the Las Cruces, uh, area,
we're suspecting that they
probably went to uh El Paso to
have those babies. So now we're
just finding out about them and
they're coming at maybe 4 or 5,
so we're hoping to reopen that
and expand that later. Thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Superintendent, are you
receiving New Mexico pre-K money
for those children and are they
served in a licensed setting
with wraparound care?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Down.
Uh, no, we don't receive
funding. We're funded
differently.
But yes, they do receive all
different kinds of wraparound
services and care, and we
provide a, a full range of
services, Albuquerque Preschool,
for example, has its own
audiologist. It has, um, support
services such as social work
services, all of, all of that is
to uh support those students in
that setting. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Superintendent. Why, why aren't,
why aren't you applying for New
Mexico pre-K funding?
From the early care and
education department.
Mr. Cha, Representative Doo, we
get mixed answers on whether we
would qualify for those funds or
not, quite honestly.
Um, also,
Yeah, there it is, um, that's
all I can say for now. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Superintendent. Have you applied
for the facility funding from
the early care and education
department.
Yes, and uh we're in the
process, I, I apologize, uh, the
chair and this and uh
representative Dao.
We are in the process and
finding out whether we do
qualify for that, and if so, we
will of course apply. Thank you,
Mrs. Car and thank you for that,
Superintendent. When you provide
services to a school district,
what do you charge per child?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dao, we do not charge the
districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I, it's been
a couple of years ago. It was
when, um, uh, before Karen
Trujillo, when she was still the
superintendent at Las Cruces at
that time, she testified that
there was there there was
contractual agreements for
services provided at the Las
Cruces School District, I
believe it was around
OK, yeah.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Doo, that was a
little bit different. Uh, it
wasn't service to the school
district for 3 and 4 year olds.
So we actually do it two
different ways. So we have JPAs
in place for 3 and 4 year olds.
That are within different
service areas of ours, and we
charge a very small amount.
Uh, several $1000 annually.
About 5000 to 7500 would be the
range annually.
And that's been in place for a
very long time. We'd had several
school districts. No, they don't
want to be involved with that,
with, uh, with that child or and
so we don't have the GPA any
longer, so it really determines
and it's really determined by
the school districts and how
much they want to partner with
us and co-provide the services
or not. And so we come to
agreements on who's paying for
what pieces, and it really
varies like with Albuquerque,
APS does not pay us anything at
all, and we're completely fine
with that.
Thank you, Mr. and you're
talking K through 12.
Oh no, uh, 3 and 4 year olds
only. We do not charge at all
for K through 12. Thank you. And
one last question, what is your
uh balance or endowment, what do
you have in reserves?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo, I am honestly not sure what
the question is. Uh, do you mean
our fund balance and what that
is right now, uh, I'm not sure
what you mean by endowment. I
don't know if you have a
permanent, like if you have a
foundation fund or something
that you earn interest off of or
I see.
Thank you for the clarification.
We do have foundation funds with
the Santa Fe Community
Foundation.
I believe right now, last
checked, it was about 700,000.
But they managed the funds, they
kind of own the funds. Our fund
balance currently, uh, I might
refer to our CFO Ms Cassius,
Teresa Casillas. What is our
current fund balance?
Please, Ms. Casillas, come on up
here.
I'm
sorry, um, Chairman, members of
the um
Representatives, um, our current
fund balance is about 7 million,
but only $3 million of that is
for instruction in general.
There a manger of that is
assigned to other uh restricted
funding sources. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Chair. Thank you very much for,
uh, down.
OK, I don't see any other uh
questions. Thank you,
Superintendent, and thanks to
the incredible team that's here
today, uh, that's part of, uh,
what you all do, which is great
to see. We'll go to uh
representative.
for the motion and then or did
you have a question? Great,
we'll go to representative Saana
for the motion. Representative
Brown for the 2,
the LFC recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Sareana, seconded
by Representative Brown. Is
there any opposition to adopting
the LSC recommendation, seeing
none.
That's what we've adopted.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK
We'll go back to Mr. Jorgensen.
And guide us through as we go
through, uh, again, we're gonna
go through the institutions, and
then we'll conclude with uh with
our, with the higher education
department.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
the first item up, we had the
accountability report.
So I'm gonna work off of this
handout.
Right here.
Um, we'll do a brief overview
there, and then jump right into
the institutional budgets.
So the first point I'd like to
make, it's in that first
paragraph. New Mexico has been a
leader in affordable college
education since 1996. So for the
past 30 years, the state has
really led the nation, um, in
providing access to a college
education to students regardless
of income.
Uh, the lottery scholarship was
among the first of its kind and
it recently got expanded in
2022, pretty dramatic expansion
with the creation of the
opportunity scholarship.
The creation of the Opportunity
scholarship.
Sort of occurred at the trough
enrollment time. So, New Mexico
Higher Education institutions
have been losing enrollment
since a peak in 2011. Um, they
lost enrollment every year,
right up to 2021. In 2022, the
opportunity scholarship was
passed, and that trend reversed,
and we are now on our 3rd
consecutive year of enrollment
increases.
Um
I'd like to point out 11 other
issue though.
You know, and in 2006,
10 years after the
creation of the lottery
scholarship. New Mexico is more
or less in the middle of the
pack in terms of educational
attainment. So the state ranked
twenty-ninth.
Um
By 2022, the state had fallen to
41st.
And if you take a look with me,
look at that uh table.
down in the middle of the page,
that's giving us our higher
education attainment levels,
it's broken out by a couple of
age groups, and it compares New
Mexico to the US average, and I
think
I think there's a couple of
takeaways here that are, um, of
interest.
First is you see New Mexicans in
general, um, are less likely
than Americans at large to have
some kind of postsecondary, um,
education.
And the other is that uh for New
Mexicans in that younger age
cohort that 25 to 34 year old
age cohort, they are actually
less likely than the general
working age population to have a
post-secondary education. This
is uh mostly concerning because
New Mexico is actually beat the
national average since the
creation of the Opportunity
scholarship in the high school,
uh, or in the college going
rate. So we have students
leaving high school and going to
college at a higher rate than
the national average.
And then we have sliding
rankings in terms of actual
educational attainment. So, um,
what you're seeing there is sort
of the product of that table on
the right-hand side, full-time
graduation rates. New Mexico's
at in 2023 averaged 49%
graduation rate in, in a
six-year time period.
That's 10 points less than the
national average of 59%.
You turn with me to
page 2 of the handout.
Um
We can see what's driving that,
it's.
Fairly simple. It's the
full-time retention rate, and
you look at that gap and it's
that same 10% gap.
So we're losing a lot of
students in New Mexico,
particularly getting them from
that first to the 2nd year, um,
of college.
The next
Graph you'll see.
re awards by type. Um, those
have been falling for several
years, and it makes sense.
They've been following along
with the overall enrollments.
Um, and we can see in this last
year, 23, 24, that's the first
year in several years that
they've actually started picking
up. So that is, um, that is good
news. Enrollments are
rebounding and degrees are
rebounding a little bit.
Um
On the bottom of the page. I
also wanted to point out our,
where we're at with tuition
right now, college
affordability.
Our average 4-year public
tuition is right now, about 35%
cheaper than the national
average.
Um
And you can see that that
relationship, uh, for both the 4
and the 2-year programs. And
that's leading to a couple of
sort of interesting outcomes.
So,
What we find when we compare New
Mexico nationally.
We find that students in New
Mexico, uh,
Carry a little bit less debt
than the
Then the national average.
Um
But they're also much less
likely to take on debt at all.
So, New Mexico students have a
very, very low propensity. Only
half of them are actually taking
on any debt.
However, for the ones who do,
they're having a really hard
time paying it back, and the
state ranks forty-ninth in terms
of the percentage of student
loan borrowers in delinquency.
Um, on page 3.
You'll see this is a cost per
award table and all it's doing
is taking the total awards.
By institution, um, and, well,
it's taking the total ING
General Fund appropriation, and
it's dividing that by the total
awards, and it's telling you
your your cost per reward for
that general fund, uh, spending.
So right now, if you look at
that 3rd column from the uh
right on the bottom line, you
can see the grand total, so the
average award right now is
costing $36,000.
Um
I'd also like to just pause real
quick to to note one thing. New
Mexico spending on higher
education currently ranks 2nd in
the nation, so we're spending
about $22,000 from the general
fund, uh, per full-time student.
That's where we are right now,
and if you wanted to see how
that compares in your volume 3
on page 112, there's a
comparison that shows all of the
states. Um, the last item on the
accountability overview is a
summary of endowment awards.
And there's 3 categories. These
were 3 categories that have been
targeted.
Uh, over the past several years
for additional funding. You can
see education, nursing, and
social work, um,
And I think the
The LFC right now is doing some
additional work to try to
determine what the impact on
those new endowment funds has
been on those program
enrollments, what we've seen,
uh, up to now is relatively flat
enrollments, um, after the
endowment awards had been made.
We don't know that very likely
could be turning around. We need
to do more work there. So that's
your high-level overview, um,
and now, Mr. Chair,
I'd like to, if I could turn to
the budget packet.
Um
And just go through a, through a
couple brief points and then
we'll jump, uh, right into the
spending summary differences.
So, on page one,
The chart on the right hand
side, that's showing you your
higher education enrollment and
appropriations where the blue
bars are your FTE students and
the red line is appropriations
to higher end. Um, again, the
blue bars we see in this graph.
They're falling right up until
21, and again, opportunity
scholarship, and then you start
to see that enrollment start to
bounce back. The other thing
you're seeing is a pretty large
increase in spending. So over
the past two years, we've had a,
uh, $375 million increase in
higher ed spending.
There's two main
Categories that account for
this. The first is about $178
million in operational funding.
These are funds directed right
to the ING base, and they also
include compensation. So that
was 100 78 million, and then the
other one, the, the other big
one was Opportunity scholarship
that was created and is
currently funded at 146 million.
So that's taking you through the
The biggest um spending drivers
in the
In the budget. I wanted to point
out one thing on page 2. This is
student supports.
Um
The LFC did a little bit of work
on financial aid and ran an
evaluation in 2023.
And what it found was that
Investing in college operations,
particularly student supports
would have a higher estimated
impact on student outcomes, then
further expansion of
undergraduate financial aid. And
the reason is because at this
point, lottery and opportunity
scholarships are fully funded,
but we're still seeing that
persistent retention issue and
low graduation rates, which is
indicating that students need a
greater level of service,
whether that's mental health
services, whether that's
advisement, tutoring, things of
that.
nature, um, to help them get
through college and graduate
timely.
And then the other thing that um
Evaluation found was there was a
projected $27 million in federal
student aid that was being
unclaimed as a result of New
Mexico students not filling out
a FAFSA. That's important
because federal aid in the state
of New Mexico is applied on top
of lottery and opportunity
scholarships. It does not reduce
the state expenditure on those
and can generally be used for um
things like cost of living. Um,
food, transportation, housing
are all eligible uses for those
hell dollars.
Um, you'll turn on page 4.
Just to give you a flavor, we're
gonna be talking a little bit of
jargon, um,
The pie chart shows you
The breakout of where the money
is, and what that jargon is. So
I'd like to go through the first
big one, the blue portion of
that is instruction in general.
That's the biggest part of your
higher ed operating budgets, and
that is, again, all of their
operational funding, their
classroom expenditures,
administrative expense,
we've got it, yeah, page 3, I
think for us on our I'm sorry,
page 3.
Uh, that funding is distributed
by a funding formula.
Um
A couple of notes on the funding
formula, the big one.
The funding formula distributes
only new money.
No higher education institution
will have a budget reduction
from the current year as a
result of running the formula.
Um, it distributes that funding
using two primary methods. One
is called a standard allocation,
and that's essentially market
share, um,
So the percent of the degrees
you're getting are correlated
back to the percent of the
award. The other part is a
performance component that says
institutions that hit certain
benchmarks for student awards
would be eligible for additional
funding. So that's the quick and
dirty of ING funding. The other
ones categorical and RPSP
funding. These are single line
item appropriations that are
made, uh, within the budget
bill. They are not automatically
addressed through.
the funding formula.
Um
That is
All as far as background. So if
you can turn to page 6. Now we
can actually start looking at
the budget recommendations.
Mm
So
Page 6 is this big summary
table.
And what you're looking at on
the top, starting on page one.
That's giving her starting on
line one.
That's giving you your, uh,
Your face.
amount. If you look at line 3,
this is the
Big part of the difference
between the LFC and executive
recommendations. The executive
is recommending a 2% increase to
base funding the LFC is
recommending a 2.5% increase on
line for, um, second column from
the right, you can see that the
LFC recommendation is $4.2
million higher than the
executive recommendation.
For, um, that base funding.
I'd like to next turn your
attention to lines 1213, 14,
targeted investments, um, you'll
see line 13 shows student
support, uh, LFC recommendation
includes an additional $3
million in student support.
That's gonna get pushed out to
institutions based on their
overall share of the instruction
in general budget. So what does
that mean? If an institution
gets 10% of ING funding, they
would get 10% of this $3
million.
That student support funding is
um
Sort of undesignated, meaning
that an institution could use it
at its discretion for, for its
student support services. So if
it believes that mental health
services are needed or again
advising, tutoring, it can
determine how best to apply
those uh student support
dollars.
On item 14, you see graduate
assistant compensation, that'll
go to 4-year schools that have
uh graduate assistants employed
um
At the schools.
Lines 17.
Through 23 are giving you the
nonformula
institutions, so that's the
health sciences Center.
Uh, the special schools, which
we just heard, and then the
other thing I'd like to point
out is on line 22, medical
faculty compensation, LFC
includes an additional $2
million recurring to be applied
to faculty compensation for
medical school.
Um, that gets us to line 25.
This is the grand total for ING.
If you look at the second
column, uh, from the right, the
LFC recommendation is
10.5 million higher than the
executive recommendation and you
can see online 27, you're
looking at an LFC recommendation
of 3.1% and an executive
recommendation of 2%.
Um, you have some differences
just going down the line 40,
other categorical, these are
your single line item RPSPs.
This is where the
recommendations diverge a little
bit, and the executive
recommendation is higher than
the LFC recommendation by $14.6
million.
Um, and then online 44, you can
see where does all of that land
us up?
Uh, the LFC recommendation is
$4.1 million less than the
executive recommendation you're
talking about a 0.4% difference
in all of higher education.
Um
Very quickly, I just want to
point a couple things out so you
know that you have them as we go
through the rest of the
presentations.
The next on page 7, you have a
high-level summary that's giving
you
That increases by institution,
as well as high-level budget
category.
On pages 8 and 9, you have a
detail of some of the
non-recurring items starting on
page 10. That's the, that's the
higher education institutional
detail, and that's showing you
every single line item of
appropriation by institution.
On page 15, you're gonna have a
higher ed department, high
level, and we'll come back to
that later, um, and then the
last thing I wanted to point out
for HEIs.
Page 23 shows all of your
performance measures and
consensus staff recommendations
for targets, and that is
everything in this packet for
higher education. I am so sorry.
Uh, great. Thank you, thank you
very much, uh, Ms. Mascias,
Madam Secretary, uh, turn it
over to you. I also want to
recognize we have a number of
leaders from higher education,
uh, from uh our four-year and
2-year institutions, research
and comprehensive, um, thank you
all for being here today and uh
I, I believe we may have um if
we have a representative from
Cup who wants to speak at some
point, that's great, but we'll
go now, Madam Secretary and Ms.
Massa start with.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
there are a couple of points
that I would like to highlight
for the executive
recommendation, and that's
mainly within the research and
public service projects for the
executive. The executive
recommended an increase of $20.2
million. The creation of 11
RPSPs at 7 institutions
statewide. Um, majority of these
items include $14.7 million
dollar difference between the
LFC recommendation, and that
includes $8.9 million dollar.
increased from 3 RPSPs at UNM.
sorry, let me pause there, Ms.
Bacias. Uh, can you direct the
mem uh in the packet apologies,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, you'll see on page 4,
the categorical and research and
public service projects, write
up, um, you can kind of follow,
um, just touching on those
points. So for you and them, um,
we have $4 million in the
executive recommendation for the
office of.
Substance abuse disorder, 2.9
million for quantum computing, 2
million for the School of Public
Health and 1.4 million to
increase overall funding for 5
existing centers of excellence,
so that would increase the
funding from $500,000 each to
750,000. Um, and then additional
$1.3 million to the Bureau of
Geology at New Mexico Tech for
aquifer mapping. This
Funding will be utilized to
support 5 hydrologists, a data
manager, GIS system, modeling
staff and software and data uh
platform maintenance. Um, and
then lastly, I would like to
also highlight the $1.4 million
that was directed to nursing
programs and 1 million for
student support programs. Um, I
appreciate it and I will turn it
over to the secretary for
additional comments. Thank you.
Mr. Cha, thank you so much,
Connor and Nicole, for all your
talking points. I'm gonna try
really hard not to be
repetitive, but I do want to
direct all of you to this sheet
in your binders. It is the
higher education department's
request for the higher education
institutions, and you'll see on
the front side a little bit
about what our institutions do
and the common good of higher
education, but then in the back
we get into the nitty gritty of
the numbers for the executive
recommendation. Mr. Chair
members of the committee, thank
you.
much for allowing me to be here
today. I am Stephanie Rodriguez
and I am the cabinet secretary
of the New Mexico Higher
Education Department. Overall
approximately 13% of the overall
budget in the state of New
Mexico goes to the higher
education sector through the
colleges, universities, special
schools, and the department. The
total request this year as
Nicole and Connor had mentioned,
but on the executive side is
$1.4 billion with over 1.2
billion of the executive
requirement.
being dispersed to the higher
education institutions through
instruction in general funds,
which is the state's higher
education funding formula,
commonly known as ING, and then
of course the research and
public service projects, also
known as RPSPs. You will see
firsthand in the first handout
that we are requesting a 2%
increase to the, uh, ING and in
new money um.
And ING to the states 24 formula
funded colleges and
universities.
As many of you may remember, we
went underwent a shift in how we
manage research and public
service projects in the state of
New Mexico as an agency and
sector. They had ballooned to
over 100% in increases, however,
with the collaboration of the
department, the Department of
Finance and Administration, the
legislative Finance Committee
and both your community and the
Senate Finance Committee a
couple years ago, we shifted
general fund related RPSPs into
the base for each institution.
and the RPSPs that you see
before you today are truly
research and public service
projects that are designed to be
for student services or pilot
programs for students or for
colleges to show that these work
and then wrap into their ING at
a later date. The request before
you today is nearly $135.5
million in research projects,
programs, student services,
quasi-state agencies, including
the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
And our designated centers of
excellence, and my last point,
we are diligently working with
the higher right to finalize the
higher education, sustainability
study in partnership with the
National Center for Higher
Education Management Systems.
The study is thoroughly
reviewing and recommending
changes to the state's higher
education funding formula,
particularly the base to make it
more equitable and then of
course really finalizing a
better process for research and
public service.
projects moving forward as a
state. We have had productive
meetings with our technical
committees with representation
from the executive, the
legislative branches of
government, in addition to the
three associations in every
higher education sector, we also
convened a meeting with all
higher education, business
officers and have also met with
sector presidents. Thank you for
listening and your time today,
members, and with your
permission, Mr. Chair, I will go
ahead and turn the presentation
back over to you or
The next question and answers.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Madam Secretary, to you and your
team and uh congratulations, uh,
just on the Opportunity
scholarship. It, it, it is truly
a, a monumental achievement, um,
in your stewardship there
amongst other areas is deeply
appreciated.
OK, uh, members, we're gonna go
to questions now, um, starting
with bringing member Chatfield
and going from there.
Yeah, so.
Um
Mr. Chairman, I, I got a call
from
The folks down at Clovis
Community College, and they were
concerned about the
collaborative for higher
education shared services, and
apparently that
Well, it's a little bit tricky
for me because apparently it's
in the do it, uh, budget.
But it funds the computer.
The, uh, the secretary can
probably speak to it a little
better than me, but, but, uh, I
think the request was for 10
million, executive has a 5
million and LFC has 2 million
and uh they were very concerned
that they were not going to be
able to.
To get done what they needed to
do, so, can you help me
understand what's, what's going
on there or there's any, maybe
we need to flag it.
Hi, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chatfield on that
chess program, we will be diving
into that project during the
section 7 hearing tomorrow
morning. Um, I know that the uh
agency or the the chess program
had asked for $10 million the
executive recommendation is 5
million and then the LFC
recommendation is 3, and that's
just for general fund.
So that's, that's what I
understand about it already. So
uh my, now I understand you're
gonna look at it tomorrow
morning and, and uh you're gonna
try to come up with some enough
funds to keep this program so.
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna go ahead
and take the second part of that
question, um, as you know, we
did do the $5 million request.
However, they requested um about
$20 million to the committee
during the interim. However,
right now I think they're
looking at 10 million, which is
what they asked you, 10 million
this year and then they'll come
back for another 10 million the
following year, and that will
complete all the state
investment for the chess
project, uh, moving forward, so
they need 20 million to finish
the project and
they will not come back to the
committees for any more funds
after that.
So Mr. Chair, can you tell us
exactly what that program does.
Mr. Cherry knew I was going to
get asked this, and I have it
right here, unless they want to
answer it, but I do have it.
So it's a nonprofit 501c3 in a
partnership with Central New
Mexico Community College, Clovis
Community College, Northern New
Mexico College, San Juan College
and Luna Community College, and
it is a unique solution and
system that aligns student
services and business processes
such as HR and finances into one
system. It's a shared system so
that the colleges and
universities can also share
information in between and it's
easier for transfer for their
students.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, ranking
member Chatfield. OK, next we're
gonna go to Representative Baca
and then Representative Silva.
Some bucket, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you for
your presentation.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I had a good
fortune this week of meeting
with students from both NMSU and
you and him, um.
Basically
In preparation for making
requests and so
Uh, first I to the, to the
presidents of those
universities, the kids that I
met were pretty much fine
individuals, so they're very
much um
Kind of gives us hopes for our
future. So, uh, Mr. Chairman,
this isn't necessarily a
question. Well, I guess it is a
question. So, of the funding
that we have for higher
education.
How much have we directed
towards school safety, making
improvements to school safety,
um.
Access control, uh, whether it
be
Cameras
It could be also mobile apps for
panic ones. That's a fantastic
question, Mr. Chair. We're going
to defer to our chief financial
officer who was also the former
director of our capital projects
division, and he will have an
answer for that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Baca. So the higher education
department has worked very
closely with higher education
institutions over the last
several years in order to
prioritize safety projects on
their campuses, uh.
One of the things that we have
done is allowed or not allowed,
but um supported higher
education institutions in order
to utilize building renewal and
replacement funds, and a good
example of that is at the
University of New Mexico in
Albuquerque, their their fiscal
year 24 building renewal and
replacement funds were utilized
in order to support uh ADA and
safety and security improvements
throughout the campus. There has
also been
Other efforts made through the
capital outlay process, uh, they
come for projects that come
through the higher education
department that also supports
safety and security initiatives
on campus.
The other piece that I would
note, Mister Chair, and
Representative Baca is.
There is, there are also other
funding opportunities that we
have supported in the past
through the department or
institutions to receive funding
for specifically the IT related
security measures that you are
referring to as well, uh, and
those, those have been
successful in the past, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for that. I, I do think that
just as we, as we talk about
flagging, as we talk about
moving forward.
We know that the impact that it
has on our K-12s, um schools
when we have an incident, but we
also, as I said before, when we
sit up here, we're actually
thinking about all of our higher
ed institutions. So, Mr.
Chairman, the other big buckets
that were kind of the highlight
were food insecurity. So it was
talking about, and I, I respect
the fact that these kids said
that it's not just an issue,
they, their campus, but it's an
issue at um
All across the state and uh
I'll, the folks uh from UNM
actually, uh, Mr. Chairman, they
brought up that they did have an
initial, they had a food pension
near the engineering.
Uh, area that they're no longer
able to support. So do we have
funds and any recommendations is
how we can address some of the
food insecurity on campuses.
Mr. Chair, uh, that's
That is something we're really
passionate about at the New
Mexico Higher Education
department with support from the
legislature, we actually funded
a basic needs report, and it is
the first time that any state in
the nation has looked at the
basic needs of faculty, staff,
and students and developed a
statewide report, um, a lot of
our students are food insecure.
I believe it's over 40% have uh
reported food insecurity on
their campuses across all
sectors. As far as the higher
education department is.
concerned with support from the
legislature, approximately $5
million have gone towards basic
needs for students at all of our
colleges and universities across
the state of New Mexico, that
includes housing, food, mental
and behavioral health. In the
recommendations before you
today, there is uh LFCre and an
exact rack. The exact wreck is
an $8 million retention fund
non-recurring. This will go to
institutions who are increasing
retention to also put money
towards student service
s such as wraparound services,
advisement, etc. and basic needs
for their students. Um, in the
LFC recommendation, you will see
Connor, is it $20 million for a
retention fund over 3 years, uh,
with, uh, year one being
approximately 4.5 million and
then small increases up to year
3,
honor, would you like to
elaborate a little bit on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative Baca, and I think
The retention fund, um, on the
LFC side is a grow
appropriation. It's a 3-year
appropriation for $20 million
that a lot of that funding will
be, um,
Pretty much unrestricted for
institutions who are able to
increase student retention, they
would be eligible to uh for a
distribution from that fund and
could use it for those students
supports, but, um, to your
question as well, the LFC wreck
has $3 million in it right now
for uh student support. What
would that look like for UNM,
uh, $942,600 would be their
increase on that. You could see
that on our volume 3.
3 page 101, and it's not just
UNM that funding is going out
statewide and also keep in mind
this is uh
This will be
The 2nd year of the 3 million, I
think we did 1.5 million the
year before that. So we'll be up
to 6 million for student
supports in the last two years,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Connor, for that
answer. My last big bucket item
is really about the quality of
life.
you know, as far as student life
here, right? So we talked about
other types of activities that
will help to improve not only
the social, emotional well-being
of students, also their physical
well-being and others too, as we
say, hopefully improve that
improve outcomes as far as
graduation, as far as retention,
those are all very important to
me, so do we have any funds?
Directly or any plans for funds
to support those uh activities.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Not
Not necessarily in this
recommendation. I do want to
point out the legislative
Finance Committee endorsed
legislation dealing with uh
higher education, investment
project fund.
Um, student life is one of the
eligible uses of that funding.
The bill had been brought and
motioned in concept during the
LFC hearing. We're looking for
that to be dropped in the next
couple of days, but that goes
directly to your question about
uh student life. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
just as we said, as we go back
and we're flagging things for
this, uh, our budget here, I
think that we definitely need to
look at these and other areas
that may be brought up by our,
our colleagues. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Baca. Next we're
gonna go to represent Silva,
please.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
secretary and analyst, I
appreciate the presentation. I
have 2 questions. Um, one, I'm
trying to understand the new
money formula, um, and so I'm
gonna try and ask this
coherently. Uh, so,
There's the standard allocation
and the performance component
that go into ING. The executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation.
Clearly are different and so
which
Of the two of these items are
being adjusted. Is it, is the
standard allocation.
Kind of the base and static.
And then the performance
components are shifting. Can you
help me understand that? Thank
you, chair. Yes, Mr. Chair and,
and Representative.
The funding formula itself does
not change.
The amount that you drop into it
does. So the standard allocation
will stay the same.
The, um
And the and the
IPP components, all of the
measures are going to be the
same.
There is one difference in these
recommendations, um, the LFC
recommended directing 50% of
that funding formula allocation
to institutional performance
funding.
So
The veteran institution does, if
it's reaching those benchmarks
of at-risk students served of
student credit hours delivered
of awards granted, um, the more
money they would be eligible
for.
Under the LFC framework, um,
when you run the analysis on it,
it's not a huge difference.
You're talking about a 0.25%
over the 2.5%. So instead of
getting 2.5%, you'd get like
2.75 if you did really great and
about 2.25 if you did very
poorly.
Got it. OK, thank you. That
makes sense, um, and then, uh,
To continue on the student
support question if
Student support is the, is that
the discretion of the
institution, how does LFC study
or understand which
interventions or supports are
working. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
That's another good question,
and we've been following up with
the institutions during the
interim process, so we'll be
looking to do that again, um,
essentially, it's a, it's a
survey.
And it'll go out to all of the
institutions and we'll say,
Hey, here was your allocation
for student support. Tell us
what you're doing with that
funding, um, and how you're
measuring it.
And that's sort of how we're
gonna, we've been keeping track
of the student support outcomes,
and I think that
We'll see when we
If uh more funding is added at a
certain point, we should start
to move the needle here, um, and
I think it's a question of, of
timing really.
Thank you. Uh, I appreciate
that, Connor. Yeah, cause if
that's a way in which we can
increase, um, retention and, and
students staying until they get
a certificate and it can be
affordable because we're paying
attention and very specific ways
than learning the, how to stay
Um, the fidelity to those
practices are gonna be really
important to know. Um, thank
you, chair. And then I just
wanna give a shout out to uh
President uh Doctor Valerio
Ferme from NMSU and uh the chair
of the Board of Regents, uh, Ama
de Vastali, thank you. And, uh,
Chancellor Doctor Monica Torres
from the ACC, um, there's 3
Donanaa Community Colleges in
House District 53. So thank you
so much for being here. Thank
you, chair. Thank you. OK.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, um, Connor, I think these
probably are gonna be questions
for you.
I may overlap a little bit on
uh,
A rep chap Phil, but I don't, I
don't think so, but let me ask
you on page 2 of the budget.
Um, the 23 LFC evaluation of the
opportunity and lottery
scholarships. It says research
indicates college funding and
financial aid boost colleges
outcomes. A New Mexico colleges
are performing below expected
benchmarks given funding levels.
And, and then it says the
evaluation states, um, I think
below that why those outcomes
are
operations, particular student
support. Can you tell me what
we're doing in those areas. I
know uh represent Silva may have
touched on those as well.
What are the operations part of
that?
Um
Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Thank you for the question. I
think
When we look at the student
supports
We've been looking at it from a
very broad lens. And I think
some of those operations are
things that we might think of as
very basic to an institution's
functioning, things like
Your financial aid operation,
your academic advisement.
Operation. Um, where we have
sort of kinks.
Where we have handoffs between
Uh, departments, I think that
that's where we can see students
sort of get lost in the system
and have a hard time continuing
to navigate it. Um, that's not
necessarily a new program that
needs to be created to address
that, but
current regular operations might
need to be buttressed in order
to make sure that those handoffs
are good and that you have the
proper overlap.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Then would
that, would what Rep Chatfield
talked about on the chests.
Is that something that will take
care of that then and make that
handoff smoother, whether it's
from community college to NMU or
UNM or from one department to
another.
Mr. Chair, as far as the chess
system is concerned, the answer
is yes for the participating
institutions of the system. So a
lot of those uh institutions may
have a 2 + 2, which means you
get your associate degree and
then you transfer to a four-year
university. The 4-year
university partner in this case
is northern New Mexico College.
If they were to expand that to
other institutions in the state
of New Mexico, yes, it would
serve as an easier handoff for
transfer.
And I just want to elaborate
what Connor said about handoffs
as well. A lot of the higher
education institution leaders in
this room, uh, when COVID
happened, switched to remote,
but as their students came back
to campus, they have switched
the model to a one stop shop,
meaning you're not telling your
student to go across campus for
services, because chances are
they're going to hit their car
and say bye, talk to you later.
If they're in one location, they
can have all the services at
their fingertips. One of our
locations actually has one.
table, the student stays at that
very table, and the staff comes
to that table. It's not the
student going from that side of
the room to that side of the
room, to that side of the room.
So those are some of the
efficiency efficiencies that our
institutions are deploying on
their main campuses as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
secretary. So following up with
that then, how can we get the uh
the higher institutions, UNA uh
NMSU and the community colleges
communicate.
How do we get them more involved
with
Those folks.
Um, it's up to the institutions.
What I will tell you or Mr.
Chair, I apologize, Mr. Chair,
um, so a lot of our 4-year
institutions have legacy
programs for that.
Um, an example of that is the
banner system. They're very
expensive programs and they're
very expensive programs to just
shut off and move to a new
program. It will cost you more
money to move to a new program
rather than maintain your
existing program. So that's one
thing there. As far as the
handoff though, what I will say
about the state of New Mexico,
we're ahead of the curve when it
comes to transfer. We have a
common course numbering system
in the state of New Mexico,
meaning that any English
course for your uh general
education that you take at any
of our public institutions must
by law transfer to any other
public institution in the state
of New Mexico. So CNM UNM,
they're doing common course
numbering. You can transfer
easily. That is the case for
every single public institution
in the state of New Mexico, the
4 years, the 2 years, including
our branches.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you secretary for that.
I, I'm still a little concerned.
When we go from here to here.
Uh, and, and maybe
And I don't know how that
happens. Maybe a pigeon.
Or with a note on the leg or
something, I don't know how that
happens, but, but I'm concerned
that they never make it. And,
and first semester, they,
they're lost and they just
finally stay in their car for
the rest of the semester and
head home during the summer and
that's it for him. So I'm
concerned about that.
Um, next question would be on
page 5.
Under you, Mr. Chairman Connor,
you had mentioned, uh, or on
this it says 2.25 million for
new tribal education assistance
centers. Can you tell me where
those might be located?
Um, yes, Mr. Chairman and
We'll get to
This in the higher education
department budget, but you're
exactly right. That will be the
higher education department
budget. OK, thank you Madam
Chair. That's the only questions
I had.
Thank you, Representative, um,
next we have Representative
Hernandez and then Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh,
Um, secretary presenters, I, I
too also wanna echo uh the
concerns of uh Representative
Chatfield and also
representative uh Duncan, um.
I, I had the pleasure of, of, of
meeting uh my um um president
of, of, of the community college
that's in my district, and I'm
glad she's here, Doctor
Pendergrass and, and I, I heard
the concerns that they had about
this decrease in funding when it
comes to the collaborative for
higher education, shared
services. I, I understand
firsthand like how critical this
is to too small to community
colleges. Keep in mind, Madam
Chair, so I
College is probably one of the
largest Native American
community colleges in the
country.
There's a large population there
and uh those are uh uh folks uh
students from from from
throughout um New Mexico that go
there and uh and Madam Chair,
we, when, when we have a
Can, can, can benefit from it
reduces this, you know, makes it
uh a whole impact. So I, I just,
um,
wanna express uh like that for
LFC and or I'm, I'm sorry for
for staff and uh and I wanna
have a further discussion on how
we can, uh, you know, find a
solution to this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Garrett.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for this
comprehensive thing that I think
we all need a um a course in how
to
read multiple sources of
budgeting. Uh, my first question
is on page 5, we had a previous
spill, I want to say it was 2
years ago for the tribal
education, technical assistance
centers, are they located
someplace now?
Madam Chair, um, that will be
discussed further in the higher
education department's budget,
but I do want to say yes, we do
have locations, the University
of New Mexico and Navajo
Technical University in Crown
Point, New Mexico.
OK.
Uh, second question, uh, Madam
Chair and Madam Secretary, um on
the New Mexico literacy
Institute $30 million. I thought
in K-12 we have a budget for 30
million for the summer.
Reading programs, this is for
the building. Have we, um,
suddenly located
I did not realize that. Where is
it? Madam Chair, I got so
excited because this has been
such a labor of love for me, um,
I,
I'm in weekly meetings with the
architects. So yes, we have
found a location thanks to the
University of New Mexico, there
is a beautiful location, um, off
of Mesa Vista near the sorority.
house and the ROTC building that
you also supported a few years
back in Capital, um, we are
working on a land transfer over
to the state of New Mexico or
maybe a property swap, uh, do
not quote me Teresa. I know
you're working on it with GSD,
but she'll know more of the
technical on that. We are
already in the design phase, um,
we are going to be done with
design. I'm by March. We're then
gonna go to RFP for
construction, and we're hoping
by the summer.
we can break ground for the New
Mexico literacy Institute, and
you're right, there's $30
million going to the public
education department, but there
was a separate appropriation
from the public school capital
outlay fund to the higher
education department in the
amount of $30 million and HED is
the the agency that is leading
the work on the Capitol side.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, Madam Secretary, and
for explaining the source of the
money cause I'm looking all over
the place. Where is it? Uh, and
then my last question is just,
um,
I know many of us, the adult
education division, and several
of us sponsoring the bill, we
really do hope that that higher
education.
Money for testing for high
school diplomas cause I really
believe if
if people of regardless of their
age, if they're working for that
high school diploma, then if
they go into college programs,
they will succeed at a higher
level, so I just want to flag
that for all of us. Uh, that's
it for now. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Pettigrew and
then Representative Little.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you all for being here. Thank
you Secretary. Um.
Madam Chair, uh, Connor, I think
the first question is for you.
If, if I go back and
Look at the average for your
public tuition.
Graph on page 2 of your.
Performance card report.
this goes back to 2003 and
shows the our cost is about
$6,722.
Uh, now, 23, 24.
Moving back to page one.
If we were to
Project the tough right graph
back to the left and go back to
2.
2003, would it be safe to assume
it's still an escalating graph.
Um,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Pettigrew, that's a little bit
of a difficult.
Question, I want to make a
couple of things just to clarify
a couple things real quick. Um,
on the graph on the
Front page. That's just general
fun. That does not include
tuition. Um,
Funding for higher ed had
largely stagnated, um, for quite
a while, particularly as
enrollment declined.
So,
In that, in that time period,
I'm not
I, I can't give you a good
answer on whether or not the
funding was, was increasing, but
I can certainly get back to you
on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Connor, for that. I, I
guess my
kind of funny, but I heard a
statement and I didn't get to
write it all down.
Um.
Madam Chair, you gave a number
of 375 million increase in
higher ed spending over what
time frame was that?
This was in your opening remarks
going through
going through I'm sorry, can you
quote me the number again? 375
million.
Yeah, uh, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, that is on page one of
your packet. Um, it is the
The
Last sub bullet from the bottom.
It says general fund
appropriations to higher
education institutions increased
by 375 million.
Over the past two years.
Thank you very much for that.
So,
You may have answered it and I
didn't hear it because I'm
ruffling papers over here. Over
what time frame? Just 2 years.
Just what? 22 years, 2 years.
OK.
Why is our tuition continue to
expand when we.
$375 million Madam Chair.
Mr. Chair, I, I will tell you
that the or Madam Chair, the
tuition rate of New Mexico is
one of the lowest in the nation,
which is good news, right? Um,
higher education institutions
did increase tuition and fees
substantially after the passage
of the Opportunity scholarship.
However, I, I will give credit
where credit is due in the past
few years, our governing boards
have not raised tuition and
fees, mostly at the four-year
institutions.
As a matter of fact, last year
for this academic year, none of
the four-year institutions
increased tuition, um, as far as
the independent community
colleges side, we have some
increases to their tuition, um,
less than 5% increased tuition
less or increased tuition for
this academic year. On average,
it was about 2.5%.
And a chair, secretary, I
appreciate the answer. Don't
think that answered my question
though. Why are we investing
$375 million in higher education
and seeing tuition continued to
rise. We're paying for it.
So the state's telling the
colleges, go ahead and increase
your tuition, right, cause we're
gonna pay you for it. That's,
it's.
Makes me want to knock my head
on a steel door, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you for
bringing for bringing me back to
the question. I have a response.
It's probably not a great
response, but it's a response I
hear from the higher education
institutions when they sit down
and meet with them a lot.
Inflation, the rising cost of
living, especially in a
post-pandemic environment, we
see it on the Capitol side, we
see it on the operational side,
um, and it's hitting our higher
education institutions pretty
hard and our local education
agencies on the public
education.
site as well. And then I don't
know if Connor has anything.
Madam Sha and Representative
Pettigrew, if you'll turn to
page 108 in your volume 3, we
have, uh, the history.
We got a 10 year history of
tuition increases in the state.
And what we can see is that
They're, they're a little bit
lumpy, so we have a tendency to
have pretty modest growth. And
when we compare it nationally,
um, it depends on the sector.
The two-year institutions
historically.
Have increased at a, at a rate
that's been slower than the
national average, and you sort
of see that divergence, um.
On the, on the first
accountability handout, the
four-year institutions have
been, um,
Slightly.
Faster than the national
average, and that's sort of
closed the, the gap from being
53% under the nation to 35%
under the nation.
Um, so overall, tuition rates in
New Mexico are still very low.
But it, uh, but the Regents also
have the authority over
tuition.
Madam Chair, uh, Connor and
Secretary I.
Go move to another question
cause I don't feel like that
truly answers my concern with
respect to that.
But
I did get, Madam Chair.
Was that
We have one of the lowest
tuition rates.
In the country.
So what that should tell me is
our out of state tuition should
be skyrocketing right now with
respect to number of, of
students coming in, compared to
New Mexico students because
we're cheaper than everybody
else.
The, the, that line of thinking,
well,
For true because based on the
answers I'm getting, were
cheaper than the majority of the
states out there, everybody
should be flocking to New Mexico
to go to school.
Um, Madam Sharon Representative
Pettigrew.
I think that
Right after this presentation,
the college associations will
come up.
Um, I think of a number of
questions have been raised here
that are gonna be
Uh, probably best answered chess
being one, tuition policy
certainly, um, they will
probably have better answers and
particularly when it comes to
in-state versus out of state
demographics and what those
recruitment efforts look like by
respective institutions, um, I
would, I would say we have a, we
have a room full of experts. I,
however, am not one on this
topic. And I appreciate the
answer and I'm, like I said, I'm
gonna stop there with respect to
that.
It is my understanding,
Secretary and Connor, that, um,
We're gonna answer or ask
questions on this and if, if we
need to pull one of the
institutions in and they can
answer that they're not coming
up individually, so that's the
reason why I'm asking at the
higher level, yeah.
And if I'm wrong, that's fine.
It wouldn't be the first time
today. Probably won't be the
last time today.
Um
And, uh, chair, you're back. Uh,
thank you. Um,
Let's go to some specific line
items if you don't mind. And,
and just circling back. I just
reading the first several pages
of, of this, uh, key hearing
issues. I see so much
expenditures that have nothing
in my opinion.
to do with education.
We're, we're looking at, you
know,
Um
Different policy development
programs. We're looking at this,
we're looking at that.
Villa.
significant amount of really,
really great colleges, really
great.
Professors, teachers out there,
systems out there.
Continue to, to, to wonder why
we spend so much time on the
administrative side on this and
less time on the education side.
I live in the line items.
On page 12, 196.
I have a concern from with
respect to the Santa Fe
Community College.
The small business development
centers, there's a $100,000 gap
between the, between the two and
From the executive side.
Um
That $100,000 gap is gonna gonna
impact different fringe benefits
for benefits for the employees
to the employee health insurance
and the portion of compensation
that to the, to the level of
competition it's not being
funded. Chairman, I would just
ask that we, we, we cue that and
look at that, look at the depth
of whether or not that statement
is full and completely accurate,
and if it is, how do we fix
that?
Um
With respect to chairman with
respect to CNM as I looked
through their line item budgets,
I don't see anything, and
correct me where I'm wrong,
please.
Um
CNM is responsible.
The fiscal agent for our Skills
USA, right?
I don't see a line item in in
the CNM budget with respect to
that.
And very specifically, I'd like
to know what that number is and
how that number is disseminated
between all the skills USA
groups.
Within the state, how, how, how,
how that's reconciled chairman
with PED.
Because the Skills USA groups,
yes, sir, college aspects of
that as well. We have middle
school aspects of Skills USA
now, but how does that fit in
anywhere or doesn't fit in
anywhere with respect to the,
the funding that goes directly
to the schools, is it inside, is
it above the line? Where is it?
Is it?
Just, I don't understand and
it's not.
Mr. Chair, Skills USA is
Supported with $70,000 in pet
funds.
In addition, CNN offers them
about $150,000 in in-kind funds.
There was a request, um, this
year for additional RPSP funding
that is, uh, it's neither in the
executive nor the LFC
recommendation, um, and if
Mr. Chair, and you're right, it
is not in the RPSP request, but
we did recommend a special
appropriation for the program at
$150,000 a special appropriation
is one time non-recurring monies
for the institution.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
for that answer. So,
If I, if I understand, uh one
time non-reoccurring.
Expenditure of 150,000.
Does, does that even cover the
total expenses for the annual
competition, and where does,
where does skills get the rest
of the money from? Is it going
through PED? Where is it?
Where are they getting it that
goes into there.
I know skills chairman is one of
the CTSOs.
And I know I have a whole bunch
of questions about that. That's
for, I think on the 14th with
PED.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh.
Represented Pettigrew, so CNM uh
receives $100,000 grant.
Uh, or from the public education
department to run the state
competition.
The annual cost of that
competition is about.
$380,000.
CNM underwrites the balance of
that amount.
Uh, because it is such an
important event to our high
schools and our colleges and our
employers.
So there's a significant in
kind, uh, both and cost, uh,
that's CM underwrites in
addition to the volunteer time
that all of our um
Judges and others put in.
I do believe K-12 schools
received some funding through
probably CTE funding, maybe in a
formula that they use to help
support their students in a
competition to get to the
competitions and and such, but
that's, that's the reason for
the additional request.
Well, I'm not concerned about
the addition, well, I am because
like chairman, I, I personally
feel like the additional request
is in is insufficient, um, and
especially with basically two
part C andM, one part state. Uh,
if, if, if you're getting
$100,000 and it's costing you
380.
Um, term that creates a problem
with respect to that.
You had another 220,000 German
with the number of skills USA
kids over here.
Um
That seems pretty insufficient
and Chairman, I'd like to pull
that out and start looking at,
at that. And this does bring to
a bigger question that we talked
about, uh, at the first look at
PEDs, um,
Budget, which isn't part of
today.
But it is an overall piece of
the CTSOs and how parts of $40
million that we allocated to CTE
ended up in portrait of the
graduate, ended up in innovation
zones, ended up everywhere
except to the CTEs.
And I also went to the other 6
CTSOs.
So there's a, there's a whole
part of this funding that I'm
not really getting good picture
on, uh, LSC has done a really
good job. Sonny, uh, just the
whole group, uh, with Charles'
feeding me information in it.
Back. So, I'm trying just to
understand this to make sure
that our kids are getting what
we need. And if, if you're gonna
be the chairman, uh CNM is going
to be the fiscal agent on it,
then we need to make sure that
We're funding you correctly.
So that you can administer that.
But we also need to make sure
that we truly understand where
that money goes with respect to
CTE, DACA.
For age FFA, da da da da da.
And so with that, I'd like to
ask that at some point in time
before we get to the final piece
of this budget, that this is
something that we do a little
bit deeper dive on if you don't
mind. Uh, thank you,
representative. We, yeah, we can
pull that, we'll get more
information there. Also, uh, uh,
Representative Garrett reminded
me uh that there's a great deal
of grow money, um, that in and
we as we go into sort of year
two and that evaluation. Uh, so
it's, yeah, quite well.
taken and a good opportunity for
us to make sure that we're
tracking across a wide array of
new investments.
Thank you very much, Chairman, I
have 2 last questions. Um,
Going to the overall budget on
agriculture, looking at that 57
million and then breaking that
down to
Uh, New Mexico State.
Chairman, my question very
specific my question, first
question with respect to ag is
how much money is directly going
to each of the 12.
Ag Science centers. I'm not
talking about the administrative
costs. I'm not talking about any
of that. I want to know how much
each one of our 12 ag science
centers are budgeted for this
year, and what's the percent
increases over last year, right?
Mr. Chair, we're going to
actually differ to New Mexico
State University. Great. So,
well, let's do this, uh, note
the questions and maybe if it's,
if it's institution specific
questions for the next two,
we're gonna finish our initial
list. We're gonna invite up um
our representatives for the
different institutions and at
that point, I think we can do
some institutions specific
questions. OK, then I have one
that's non-institution specific
and
I was under the impression we
were gonna ask them the higher
level, and if they wanted to
pull up the, the, the specific
college and they could. So I
appreciate that clarity very,
very much. And, uh, line 13, a.
6.
Chairman, if you don't mind, I'd
love to have an answer of.
What student support.
What, what's wrapped up in the
concept of the $3 million for
student support.
And are there, is, are there
medical codes associated with
that, and if there are, how do
we get a list of what those
medical codes are, da da da da
da.
Can you help me out on that one?
Mr. Chairman, yes.
So student support in this case,
um,
You're seeing it as a, as a
technical recommendation in an
LFC budget doc. What you're not
gonna see is specific
appropriations language in the
GAA that says 1 million to X
institution for student support.
So the follow-up mechanism is
gonna be, um,
Essentially staff driven.
We're gonna go back out to the
institutions and ask them for an
accounting for that student
support funding.
So that's what you're gonna see
there. The, the reason that
there's not specific language is
because, you know, we just heard
about the, like, a food pantry
at a college.
It may very well be the case
that some colleges think that
We would like to use our student
support allocation to support
basic needs initiative on our
campus.
Um, and this gives them the
flexibility to do that, but
they're, there needs to be
follow up and that follow up
will will be provided over the
interim.
Thank you very much, Chairman
Connor. Thank you for that. So,
on some of the other budget
items with questions that were
being asked, it was like, you
know, depends on performance, on
how much of the percentage of
the pie you get to keep, and I
didn't know one, if this was
gonna be performance based as
well, so the point College is
outperforming on all their
metrics, then they get a bigger
piece of that 3 million, didn't
know if that works. So this is
gonna be Chairman, a decision
that's made at the HED level
based on what the individuals.
schools need because we have a
$3 million pot of pie. We don't
know how we're going to
distribute it, and at the end of
the day.
The categorical spending piece
of that.
And I understand some of that's
going to come in the interim. I
just don't understand the
distribution part of the 3
million. It's a great question
and Connor, let's go back to
you. I think is it pro rata
based upon sort of, go ahead,
please explain that. It's a
good, it's a very important
question. So on page 101 of your
volume 3. Got it.
You'll see the, you'll see the
distribution of that student
support money by institution.
Um
I said the
The staff follow up.
That is going to be following up
on the funding that you see in
those line items. So right now
the LFC recommendation has
$135,400 for New Mexico Tech.
Or their student support.
This interim, um,
Supposing that the LFC
recommendation is adopted and
becomes law, this interim, um,
staff myself, higher education
department, Department of
Finance and Administration will
be asking institutions for an
accounting for where those new
uh student support funding
dollars are being spent.
Excellent. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Connor. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you. Um, and,
and so with that,
I will yield my time back and
we'll wait for the
Uh, institutions to come up.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Pedro. We're
gonna go next to Sam's Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary and
everyone that's here to provide
this information. Um, I have a
question that actually involves
two different pieces and two
different departments, Mr.
Chair, but it pertains to, I
think it feeds back into the
issue of support services. I've
heard it mentioned, I've heard,
um, and the two that in it
involves would be higher
education and the Yazi Martinez
case.
So what I'm hearing what I have
heard so thus far is that
there's a continued need for
remedial services. Um, in
institutions of higher learning,
Mr. Chair, and I'm wondering if
If you could, if there is
funding first, uh, Mr. Chair, if
there.
In the academic support piece or
let me rephrase that question,
Mr. Chair. Where is that type
of.
Instruction included in the
budget. Uh, I may have missed
it, uh, given there's a lot of
pages here and I'm trying to
keep up.
But I'm uh curious about that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and and
Representative Little, I think
two places. Um,
One is the, the student support
funding you just talked about,
that might be ineligible use.
The bigger one.
Is your ING base.
Um, and I think it's important
to, to keep
In mind as we're going through,
the ING bases.
It's significant, um, and it's
And it's pretty open to use by
institutions for academic
purposes. So what you're really
looking at is
Um, again, in the executive
recommendation.
Uh, about $17 million in
additional instruction in
general funding, and 21.1 in the
LFC recommendation or
instruction in general. That's
just new money.
Um, there's also the, the
existing base funding amounts.
And I think, um, that's the
high-level explanation. I think
when we have the institutions
up, um, that's another really
good question to ask them
because they will all have a
very good detailed answers on
it.
Thank you, um, I, that would be
really, um, that will be
helpful, um, Mr. Chair, then, so
I can finish out, I'd like to
finish out my question by
asking, um,
It's my understanding, uh, as I
understand the Yazi Martinez
case, this is not just having an
impact on Native American
students, but also English
language learners and students
with disabilities and what Mr.
Chair, I'm looking at is
That
In the, this began in 2018. He
determination was made and uh.
And has yet to be implemented.
My question Mr. Chair, then is,
do you see?
Do you see that once it's
implemented in those services
are available, those the fun
funded.
Um, I don't think it's going to
be immediate, Mister Chair. The,
the
Turn around.
But I'm wondering if you see
that that is going to have an
impact on the
recess rate of students entering
college, uh, whether they're 2
year or 4 year, or even CTE uh
uh institutions.
And until then,
Do we see the continued need.
Well, we continue to see the
need for uh.
Enhanced funding of, of, uh, for
remedial services.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh it
may be a more lengthy discussion
truly understand that, but I,
I'm curious to see.
Uh, to hear.
About your thoughts and Mr.
Chair and Representative, I
think you're
It's, it sounds to me like
you're touching on on a pretty
broad issue, and I think it
would be
Uh, good for us to maybe handle
that offline.
Would that
That would be uh just fine cause
I'd like to ask a few more
questions and I don't want to
take up the time here.
That's great,
thank you for that. I think we
wanna get some we'll invite the
panel to share answers for the
institutions that are here, I
think also invite um follow-up
written answers around that
particularly. I know there is
legislation last year that dealt
with uh teacher training and how
to approach that. And there were
some commitments as I, so
So
Good, great question. A lot of
uh follow-up offline.
Deputy Secretary Patricia
Trujillo will follow up with
you, Representative Little.
We're doing a lot of work with
the University of New Mexico and
Complete College America on this
uh issue with remedial courses
and remediation, so we'll follow
up and we'll answer those
questions for you as well. Thank
you very much. I appreciate that
information. Excellent. Thank
you very much, Representative
Little. Uh, OK, now we're gonna
go to Representative Dao and
then Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will
wait for the specific
universities. Thank you. OK,
that's excellent. And, and just
as a clarification, um, we,
we're gonna, we'll ask the
representatives from for, so the
council university presidents,
the associated, um, community
colleges, independent community
colleges, they'll come up and
present if members have specific
questions for institutions that
we have representatives here
today. We'll take the time and
ask them to come up. Um,
But we won't have sort of each
institution one at a time. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
have a, a general question that
I'll go ahead and ask now. So
I'm looking at this page, page
one, on the chart.
Um, and I, I
For me, this graph here.
It looks like over 1/3 of the
students which taxpayers of
state in Mexico are providing
free college, are choosing
humanities in general education
coursework.
Whereas the number of students
in our highest demand, whether
it's education, social sciences,
trades and applied technologies.
Those are high demand jobs that
we desperately need, and they
have the lowest enrollment. STEM
looks pretty good. Um, so I'm
I now represent Tack. It's new
for me. And I'm wondering if,
and it's small, so it's, it's a
research institute, but it's in
a community, so, but it's not
treated like a community
college, treated like a research
institute.
Almost every student is.
Focused on
Sim, and almost every student
Is in the areas that we are
targeting with our grow money
for growth and economic
development is looking out for
growth, whether it's quantums,
what it is. Is there any sort of
factor or anything that's that's
helping them reach their gaps
when they're not, I don't, I'm
not, I'm still learning, but
they're like they're not,
they're not, they're not a
community college, they don't
get the same.
Formulas.
Yeah, no, and I may answer, Mr.
Chair, I may answer your
question, Ron representative. So
if that happens, you just tell
me and I'll try it again. So
you're absolutely right, the
majority of folks that are
completing degrees are in the
humanities. If you add health
professions in STEM, it's a
little bit over that 55,000
number at 57,000 students. How
are we targeting those
populations? It's through the
performance measures and the
formula. So if schools are
graduating students in STEM.
Healthcare or workforce high
demand areas, they get more
money in the new money for those
uh graduates. They also get more
money for at-risk students, and
I may have answered that wrong.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you for that.
And what would, what would that
mean for New Mexico Tech
specifically.
Mr. Chair, we're looking at the
LFC packet for you. 12, Mr.
Chair.
So page 12, line 157.
Shows you the New Mexico tech
instruction in general line.
Um, you can see the
Executive recommendation is at
38.9 million LFC recommendation
is at 39.2 million, so there's a
$359,000 difference between the
two of them. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'll save the rest of
questions for later. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Dao. Uh, we're
gonna go to Representative
Herndon and the editor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, my question is actually
directed to the um to Madam
Secretary, and I am looking at
your ING formula again and I
want to give you some basic
information so that you can help
me to understand the answer. So
yesterday we had the healthcare
authority before us. One of the
things that they presented was
there was a reduction in uh
mental health issues affecting
teens. Well, a couple of years
ago, we uh dedicated
$1.7 million to schools for
mental health rooms. So I'm
looking at that as being a
correlation. I don't have the
data in front of me yet, but I'm
looking for that, but with
respect to that, those mental
health rooms we're asking for
additional money again this year
to expand it to other schools
that we couldn't support when
the first request was put in,
and in that regard, one of the
things we were asking Mr. Chair
and Madam Secretary, is that
students who are in their senior
year.
in graduate school who are
studying behavioral health,
psychology and sociology would
be the students who would be uh
staffing these mental health
rooms for students to talk to
that combined with the fact that
we now have a counseling
compact, which is in the
legislation to come before this
legislature to be approved, um,
would be, there would be enough
people for those interns to
report to somebody. So, but my
question to you is in terms of
the funding of those
Interns should be paid with the
money come out of this public
service project funding under
ING and for all the schools, is
that within your uh jurisdiction
for all of these schools to
participate when I say all the
schools, I'm talking about
colleges and universities for
purposes of staffing the um the
mental wellness rooms,
representative, it's good to see
you, um, the answer is yes, ING
could be used to fund them.
There's also something I want to
highlight at the comprehensive
regional institutions, they
receive grow money for workforce
that is dedicated for
internships so they could
potentially use that money as
well. Did I miss anything,
Connor?
Programs like that are also
Good candidates for RPSP
funding.
Um, if you have a statewide
Program, um, oftentimes what
will, what we'll see is
Um, institutions create.
Uh, program, uh.
I could serve an entire state.
Now in this case, um, I don't
know the, the ins and outs of
this program, exactly, but you'd
have to house it at the right.
Um, institution, but you could.
Also request single line item
funding for this particular, in
this case, public service
project.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for the response.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon,
Representative edit.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, panel.
I'm curious. I know you
mentioned this, but what is the
overall, um,
Salary increases for uh higher
education. Is there, is there
one answer to that? Can you go
over that for me and, and
Connor, maybe that's for you.
Uh, in the LFC recommendation,
it would be the same for higher
ed as the rest of state
government at 4%. Um, we have a
detail in volume 3 on our back
page.
Um
That's OK. That's good enough.
That's what I wanted to know.
I, the follow-up question that
Mr. Chair and uh Connor is um
Does Higher Ed have the same
problem that other agencies have
had when they come here that
they're lower.
Uh, they, uh, lower paid
employees are very far apart
from their upper paid employees.
Mr. Chair and representative, I
think that would be a a question
that would very likely vary
depending on institution.
Um, and I wouldn't want to take
a, a general stab at that, but
the institution associations
would probably have better
information on that than I
would. That's fine, Mr. Chair,
and I guess, I guess I just
would like to make a comment
that.
A long time ago, I think it was,
I hate to say this, about 50
years ago, uh, Governor Jerry
Brown, we had the same, they had
the same problem in California.
They had a lot of high-end, um,
wage earners, and then the
people at the bottom were very
low end, and when they gave a 4%
raise, something like this, what
they did, instead of giving
everybody a 4% raise, they took
that money, they divided it
equally among the employees and
gave everybody the same amount.
So let's just say
The receptionist got a raise of
$1000 in the college president
got a raise of $1000. Over a
period of 4 years, if you do
that, that makes a substantial
increase for for employees at
the lower end of the wage scale,
and I just thought it was an
idea that maybe we could look at
here because, because we see
that in uh it hasn't come up
here, but in department after
department coming in here that
that seems to be a real issue.
And um, you know, 4% raise for
somebody making 125,000 isn't
going to make that much of a
difference for somebody making
30,000, it's a huge difference,
so I would, I would just like
the body to consider it. That's,
that's all I had to say about
that, Mr. Chair, and then just
one last thing, what percentage
of our faculty members are
tenured and what percentage are
adjunct?
Mr. Chair,
uh representative, I don't have
that information right in front
of me, but what I will tell you
is my colleagues at the
department, the academic affairs
and Policy division in the
research and planning division
actually did pull some of those
preliminary numbers for our
annual report. We'll get it and
go ahead and pull what we have.
Um, we're waiting for some
responses still from some
institutions, but let me give
you what we have, um, and then
we can have a another
conversation with you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you. I would appreciate
that and I happened, I mean, I
think we all know.
Our universities are built on
the backs of that faculty, who
are paid very little, uh,
compared compared to a tenured
position and I would like to see
uh along with the numbers, I
would like to see Secretary your
recommendations for changes on
that. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herrera. Uh, next
we're going to go to
Representative Brown, please.
One quick question, my second
answer,
if you could pull the microphone
to the
5 seconds.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, um,
The, the question I have, Mr.
Chair, and this is probably for
Connor. We're looking here at
about a $1.4 billion budget for
higher ed, grand total.
I assume we're going to see some
requests for special
appropriations and
supplementals, and we're not
going to venture into that
today. I know that, but just
wanting a ballpark figure about
how much.
Save millions of dollars. We're
looking at if we were to
aggregate those requests. Mr.
Chair, thank you.
Mr.
Chairman, you're looking at
about 136 $139 million.
Great. Thank you very much
Represent Brown. OK, now we're
gonna go to Vice Chair Dixon.
Mhm
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I have a couple of questions and
you can just let me know if some
of them are better for later,
um.
On page 2 of our fabulous high
level, um, you know, I think
we're looking at the retention
of freshmen, and I'm just
wondering,
Do we have a sense of how our
retention efforts are going and
if they're making.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, I would say one of the
limitations that I have from my
perch is we rely a lot on iPad's
data, which lags generally by
about a year, but I think that
some of the institutional
leaders will have a much better
Uh, up to-date answer.
Mr. Chair, so right now our
retention for fall 2021 and fall
2022, we're looking at 66% for
both 2 year and 4 year sector
for lottery scholarship
recipients are retention
semester to semester is over 90%
for opportunity scholarship
recipients, it's 11% points more
than 65.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um,
Also on page 2 is the
information about the money that
uh New Mexico students are not
getting from the FAFSA.
Program, and I'm wondering uh
what are the specific efforts
that we are doing in state to
increase that.
You know, to make sure that our
students are getting more of the
FAFSA money.
Mr. Chair, vice chair, uh, we
actually partner with the New
Mexico Educational Assistance
Foundation. It's located in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. They
have workshops every single
Monday for any student in the
state of New Mexico, that is a
high school student and their
parent, and they're also offered
in Spanish, and if they need an
interpreter, they pro they
partner with interpretation
services from various
organizations in the state of
New Mexico. Um, we also have a
helpline at the New Mexico
Higher Education.
department and staff Monday
through Friday 8 to 5. And then
we respond within 48 hours max.
I will tell you my team answers
the very next day. Um, they can
call our helpline and then we
can refer them to the New Mexico
Educational Assistance
Foundation for one on one
support if they're unable to
attend a FAFSA Mondays.
And Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, when we get to the higher
education department, again,
that's where there's
Um, some language recommended by
LFC in the budget that pertains
to students filling out FAFSA
and institutional income
verification or a waiver. So
getting a little bit more
proactive on getting.
After those students to sign
something.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
um, uh, Madam Secretary and
Connor, I do think that it is
very important that we be
proactive and push because I
don't think that our high school
students necessarily, you know.
Anyway, um, for, I have a
question about medical school
residents pay, but since that's
a specific to UNM, should I
wait?
we may have a
OK, probably has an answer. OK.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. My
question, um, so there is a line
that is just for medical student
resident pay, I think, I, I
believe that I saw, yes, um.
Page 10, line 47.
Glad I made a note. Um, and I'm
just wondering, um, where this
amount gets New Mexico
residents.
Uh, in relation to other
residents regionally. I mean, we
have heard a lot about um
whether or not our pay for
Medical residence is competitive
and if it's sufficient.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, I think.
Another thing to, to keep in
mind here is that there's a lot
of clinical revenue that's also
generated, um, that also goes
for this purpose.
Um, I don't.
I know that HSC has looked at
this, and I know that they've
looked at this when they've, uh,
entered their most recent uh
contract with the union. I
wouldn't wanna
give you wrong information
though.
Mr. Chair, Madam, vice chair of
the University of New Mexico
will be presenting or will be
here to answer that, but I do
want to elaborate. So yes,
there's the line item in RPS
pieces and then there's also the
GME funding that comes out of
the healthcare authority, as
noted in the specials hearing
earlier this week.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary and Connor, um,
the various pots of money. I, I
don't always pay attention to,
so I appreciate that. Um.
Centers of excellence. Um, how
many centers of excellence do we
have in New Mexico and uh could
you remind me when they were
established?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
they were established in 2019,
originally with 4 centers of
excellence at New Mexico State
University, New Mexico Tech, the
University of New Mexico and San
Juan College. Since then we have
added two centers of excellence
at New Mexico Highlands
University for social work in
western New Mexico University
for early childhood education
and care. So we only have 4 that
are established by law, 2 that
are establish.
published by the executive
through research and public
service projects, and then we
have some informal centers of
excellence that operate here and
there. Um, one example is the
geothermal center of excellence,
um, as you know, there was a law
that was passed for that. I
think there was some junior
money associated with that at
New Mexico Tech.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Um, one of the
things that I noticed across the
board with the Centers of
excellence is that LFC um kept
the request flat, whereas the um
executive recommendation was
basically bumping each of them
up to $750,000 and I'm, I'd like
to know what the rationale is on
both sides.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair for
us, our centers of excellence
are, are not bashful. They come
to us every single year. Um, I
have one center of excellence
who has said I want 10 million.
I've had another that has told
me 1 million and I can live, uh,
I, I will say neither of us have
gone up to those numbers. We've
been a little bit conservative,
but the, the main thing is they
want to do more projects. They
wanna, uh, they want to apply
for more federal grants, but
they had their, they need more
capacity for that more staff.
Um, they want to do more
research. I think a really
successful one that we have is
New Mexico State University with
a focus of artificial
intelligence in agriculture, um,
there's a lot of NSF grants that
they are eligible for, but may
not have the capacity to apply
for, given that they received
the amount of money that they
receive, uh, Connor.
Mr. Cha and representative, the
LFC budget guidelines
prioritized funding for those
base ING increases and that was
directly related to um.
To that evaluation that was
showing that
The biggest increase we thought
we could see was in bolstering
those basic operations. So,
That's where the LFC
recommendation came down on not
only centers of excellence but
most RPSP.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary and Connor. Um,
if I'm thinking of this
correctly, we have the center,
the original 4 were agriculture,
cybersecurity,
energy, and Madam uh Mr.
Bioscience, bioscience, OK,
that's what I thought and the
bioscience authority is in
essence, the center of
excellence.
Is that correct? Mr. Chair, they
administer the funds.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. The reason that
I'm highlighting the original 4,
and this sort of goes along
with, I think what
Representative Dao was.
Uh, you know, maybe her train of
thought as well is that we have
9 strategic sectors in economic
development.
And um,
Four of those are cybersecurity,
sustainable agriculture, and
water, um.
Biosciences and
Uh, sustainable energy.
I am concerned that
I, and, and I do appreciate that
we are funding in other
mechanisms. However, I think the
point is well taken by the
secretary that unless the money
is specifically put at those
centers of excellence.
To do what those centers of
excellence need to do. We are
missing out on an incredible
opportunity to build the
ecosystems in each of those
sectors. Um, and so, um,
My, um,
You know, I'll follow up. I
don't know that I'm on the, the
higher education subcommittee,
but I am particularly interested
in, in supporting those, and I
do have a um
Special interest in the
bioscience Authority, uh, Mr.
Chair, secretary, and I'll tell
you the, the reason for that is
because I know that the
bioscience Authority is is doing
a lot of commercialization, um,
and tech transfer efforts, and
this is by no means suggesting
that the others are not. Um, we
do have several venture capital
companies that operate in New
Mexico that uh work directly
with New Mexico-based bioscience
companies and
Um, the bioscience lab space
that most operate out of has
been full for several years. And
so I know for a fact that we
have lost several bioscience
companies because we didn't have
adequate space to support them.
Um, and so I just wanna flag
that I think um we can really um
enhance that.
dual purpose of academics.
Um, you know, student support,
um, and building the economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, ma'am, Vice Chair,
we're gonna go to Representative
Sanana I a couple of quick
questions and then we'll get to
uh our association leaders
you Mr. Chairman. Just real
quick, I want to go back to
FAFSA. You didn't list that you
were going out to the high
schools, um, Madam Secretary,
are you doing that or no? uh Mr.
Chair, yes we are. We do go to
our high schools, we go to
college fairs and we actually
went to um call high. I'm sorry,
yes, we go to college fairs in
high school graduations.
in certain districts throughout
the state of New Mexico to
provide services and
information. OK, just want to
make sure. Thank you.
Excellent, thank you very much
Representative Sareana. Uh, OK,
a few quick questions before we
go through, um, one just sort of
overall in the LFC
recommendation, the higher
instruction in general is sort
of across the board for each
higher education institution.
Uh, great, um, number 2,
Maybe picking up a bit on the
centers of excellence, are
centers of excellence included
in Formula funding in the higher
education formula.
No, Mr. Chairman, they are, uh,
RPSPs. They're RPSPs, got it.
OK. So, um,
Sort of the, as we move to make
uh our funding formula with a
lot of credit to the department,
LFC, and to other stakeholders,
sort of more responsive to uh
bringing out the best in each
institution, the centers of
excellence are outside of that,
uh, outside of that process.
That's correct, Mr. Chair. OK,
um.
So the, the needs are clearly
there, but it, uh, the, our
ability and maybe this speaks to
some of the our continued work.
And shared responsibility around
RPSPs which are incredibly
important offer a lot of nimble
opportunity for the state to
invest.
Is how we integrate that into
sort of a performance based
system that uh or, or if we can,
and maybe we can, but, uh,
important to know it's outside.
OK, what we're gonna do,
members, um, I wanted to give
the uh opportunity for the uh
council university presidents,
the um uh association of
Uh, yes. OK, let's do this. Uh,
members, we're gonna take a
quick 10-minute break. Um, we'll
call up the uh a quick 10-minute
break. We'll call up uh
President Stokes, uh, President
Raleigh, and President Torres
for the um independent community
colleges, the association of
Community Colleges and council
of university presidents. I
wanted them to come up before we
adopt our recommendation just so
that we can hear from them.
Uh, but let's come back at
5:20 and um yep, we'll see
everybody soon. We're adjourned
until 5:20.
Yeah, yeah, and the new ones,
those new ones.
right.
All right.
I see her now.
It's great. All right, we'll go
ahead and get started again.
We see some new faces in the
audience, uh, thanks for
everybody sticking with us.
Members, thanks so much for
really uh great questions and a
lot of time, uh, we're gonna go,
of course, briefly to our um
association leaders who are
here, you can introduce
yourself, tell us a quick little
bit about uh the association
that you lead, uh, and then, uh,
if you wish to, you know, tell
us which recommendation you
prefer if you'd rather not for
whatever reason, that's all
right to, um, although we always
love preference, but no, yeah,
either way.
I don't want to put anybody on
the spot. Folks are welcome to
or not and then members this is
a good question.
Leaders of these different
associations and sort of time
permitting and wanting to sort
of move through if we have other
institutions specific questions,
we can dive in. With that, uh,
uh, President Stokes, if you
want to kick us off, uh, or
however we want to start, we'll
go ahead.
Thank you, Chairman Small and uh
and uh Vice Jerry Dixon and
honorable members of the
committee, we are grateful to be
here and thank you for your
support, um, what you have in
your packet is, uh, is in fact
the unified priorities for
higher education for uh the
associations that we represent,
we've been working together for
several years to bring to this
uh to this committee and to the
legislature, the, uh, the things
that we've identified as things
that we agree on.
that are necessary for the
success of our institutions, uh,
I am the uh the president of
UNM, but today I'm here in my
role as the leader of the
council of university
presidents, which reflect uh
represent the the 74 year uh
colleges in uh uh in New Mexico,
uh, and I'll, I'll, I think I
will let our uh my other leaders
here at the table, uh, introduce
themselves.
Thank you. Um, good evening, Mr.
Chair. um, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members.
My name is Becky Rowley. I'm
president of Santa Fe Community
College. I'm also the chair for
the Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, so our members are CNN
San Juan, Clovis Community
College, New Mexico Junior
College, Masalands, Luna, and
then northern New Mexico College
and Western New Mexico
University are also part of our
group, as well as Mexico
Military Institute and
Southeastern New Mexico College,
and we are pleased to be here
and as President Stokes said,
this is a unified.
Priority, we work together on
this and we, um, we, we support
the LFC recommendation for a 4%
compensation increase, uh, 2.5%
increase in the formula fund,
um, and the various other
components, and I'll, uh, Doctor
Torres.
Good evening.
Torres
And I am the um Chancellor of
the NMSU Community Colleges,
functionally the president of
Donana Community College. Happy
to be here. Um, there are branch
campuses for Eastern New Mexico
University in Roswell and
Riidoso, for the University of
New Mexico, we have branches in
Gallup, Los Alamos, Taos in
Valencia, and the New Mexico
State University branches in
Almogordo grants and.
And with that we um we do have a
a unified higher education
priorities in your in your
packet. I will say that within
that presentation, uh, you'll
see a synopsis of everything
that was presented to the
legislative finance Committee in
uh in December. Um, so, uh, uh,
those have been briefly touched
on here, but I wanted to say uh
um repeat that we are supporting
the LFC recommendation and we're
just happy to take questions.
Outstanding.
Uh, great. Thank you all very
much. I really appreciate it,
uh, briefly, I wanna uh ask um
uh representative Baca notified
me, we have a few folks who have
come in. They were trying to
find a committee that was still
working late on a Friday in the
capital.
And of course if you walk into
appropriations if that uh uh
some of the folks who are from
the East Mountains, uh, and are
here if you would stand up, uh,
there're here at the Capitol and
receiving some of their
schooling at home.
Also, I think we, there's a uh
maybe a another Dixon in the
room with who may have extra
tough questions for the vice
chair of the committee at some
point, uh, OK, with that, let's
go straight to questions,
members. This is for the
association's. Thank you all for
being here today. We're gonna
start with Representative Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Is quick, um,
just quickly, um, I just want to
kind of
Touch on what uh we kind of
ended with in the discussion
with them a rep with the vice
chair uh Dixon in relationship
to centers of excellence and
really understanding how those
partnerships are.
are working together with our
agencies where we're funding
like um budget items or issues,
Mr. Chair.
Um, if that makes any sense, if
not, I apologize. It's been a
really long day, long week, but
um.
Does that make sense first of
all, and if so, if anyone can
can um facilitate this
conversation, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Lujan, um, as Mr. Jorgensen
said, the centers of excellence
are funded through the RPSP uh
process, um, I don't have any
particular knowledge or
information specifically about
how all of those are, are
working, but some of my
colleagues may.
Sometimes.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Luhan, um, I, uh,
at the.
I know we have centers of
excellence at various
institutions throughout the
state, um, and I can't speak
specifically to how they might
be operating with Mr. I'll be
I'll be a little more specific
and in regards to um New Mexico
tech and the geothermal look
incredible work that they're
doing and research and and in
the economic development uh
requests that we saw at um
alright Mnerd and that meaning
the budget as well. And so.
From, from this, from our
position sitting up here in an
as lawmakers and as as
facilitators to really work
towards how we get to these,
these bigger economic
development concepts for our
state and the universities being
integral to us doing that. How
are those relationships working
as we're looking through the
lens of our budget.
And we need to spend, we need to
go, we need to spend here for
the research and for the concept
and recruitment, so we know that
we're doing this, but we also
need to know, um, on the agency
side, how they're developing
their budget and how you're
working together, I guess,
where's that cohesion, Mister
Chair?
Great. And if I, I know there's
some folks from New Mexico Tech
here, if you want to come down
and and uh offer a brief uh
answer that's great. You're very
welcome to, if not always, we
can follow up offline.
Um, Mr. Tay and uh
Representative Luhan, there may
be those actually I see someone
standing, so I will, I will.
There you go.
And maybe we can hold the
microphone up. Yeah, that's
perfect.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, thank you for
the question. New Mexico Tech,
we have the Center of
Excellence. It's funded not like
any of the others, it's in
non-recurring funding in section
9 $500,000 a year of
non-recurring.
It sits at the New Mexico Bureau
of Geology and Mineral
Resources, Mr. Chairman.
And it does work with uh with
all the stakeholders, so they
are working closely with the
stakeholders at the Energy and
Minerals department and others,
and they've hired a new person
to help with that. Our other
center of excellence is we have
cybersecurity. That one's
working with industry and the
other universities, and we have
uh the energetic materials
research and Testing Center, uh,
that was created many years ago
and works a lot with our
national laboratories.
Thank you, Mrs. That's, that's,
I think that we're trying to
draw upon is, you know, we have.
And everyone's told that we have
all this, this, this huge budget
we do, we're fortunate at this
time, but it's not as big as
everybody thinks, I think. And
so I think what we're trying to
do is, is be really responsible
in how we are using or how those
resources or you are as
resources coming together to
really share that those those uh
perspectives and
responsibilities through our
budget through the through the
taxpayers' dollars because we
want to be more, we want to be
effective.
We want to be efficient and we
wanna, we, so that's, I think
where I'm hearing those, those
um.
I don't think they're concerned.
I think we just wanna, we want
the assurances that this is all
happening in the filtration of
this is is moving in the right
direction and, and I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much.
We're gonna go to representative
Herrera, then represent Pettigre
represented,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, panel, for your, um, for
coming here and being with us
and for this set of
recommendations.
Um, at the former presentation,
I asked um
I, I talked about a method for
equalizing kind of people at the
lower and the higher end of the
uh the wage, um.
And I guess, and I see that you
have, uh, you wanna allow
institutions the flexibility to
implement an average increase.
What do you mean by that?
Um, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Harrara, um, what
we're asking for is the, with
the flexibility that comes from
being able to provide an average
raise rather than a definite 4%
across the board raises and that
is because we're constantly as
institutions dealing with um uh
salary issues at every level of
the university, and so this
simply gives leaders the
greater flexibility to make
adjustments within so that some
people could actually earn more
than 4% and, and some possibly
less.
And, and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, um.
Represented here, I, you know
what, as I've listened to
institutions talk about what
that means by average. I've I've
heard them talk about two
particular kinds of
circumstances. One of them is,
um, that we have faculty, uh,
you will hear us say that we
have a lot of faculty who are
underpaid, and sometimes we have
faculty that other institutions
are trying to recruit. And so
sometimes that flexibility
allows us to pay a faculty
meritorious faculty and and to
try to keep them with our
institutions in the state of New
Mexico, but the second one
refers to really the kind of
circumstance. There are other
people
that maybe we have increased our
salary tables so that we're
bringing people in at a higher
rate, but then it causes
compression, um, and
particularly problematic at the
lower end of the salary range
and so I, I do know that there
are, there are institutions that
have used that sort of
flexibility to try to address
salaries at the lower end of the
rage as well. But those are the
two things that we mostly hear,
we mostly hear institutions
talking about.
Uh, well, thank you, thank you
for that and thank you, Mr.
Chair. I, I guess more and more.
I
As body, I think we ought to
leave these salary increases to
the managers, uh, instead of
having line items in our budget
and or, you know, different
categories in our budgets, I
think I really think we ought to
leave these decisions to the
management of the of our
different departments and
institutions, so I just want to
say that, Mr. Chair, thank you,
ladies. Thank you very much from
Santa. Uh, next we're gonna go
to represent Pettigroup.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
for being up there. Um, chairman
earlier I asked some questions
specific to New Mexico State.
You gave us a 10-minute break. I
was just gonna let you know you
gave me a 10-minute break and I
got my answers. I have some
stuff for a subcommittee for
higher education subcommittee we
can talk about, but I'm good.
Fantastic. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Uh, OK, we're gonna go next to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. uh, during the
break, I was talking to Charles
and I think this is what Charles
said to me. I, I, I couldn't
really hear it very well, but
Charles said that if I arm
wrestled Rep Bach and I beat him
that I could get San Juan
College's money up to the sounds
exactly like director Seli to
me.
And I just wanna know if you
want to do that now or after on
the next break. We're gonna
leave that off the webcast.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I do
have a question for San Juan
College and with this be the
time to do that now. Yeah, a
question and if you want to
flag, as members want to sort of
flag things to really pay
attention to. This is also a
good time, and it might be the
secretary's question as well. So
we have $187,000 difference
between the executive and the
LFC and in the instruction and
general purposes and I was
wondering if I could get
somebody to it, it might be you,
Connor, as well.
Could you address that? Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um
No
Mr. Chara now.
And Representative, yeah, so you
are right, the LFC
recommendation is about $190,000
higher than the executive
recommendation, and I think.
You're seeing that overall ING
base uh
Difference
the LFC just had more ING
funding there, um, and then
Yeah, and then I think San Juan
was one of the institutions that
also got and included, um,
improved performance bump.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could you,
um, could you answer what
general purposes are or?
Maybe that would be
O
Oh,
for the instruction and general
purposes, yes, yes, sir, Mr.
Chairman.
That entire category,
instruction in general, um, that
is all of your in-classroom
instruction, that's gonna be
The vast majority of your
overhead, um, and operations
costs a tiny little bit, maybe
not, but think about it as just
about everything the university
is doing that is not
Um, like one of those line item
appropriations, I think is the
safest way to go. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chair. We have got a, a
great partnership with our
college up there and they do
some wonderful, wonderful
things. So sure, I would, uh, I
would ask us to look at that and
see if we can go to that. And,
and again, my offer is on the
table, um, you know, with Repach
if we need to do that.
Noted
Uh, OK, we're gonna go next to
Representative Herndon and then
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
presenters I have just some
clarification questions. The
first one is with respect to CNN
and uh I think that Tracy
Hartzler, the president is here.
So a couple of years ago when
the legislature was given
discretionary money to uh move
forward with programs, what we
started there, what was started
there was women in the trades, a
program to make sure that more
women were, were being traded,
uh, being trained in the trades
area. As I look at a page.
13 and line 205, I see something
called workforce development. So
my question to you is whether or
not this refers to the
continuation of that women in
the trades program so that it is
going to be occurring in March
again this year.
Mr. Chair and uh President
Hertzler may want to elaborate,
but women in the trades was
actually rolled into instruction
in general as part of the
process that we did a couple
years ago to decrease our PSPs
for instruction in general
purposes, so that was moved into
their ING, uh, the workforce one
that you're referring to is a
different RPSP that the
institution receives. President
Hartzler did I mess that up or
miss anything.
Come, come on up.
They may see the
So the $70,000 named workforce
development is the same amount
and the same purpose for women
in the trades. It was.
Um, his name something else
really with the understanding
and the
Seen him requested of the
department, um, additional
money.
To expand.
Uh, women in trades to address
the skills USA question and so
we will still have women in
trades as an event, we will
still and we're structuring it
differently, uh, to leverage the
workforce funds, workforce
growth funds, uh, so that we can
bring in more apprenticeships
and internships and expand it,
but it was a name change really
with the hope that we'd be
building on with Skills USA. The
event will not go away. Oh,
thank you very much. I'm happy
to hear that it's more than an
event.
Thank you, and Mr. Chair and um
and Ma presenters, uh, I'd just
like to ask the question of
President Stokes. So President
Stokes looking under health
signs the center, and there are
a list of items there, uh, Mr.
Chair and President Stokes, uh,
one of the items that I don't
see listed, and I'm hoping that
this doesn't mean it's gone
away. I don't see communities to
careers as a program listed
anymore. Is it still a viable
program within the university.
It's a great way to make sure
that our, our health
Here, um,
Professionals are growing and
staying in our state.
Um, I will have to find out the
answer.
OK, that was my assumption that
it was rolled up into ING, but I
thank you. I have people here
ask you haven't answer to this
question. It was rolled up in
the ING.
OK, so Mr. Chair of important
programs that we did that with.
So that means it's still
available, is that correct? All
right. And then one final, one
final question and I want to
make a quick comment. There is
something called community-based
education online 22 on that same
page. What is that, Mr. Chair,
madam, uh, President.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
representative, I would have to
defer to someone on my campus
about exactly what that program
is. OK. And Mr. Chair, my final
comment and Madam President, I
just want to thank you for this
mock trial program in high
school forensics. I just think
that is an excellent program.
And thank you for continuing
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. We're gonna go to
Representative Garrett, Vice
Chair Dixon, and then Vice Chair
Dixon Saarrett, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
ladies. The era of women. Sorry,
I just have to salute it. Um,
first of all, our, our community
colleges, whether they're the
two-year extensions or the
standalone independence are such
a blessing to the state because
you can pivot so quickly to
adapt to industrial needs. So
that's a real blessing. My
question is about, we have
thousands of high school
students now.
Able to take classes at all your
institutions, um, which helps
finances and for those kids that
are ready for it, it's
incredible whether it's career,
getting a year ahead or 2 years
ahead on traditional college,
whatever it is. How many early
college and high school campuses
are located in your respective
groups. Do you have a count?
I know, like CNN has, I, I
forget what it's called early.
college and high school, they
actually have a campus located
at CNM, but how many others do
we have?
Go ahead, Becky and I can
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, um, I know that I think
San Juan has an early college
CNM has an early college. Clovis
has an early college, um, we
have a high school on our campus
in Santa Fe, but it's not a true
early college model. They do,
um, uh, they do a lot more dual
credit than and your average
high, your average public high
school. Um, so there are various
models.
Somebody's gonna give me the
answer here.
Thank God.
Um
Actually, I would count that,
Mr. Chair, actually, cause it
makes it easier. OK.
Thank you.
Um
Miss, oh, go ahead.
Oh.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garre, apparently
there are 21.
across the state. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and if someone can hand
us that list in the next week,
that would be great. Oh, thank
you, Madam Secretary. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Garrett.
Next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
have uh sort of two questions.
Um,
I'm curious uh about the
technology enhancement fund. I
see that that's a, a request,
um, in the unified, um.
Budget.
Um, and that the LFC has
recommended a portion of that.
Now I was just curious um how
you feel that's working, you
know, is it a, I mean, clearly,
I think it, it is successful
since you guys have asked for
more money, but I'd like a
little bit uh more insight.
I will say that we have been
working very closely with HED.
We have uh Mr. Chair and, uh, I
share Dixon, um, we've been
working very closely with HED.
We do find it extremely
valuable, uh, more and more of
the funding that we seek
requires matching funding, and
so, you know, we've had to work
out some ways in which we define
what's actually covered in
everything, but I we are
definitely on the right track
and we believe it's.
important for our
competitiveness, um, for federal
funding. Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, um, in listening to
conversations in New Mexico
State over the last number of
months. The vice president for
research says exactly the same
thing that it's really critical
for the work that they're doing.
Mr. Chair, um, and chairs, thank
you, that's really good to hear.
Um, I've been impressed with it
and and so I'm glad that it's um
having a positive effect. Last
question that I had, um, is
about, um,
Some of the collaborative
efforts for NSF grants, these
larger sort of funding
opportunities like the engines
and things like that, um, and
I'm wondering, I believe with
artificial intelligence, um,
that CNN um is supporting the
effort with some workforce
development, but I am curious.
The interaction with some of
other partners around the state,
um, our community colleges, and
I wanted to know um if there's
good participation.
At all levels.
Of our institution. Mr. Chair
Representative Dixon, I would
say that that is an emerging
field for all of us. Um, yes,
CNM is really kind of become a
leader in the artificial
intelligence space, especially
in the community college arena.
Um, I, I know that all of my
colleagues generally have at
least some programming in that
area, you know, and, and part of
the challenge for us, you know,
it's a twofold challenge, you
know, there's programming that
we're offering our communities,
but then there's also the
challenge.
Of training our own personnel,
um, encouraging our faculty,
training our faculty, and then,
um, passing that along to our
students because I think we all
agree that we have an obligation
to our students to know how to
use this technology so that when
they graduate, regardless of
what they're doing, they feel
that they're prepared to enter
the world of work with and use
artificial intelligence. Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, if I
would actually defer to
President Fermi. I know.
he, he is, it's a significant
priority for him, and we're
starting to see a lot of
activity, not just on the
community college campus and the
university, but across the
system, President for me, would
you?
This one doesn't raise up, Mr.
Chair and Miss Miss Vice Chair.
I think what you ask is exactly
the right question because we
can do a lot of research and
training at the 4-year colleges,
but we also need to integrate it
with training for technical, and
this is something that at my
former institution, we were in
fact advancing and we were
working, for example, with Intel
to figure out their needs in the
workforce and working to develop
that through.
partnerships and grants. So it's
a great question, and I think
that's something that, as you
know, I'm very passionate about
and I really want to move
forward, moving forward.
Um, and, uh, I'd like to
mention, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Dixon, um, we've
had, uh, I do agree that it's an
absolutely emerging thing that
we're doing, the partnerships
across the institutions, the
community colleges, but also
outside of that as well, and I
think a very good recent example
is that uh is the quantum uh
initiative, which is a
partnership that includes uh
CNM, it includes UNM and
includes the labs, um, it's a
very big initiative for us.
And there are, there are, I
think other examples like that.
Thank you. um, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you uh for that
insight. I really appreciate it.
It made me think of another
question on those same lines,
which is, um, are there, is
there a way that
The institutions share best
practices on working with
industry to identify the jobs,
uh, and workforce skills that
are needed.
How does, yeah, do you all work
together?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Dixon, we do work together, we
do share best practices. I would
say that our system for doing
that is not that formalized, um,
but we do, you know, the
independent community colleges
certainly meet together as an
association, uh, weekly right
now. Um, we often bring in um
outside entities to speak to our
group, um, to talk about, you
know, emerging projects that we
may have together, but I would
say that a lot of what enables
us to work collaborative,
collaboratively together is that
we do, we do know each other
well. We have built those kind
of relationships that do allow
us to work together. I would
also add that in, in being part
of our chess collaborative, our
employees work together across
disciplines all day, not almost
all day, every day, and so there
are so many partnerships out
there that are thriving.
that I don't even know about and
that I, you know, just hear a
lot of good things as, as we're
moving forward.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Uh thank you very much, Madam
Vice Chair. Uh, great questions.
I have one quick question, um,
we, there's been uh updates to
the funding formula. We've moved
far away from penalizing
institutions, moving closer and
more and more towards rewarding
sort of excelling in specific
areas. The question is, do you
all agree that there is more
work we can continue to do in
the funding formula to
prioritize progress.
At all of our institutions and
sort of the help you compete
with your peers outside of the
state, move away from sort of
in-state competition that used
to be the model.
Absolutely, uh, Mr. Chair, um, I
think that anything we can do
that creates a formula that does
exactly what you're saying is
what we're always looking to do
that. Thank you.
Great. And thank you very much,
panelists. Uh very exciting. I
appreciate you all being here
today and I think, uh, great for
the committee to see exciting
leadership and collaboration.
Uh, we have one more, I'm gonna
go to ranking member Chatfield,
then we'll go to Vice Chair
Dixon for uh for the
recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, what I
have is more for Connor, just to
flag a couple of things, uh,
Mesa lands nursing programs,
200,000 less than one and in the
other and I think that's pretty
important to Maland this, it's
pretty important to our
community, so I would like to
meet with you and talk about
that a little bit. Also, the
witchy kids.
Uh, we have a nice new, uh,
Uh, program that was by an
agreement with Texas Tech and
the school there in, in Amarillo
and some of our kids go up to
Colorado, I think a few, uh, to
some other states, but uh
I, I got, I had, I was contacted
looking for a little bit of
funding for those guys and about
450,000 I think it was. And uh
So wanted to visit a little bit
about that and uh
We can do that offline. Thank
you, Mr. Cha. Excellent. Thank
you very much, ranking memberm
Chatfield. OK, with that, we're
gonna go to Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice Cha
Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield, a hair before.
Is there any opposition to that
motion, seeing none, that
motions adopted. Thank you all
very much. Thank you for the
extended hearing. We're gonna
invite Madam Secretary.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for
staying, uh, we'll invite back
up to for the higher education
department, Mrs. Facias, thank
you.
All right. Um, Madam Secretary,
thank you again and Mr.
Jorgensen, we also thank you.
Uh, let's go ahead and get
started on the higher education
department budget itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members.
The higher education department
budget you can find on page 15
of that large budget packet.
Um, that's the
That is the high level for the
Department general fund to
overview, there are no
differences on non-general fund.
Um, items.
I just like to point out
Basically, you're looking at
At 3 differences in this budget
overall. The first difference.
is on
Line 3, tribal education
initiatives.
The executive recommends $2.25
million. This amount is not in
the LFC recommendation.
Um, next, adult literacy. These
are items on lines 24 and 7.
The LFC is essentially
recommending a $1.25 million
dollar increase for these adult
ed items in the general fund,
the executive is recommending a
$5 million increase for those
items.
Um
Tribal RPSP. There's also two
RPSPs. There's one at NTU and
won it sippy that are included
in the executive recommendation,
not included in the LFC
recommendation.
Um
On the next program, student
financial aid.
See two differences, lines 34
and 35, the LFC recommendation
held funding flat for the
graduate scholarship and the
minority doctoral loan
assistance scholarships. The
executive increased those by
511,000 and 230,000
respectively.
Where the opportunity
scholarship.
Uh, there is no difference. Both
of those recommendations
recognize uh
Hire trust fund revenue coming
in and paying for any increase
in FY 26.
Um
Two other notes real quick.
One, for adult ed, the LFC
recommendation has $1 million in
10FF funding, that's for adult
basic ed programs.
Um, that funding is not in the
LFs or in the executive
recommendation.
Um, so it's not necessarily 1.25
general fund only. It's actually
2.25 million for adult ed in the
LFC. OK, if you'll turn with me
to page 16.
Um, this is
We have some differences in
language.
Uh
But when I want to direct your
attention to is item number 3.
This is the language we were
talking about, um,
Trying to get more proactive in
encouraging students to fill out
a FAFSA, an income verification
form, um, or a waiver.
That recommendation is in the
LFC. It is not in the executive.
And then one other um
Larger difference, line 8.
Uh, this is in the student aid
program, sorry, this is page 17.
Uh, the LFC recommendation
includes language, this is a
specific callout for itchy.
Um
To hopefully stop having to do
uh a bar.
Later on in the year.
With that, I would like to turn
it over to Miss Mascias for any
additional details. Thank you,
Connor, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I would like to
point to page 15 on the
executive recommendation, just
giving a little additional
context about the RPSP items to
the uh tribal colleges and
universities, so we included
400,000 for the Navajo Technical
Center for center for computer
science research program and
then 230,000 for the Southwest
Indian Polytechnic and
to Allied Health program. And
that's included in the recurring
budget um for the agency.
If you'll follow now to page 17,
I just wanna highlight uh an
executive need for the section 4
differences, um, the line 6 on
page 17 at the bottom you'll see
a specific callouts for the
state higher education executive
officers association.
annual dues and it's kind of cut
off, but that's the witchy, um,
juices that the agency needs,
um, that is needed for, um, to
ensure it's due to procurement
and it's something that they
need internally for the agency,
so then they don't have to um
it's for administrative. It's
just something to call out that
they really need um for
procurement for audit, yes,
thank you, secretary. And then
on the other portion that we
didn't discuss for the agency
budget is for FT.
Ecounts, the um agency for the
executive recommendation
included FTE for 3 data analysis
positions, one financial aid uh
position and we would appreciate
your consideration to do a
technical correction to include
3 additional FTE for the agency,
um, I think in terms of the
operations between the executive
and the LFC we're still pretty
close, but we would greatly
appreciate that consideration
for technical adjustment to the
FTE count. So that
it's my remarks, I'll turn it
over now, Mr. Cherry had a 10
minute presentation, but I'm
gonna respect your time today.
I've cut it down substantially
right now and I just want to hit
the highlights and then we can
go ahead and go into Q and A.
Thank you, Nicole and Connor
again. Um, I'm here and joined
by my chief financial officer,
Gerald Honey, who will also be
available for res responses, um,
so my document is actually this
booklet right here.
And I'm gonna go ahead and skip
to page 2 on the inside.
And I want to discuss full time
employees and vacancies. The
higher education department
oversees $1.5 billion in state
capital and federal dollars and
serves over 110,000 students,
25,000 faculty staff across 24
public colleges, universities,
for tribal colleges, 3 special
schools, and the University of
New Mexico's Health Science
Center. We do all of that with
58 FT.
This upcoming year, our agency
will need to further support,
will need further support in a
few areas to achieve staffing
capacity for the research data,
literacy and support services
that oftentimes you question
about question us about during
these hearings and then also in
the interim, so this upcoming
year, uh, we are requesting that
FT and we are requesting the
official language to allow us to
hire those FTE as well. I also
want to touch on the lottery
tuition fund. Now this is rather
technical.
But it's really important for
our agency. The department is
requesting language, not an
appropriation. We have it fully
funded to address an accounting
issue that can result in an
audit finding for our agency.
This will grant us some
flexibility in the transfer of
the fund between the 400 and 500
categories. Now, on page 3,
we're gonna talk about our
little gold star, and that is
adult education and literacy.
Last year, enrollment in our
adult education programs has
grown by 10%.
and we are almost near
pre-pandemic enrollment levels.
As we know these programs help
build our state's workforce
while improving outcomes for our
families. Therefore, we are
requesting a $3 million increase
to serve more students, increase
the number of programs in our
state, particularly in rural New
Mexico and recruit and retain
educators in these fields.
Additionally, with the sex, the
success of the first round of
high school equivalency vouchers
that we did a few years back
with federal funds. There's a
quest for 1.25 million to offer
these voucher, services and
materials for New Mexicans in
alignment with House Bill 167
sponsored by Representative
Garrett. It is critical for me
to note that these are given to
individuals who can prove they
can pass the exam by practicing
by passing the uh practice test
before they come to us to
receive a voucher for GED or
high set.
Now in closing, Mister Chair to
respect everyone's time. I want
to mention that my wonderful
agency colleagues I've been
working all day since 8:00 a.m.
and are here to support me in
responses and also we have the
deputy secretary Patricia
Trujillo, and we now stand open
for your questions. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you to your
staff. Uh, we'll go straight to
questions starting with
Repenthan.
This chair, um, just on that
last, one of the last points you
made on the 2 $2.5 million it's
a pretest for individuals that
want to take the before they
take the GED.
Miss, Mr. Chair, yes, we require
that before we give them a
voucher to take the test for
free.
Practice test. So Miss
OK.
So, so what is that? But what is
it budgeted for now currently,
Mr. Chair. Oh.
Mr. Chair, I apologized. We
received $250,000 of federal
funds from federal relief
dollars actually, the public
education department transferred
that over to us. Uh, we are
almost done with that fund. Mr.
Chair, what did we do before
that?
Can you repeat that, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, what, how do we fund
this program before that or do
we not even have this program,
Mr. Chair, that was the first
time we ever funded the program
and administered the program.
Mr. Chair, what were students
doing before that? Wen't they
getting some kind of assistance.
Mr. Chair, sometimes they would
get it from the program
themselves if they had non-state
dollars such as federal grants
or foundational dollars, maybe
they got something from
philanthropic uh philanthropic
organization, um, but
Just so you know, 190,000
individuals in New Mexico
actually are eligible to take
the high school equivalency
test, whether that's GED or
highset, only 3% do. So this
would allow for that to happen,
but you're right before that
they would have to pay out of
pocket or get some money from
their program. Mr. Chair, I
just, I just recall when I was
it's been a while, I'm gonna
date myself, but even at like uh
before it was in CNN TBI that
they provided those.
They they provided those
services before you, you know,
at the community college level,
and I think we do here at Santa
Fe as well and then in Spanish
as well or other languages, so
I'm just confused why it's $2.5
million because what would get
this, what would get the the
potential individual to to is
it's the cost of this it's
prohibiting them, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, we have 26 adult
education programs in the state
of New Mexico, including the two
that you said. It is cost
prohibitive. It's $145.
to take the test.
OK, but Mr. Chair, the voucher
there we're gonna cover the
voucher or we're covering the
pretest or both, Mr. Chair.
Mister Chair, the pretest is
actually free.
That's what I was wondering.
That's why I am so sorry, Mr.
Chair. It's a it's late.
That's it. Good night. Bye bye.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, we get each other
sometimes. Today is not that
day.
Uh, Representative Vincent, and
thank you, uh, thanks for going
through that some Vincent, then
represent little. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, I
don't know why I get confused on
this opportunity scholarship.
What makes a kiddo
eligible for the Opportunity
scholarship, what takes them out
of
Eligibility for the scholarship
and how does the lottery work
into that?
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, let's start with
eligibility. So you have to
apply to a public higher
education institution in New
Mexico, get accepted, enroll in
a minimum of 6 credit hours and
be a New Mexico resident as
defined by the higher education
department and the institution.
The second part of that
question, I know the last part
was how does that play into
lottery, what was the second
part, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair, so what, what makes
them eligible, and I saw you
with your eyes closed and you
were looking deep in your brain.
I appreciate that. Then what
makes them ineligible.
Mr. Chair, it could be a number
of factors. So there is a GPA
requirement, you establish that
after the first semester. It's a
2.5 GPA cumulative, so over the
course of your studies, right?
If you fall below that, you can
lose your scholarship. However,
we have a mitigating
circumstances waiver, so if you
were in the hospital, you have
to take care of a parent who is
sick. You can fill out the
waiver and get it the next
semester, or you can have a
grace period where you have to
wait 2 years before you
re-enroll.
in the institution, um, you can
lose the scholarship if you
disenroll in the institution,
you have to wait those 2 years,
uh, you can lose the scholarship
if you drop below the 6 credit
hour threshold. The last
question, how does it work with
the lottery scholarship. So
lottery scholarship does not
cover the first semester of a
recent high school graduate.
It's actually the opportunity
scholarship that covers it for
that first semester, and then
you prove that you can.
Pass your first semester and
lottery kicks in the 2nd
semester in lottery covers all
of tuition opportunity covers
fees for that student, so that's
how that plays in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
really appreciate that
explanation. So if a kiddo say
they graduate and they leave the
state.
And they enroll in another
college, and they don't like it,
and they decide to come back.
Are they still eligible, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, I love this
question, um, you're actually
sitting next to the expert who
passed this bill too, so she
knows the response to this. I
love her. Um, so yes, we've
actually had a lot of people
who've left out of state, but if
they keep their New Mexico
residency and establish that
with the institution upon
enrollment, opportunity
scholarship will kick in for
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Lujan, that's how
you connect right there.
I connect and let's keep, we'll
keep going. We, we've got to
keep going. It's great, I think
very, very well explained, um.
uh, any other questions? OK,
great. We're gonna go next to
representative Little then
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I've
got two areas I'd like to ask
for your help in walking me
through, please, uh, on page 15,
uh, on the general fund, uh, we
walked through, understood uh a
line to adult literacy because
because there's a million in
other funds, uh, number 3, line
3 though, um, could you walk me
through that. Uh, I was trying
to follow um in the explanation,
the detail.
the on the differences um and
the um page 16.
Um, but I lost it and it might
be the time to forgive me, but
I'd appreciate it.
Mr. Chair, on that page 15
tribal education initiatives.
Yes. It's actually the tribal
education technical assistance
centers that was established by
law two years ago.
And so what?
Um, again, take me one more
step, please. What happened with
that?
Did, did it move to another.
Funding source.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
currently that program is
currently funded through a
special from the Indian Affairs
department, um, and it's, I
think what they're asking for a
reauthorization. I'd have to
double check on that and get
back to you, but currently it
has non-recurring funding,
right? So the department is
asking for recurring funding for
the technical assistance
centers, and that is through
House Bill 280 was created in
203 23 to improve student
success.
From early education or early
childhood through higher
education.
And Mr. Chair, um, and
representative. So,
When initially that bill was
passed. It had an appropriation
on it.
The appropriation was stripped,
the bill that created the
technical assistance centers
passed.
The special appropriation that
was referenced was initially in
IAD there was a governor veto
that made those funds eligible
to support this purpose.
Um, in the next year, the
Program was not funded by the
legislature and you see it here.
Not funded under the LFC.
But funded under the exact. So
that's the, that's the history
of
How we got to where where we are
today.
OK. Uh, so then my next
question, Mr. Chair, uh, is just
to follow up, um,
The bill passed, correct?
Well
I will there be funding?
To support this.
Uh, piece of legislation.
Mr. Chair, there will be funding
until the end of this fiscal
year, however, moving into the
next fiscal year, there will
not, unless we go with the
executive recommendation and
from that.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, and
Mr. Chair, I would like to flag
this for the the the
discussions, um, the further
discussions. Thank you very
much. And one more question on
the um
RSP uh line 14. It looks like um
I was trying to follow that as
well, Mr. Chair, but I.
Didn't find anything that
referenced it or maybe I'm not
looking in the right place.
Please, uh, guide me. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, are you referring to
No, um
And uh if you can, there you go.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative. So, yes, page
15, line 14. These are tribal
RPSPs. There are two of them.
There's $400,000 at NTU, um, and
that's for a computer science
program. There's another
$230,000 at Sippi, and that is
healthcare
Allied Healthcare.
Programs. There's also language
in the executive wreck for both
of those. Um, they do not appear
in the LFC wreck, they were
requested, um, during the RPSP.
Hearing process, um,
Typically
Uh
This is a little bit of a
departure. I think there's one
current, uh, tribal school RPSP
that's funded right now. That's
a nursing program at NTU for
$216,000.
Um, but typically the
The state has not necessarily
directed line item funding to
tribally controlled colleges,
because they are not state
institutions.
Thank you very much for the
response, uh, did you have
anything to add, if not, that's
OK. All right. Thank you. Uh,
I'll follow up with, um, just
some background on this. Thank
you so much.
Thank you very much for. Next
we're gonna go to Representative
Brown and then represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I'm
gonna do what I do every year,
um, we work on budget is flag
the adult literacy, uh, funding,
and um we really like to see
additional uh more than what LFC
is proposing on that. Um, it's,
it shocks me every time I read
this, that New Mexico ranks last
nationally in adult literacy.
We've made some great
improvements, I think, in the,
in the programs, and this is not
the time to let up on the gas.
Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
may have heard this wrong, but
um I was taking some notes when
you were talking earlier. Um,
Navajo Prep, did you say
anything about them?
OK. Thank you, Mr. I heard
wrong. No worries. Thank you,
uh, Representative Hernandez and
then Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would like to just, um, get
clarification on page 15.
Um,
line, um, 10, the dual credit
program for tribal colleges.
Um, how, how's this, uh, 600
The 1000 factored in.
Where
the 4 tribal colleges that we
have in the state of New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, New Mexico
invested in the Shiprock campus
of Dine College by building out
the uh science center. Beautiful
institution, beautiful building
and today when I was Mr. Chair
when Jane called to visit, uh,
uh, came to my office, they
talked to me about the increase
of dual credits because of that
new science center, and, um, Mr.
Chair, uh, nowvo Technical
University also
a flight this one item for me
and Madam Secretary, how do you
guys factor in that 600,000.
Chair, this is actually a
fantastic question. So of the
four tribal colleges, SIP is the
only exception that does not
provide dual credit at this
time, so we're only talking
about uh Navajo Technical
University, Dane College and um
I I Institute for American
Indian Arts, um, what we do to
have autonomy and sovereignty.
Associated even with our tribal
colleges, they are allowed to
have a working group.
Right before the fiscal year to
determine how that is dispersed
to the institutions. A lot of it
has to do with enrollment, but
other consideration and factors
associated with membership as
well.
Thank you Mr. Chair, uh, I, I
would like to just flag this
area for uh the committee, uh,
not technical University is
requesting an increase to
800,000. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we're gonna
go to Round Pettigrew, then sit
down.
Yeah
I was gonna get away without
asking questions on this one,
but
Uh, thank you, uh,
Representative Vincent for
asking your question.
Insectary Rodriguez for your
answer. Now I need a
clarification.
German
The secretary, you said as
defined or New Mexico resident
as defined by New Mexico higher
education department.
Can I please get a definition of
that.
Mr. Chair, absolutely, Director
Romero, can you please give a
very brief response.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
so, the brief, uh, residency
requirement within the state of
New Mexico for an individual to
receive in-state tuition and
state financial aid is 12
consecutive months.
Mr. Chair, there are policies
that other institutions though
that require you to have a bank
account, provide two statements
that show that your address is
in New Mexico, but just as far
as the higher education
department for the in-state
tuition it is that.
chair
Mr.
Romero.
To live here for 12 months, it
doesn't matter.
Uh, from what country, from
anything.
Live in New Mexico for 12
months.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee representative, that
is correct. So 12 consecutive
months they do have to provide
two overt acts that, um, again,
like secretary mentioned, it
would have to be a driver's
license, vehicle registration,
voter registration, income tax
from or filing taxes within the
state of New Mexico that would
determine your residency within
New Mexico. Now, there are also
a residency requirements in
terms of um there's undocumented
students that we do have
non-discrimination principles,
um, that for those particular
students as a um
individuals who um are
undocumented can actually
receive in-state tuition um if
they have graduated from New
Mexico High School and attended
a post-secondary education
institution. Um, there are other
requirements within um the
institutions for US
citizenships.
Thank you very much, Chairman.
Thank you for that answer. Can
you send me the documents for
that. Thank you.
All right. Let's go now to send
down and so.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that. I just
call a question on Pettigrews.
If someone comes to an institute
in New Mexico on a student visa.
And they're here for 12 months.
Will they then become free?
Chairman and members of the
committee representative. So,
um, if an individual comes on a
visa, there are certain
requirements, so they won't be
necessarily um a resident of the
state of New Mexico, um,
however, or even eligible for
state financial aid programs.
Um, they do have to meet that
non-discrimination principle
which would necessarily be that
they have to graduate from high
school and
uh and we attended a
post-secondary education
institutions, so no, they
technically would not be
eligible for in-state tuition,
but again, um, it could uh
potentially be institutional
policies that would allow them
to gain in state residency for
tuition purposes.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
they, would that be that they're
seeking citizenship or would it?
If they're seeking citizenship.
Um, so the seeking citizenship
is, is not necessarily um a
factor of that. It's if um if
they've been here for 12
consecutive months, um, the
institution will still document
them as an active, not out of
state resident, but um it's an
international student.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that. Um, I, I'm
trying to wrap my head around.
The presentation that started
with this is a public good.
Versus I, a, a real strong
desire for us to solve
solutions, um.
employment and high demand jobs
across our state, and we could
just take nursing or just take,
you know, technology uh the
different jobs that we need to
feel and trying to rectify in my
mind if this is about increased
enrollment institutions. If this
is about
Graduation rates, if this is
about building a workforce, so
I'm, I'm processing these
things. There's no obligation to
stay in the state when you
graduate. There's no obligation
to serve or to work in the
state. Is this correct, Mr.
Chair?
Mr. Chance there, you are right.
There is no uh er there is no
commitment, um.
commitment to stay. Thank you.
And for a lottery opportunity or
any of our financial aid
programs aside loan for service.
OK. And, and thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for that
secretary, and I think it's
actually almost hurt our core
programs, because a lot of the
core programs, people invested
in the local community, whether
it was AmeriCorps, Vista Corp,
Job Corps, what it was. They
invest in the community, learned
about a career, fell in love
with the career.
stayed in the community and
worked for loan forgiveness. So
it's it's, it's another area we
should look at if we're not
fully utilizing our federal
dollars because we're using
less, uh, I would guess it, I, I
know it's harder in my area to
recruit for core programs.
than it used to be in the past
because they don't need to pay
for anything and there's no
obligation. So that's, that's an
easier route. Um, but anyways,
thank you Mr. Chair. That was
not what my questions were
about, but I think it's
something that we should think
about. I think, I think.
The answer has been questioned.
Without even asking the
question, I've gotten my answer
on why we don't require FASTA
before we do a a scholarship
last resort.
Um, on page 15 on line 21, the
veteran scholarship fund, just
real quick, this is flat, um,
and I'm assuming that there's
less folks from the Vietnam
veteran area that are applying.
What happens to this money
that's not funded are family
members eligible or what?
As this population.
is less likely to go back to
college. Um, what, why is this
remaining flat?
And the same one for more time.
I'm assuming more time could
could increase.
Madam Chair, that's or Mr.
Chair, that's actually a really
fantastic question. You are
right. Uh, Vietnam War veterans
have decreased, as you know,
over time. Um, that's something
we can dive into and look into a
little bit more wartime veterans
includes those that are of the
Iraqi war, for example, or does
it does it excuse me. So yeah,
that one's a little bit more
broad. Um, we could look at
probably moving funds from the
Vietnam War scholarship over to
the wartime veteran scholarship
fund to address that.
I will say a former member of
this committee was very
passionate about the Vietnam
program, as you know, I got a
question about that every time,
and that was a little bit of a
respect factor to him and his uh
dedication to always contacting
me before session and asking me
to keep it flat.
Um,
Mr. Chair and secretary is it,
so it's non-reverting.
Mr. Chair, you're right. It is
non or it is non-reverting,
correct?
It is not reverting to I, you
don't have to tell me right now,
but I'd like to find balance on
that one and also send it to
you. Thank you. And then I, I,
to be clear, I want it to be
used for
Veterans and
military personnel. I'm just
curious.
About the successful
enrollment in that lineup. Uh, I
would also like to know, you
don't have to tell me now what
Allied Health is. That, that's,
that's a lot of money.
I'm just curious what Allied
Health is.
Is that something I can get a
report on Mr. Cha, absolutely.
So Allied Health is actually a
loan for service program. So
that's a program where you uh go
to school, you get the
scholarship and then you have to
work in the state of New Mexico
for a commitment of 2 years for
all our loans for service
programs, um, or you have to pay
back that loan. Oh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you. So out of
state people are coming in and,
and that's maybe where we're
getting some residency or
getting some folks that stay in
the state.
No? OK. All right. You can tell
me later cause I'm hungry. I
don't know about everything
else.
You're losing me fast. OK, thank
you, Mr.
Thank you. We're gonna go next
to Silver.
Thank you, chair. Um, just
quickly, I, I wanna clarify, um,
A couple of things. So, adult
literacy on um
Jetline 2 and line 7 adult basic
education. These are two
different but related programs,
correct?
OK.
And can you, um,
tell me how many programs does
the higher education department
administer for both adult ed and
literacy.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, 26 programs in the
state of New Mexico for adult
education in 18 programs for
adult literacy in the state of
New Mexico. Thank you, chair,
and what's the, how much money
does, does that
Cost to do all of those
programs. Thank you, chair. Mr.
Chair, currently for us to do
adult education, it's
approximately $6,828,000 and
then we receive a match from the
federal government for literacy,
it's $750,000 and we do not
receive a match, which is why
we're asking for an increase of
funds.
Excellent. OK. Thank you, chair.
And how is the educator
retention for these programs
going. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
it's actually not the best. Um,
we have a lot of competition
with two sectors, and that is
the public education sector
because of those salary
increases to the tiers, right,
which is a fantastic thing. But
we're losing a lot of adult, uh,
education educators. The second
is becoming adjunct professors
at our colleges and
universities, they are
qualified. They can do that
work, and they
may make more money if they're
an agit person professor working
full time, uh, depending on the
institution.
Excellent. OK. Thank you so
much. Um, I just wanna echo uh
Representative Brown and the
concerns of making sure that um
both of those line items um are,
are just kind of more adequate.
So thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Silla, uh,
that you.
Mr. Chair, um, a couple of quick
questions, um, in volume 3, page
152, looking at the fund
balances, um, the teacher loan
repayment fund, uh, in November
2023 was 9.7 million and then
November 2024, was essentially
9.7 million, and I'm wondering,
uh, is that
Was that a fund that is supposed
to be spent down over multiple
years or is it just we have
extra money. Mr. Chair, there's
actually a mandatory transfer
that has to happen out of that
fund that has to be done by the
legislature.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary. So does that mean
that we haven't been, uh,
requiring a mandatory transfer.
Mr. Chair, that is correct.
We've had more general fund
dollars coming into the states,
so we have not touched the fund
for years in which we don't have
as much money. We have that
money so that we continue the
renewals for teachers that are
currently on the program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. That is very
helpful.
Um
The other loan repayment, um,
funds.
It's great that we have a list
of all of the different ones,
um, on page 15, and are we just
tracking
I assume that um
The loan repayment programs if
we're asking for
Let's say public service law
alone.
Repayment is 194, 194,000, but
that's about how much we're
spending.
And that the supply and demand.
equal. Mr. Cherry, yes, that is
correct, and we actually have
our legal counsel who serves on
that committee that makes those
awards, and we do spend that
that money down.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
and so the supply and demand
question though would
I, I guess I just wanna make
sure that all of our loan
program repayment programs. We,
we just validate.
That
There's demand for the money and
we're spending it all. Mr. Cha,
you know, we, we talked about
this earlier this week. So the
answer is yes for all of our
loan repayment programs with the
exception of health professional
loan repayment program did
receive or did have a $5 million
reversion out of the $25
million. And as I noted in that
hearing, what happened is we had
lots of applicants, but a lot of
them were ineligible, and then
also we compete with the hearsa
loan forgiveness program, in
which they have
Higher caps.
For that loan repayment, so they
will pick that program over our
program and how we're gonna curb
that next year is we're gonna
have 2 cycles in which we open
applications so we can do that
marketing recruitment work for
the work with the hospital
association, the doctor's
association, and get that
information out.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, last
question, um, the FAFSA program,
um, Connor, that you talked
about, um, the $5 million for
that, is that for 1 year or 3
years.
Uh
Helping to get more students to
apply.
NASA
Mr. Sharon
Representative
The, the, the language online,
page 16, line 3.
is language only. It would be
under the opportunity
scholarship program, there's no
additional appropriation.
on it, um, and a proposal from
the LFC recommendation.
Simply
So that uh institutions are
getting opportunity scholarship.
They need to go after those
students, um, and they need to
get a FAFSA, an income
verification or a labor.
Thank you, Connor. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
OK. Thank you very much, Madam
Vice chair.
Um
Briefly, uh, madam, uh,
secretary, the federal funding
landscape is changing, or I
guess, in a great deal of fox
and sort of chaos right now.
Is the department and are the
two positions that you're
requesting will first one a is
the department working with
institutions are prepared to
work with higher education
institutions, that sort of
stress tests and me.
It's very helpful to understand
that, and I guess one be are the
two positions that you stressed,
uh, that you'd like, uh, uh,
availability to hire, are they
related to that or not related
or could they be utilized?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
question. So, um, I think I
wanna answer this in uh the, the
two, the two questions that you
asked. So the first is the two
positions that we're requesting
for the department are actually
in order to support capacity
that's necessary in order to
address a lot of the, uh, a lot
of the data requests and and the
need that we have as an agency
in order to provide uh the
additional support and data for
the work that higher Ed is
doing.
Uh, for your second question, as
it relates to the, the, um, um
The changes in, in uh federal
funding for the possibility of
changes. These positions would
also support those uh endeavors
in order to do research, uh,
and, and do analysis for us as
an agency, uh, in order to
ensure that our programs remain
viable. Our federal programs
remain viable, and then also any
support that's necessary uh for
uh for our agency and the higher
education institutions, uh,
continues to remain viable.
Great. Uh thank you very much
for that and thank you for the,
uh, really focusing in on that,
Madam Secretary. Also want to
flag, I think the um you know,
there's a lot of great progress.
The, uh, really exciting to see,
um, adult, adult basic education
and literacy.
Uh, and apprecient Brown and
representative Silver really uh
flagging that because
We talk when we talk about
workforce, we talk about many of
the challenges that are out
there. This is a, perhaps one of
the purest ways to go to to
tackle that challenge and to
help make New Mexicans' lives
better, so.
Great to focus on that. So, uh,
we'll have some continued work.
We're gonna ask for the LSC
right now. Um, thank you for uh
let's go for that right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt that
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vier
Dixon by Roy Garrett to adopt
the LFC recommendation during
any opposition to that motion.
Satan, we've done that.
that's gonna wrap this up for
today.
We'll be here at 9. We did get
started a little bit later
because of the floor. We're
committee, we're coming into our
very intense time. Uh, I
appreciate everybody working
super hard. We'll make sure and
have uh food I wanna think
Marcos Gonzalez for uh providing
the pizza today. I think our
sort of.
Positive feeling and really
buckling down. It's, it's gonna
get a little tougher, but the
work level and effort is just
outstanding. So thank you. We're
adjourn for the night everybody
at 9 a.m. tomorrow.
We'll see everybody at 9, in our
work.
Do we know what committees or
what workers are working
tomorrow.
