Because stand pretty
Please turn the microphones off
until we're ready to speak.
Excellent. Thank you. And I note
that because I've I've certainly
violated that and
Uh, so I'm the first example of
what not to do with microphones.
We're going to go first to Mr
Davidson.
Uh or let's go. Let's switch it
up. We'll go to Mr Siviglia
first and go from that Mr Chair
Committee members. We've got the
fifth Judicial District Court
here with US Chief Judge Mark
Sanchez. The fifth is lead
Chavez and Eddy County, the LSC
and executive recommendations
both fully fund the agency's
requests.
Both in its face and mansion
request.
The LSC and executor X both fun.
the slight increase in the
personnel contract categories
and there's slight decrease in
the other category.
We reach consensus and our
performance measures and we
both, uh, fully fund the
agency's 3.5 new FT. These are
for two new judicial specialist
apparent legal and a half time
surveillance officer. Pass it on
to my counterpart, Mr Davidson.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman of the committee.
Thank you. Please speak. I know
it's sort of
Mixed messages. But please speak
loudly and clearly into the
microphones. I think we may be
having a bit of trouble on our
Webcast hearing.
Um
Okay. Uh, Mr Davidson, You said
there was nothing further to
add.
Okay?
Judge Sanchez. Let's go to you
and please feel free to
introduce your team here today.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. My name is Mark
Sanchez. I'm the chief judge of
the Fifth Judicial District
Comprising reach Conte's I have
with me today. Mr Kenan
Crowhurst, our chief executive
office for the District have
some matters that I want to
touch on before we get to our
specific Can you please remember
the self help centers?
Um and then also remember our
difficulty. The jury trials and
also with warrant enforcement,
um and, um, technology without
alternative over to. We're
asking that you find those were
we think we only have funding
for
Retrials at this point and
please keep that in mind, um,
alternate over to Mr Crowhurst.
Thank you, Judge. Please turn it
off.
Okay. Thank you. For that. I
apologize. It seems like we're
having
Okay, We're having a few echoes
in here. Uh, let's hold on for
just a quick second.
All right.
It's still the same.
Okay, We're so I apologize.
It's gonna make this untenable
unless we get this fixed, so
we're gonna wait a little bit
