You.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hochman Vigil
your.
Representative Lane your.
Representative Lara.
Your mentor Representative
Garcia is presenting his bill
and Representative sending Anna.
There.
Representative Sweetser.
Sorry.
Representative Trujillo.
Well here.
Madam chair.
You have a quorum ready thank
you we're getting some.
Everybody to please me at their
computers get a little change on
our agenda today we're going to
start with Senate bill forty
eight.
Senator menu also we're gonna
have bill go ahead and talk
about that our first item for
today is the committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight was to which is the
general appropriations and
authorization expenditures so
bill let's talk about Senate
bill forty eight.
I just madam chair.
Senate bill forty you have
before you Senate bill forty
eight to substitute and it's all
that is is the Senate's.
A separate building so we have
the two spreadsheets.
That also were handed out to you
the first is in title house
questions of right here state
committee separate Senate bill
forty eight and the second is
the Senate supplemental J.
appropriations I find both so
choose that you're there is a
way of tracking through that
bill of.
Once it is completed.
I'm.
So madam chair.
Right.
House questions start sure right
one of twenty seven.
And they're all the items that
were requested by members of the
house.
And they were my sides a little
bit where for the agencies were
they needed to be are those
kinds of things Harris
combinations that happen for
instance if you look at the
first page on lines one and two
there are two different request
but they were combined into one
item on page two of to be Act
section W. one that you will be
able to provide once the
committee report is made.
These are the items madam chair
that are all through here you'd
like to go one by one but I
believe that you are.
We're gonna let the committee
cutting rooms through this we're
not changing anybody's request
but if you have any questions
about it so in other words as
bill and mention all the first
two items basically going to the
same place so that project got a
hundred and thirty thousand
dollars.
And then the second our number
three number four same thing I
like the way you've done this
bill so people can tell what
those total amounts are
especially if they can combine
requests for work with another
legislator on these things.
So I want to give everybody just
a minute to go through it but
before we start you have a
question on it Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I don't know whether
anybody else is having audio
difficulty on the receiving end
but there are.
Here in suite two hundred
there's quite a bit of of
interference but madam chair my
question is to simply were
repeated what I believe I heard
which is what we have here are
the Senate.
Of the and so I suppose
additions and that's that's all
we have is that correct.
Is not correct in your packet
you should have a copy of Senate
bill forty eight.
And you should have a copy of
the Senate at two forty eight.
What we're going to talk about
are the house portion so in
other words our ads get rules
them to Senate bill forty eight
we're not gonna do anything
we're not going to touch the
Senate staff that's already been
vetted what ends up happening on
page one through twenty seven of
the health portion of the
substitute we just look at it in
general I know the staff done a
heck of a lot of work on this
and it's worked very closely
with the sponsors of these
different issues and as billet
said number one and number two.
Are basically going to the same
place.
And they're both non reoccurring
the HSD code the agency which is
the officer I mean the
administer is that the office of
the courts bill that first one
that on page two and then the
what section it's in so total
combined for those two is a
hundred and thirty thousand yeah
we're going through the all the
rest of them I mean three and
for those to the eleventh
District Court five and six the
first and so forth starting with
nine it goes to the DFA
and we just want to take a
minute here to give the
committee a chance to look at
only the hard house portion
that's all we're gonna talk
about today and if there's any
questions for bill now it's
going to be the time to ask so
I'm starting to look at page two
I don't see anything that
jumping out might also be able.
But if anybody does just raise
your hand will take a few
minutes and then we'll have bill
out of the question.
Sure I really appreciate the.
Notation of non recurring and
recurring on this far it really
makes it easy to read I
appreciate that very much.
Make sure everybody get your
look for your own stuff in here
and make sure it's in there.
Madam chair when we're all said
and done here we will be able to
assist the members find their
things a little easier it's hard
for them to find the right now.
I hope that the Appropriations
Committee can find it that bill
I mean I'm I'm hoping that our
committee's gonna.
Get up and go here where they
understand what they're looking
out I I would get that for the
rest of the chamber my hope is
is that that we know what we're
gonna.
Bill remind me what are total
stand is for the house and
Committee each individual member
got.
Chair each member had a hundred
and eighty thousand dollars your
recurring and a hundred and
eighty thousand dollars
nonrecurring.
For seventy members of twenty
five million two hundred
thousand dollars both that's the
spread betting half twelve
million six hundred.
Is a nonrecurring twelve million
six hundred is recurring.
And when you all were booking
recurring and non recurring it's
it's because of the type of us
is that correct that's correct
madam chair.
As I mentioned to the committee
what ends up happening we will
just roll our peace into this
bill.
And then it'll go down to the
floor and will roll this baby
upstairs.
So.
Committee on any of the pages
that you've had a minute to go
through it do you have any
questions about any of the
anything that's in this
presentation.
Yeah I don't see any hands up so
everybody must be happy bill
with what they've got front of
them I'm certainly happy I think
you guys have done a good job at
all in this together.
And Representative Sweetser you
have a question not a question
madam chair but I just wanted to
say thank you I know it was a
big left and a lot of moving
parts I it's so nice to see it
like this they did a great job
thank you.
Ready to have anybody else that
might want to make it Madam
before I go for a go to small
for a motion.
I don't see any other.
So.
Small for the motion.
I think madam chair I would move
that the.
HSC committee substitute for.
The Senate finance committee
substitute for house bill forty
for Senate bill forty eight.
Madam church use me.
It's it all it is is amendments
to the bill because there are
several a committee set up for
Senate bill forty eight as
amended
I'm sorry amended as follows
event includes all outside so
it's not a separate so that I I
apologize madam chair thank you
Mr Valdez so I would move the
HSC amendments.
To the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight.
Sure and the second for the
amendment is there any
opposition to the approval of
the amendment.
Thank you madam was go to up for
motion Representative small
madam chair I move a do pass for
the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight as amended.
We have a motion to have a
second second.
Okay we we have a proper motion
proper seconds.
For the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight as amended is there any
opposition to that amendment.
Saying that it has been approved
so we've got our junior is on
its way if the back to be
delivered to the house floor.
Okay let's go back on the agenda
now.
First one is house bill twenty
four as amended state engineer
water planning and management.
Representative Lujan Romero and
I've got to be a tabling motion
isn't that correct.
All thank you madam chair I with
all of our work we can move to
table House Bill to twenty four
as amended no and then we funded
many of these.
We have a motion to have a
second.
Second.
Okay we have a proper motion
proper second is there any
opposition to that motion saying
down the bill's been terrible
okay good house bill one seven
seven.
Thank you madam chair the
tabling motions.
Thank you madam chair I'm still
working on our vineyards about
that move to table.
Okay.
We have a proper motion in a
proper second for tabling motion
on house bill one seven seven
any opposition to that state
known the bill's been table
that's going to house bill one
eighty six.
Is the representative in the
room we're going to have to
table this bill I think.
I move to table house bill one
eight six second okay we have a
proper motion and a proper
second for tabling of health
bill one eighty six which is
making straight appropriation is
there any opposition to that
tabling motion thing the bill
has been tabled.
Senate bill one.
Kids are you on.
I think madam chair and here to
present it I'm also.
We're on
Senate bill one.
Relating to public education
increasing the minimum salaries
go ahead.
You madam chair that's just what
it does it increases the minimum
salary to fifty level one sixty
level two and seventy level
three this is magic so we don't
need lots of.
I've got something here so is
there any questions from anybody
on this bill.
These are people in the audience
that are dying to talk
Representative small orders are
we just.
So today hi there are attendees
in the audience madam chair but
no hands okay there is one and
I'm sorry for.
This of the for Amy Prada and.
Time are ready.
Okay
Okay for one minute miss Prada.
It actually madam chair members
of the blue my name is Amy Prada
and the network for native for
teach plus New Mexico I work
with teachers every day and I
hear their voices and their
stories their challenges and
successes they care about our
students and their communities
they've been working very very
hard through this pandemic they
have most recently conducted
research through our network our
policy fellowship.
And collected data that
recommends at this increase in
salaries for educators this not
only will fill the vacancies
leaving around twenty five
thousand students without access
to a certified classroom teacher
but it will retain our best and
brightest teachers that are
having to work multiple jobs to
make ends meet with the
additionally recommends that
funding be looked at.
Who are effective but feeling
our responsibilities in high
need areas thank you for your
time and consideration in this
most important matter and we
thank the sponsors of this bill
as well thank you thank you very
much Mr Browde others one more
brief cut public comment madam
chair that be where.
Okay go ahead miss Kelly
appears.
It really fast of course my
computer yesterday.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Kelly Pierce I'm a proud
educator and a senior fellow
with teach plus.
How many tell you couple of
stories Bernadette orchestrated
all the moving parts to pull off
an evening with families in the
school gym teaching them the
history of women arias or
depending on where you live in
New Mexico fairly does and then
helping them make their own to
take with them Angela brought
together educators from across
the district to plan a Saturday
community fun run attended by
more than one hundred people
from fifteen campuses Kristina
lastly systematically handed out
art supply bags as cars passed
by her so that students could
created craft during a virtual
after schools zoom session in
partnership with the national
Hispanic cultural center
teachers teach but they do so
much more for our state's
children none of us enter this
career there with dollar signs
dancing in our heads the years
of low salaries and a dearth of
pay hikes takes.
We're gonna have you stop here
we can wrap it up.
Thank you very much for
considering this for our super
heroes are teachers.
Anybody else on the committee to
have any questions
Representative Sariñana
promotion.
Madam chairman of house and
Senate bill one
The past.
Thank you that's the right
motion is there any opposition
to that motion.
Seeing the bills passed thank
you.
Okay let's go now to Senator
Ingle in the ground for Senate
bill seventeen.
Representative Crowder go ahead.
Sure Senate bill seventeen is
annual water project the
authorization bill The New
Mexico finances Authority
oversight committee unanimously
endorsed this bill
this is they met back in
November of twenty one vetted
this complete set of projects
every project that applied was
approved.
and they are recommending
funding of all thirty six
projects there's five flood
prevention projects six water
conservation and treatment
projects twenty one water
storage advancing delivery
projects three watershed
restoration projects one
Endangered Species Act project
and I would stand for questions
chair.
Representative Crowder what's
the total on this and is this
out of the water project Fund.
This is sixty six point four
million total and it is out of I
believe yes the water project
funds and how many applications
did we have Representative.
But thirty six and all thirty
six were approved.
You know.
This year by any chance madam
chair I am.
Peter let me ask you a question
do you think that that year
round project developments our
process has worked for us.
Madam chair it doesn't many
instances except when there's a
big increase of funding or a
massive decrease in funding in
any particular year because
we're not able to respond
to the changes in the funding
level so this year will have
more funding available than we
anticipated and that'll make it
hard to fully allocate the
projects the funding you know
when we change that whole
process to all the year round
process it was to actually
provide stronger technical
assistance to the applicants but
I'm hoping that that's worked.
I'm madam chair I the the
requirements are much clearer we
are seeing a decrease in
applications over time the cause
of the up front requirements.
We've got the main sponsor.
Ingle Sir welcome to House
appropriations and finance.
Thank you madam chairman I'm not
great on the computers I much
rather be there in person but
I'll I'll do whatever I need to
do and there's this bill
particularly is the one that we
see every couple years or every
year.
Number three here Mexico finance
authority for water projects and
all over New Mexico the bill
basically
Here's the evidence of what's
needed in water projects and
then if they do the research on
it and then within the next year
if there proves why there's a
bill is created for that that's
what this is.
I'll be glad to try to answer
any questions I don't have the
bill in front of me but
basically the water projects or
statewide.
Help for statewide initiative
worked out very well the
original bill was passed in
nineteen ninety two and it's
been working for New Mexico ever
since.
Senator I remember when there
was tweaks made by
Representative Joe scale into
thousand one my first year
serving in the New Mexico house
and you would have thought that
we had to work to the battered
cow on that everybody came out
screaming on that but he did it
was a stalwart on this project
acts make sure that the project
fund was set up properly and and
I think it's been a real good
project let's go to committee in
the state to have any questions
on this bill.
Questions so Representative
small for the motion.
madam chair I move a do pass on
Senate bill seventeen.
Representative small
Representative result for two
thousand a second proper motion
proper statement is there any
opposition to that motion saying
none Senator you have to do
passed out of house
appropriations thank you and I
think that's our only committee
and now so one of you great
people can decide who wants to
carry it and.
Of the whatever you decide
search may show.
Good job Representative Crowder
so thank you very much thank
you.
Thank you Sir let's go to Senate
bill thirty six.
Representative Figueroa are you
here on that bill.
Yes madam chair I am here for
Senate bill thirty six well
we're all ears.
This is a bill to raise the
employer contribution to the ERP
by one additional point in FY
twenty three if percentage
points and another additional
percentage point in FY twenty
four to and up eighteen point
five percent it is included in
house bill two.
Is there anybody in the waiting
room there that was just bought
their guns.
Thank you madam chair we have a
we're going to close it at
For attendees there can we do it
for thirty seconds the piece.
Yeah we don't need lots of we
don't need lots of talk so let's
go ahead.
Hey we're gonna start off with
Mr Goff Russell got for thirty
seconds.
Madam chair my name is and
members of the committee my name
is Russell golf on the executive
director of the New Mexico
association of educational
towers I stand in support of
Senate bill thirty six we
believe the additional your
contributions will further help
to reduce the unfunded liability
and to improve the solvency of
the RB Fund thank you very much
thank you to the Sanchez
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you very much Mr Goff next
we have Roger Greer Mister Greer
for thirty seconds please.
Okay let's go on I will come
back to Mr Greer.
David option Mr David Archuleta
please.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee my name is
Dave excellent I'm the executive
director of the educational
retirement board I would like to
think Senator Stewart
Representative Figueroa for
sponsoring this legislation as
and was this close in the
direction of achieving a one
hundred percent funded status so
thank you for this in your
consideration.
Thank you so much Mr archer
that's a let's go back Mr Reso
group excuse me Roger Greer
please.
Go ahead Mister Griff brief
thirty its disposal.
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you there my name is
Roger in the a a RP New Mexico
volunteer for the consumer
average fifty advocacy team they
are creating Mexico asked that
you please support Senate bill
thirty six and we think the
sponsor Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill forward and
we thank you committee members
for all you do for the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr Gramm we're gonna
conclude with Mr marks of Asia
from the council of university
presidents Mr savage.
Mr seven.
All right marks of a draft from
the New Mexico council of
university presidents for public
comment.
Okay I see.
I just sit in there any longer
but I'm sure I believe he also
was the COVID in support.
Okay.
That concludes yep that
concludes the public comment.
All right let's go to the
committee any questions from the
committee I just want to alert
the committee to one thing and
that is we're one year out on
expenditure in FY twenty four so
we need to remember that when we
get into LFC this next summer.
And that's unusual for us to do
that I want to make sure that
that is flagged is there anybody
else that has any questions on
this bill.
Representative small for the
motion.
I move a do pass on Senate bill
thirty six.
The
second there are no.
We have a promotion proper
second is there any opposition
seeing not seeing now the bill
has to pass.
All righty let's.
Go to Senate bill thirty seven.
Thank you madam chair I'm
putting on Senate bill thirty
seven for that says Senator
Rodriguez Senate bill thirty
seven making appropriation from
the public project revolving
fund to the drinking water state
revolving loan fund.
Hi.
That's right I'm sorry well
known for the water shift so the
construction loan fund and the
cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure madam chair
Senate bill thirty seven is a
New Mexico finds Authority
public project revolving fund
appropriations bill I am
carrying such on behalf of M.
NMFA's legislative oversight
committee which voted
unanimously to endorse this bill
the bill appropriates total of
fourteen point two million from
the P. P. R. F. two three
identified funds six point seven
two million to the drinking
water state revolving loan fund.
Two point five million to the
water wastewater facility
construction loan fund and I
five million to the cultural
affairs facility infrastructure
madam chair.
Yes.
The appropriation contained in
this bill thirty seven.
Do not affect the state general
fund and Marquita Russel is here
as a witness chair.
Representative Castellano worse
money come from.
It's coming from the mortgage
finance forty.
From Michelle tell you which for
now hold on madam chair.
Find a mentor.
Not.
Madam chair if I could.
And.
It's it's from the public
project revolving fund which is
administered by the New Mexico
finance authority.
Thank you.
Go to everybody else in the
audience that wants to make
comment on this bill.
Gonna go to the committee.
What's the total amount Marquita
we're moving out of the public
project revolving fund into this
madam chair tools fourteen point
two two million it's larger this
year because of the unusually
large federal grants that are
being made to both the drinking
water state revolving fund and
the clean water revolving fund
they're much larger this year
that request a larger state
match.
So is that something we have to
write for the automatic grounds.
This Madam we have we have the
availability now with the new
infrastructure bill to write
grants to the federal government
for water and wastewater project
so does this go to that match or
does it go to an existing map
madam chair goes to the existing
match for the state revolving
funds the ones that are
administered by the EPA so this
is a different mark already
Representative Crowder for
question.
Thank thank you madam chair I
just curious what those fund
balances are they were
transferring out of on the FIR
it looks like there the one of
us coming from the drinking
water revolving fund the other's
wastewater Fund culture your
infrastructure fund what what
are those fund balances
currently.
Madam chair thank you so the
monies are coming from the
public project revolving fund
and being appropriations to
those three funds the NMFA
administers one of those three
funds the other is administered
by the environment department I
don't have their fund balance
and lastly the cultural affairs
facility authority I don't have
their ballots but I can tell you
that these new dollars that are
coming as a result of these
capitalization grants allow for
additional enhancements such as
grants or principal forgiveness
which is not true of loans that
have already been repaid so
these dollars even if they're
not if we have money on hand the
money that we have on hand
currently can't be used to
provide grants or principal
forgiveness and these new
dollars from the federal from
the feds will allow for that so
these are particularly important
because they provide greater of
depth the funding for the small
communities thank you madam
chair I missed the public
project revolving loan fund what
do you have that fund balance
madam chair that changes from
week to week we just drew a
thirty two million thirty two
million dollars from a line of
credit to mate obligations for
loans that we have funded and
they will issue bonds to
replenish that fund so we we
issue bonds four times a year we
draw down the monies to fund
loans and issue bonds again
right now we are.
We had to draw from our line of
credit in order to meet the the
funding demands for the program.
Thank you madam chair.
Do we have any other questions
for many of the other committee
members.
Many.
I move to do pass on Senate bill
thirty seven seconds.
Improper motion proper second is
there any opposition to that
motion staying on the bills
being passed.
Thank you committee thank you
madam chair thank you committee
thank you.
They all what is our we are back
loaded log of bills or can we
shut it down for the session
madam chair there is one bill
out there yet this is not on his
agenda.
It says Senate Bill.
One thirty five.
Which changes the the
The the amount going into the
taxation attention
stabilization reserve Bellary
Fund.
And what's in the operating
costs and that bill is not been
schedule.
The rating under is that one of
those things where we're trying
to prevent money into going into
the rainy day fund I want to
have a good thought on that
let's not just do that one today
I put it on the agenda will find
some time to do that but not
today.
All right anything else.
The body holes all right thank
you very much same time same
place tomorrow.
Good afternoon bye
bye.
