Okay Representative Armstrong.
President.
Representative Brown.
I'm here.
Representative Crowder.
The.
Representative Dixon.
Here Representative.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative sister.
Yes are you working on the.
Representative Hochman Vigil E..
I'm here thank you.
Chair small.
I am here as well.
Thank you Martha welcome.
Again as a reminder thanks
everybody please go on mute if
you are not speaking we're going
to go ahead and start
with
Agency six oh three with the
African American affairs.
And
miss and and excuse my
pronunciation the budget sheet.
Thank you were close.
Thank you can you please start
us off then we'll go
there three the man as and then
invite the office of African
American affairs to make a brief
presentation thank you.
I'm so good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Carla the
khaki and I am the LFC analyst
for the office of African
American affairs I'm also the
analyst for the Martin Luther
king Commission.
So I'm I'm sorry the sure you
wanted to start with the office
of African American care six oh
three yes please okay
so that six so that HSD six oh
three the office of African
American affairs is in volume
two at page two oh one.
I'm so there is I. two hundred
and twenty nine thousand dollar
difference between the LFC
recommendation and the executive
recommendation it's all our
general fund revenue.
I'm during the two thousand
nineteen legislative session the
agency received a reoccurring
appropriation of three hundred
thousand for programs and
exhibits at the African American
art form that the African
American performing arts center.
The executive has transfer that
money into the state fair budget
for at the request for easier
distribution and administrative
administration the LFC budget
includes the money in its
original provided state so it
includes the money in the office
of African American affairs
budget and that is in the
contractual services line so the
main difference is in the
contractual services which is
quite different the LFC budget
is two hundred fifty thousand
over the executive budget that
is due to that money being the
O. A. R. the performing arts
money being and the away budget
versus the state fair budget.
Both of the recommendations
include a small increase in
personal services to ensure that
there are sufficient funding for
the agency to fill all their
vacant positions.
and both the LFC and the
Executive recommendations
include decreases in the other
category for operating expenses
the executive decreases mostly
attributable to our fixed rate
changes and the LESC
recommendation also includes a
reduction of twelve thousand for
an I. T. contract that was
counted twice because of changes
in accounting practices.
All of the performance to our
targets and differences have
been reconciled and with that
I'll turn it over to Diego if
you have anything to add.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that as Carl
mentioned the primary difference
and the LFC and Executive
recommendations is this a
appropriation from the junior
bill that is intended for
programs in existence more can
performing arts center
the executive side we decided
that this.
Money would be better utilized
to be more administrative.
The efficient to channel that
money through accidental rather
than through the office of
African American affairs and.
Yes yes it do you.
And so forgive me for not
introducing you sooner Amy but
Mr chair members of the
committee Amy Whitfield is with
us and she is the executive
director for the office of
African American affairs and
what I can turn it over to her
now thank you please thank you
miss budget sheet and please
miss what field director with
filled thank you for being on.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee am I able to share
my screen during the
presentation.
If you are you should be.
You should be able to see a
share screen icon at the bottom
of your screen Mr chair.
And and that any.
It the hope is disabled it's
fine I can go ahead and present
without that presentation Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for allowing
me to speak with you all today
the office of African American
affairs is a mandate through
statute that was created in
nineteen ninety nine and I just
want to share with you a few of
the accomplishment that we've
had in the fiscal year twenty
twenty one of those things that
the town hall meeting that we
were able to hear from our
community about how important
things where for them about how
government can really get that
African Americans in improving
their lives and so we learn from
them many things about public
safety and community and
economic development education
health and policy changes that
might happen and all of those
things are what is informing the
way that we want to move forward
I'm this year that we're
currently doing and in future
years.
We have several programs and
initiatives in fiscal year
twenty and had many programs we
were able to maintain those
programs even through COVID
nineteen and in fact we created
program I'm the typically to
improve the understanding and
the affect of the African
American population during the
pandemic one of the things we
created with a report for
African American communities
that was written by at four
African American to really help
them understand the impact and
particularly the racial
disparities that we're being
faced by African Americans
during the pandemic we created
that Representative hi captain
we also created that through a
newsletter.
Other thing that we were able to
do in fiscal year twenty twenty
to respond to that then that and
really making sure that African
Americans were correctly counted
during this budget knowing that
they are very under represented
and counting across the nation.
And that we cannot do our job
without the community partners
and the collaboration that we
have and so we work with so many
different community
organizations that the
organization and social advocacy
groups to make sure that we can
do what we want we're able to
do.
As I want to share just a little
bit before I open it up to your
question of when we're talking
about appropriation for the
office act making it very what
exactly is that going to and so
we have a few priorities the
first priority is that we want
to respond to our community
needs we want a multi year plan
that is implemented based on
impactful measures really
looking at that mandate from the
house bill nine oh nine that
that we're here to improve the
lives of African Americans in
health education and economic we
want to be able to take National
that practices and be able to
translate them into the African
American community here in New
Mexico really making sure that
we have a focus on what can be
applied here for our small but
very might lack population.
Our priority to is improving the
distribution of data on black in
New Mexico over and over the
hear the African Americans are
just too small the population
measure and we want to be
impactful and that we want to
make Banthin improve the African
American data that we currently
have on our website and we want
to make sure that we're
reporting out that data from a
resilience and strength when I
want to be able to collaborate
with our other state department
to make sure that the
information and the data that
they have on African American
can be distributed to our
community.
Our priority three to continue
to build our outreach program
and to build in a policy and if
the question leadership plan so
that many community leaders who
are interested in being involved
have that yellow have that
capacity and have that act that.
And then a priority for it to
maintain the cultural
celebration and the recognition
of the African community
American Community we do that
with our everyday heroes award
we provide award to more than
fifty African American
throughout the state really
talent
The celebrating the things that
they've done for the community
throughout the year.
That really is an overview of
our expect is an overview of
what we want to do with the
fiscal year twenty to and so I
would have to take any
questions.
Thank you so much director with
the field thank you to the
analysts will now go to the
committee for questions for
either miss what field or for
the and or the analysts first up
will be Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
miss what field I have a couple
questions regarding your
efforts with the census and to
make sure that all of our
African American individuals in
the state are counted can you
tell me a little bit more about
what you have done that are
regarded how your plans change
to make sure you got an accurate
count after the pandemic
occurred.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee we
really worked with our community
partners on that we had we
joined the total census count
campaign to make sure that we
were working in collaboration
that we had collected impact
throughout the state we need
personally worked with a lot of
that religious organizations
that are common and accu
American Community our churches
to make sure that they were able
to encourage their membership to
go and to host you Madam I'm in
to make sure that they were
following within the within that
social order the public health
order we also did a really big
marketing campaign so that we
year champions within our
community to encourage people to
get out and vote our get out in
the fill out there and good part
we also encourage people to get
out and vote that year and while
I'm and then I think one of the
most of the things that we did
in really continuing that that
the campaign even when pandemic
created is that we started
partnering with the department
of health as they were doing
testing to make sure that we
could get hacking into African
American Community make sure
that the community outreach that
we deal with getting them to
know about the importance of
testing and the act that the
testing and then we connected
that with filling out that that
that that well the most of that
testing that happened included
you know this week we were able
to bring I've had the things
like that the people get out
there and it's right there.
Thank you very much Mr build and
in terms of lessons learned from
that program do you feel like
you did a pretty good job do you
feel like you've got a fairly
accurate counter there are still
some holes that need to be
filled thank you Mr chairman
would build.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I think we have
some great lessons learned and I
don't think that we were able to
get all of the folks counted
that we kind of then how did I
do think that we did an
exceptional job you know beyond
that the restrictions that we
have around the pandemic I also
think that the which is that
were created when we weren't
sure you know the date within
the amber it would be pushed
back to October that carbon
problems there at that well I
think what we really learned in
no matter how early the dark
it's not early and that right
in that as but then it just
finishes now we should probably
start talking to people about
the budget in ten years is that
people really want to support
their community and when they
know how important and just as
they participate but it is a
very hard thing to make sure
everyone gets counted but I do
think that both are off after
making a very that the personnel
office campaign and then also
that total count campaign that
we were part of we've all
learned lesson that we're ready
to put those in it that this is
reopened which might be expected
or what we can do in ten years.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
that's what builds I have one
other question for the analyst
miss the catchy with regards to
that three hundred thousand
dollar junior bill appropriation
that was originally meant for
the
a a a budget that was
transferred on instead to expo
does that still mean that the
office of American African
American affairs has access to
this money or was it completely
removed from their budget.
It was.
The budget is included and in
the exactly and and the
executive budget it is not so if
you get the committee adopts the
executive budget the money would
not be our with the office of
African American affairs so the
money would be with the state
fair to administer the programs
and exhibits at that performing
arts center.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman academic I'm sorry
excuse me sorry Mr chair members
of the committee and that would
also depend on what the
subcommittee a does and the
sharing that they're currently
having with the state fair
budget.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair Mister catchy that's all
the questions I had.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil next we're gonna go to
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you director with build up
my questions also went back to
that junior money this the khaki
so.
So it it it is now included okay
for LFC the budget where is it
in the state fair it's not there
at all right.
Correct I'm that LFC budget for
the state fair did not include
general fund money for the
African American performing arts
center the money for the African
American performing arts center
is in the office of African
American affairs.
But I think maybe just to
clarify the office of African
American affairs is a separate
entity from the African American
performing arts center so any
kind of transfer of funding for
programs and exhibits there had
to go through some kind of.
You know agreement between the
office and the performing arts
center and I don't know if you
want to add anything to that Amy
are not.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I think I want
that Mexico prying on what
because you get that is that
American performing arts center
the phone into G. and we want to
be able to support them and the
work that they do but.
Realistically speaking we do not
have the administrative support
in order to be able to do that
we don't have lawyers in order
to be able to get the contract
through quickly procurement come
first and then go to each at the
and that that is something that
is lengthy as well and so we are
in full support of whatever
transfer happened that would
allow the African American
performing arts center to be
able to reach African American
and and other than our state
with cultural appropriate
information and Sir.
Okay Mr chair and director with
the thank you for that I guess
I'm going to and and doubling
over the intent of the money as
delegated in the junior bill
from or maybe more than one
members specifically wanted that
money to go somewhere and they
wanted that money to go to the a
eight right and my correctness
the keiki.
Yes junior bill that was passed
in two thousand nine made the
appropriation specifically to
the office of African American
affairs.
I don't know if
the intent of the representative
who sponsored that junior bill
has changed I my guess is it
has.
It has yes I'm I do believe that
that Representative is in
support of the transfer of the
money to the state fair for
administration that money is
still dedicated to exhibits and
performances at the performing
arts center it would just be
administered by a different
entity.
All right thank you thank you
very much Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
we're gonna go to Representative
are a.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you analyst thank you miss
Whitfield I.
I guess what it was African
American population in the state
right now I guess I'm not
familiar with that.
Can you hear me.
Mr chairman members of the
committee at the okay I can
answer that so that is about
three percent of our state you
know census count range from it
being anywhere from sixty to
seventy five thousand people in
the state there are with that
the county throughout the state
that have more percentage than
that particularly in the
southeast region of our state
and then also in the Alamogordo
area and so those are the ones
with the highest percentage in
the county but it's about three
percent of.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
miss with okay I guess.
You know this is been I think a
pivotal year for all of us.
in regard to of the African
American community in our state
and our country how many I'm
just curious how many peaceful
protest I know this is your job
okay and I know you weren't
doing this but I'm curious if
you track the number of peaceful
protest in the black lives
matter movement in our state.
You have a number on that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I haven't tracked that
I don't know what the what the
number of protest where I think
that when we talk about protests
we want to expand that to be
thinking about not just protest
meeting people marking down
street but also those things
that we don't the clearly in the
new I'm so beyond protest we
occupy huge increase in people
who wanted to support black
owned businesses many newspapers
and many of our new stations
created black owned business by
where people could go in support
them I also think the governor
created the governor's Advisory
Council for racial justice act
which I've had the opportunity
to staff this summer and so
there's this huge increase the
people asking questions about
that and how they can
participate there were over five
hundred applications to join
that hello well for less than
forty per this position and that
we adopted consistently get
questions you know before this
summer of how people really can
help to improve the lives of
African Americans and so I
haven't kept track of the
protests that actually a really
good idea and something that I
should probably put it into our
FY twenty twenty twenty two goal
but that really we look at
advocacy and activism of the
more well rounded all of the
different things wanted to.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
miss that tell yeah I'm a I'm
yeah I I I know it's not your
job to create protests but but
it but it was it was really I
think a really.
Great outpouring for this
country and in some ways in some
ways it was devastating to
different communities but of for
people to kind of recognize of
the history of what's gone on in
this country and to step up and
have a voice and to support
African Americans and that.
During these times that I think
I think sometimes you see it
sometime should live in a change
you know and I I think we all
went through that this year not
only in COVID but in but in
really understanding the depths
of institutional racism and what
it means to each one of us and
help limits all of us are so I
I'm just wondering are are you
planning seminars and programs
to kind of build those
conversations in communities.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee yet I think
that is one of the bases that
top African American affairs
expelled and has done an amazing
job that over the last twenty
one years just in this year in
FY twenty one we have a
entrepreneurs theory that will
start next month where we are
inviting entrepreneurs in the
black community to learn very
that that that claim about we
that they can start businesses
and build sustainable businesses
to you know in order to really
be part of that black owned
businesses the other thing we'll
be doing it for black history
month we like to collaborate
with the black leadership
council also known as the black
history organizing committee
thank you month long monthlong
even and that we're going to be
doing what we're calling the
African American virtual The New
Mexico African American virtual
museum so they'll be or I even
throughout February really
celebrate our history there's
also an African American and
southwest museum here it is a
traveling museum if you haven't
seen it I would really encourage
you to go and then what we're
doing right now particularly
around hi.
that protests this summer if we
created a podcast called re
educated and it really talks to
our community about those issues
that have been becoming very
public you know reasons why
African Americans don't have the
same access to resources needed
services reasons why racial
disparity continue to happen you
know what is the difference
between systemic racism and you
know interpersonal right.
And so that that protected been
a really great way for us to
Representative as well.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
miss without that's all I have.
Thank you so much Representative
thank you so much director with
filled and
for being here today I don't see
any other questions from
committee members.
And so
we're alluding to we're ironing
how to do these resume but I am
not seeing any other questions
deeply appreciating the great
questions and again director
what field you're fantastic
efforts in presentation and a
very trying time I think we can
go ahead and go to vice chair
Hochman Vigil for a motion then.
Yes please make the motion last
for a second and then go from
there.
Thank you very very much Mr
chair at this time to make a
motion to adopt executive
recommendation.
Thank.
Great there's a motion to adopt
to the executive made by
Representative Hochman Vigil was
there is there a second.
Representative SI think.
Alright it's seconded by
Representative Sweetser and will
give a little bit extra time is
there any objection from
committee members to adopting
the executive recommendation.
Okay seeing no objection from
committee members to adopting
the executive recommendation
with the motion made by
Representative Hochman Vigil
second by Representative
Sweetser the we adopt as a
recommendation the executive
budget for
The.
Six agency six oh three Office
of African American affairs
thank you so much director with
Phil.
rex thank you all working
through this next we're going to
go over to HSD code six zero
five that's going to be the
Martin Luther king junior
commission and again I would
like to start with the LFC if
miss potentially could get us
started there please also.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee our
that Martin Luther king junior
commission are summary is on is
in volume two page two oh five.
LFC general fund recommendation
is that seventeen point six
thousand less than the executive
recommendation.
And I am going to let Mr Jimenez
present the judge the rest of
the differences and the two
recommendations.
Mr chair that is Carolyn action
the LFC general recommendation
is seventeen thousand six
hundred dollars less than the
executive those recommendations
are one hundred percent general
fund.
The executive recommendation is
flat with the commission's FY
twenty one budget and includes a
slight increase for operating
expenses and personnel services
to provide additional accounting
and financial assistance to the
committee well slightly
decreasing the contractual
services category at the LFC
recommendation and.
It's a five percent reduction
and from the agency's FY twenty
one operating budget with a
twenty five point three thousand
reduction and the personal
services employee benefits
category.
the HSD as there's only one of
them is filled so they have a
vacancy rate had a vacancy rate
of fifty percent for the
entirety of FY twenty and still
today
the agency that have a third
position that was recently
eliminated because they would
have to they can for so long.
Over two years.
At the executive recommendation
includes a small increase in
funding.
The person on.
Category to ensure sufficient
funding for for all the
commissions and including the
financial administrative
functions as I mentioned before.
the LFC recommendation includes
an increase in contracts for
professional services to provide
consulting contracts for
financial and accounting
functions.
The performance of the
differences are reconciled and
are noted on the performance
measures summary statistics kind
of put a button on that the
differences at the LFC
recommendation recommends an
additional.
Financial and accounting
assistance through a contract
and the executive recommends
that that same services through
a full time position thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you very much mystery
menace and I believe we have Mr
waits.
Yes Sir excellent thank you so
much for joining us here today
and please Sir
we would move to you in please
take it away.
It doesn't look like I can share
my screen all let let me try.
We're going to.
Promote you.
It's.
Now Mr weights to you and I
apologize again to director with
Phil for not being ready with
the first presentation Mr waits
we should have you promoted
where you'll see the up I'm.
Perfect.
As I can everyone see that.
Sorry Mr it's not up yet okay.
Who who who it's.
How's that could everyone see
that.
No unfortunately we can't Mr
okay I I'll I'll just present.
Okay this would still do it
I apologize.
Thank you chair small committee
members
I am the executive director of
Martin Luther king Commission
The foundation of a the
commission established on the
principles of working closely
with communities all around the
state to foster community
unification.
Racial harmony multi cultural
diversity and.
And social justice for
improvement of the quality of
all New Mexicans.
Broad communications of Dr
king's legacy of lifting the
intellect of our use and
elevating the effectiveness of
our community leaders educators
and role models.
I can my commissioners are Mr
waits yes I apologize for it
let's get I apologize can we
give this one more try now for
sharing your screen okay.
Let's do this.
Do you see it I'm sorry.
No I apologize for the technical
difficulties on my and I
apologize for interrupting
please go but continue with the
presentation sorry.
our commissioners are from
Albuquerque constant Stacey
Blake more can really with the
state treasurer Tim I convert
from requests we have
Representative garland more from
Los crucis Terry Tolbert and Dr
Bobby green from or tell us that
chairman is Dr Representative
Oscar Robertson percent of Santa
Fe we have Kaylee sellers are.
the W. secretary Secretary of
Indian affairs I guess it was
all over secretary of state and
those of my anses commissioner
of public relations and from
harms we have Joe cotton.
Our mission is to promote Dr
minus to cancel lastly on human
rights equality nonviolent
social change and unity and
connectedness to the people of
New Mexico through remembrance
celebration and action.
Our vision.
It is to create a stronger
network of community
organizations I.
Collaboration coordination and
cooperation.
The strategy from marketing can
commence.
Commission amplifies and Dr
king's visions by educating the
public on Dr king's philosophy.
The importance of combating
social problems in equities.
I never City training across the
state.
Provide the public we resources
to overcome the three evils
prejudice poverty Matilda
militarism.
And continue supporting Dr the
national M. okay initiatives of
programs including.
Martin Luther king day
commemorations and other civil
rights act at the events.
M. okay statewide activities and
initiatives.
This year we hello virtual
commemoration.
Around the state.
Our annual user conference with
was not held this year because
of the COVID along with our
indoor indoor track and field
invitationals.
And this is this year gather
more information.
Educate others.
Remain committed.
And more community outreach.
I wish we could see the slides
but.
We go forward and steps that
have impacted our success.
Our partnerships around the
state.
Positive audit reviews statewide
participation and support.
Funding employee grant writers.
Measures of achievement
established measures of
achievement roadmap to
sustainability and increase
transparency.
And finally what's ahead.
Strategies for our success
employee hire competent staff.
Defined measures of success
establish and cultivate new and
current partnerships reaffirm
and strengthen statewide
enthusiasm at support and are
expected outcomes are increase
our brand recognition increase
the number of statewide holiday
commemorations and increase the
number of use that to at times
violence workshops with that I
stand for any questions.
I apologize for not being able
to see this.
Now Mr weights that thank you so
much for your presentation and
and and and we apologize I
apologize for more and
will work to make sure that the
slides are available for members
but but thank you very much
nonetheless for going through
the presentation first we'll go
to Representative Hochman Vigil
for questions.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
this is a question for the
analyst agency of the catchy
catchy catchy.
The khaki.
The open space it's actually
part of my district in
Albuquerque so yes you so much
Mr chair so I'm going actually
and be volume two page two oh
five and looking at the agency
requests maybe the director can
help eliminate some of this as
well but I see that the agency
requests
where is.
Intial over what was budgeted
but recommended for fiscal year
twenty one and under those
increases there's a subset
substantial amount of a hundred
to one thousand three hundred
dollars under other and so I was
just wondering if maybe we could
elucidate a little bit more on
that request and what is
specifically being sought.
When we utilize the other I got
a I'm I'm sorry shares terms
small committee members of the
others we realize that in a lot
of different ways it
mostly in support of our youth
programs and things like that so
that's where we utilize the
other for a lot of different
reasons you know it's a catch
all
sort of category.
Okay thanks so much do you have
anything to address the catchy
Mr chair the project.
Other category as I'm sorry.
Mr chair and members of the
the working.
I other category does include
the money for the programs you
know our outside of what you
would consider professional
service contracts it is the
money for the program so it's
the money for the youth
conferences and of the and
rations and so
a big piece of you know the
program money resides in the
other category.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair Mr director Miss Suazo
khaki that's all the questions I
have.
Thank you representative next
we'll go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you chairman of and
wonderful presentation Mr
weights I really appreciated
that
I was wondering when we're
looking at the vacancies and the
shifting of funds from
personal services employee
benefits to.
Contract
couldn't and maybe espectacular
also elaborate on this but
what's the so that I understand
what's the rationale of
switching it
where those funds are going.
I can answer that for you if you
all one of the main reasons we
have a vacancy for such a long
period of time so excuse me that
money was held in that in the
two hundred category.
And so it was available because
we didn't have employees and
that area so it is was it was
easier to.
Move that money into the three
hundred category now understand
ability we did complete of for
audits this year
so.
A lot of those funds removed to
pay for those audits into the
three hundred contractual
category.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you Mr
waits
Are there any other
any other questions from
members.
The.
I don't see that there are any
other questions from members
with that then we will go to
Representative Hochman Vigil for
a motion.
Thank you Mr chair at this time
I make a motion to adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you Representative is
there a second.
Thank.
Excellent okay that's a there's
a motion to adopt the LESC
recommendation by Representative
Hochman Vigil in it was
sent seconded by Representative
Dixon.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
Okay seeing no opposition to
that motion.
The adopted as a recommendation
the only the LFC a budget for
HSD code six zero five the
Martin Luther king junior
commission Mr weights thank you
so much for taking time today
and we can work with you to
ensure that those slides are
available for members thank you
for for your support also.
Absolutely thank you Mr with.
Okay excellent thank you all
next we're going to go to HSD
code six six two that's going to
be the minors hospital.
And.
We'll go to
miss ruby and SQL to kick us off
for the LFC narrative.
Hi good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee nice to see all of you
I will introduce first let me
say that miners.
Hospital of New Mexico can be
found in your LFC volume two
page two fifty eight.
That's where that can be found.
And let me introduce first off
my the folks from minors
hospital up in rat tone who are
I'm sure happy not to have had
to drive down to Santa Fe in the
snowstorm this year so that we
have with us from the minors
hospital Mr Bowe beams his the
director and chief operating
officer chief CEO at the
hospital and we also have with
that HM Mr lining Medina who is
the chief financial officer and
then my counterpart with the
department of finance and
administration is more MaryBeth
and more.
So with that we'll go through
and summarized the differences
that.
At a really high level for you
the minors hospital New Mexico
is not a general fund agency if
the one of the lucky
beneficiaries of the land grant
permanent fund that was set up
in that state constitution so
and the revenue see here that
transfers are from the minors
trust fund which is a
beneficiary of that land grant
permanent fund the federal
revenues are the revenues that
they generate from.
Grant and the federal matching
revenue and then other revenues
from primarily Medicare revenue
from the hospital.
So really before well you'll see
here between the two there's
only one difference between the
LFC and executive recommendation
Mr chairman.
One point one million in that
miners trust fund revenue that I
was discussing so we I need to
to at let the committee know
them in the LFC recommendation
I failed to.
To include a portion of the
minor stress run revenues so
that penal and charitable
contributions so that basically
is making up the difference
between the two that revenue
piece was not in the LFC
recommendation and so we all
kind of straighten that out a
couple of days ago and got clear
on that and got the numbers
correct and also so I I really
need to say that up front so I'm
and basically in the LFC
recommendation at that lower
amount that just checking to and
to you context three pieces
those are two pieces instead of
the full three pieces of minor
stress fund revenue we were
different by that one point one
million.
And that one point one million
failing to really all three
categories but I'll I'll just
summarize what those are and
personal services LESC of course
is lower and that's tied to
the difficulty just overall in
recruiting and retaining a
person up at a hospital in
general and particularly real
rural hospital in New Mexico.
And contractual services you'll
see that there is a substantial
amount of contractual services
revenue in this budget and
that's for that same reason it's
hard to keep on actual.
State staff these at high cost
at medical personnel so we use a
lot of contract medical
personnel up at the hospital so
that that that that high
costsharing contractual services
and then lastly in other other
categories primarily some of the
big cost their pharmaceutical
and and medical durable medical
equipment and all so there those
cost more so LFC across the line
is different because we didn't
pick up that additional one
point one million and at in
minors trust fund revenue hello
I also we had some slight
differences between the LFC in
the executive in our performance
measures but we've highlighted
it where we've come to agreement
and consensus on those.
And the only difference in
language was just associated
with those two different amounts
of minors trust fund revenue.
So that's really at a high level
summarizing the differences in
the recommendations and I don't
know if miss more carrots to at
no she's on I'm not seeing her
but they might be and Senate
finance she's not on there.
Mr chairman.
Any hi there sorry I should have
announced it at the beginning
but I'm my name is Cynthia
Martinez and I'm actually
covering for merry Beth because
yes she's double booked and
Senate finance but I think
RubyAnn did a really great job
of summarizing the major
differences the overall
difference is that one point one
million dollars and it is
sprinkled throughout primarily
in a PS need be or personal
services employee benefits and
just a small part in contractual
and other and so those are the
major differences just another
reminder that miners is not a
recipient of general fund they
do operate off their trust funds
and so with that I'll turn it
over to the agency for their
presentation so thank you.
Name is mentioned.
Yes good afternoon Mr chairman
members of the committee thanks
for having us today we are glad
we didn't have to travel down
the work it's a pretty a strong
storm here and have gotten a
considerable snow so but we're
glad we can join you of course I
would be our CFO who does all of
our financial work for us Mr
learning with the and I just
want to say we are very
fortunate to of this been with
me for just over two years now
and in it's not easy to Mary
hospital revenue cycle and
accounting with governmental
accounting but he's he's found a
way to do that so we're very
fortunate to have him I'm just
going to I get the easy part of
this presentation of this we go
through some of our highlights
and achievements I think the
state can be very proud of this
hospital and what we've
accomplished this year in the
number entered over line just to
talk a little bit about the
finances I I think
got most of what you need to
know in your packet but we'll
let Bonnie and make of a few
little comments about that or
some additional comments and
then answer any questions you
may have so with that are twenty
twenty achievements are we've
we've been in a year like no
other especially in health care
is you know
and we started out the year just
fantastic we got notification
that we were designated as a top
twenty rural critical access
hospital in the entire nation
and that's out of one thousand
three hundred fifty a critical
access hospitals across the
country and so we're very proud
of that but low and behold we
did get to celebrate very long
because next thing we know we're
in a global pandemic in the so
that's kept us of course very
busy making accommodations
setting up our incident command
doing all of the safe practices
that all of our hospitals have
been doing.
In trying to both take care of a
COVID patients and keep our
workforce healthy at the same
time
so it it it really has been a
year like no other some of our
accomplishments of our around
COVID
we have been able to taken
accepting care for COVID
patients especially in October
November when we went through
that little search we did a
great job of ours our medical
staff and clinicians of caring
for
COVID patients Roger community
because we could not get them
transferred out to the bigger
hospitals in addition we have
been a leader in rolling out the
vaccine we've vaccinated
vaccinating the majority of our
staff we the last week we've put
on two clinics one with the
department of health we don't
again about three hundred eighty
doses to the community to those
people that qualified and then
on Friday the day after we we
did we gave about another two
hundred fifty doses from the
hospital itself
and we have another clinic
scheduled for this coming Friday
to roll out another five hundred
jobs so we're trying to get that
vaccine pushed us quickly as we
can and that's not easy in a
rural communities you know with
some of the ultra low
temperature storage requirements
but I just can be proud of the
staff and and what they've done
and how they were going to come
together to do that few other
notable achievements we replace
all thirty of our new our.
All thirty four old infusion
pumps with new state of the art
infusion pumps and you know
that's a primary mechanism for
delivering medications IV fluids
it it's it's the main treatment
method for in patients within
the hospital and it's very
efficient our farmers
pharmacists can now control the
formula area make a pop formula
the changes.
In the computer it automatically
downloads immediately to all
thirty these in fusion this be a
wifi so that's a big improvement
for us in addition our automated
control system for the
medication dispensing system on
the nursing floors was it ten
years this hospital was built
just over ten years ago and so
the the army so or the automated
medication dispensing system was
at ten years and end of life so
we've upgraded it and that cost
is about three hundred fifty
thousand dollars we had some R.
thirty seven bed long term care
facility that had some H. back
issues that they were again an
aging facility we've gotten
those up to current standards in
grade and that was about three
hundred thousand and then we did
a total makeover of our memory
care an outdoor area in the back
in the wild was just in time
because as you know our long
term care facilities from across
the state have been pretty much
lock down and this provided a
way for the members to do very
limited but have some visitation
with the residents of the long
term care facility additionally
as you know there's a shortage
of family practice physicians
around the country but we were
successful including two new
family practice physicians and
two nurse practitioners for
rural health clinics so those
are notable achievements
You know I think you're probably
familiar with the fact that one
of the other things miners
Colfax Medical Center is known
for really across the countries
are black loan program we have
an affiliation with the
university of New Mexico and
we're really known as the
premier programs around the
country
our our manager there Charles
Pollard is just on a bang up job
the the I was able to acquire
new grants of more than a
million dollars for the next
five years so that takes us well
into the future in addition we
secured funding for this
beautiful new outreach mobile
manage you see in the picture
and we just received that in
November now we we have been
pretty much drive this time and
and not able to get out on the
road so we're we are anxious in
the year ahead twenty twenty one
at least in the second half
we're hopeful that we can get
out and we we of yeah institute
our our mobile outreach program
so there's there's a few
highlights there
you know just to educate you a
little bit I stopped you view
all faces on the screen and a
few new ones but just a to
educate you and and
If you remember some of the
things that the trust fund helps
us support
they they're really there to
help our miners receive the much
needed care that they need
it helps us provide for more
maternal child health care we
have an OB program here that is
one of the smaller in the state
but there's no other all the
program around so the next only
program is a hundred miles to
the south to altavista Austin
Allstate is a hundred miles to
the north up to twelve but low
Colorado and out to the east
it's up to two hours
Representative to the west it's
all the way into taxes so we
provide maternal child health
care to a large catchment area
Europe or north eastern New
Mexico additionally we have
Our general emergency and acute
care services
and we are level for trauma care
center and have that designation
we do see trauma coming off the
interstate we had a couple major
accidents since I've been here
and so we maintain that trauma
designation and then again
without the this support of the
hospital trust fund we would be
able to have some of the capital
improvements in the recruitment
and retention of primary care
that we need for the the
community and for the billion
not just for the the total
community before the whole
northeastern New Mexico region.
so just a little bit about how
we use those hospital trust
funds so with that I'm gonna
turn it over to Lonnie and he'll
take you through some of our our
current financial proposal that
we put forth as part of our
budget this year.
Good afternoon
Looking at are requests this
year for wages and benefits
we're looking for a five point
nine percent increases mostly to
eliminate.
Family nurses would like to hire
full time nurses with that
having travelling nurses but in
a small hospitals difficult to
do that at times but we're we're
trying really hard to eliminate
as many of our travelers can our
contractual services so again we
have the increased costs for
traveling nurses and locum
positions as well as
National staff and since COVID
started we had a a thirty
percent increase in what we're
paying our travelling nurses so
we're expecting our contractual
and services to increase about
four point six percent or so.
other expenses we kind of
estimated a little behind in
school year twenty one so we're
lowering it down a little bit by
two point eight percent for the
fiscal.
Lori down to twenty percent of
fiscal year twenty to our total
expenditures we're looking at a
three point eight percent
increase over the fiscal year
twenty one operating budget and
eight point two percent over the
fiscal year the actual twenty
year fiscal year twenty
expenditures so it's about a
four percent increase per year
which is normal for our kind of
industry and it's needed to
operate are possibly patiently.
Mexico we have is going to be
our revenues so again we receive
no general fund revenues and
we're we were requesting thirty
five point nine point three
million dollars
most of our revenue again it
comes from patient visits and we
had approximately twenty seven
thousand five hundred.
Patient visits for fiscal year
twenty.
We we received about eleven
million dollars in Medicare
revenue another seven point two
million in Medicaid revenue
commercial revenue of the cross
the shield Presbyterian those
types of insurance companies we
a little bit over five point
seven million and then other
revenue which includes south pay
about three point two million
dollars we were also lucky
enough to get money is trust
fund money like.
Really answers from the land
grant permanent fund and we were
estimating eight point eight
million dollars and showing a
two percent increase over the
fiscal year twenty revenue that
we received from the land grant
permanent fund or the miners
Trust Fund.
To go along with the expenses
and our personal services and we
were looking at spending twenty
point nine million dollars a
little bit over that contractual
services almost eight million
and then other expenditures of
about seven million dollars
again the thirty five point nine
point three million.
We go to the next page we're
just on our income equal in our
expenses and showing breaking
even so the executive branch is
showing that we that they
recommend at thirty five point
seven point three million and
which is two hundred thousand
less than what we were
requesting and the legislative
branches is what showing thirty
four point six four three but I
think we
came up with another one point
one million.
To equal what the executive
branches and and I think RubyAnn
for helping us out and finding
out where it actually came from
so
The last page that I have here
is going to be the miners Trust
Fund so this one showing where
we initially requested a twenty
million dollars which of the two
point two point six percent over
what we received in fiscal year
twenty but after the economist
should showing where the money
was coming from we we agreed
that it would probably be
lowered to eight point six
million dollars.
again it's a one point one
million dollars difference in
because the where we receive six
point eight million.
From the minors hospital land
grant permanent fund and then
another one point one million
from the.
Several people in reform of land
grant permanent fund as well and
then another seven hundred
thousand the my mistrust
investment interest so all that
together as up to the eight
point six million which I think
we're in in agreement with
other than that I am open we are
open to questions thank you.
Thank you analysts and that
thank you gentlemen very much
glad you guys are safe and also
getting some good moisture we do
have a few questions first we'll
go to Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you analysts and
German for the great
presentation very helpful I
first have a question for our
analyst agency ask about this as
well can you talk a little bit
about how you arrived at the
permanent fund estimations for
this year but with regards to
this particular budget.
Yes Mr chair representative of
basically that last slide that
one he had fifty one and but at
the slide the breaks that breaks
it out Lonnie that show that
right there so you'll see the
LFC that seven point five so
it's the six point eight plus
zero point seven.
And of but it was minus that one
point one million so that
charitable penal and reform land
grant permanent fund amount.
That might be the other two
pieces which are clearly
delineated to minors Trust Fund
that will stream of revenue.
Is has a one sixth or one
seventh distribution and that
one six one seven that that
distribution totals to the one
point one million and that was
not captured in the LFC
recommendation.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman says well that's what
we were missing I next I have a
couple questions for Mr use
beams and the dean at can you
talk a little bit about your
comment program at the hospital
and specifically whether not you
received any cares funding to
help you roll that out.
We did receive cares money cares
Act money one was to provide a
relief fund which is around
three point seven million
dollars we also received another
approximately three point two
million dollars from the
paycheck protection program.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair Mr Mr beams and admitting
that do you have any requests
for additional comment support
built into this budget and if so
where is that.
No I think if there is no
provided the funds we will get a
the federal government and at
that time we do have a mechanism
to increase our budget at that
time
But as of right now we don't
know for sure if we're going to
get any more money so
what we're since we don't
receive any general fund monies
everything that we have to stand
is it basically on patient
revenue and then the tears Act
money.
Okay thank you Mr chair are.
Messrs beams and Madine I can't
say which one of you speaking so
limitations on their my
apologies but you had mentioned
that you that sounds like to me
you are giving out those edges
of the Pfizer vaccine right now
is that correct.
Yes.
Okay and has anybody touch base
with you sorry Mr chair as
anybody touch base with you
about potentially getting access
to the maternity baxeen because
it doesn't have those going
requirements and you are a rural
hospital who may not be may not
have the same infrastructure
requirements to keep advisor
vaccine on hand.
Of the yes there's there's
public issues around that the
R..
The visor vaccine is all
tropical storms are with them
and are not used it is not OK of
it it's not quite in yeah you
can keep it keep it at a lower
temperature the problem is being
a small hospital this creates a
lot of logistical challenges
with the two thousands and so
since we went with the visor
vaccine birds
we are decided that we should
stick with the visor vaccine so
we.
For a two dose vaccine and and
not go with the German now.
That being said I believe the
long term care facility which is
separate and staying they are
using regarding vaccine but
they're they're vaccinated in a
little bit different mechanism
than our hospital in the general
community population so for the
hospital of the community we're
going with Fizer or long term
care facility we are using with
our.
One thing we are looking at is
should we acquire knowledge of
all to be sure Reser
we've had some debate act boards
we would kind of weighing in
with our medical staff
there's that we we would we were
thinking we want to go that
direction but now as we're
learning more about the sequel
does vaccine and its
availability and its door the
the lesser storage requirements
that it has we are we are we're
not exactly sure what yes
whether we're going to go ahead
and procure a culture well it
but you're freezer.
Those are some of the discussion
we're currently involved.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
thank you answers beams and
Medina that's all the questions
I have at this time thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
Quick reminder of course thank
you for going through the chair
and then next will go to great
questions and we'll go to
Representative X..
Thank you Mr chair this is
very fascinating presentation
and for those of you who don't
know me I am a first year
Representative in the
legislature and have not served
on probation previously.
Therefore
so Mr chair and
miss misters beams and Medina I
was very impressed that you had
recruited to family practice
physicians and also to new nurse
practitioners and so I was
wondering if there were any
particular
successful recruitment things
that you used or if.
no I don't I wouldn't say that
there's anything really unusual
we try to base our compensation
on market data and so we don't
want to be the highest there we
don't want to be the lowest here
I think the geographic location
helps to some degree one of the
providers that we were able to
recruit was actually practicing
practicing dollars what we're
they're looking I know the area
they live the lifestyle we live
the geography sell your house
since of unity harmony dot com
find that man's you know and in
that relationship in pursuing
and and all the way
you know consummating individual
result that's been our success
you know under a lot of people
that really about this area of
the geography intervention ready
actually to get out of the
students are that's where
success is.
But we do use a recruiter from
time to time and and what amount
that I think they're pretty good
too from one doctor to another
so that helps out quite a bit as
well but we are in a next unity
and and people like being
halfway between Albuquerque
members so it's it is and next
slide please the.
Wonderful thank you very much Mr
chair and ms SQL I did have
another question about and this
goes back to the fact that in
New I was wondering if you would
be able to walk me through some
of the performance measures
particularly the ones that are
circled and as someone who
doesn't really understand how
I'm supposed to read this if you
could just give me a little
guidance I would appreciate it
thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative
He I circled on here and a
little additional items in the
box basically you're seeing a
column that that FY twenty two
LFC recommendation and then FY
twenty two.
Executive recommendation.
And
Where those two amounts are the
same on the performance measures
where the targets are not the
same that's your we've circled
one or the other thing let's go
with this target or let it go at
that target so specifically.
You'll see about.
Six down the way down the row
there is an output measure and
and how could performance
measure typically means your
accounting something in effect
as opposed to an outcome measure
where you're years trying to
measure
Thank you usually get what we're
doing this is unusual but you're
within outcome measure you're
trying to measure and overall
performance outcomes so we
usually like outcome measures
the fact but in this case it's
an output measure and it's
saying the number of visits to
the outreach clinic at the
hospital so you'll see that the
LFC recommended a hundred
seventy five as the target and
the executive recommended a
hundred and fifty as a target on
the one seventy five a circle so
in that case we went with the
higher number
recognizing the little higher
number of revenue and in the
budget or money to encourage
more at outreach clinic up
attendance and clients and
basically you continue on down
that only very and other than
what I just described is that
over here.
On the end of the measure
there's two little boxes with
stars and when you see that
that's actually a technical
glitch in the LFC recommendation
we star performance measures
across all state agencies that
we recommend for inclusion in
the General appropriation act so
typically these are
outcome measures are quality
measures that are really
important and we want to
highlight them so that's the of
those stars are Beloff
unfortunately and some of these
documents so you're seeing
little stars added and those
again indicate performance
measures that would be actually
highlighted in the official
general appropriation act
included as law when that's.
So just to go over one more
you'll see here percent of
occupancy of nursing home based
on licensed beds and the
executive recommendation was at
fifty percent of the LFC
recommendation was it sixty
percent in the sixty percent is
circle for the higher amount so
that's basically the protocol
that you just follow all the way
down I I hope that was helpful.
Yes.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you so much Representative
Dixon next we'll go to
Representative at a and then
we're going to have
Representative ranking member.
Thank you so much Mr chair and
I'd like to congratulate
everybody up I don't think it's
ever been harder to be a rural
hospital in America and.
I don't know a lot of these
rural hospitals are in danger of
closing a congratulations on
making that twenty and really
congratulations on your audit no
funding Santa Fe from ten
findings is very very impressive
especially for a top hospital
environment so I'd like to
congratulate you on that I to
fairly new to the Appropriations
Committee so I'm very curious
about I was looking at Colfax
County you've had a a reduction
in population of of over
thirteen percent I think in ten
years I I'm curious about what
it means to in your mission when
you you're you're set up to
serve the beneficiaries of the
miners Trust Fund in New Mexico
so I'd like I'd like to know
what it is to be a beneficiary
and I'm not also like to know
what you consider to be your
service area I in the north
thank you know that's a long
question Mr chair but those are.
So starting with the service
area we really consider our
service area primarily to go
to doctor Springer if you're
lacking them this out to Las
Vegas we we have a lot of folks
from Cimarron cities that
becomes a miner's programs and
consider to the western
certainly there's a smaller
hospital are quite new county
hospital but they don't offer
the complete array Services that
we that we have to general
surgeons and our and we have
only program so we get a fair
amount population from that
direction yes I think that
there's no all the programs are
interested that they have
limited general surgical
services
much more than what we are
present what we see some
problems migrating from the
north on on this the southern
part of Colorado across the past
two years so I would say that's
our general catchment area
beyond that are one long program
is really one of the servers are
the whole western region of the
United States some of that
million dollar grant that we get
the for the a million dollars
for the next five years is
really to provide services in
Wyoming Utah in Montana so we
ventured out
in our providing black loan
services there in in again in
collaboration with the
university Mexico and Dr the
public knowledge Dr Pasti
Senator within the state would
travel to.
All the different mining
communities all four quadrants
of our state
doing mobile outreach clinics
and that's where we educate
mothers about miners Colfax
Medical Center inability when
they have a need to access us
for either healthcare worker
long term here our long term
care facilities a beautiful
facility you'll never see
another one like it was the
regional hospital that was set
up in the early nineteen
hundreds around nineteen tenants
of properties that have older
than stated so and it's been in
the mid nineties it was
refurbished renovated in terms
of distance an astounding long
term care facility it has
bureaus on different walks of
the court orders that highlight
all mines Boston Mexico's over
ever up this way let us know
once word will be endemic we can
get it to work it's really just
an outstanding facility so
that that service areas budget
largely
you know we have miners have
have either our portion of the
proceeds in our long term care
facility from throughout all
areas of the state of New
Mexico.
The number I'm sorry I got a
little windy there but after
that the first part of the
question what was the earlier
part.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
and
Yeah I was wondering if you did
worked with all the mining
companies in the southern part
of the state so it's good to
know that your mission and
that's that's what you do and I
appreciate that answer.
We are going to take a trip to
Colfax when the pandemic so.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much
Representative at at at at
ranking member Crowder please.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate yeah let me ask a
clarification question miss us
bill.
This bill on the other
differentiate.
Under the LFC and exec based
recommendations we had back in
the one point one million
dollars.
It appears that the total is
identical for both the exact in
the LFC is that correct.
That's correct Mr chair
representative Crowder okay
thank you ms SQL so I continue
to drop on down into uses is the
one point one million you added
at the top gonna be expended
identical to what the exact is
recommended or is there a
difference in how the monies
will be spent.
Mr chair representative Crowder
it would be as the executive is
laying it out.
So both of whom are identical.
The income and expenses or
revenues in uses dangle over
that's correct I just want to
clarify the expended the
expenditures I wasn't sure what
you just said side I just
required by the so I guess my
final question is is
The two German from the hospital
have a preference on which one
we pick.
However money answer that
question.
It doesn't matter to me well
executive gave us more begin
with so we'll take that one.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I don't think it makes you very
much we'll take you know what
you're willing to give his.
That thank you so much gentlemen
thank you Representative Crowder
and thank you for both you are
set hoc movie Helen was asking
about another's drilling down
into that
question and and it seems very
much that that
we are we do have some space
especially considering that this
does not come from the general
fund so with that I don't see
any other questions.
Are we know that even if we
we choose executive it won't
take the one hit the General
Fund and that there's a source
of revenue miss us bills
confirmed that that.
Is included in one so let's go
over to Representative Hochman
Vigil for a motion on that Mr
chair I make a motion to adopt
the executive recommendation.
Thank you for the motion to
exactly executive is there a
second.
We've got a a way from ranking
member Crowder to adapt to
second the adoption of the
executive recommendation for HSD
code six six two miners Colfax
Medical Center is there any
opposition to this motion.
Okay seeing no opposition
adopted only as a recommendation
is the executive director of a
budget for HSD code six six two
miners Colfax Medical Center.
Thank you all and also big
thanks LFC staff for enabling
the screen sharing which was
very helpful specially in the
presentation thank you gentlemen
stay warm and thanks for all the
you do especially during this
incredibly difficult time.
Thank.
Committee we're gonna go ahead
to we're gonna stick with that
miss us about going to HSD code
six zero four and asked her to
start us off with the commission
for the deaf and hard of hearing
persons in again agency code six
zero four.
Thank you Mr chairman and again
I'll start with introducing the
folks involved and.
The
again I RubyAnn SQL with the LFC
and I guess in the skin and
help out here with them since
MaryBeth incentive finance
committee so miss intent
Martinez with the executive.
And.
The HSD director it will be with
this as well and he's Mr
anything go.
gone I guess Mr anything gone so
the in your volume to for LFC
the commission for deaf hard of
hearing persons agency code six
oh four its down on page two
zero three if you wanna look
that so Mr chairman members of
the committee here we have
another one that's kind of
interesting and have a little
bit to it so as so at bear with
me while I explain some of the
issues I'm.
On the the revenues you see that
LFC is it higher by two hundred
and ten thousand four hundred
dollars which is is fairly
substantial for this agency
because that the it's a smaller
agency and then you see in other
transfers that the LFC
recommendation is lower by a
million basically a million and
eleven eleven thousand.
So why is that so there's a
little bit of a discussion that
needs to occur here to
understand it so I'm
recommendation for deaf and hard
of hearing persons of it does
get done general fund support a
little bit but it basically as
the recipient of another revenue
source.
It's the telecommunications
relay service fund.
And that comes from a surcharge
on on on phone usage and there's
two ways split on that revenue
that was changed about six years
ago and and in line statutes I
will put the portion of it goes
to that help you make you know
telecommunications relay service
fund that the commission for the
deaf and hard of hearing get and
the other portion goes to the E.
nine one one Fund I'm so where
about six years ago when a bill
was passed in this was changed
the fiscal impact report at that
time indicated that the
commission for deaf and hard of
hearing persons was expected to
get about an additional one
point three over million
additional revenue from from
this source.
Unfortunately that really has
not occurred that did not really
manifests and we've worked year
over year with the taxation and
revenue department we at Dave
TRD has sent out letters to the
telecom companies saying these
you know be sure you're doing
the taxes right everything so
everything short of that TRD
audit has occurred where they
actually go to the different big
entities and local they're
booked into an audit so they
haven't had that person and.
Time to do that over the last
few years but they did send out
letters I believe last year at.
meetings LESC had we've been
trying to work on this for some
time now to try and see what the
situation here so the piece that
I want to bring to your
attention Mr chairman is.
The.
Little I think it's the second
bullet here.
In your in your differentiate
under revenue.
And it's talking about special
appropriations so.
The HSD two years ago so during
The twenty nineteen legislative
session.
I requested and received a
special appropriation for five
hundred thousand in general fund
five hundred thousand in other
revenue last year during the
twenty twenty legislative
session the agency requests
again and the legislature funded
again another special
appropriation for four hundred
thousand in general fund four
hundred thousand another state
funds.
That a special appropriation
for the agency's operating
budget and as you know Mr
chairman members of the
committee we typically don't
fund recurring operating budget
costs in what we call the back
of the bill section five of the
bill by special appropriation we
usually find it always up in
section four of the bill the
regular recurring appropriation
by the bill I mean that general
appropriation act house bill two
for new members so
so what we seem basically is
this telecommunications relay
service fund hasn't really been
manifesting so we're stymied
their and for the last two years
we've been effective in funding
the agencies operating budget
with.
With a special appropriations
which technically is not
recurring revenue so that the
LFC recommendation so you see
there that we're trying to add a
little well somewhat additional
general general fund revenue
just try to right size begin
right sizing this budget.
The additional two hundred ten
thousand or the total of six
hundred ninety point eight
thousand in general fund revenue
and you see there the ratcheting
down by million dollars of tell
it other transfers but that's
telecommunications relay service
fund so that rolls down then to
the to the expenditure
categories so you see in
personal services employee
benefits LFC recommend a hundred
thirty six point six thousand
lack any contractual services
LFC recommend six hundred sixty
five thousand eight.
So what that means is
The LFC personal services
employee benefits.
It is.
We're at about eleven percent
below the operating budget and
that today about a twenty five
percent funded vacancy rate and
then the contracts that just
tries directly to the other
transfers and that revenue may
not be realized anyway but the
for contractual services the LFC
recommendation.
It's about eighty per eighty
seven percent over FY twenty
actual expenditures but of
course below the operating
budget.
So that
really that the summary here and
the executive recommendation is
basically at the FY twenty one
operating budget level they
added in a hundred thousand of
other transfer everything from
the telecommunications relay
service fund but they're
basically flat with FY twenty
one operating levels so that is
the difference
overall we had against some
differences in performance
measures we've adjusted dealt
with so that's a little maybe a
little confusing so I'm happy to
answer questions and I don't
know if in the wanted to add
anything else for the executive.
I yes thank you and and includes
the and she actually did an
excellent job in breaking down
the differences of the revenue
that perfectly captures the
major differences and she is
correct in stating that the
executive recommendation and we
did this with a lot of agencies
try to bring them back up to the
our fiscal year twenty one
operating level and so that's
why you see the difference the
one shift is that there's not
the utilization of fund balance
which you talked about of the
non recurring funding and so in
a not show that's what the
executive recommendation
reflects and with that I'll turn
it over to the agency for their
comments thank you.
Thank you Mr students.
Thank you my name is the one Mr
chairman I'm.
Sorry.
Trying to find their own
Okay.
Mr chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Nathan I'm from that the
executive director from
commissions were left in our
care.
both are missus and
there's more the thank you so
therefore taken.
Really here I have done
excellent job explaining a very
complex problem
Think it's important to
highlight
one section I feel needs to be
on.
And emphasize for
Make clear.
The contract funds for most for
a lot of it is used for our
relations Mrs in the state of
New Mexico builders federally
mandated services that the state
has to provide which is
telecommunications relay
services which is actually top
of on services and traditional
rulers Services that's the
Y. or T. T. of this world and
that enables are deaf and hard
of hearing community to access
services in the fall
To be honest once the pandemic
it in the on March period we saw
a significant increase in the
amount of relates services being
yours part of that was due to
the fact that people were
transitioning to working from
home part of that was because
they were not able to go to
certain locations to get
services part of that is because
the the world of
telecommunications when it comes
to platforms such as and pop for
such as webex are not as
accommodating as we would like
them to be for example I can't
share my screen and actually
have the interpreter visible in
a way that successful from
that's something that we've seen
time and time again through this
pandemic
one of the results of that is as
you notice there's no captioning
on this focal right now I'm
using action device and
interpreter in real time to
actually be able to access this.
Conversation.
Most people don't have that
privilege order luxury and as a
result they have to use realize
services to supplement their
communications so for example if
you wanted to go to a telehealth
visit they would have to call in
to a third party to get
religious services to caption of
phone call understand with their
doctors saying in real time.
The other part of the issues
realistically broadband is not
as successful misstatements
Special rural areas and that
creates a barrier for people to
access a platform such as zoom
webex Senator.
So people rely on the relay
services and able to.
Access all these different
services they expect to get on a
day to day basis whether that's
PTA meetings ordered us going to
the doctor's lawyer medical
professionals such Rowe we see
that increased so what's the
impact look like so we saw
thirty six percent increase we
want to.
The March to.
June.
Really services thirty six
percent increase represents a
significant part of that
contract with them not those
numbers are going down the
reality is that we still have a
pandemic what we're dealing with
and we still have a lot of
accessibility issues that we're
facing.
The other issue that we need to
address and I think Senator well
really did a great job the
dressing is a last year alone
FY.
Eight point five percent revenue
growth.
communications researcher from
the.
this is part of why we and
asking for general fund support
because we're trying to.
And services are levels now some
of you may be asking what level
of services are you provide
right now a lot of what we're
doing is educating improving
access to a lot of these
platforms.
As you may of us seen during the
recent inauguration and recently
there was an announcement that
ASL American Sign Language
captioning should be at the
forefront of access for a lot of
well our community not just here
in New Mexico but the National
the Legislative Council has been
working with our agency and they
have captioning during their
what cast which is a.
Level access would not hand in
previous years we've seen ASL
interpreters more more these
days across the not just a state
a nation.
Funding access to COVID nineteen
resources.
Our agency has been providing
and to date we have at least
fifty four videos addressing
issues from sciences vaccines
and the election the previous
election we've been providing
that an American Sign Language
with captioning as well as video
transcription for people who are
deaf blind.
A portion of the general fund
what majority of the general
fund that we use right now was
allocated for services to direct
line of seniors and that post
commune bac community suffered
greatly during this pandemic and
as a result those services Mrs
for service providers are
provided by a vendor which is
not a contract was able to
shuffle through individuals turn
the spring that will transport
them provide information in
direct contact using PP use in
our equipment.
The vendor did our secure
funding for that to get the PPE
so wasn't a cost of our contract
but it was an additional
expenditure because we were now
providing essentially food
delivery because the deaf on
Community the members of that
plus community in the best
seniors were scared about going
you know.
Those services.
As a whole contributed to making
sure that we have access for our
most vulnerable populations.
In general B. the world really
wasn't ready for this pandemic
and the accessibility
accommodations that we often
receive on a day to day basis in
person we're no longer available
to us really services became
that supplement and became that
support for those community
members across the state of New
Mexico including our indigenous
community and are all most for
and impoverished areas.
As a result we continue to see
this need for really services
because the supplementing the
telehealth world that we're now
in the telecommunication world
that we're now in with zoom and
webex and we also continued to
our other services which is New
Mexico increase the number of
interpreters across the state
work with law enforcement to
make sure that they have
accessible needs to communicate
with a deaf hard of hearing deaf
once these disability community
and also to start working on
disseminating the vices of
Business which the S. are
capturing Saddam and his speech
recognition portion.
Would be able to.
Provide for them to be able to
communicate when we have mask
wearing social distancing needs
and this pandemic I know we're
talking about the FY twenty two
budget I understand I do not see
that we will be returning to
business as normal for a lot of
our communities are a lot of our
community have co occurring
disabilities are anxious your
and they have a lot of concerns
about what is going to look like
when we get back to normal what
we call.
And this is part of why I think
the budget request that we're
we're looking at
Aston creating the general fund
in order to supplement this are
important service as we move
forward and try to address this
revenue issue and we continue to
see.
We also need to be able to
maintain the level contracts we
have which is kind of a
contradiction because we need to
be able to provide those devices
and the high level of really
services not really services are
not gonna drop I just looked
again today they continue to
rise we continue to see in need
we will continue to see that
need as long we have issues with
access to help telehealth and
other
programs such as webex zoom
social.
With that I stand for any
questions.
Thank you very much.
Director com um we do have a
number of members with questions
were first going to start with
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I'm I would
like to follow up on the
discussion about the relay funds
and
What do you know where the
breakdown is just to make sure
that I fully understand is.
for that in T. I'm taxed revenue
is not collecting it from the
providers where exactly is the
breakdown if you don't mind
thank you very much.
David do you want to take a
crack at that.
Chair members with.
We the amount of revenue the
school will remain unchanged
since I've been elected director
in previous years Representative
Saini percentile of the total
bill that people get when they
pay for their phone bills
there are Google built carrier
from those on their home phone
bills and such
most of you probably would have
met you don't have my home
phones these days I assume so
that means most of you are not
contributing to that fund now
the mobile carriers now mobile
carriers change their plans
nearly almost the change almost
a bill for what they go for how
the bill for it and so the
percentage of the bill which is
I think it's point three three
percent of the bill.
Is.
Only going to encompass how much
the provider actually
the the carrier for example AT
T. Verizon center actually
charges for their services and
that portion is going to be a
minor portion of the so for
example hi a a hefty amount from
my phone service I have I will
Senator on there all they have
ample numbers of pay maybe five
cents a month.
So that amount.
Doesn't add up as much as we
would like to and part of that
is because the this system keeps
changing so because it's a
percentage of the total amount
bill that you all received the
than the amount totals up to
almost a fraction of what you
may pay for dental well so let's
say you pay sixty dollars the
surcharge and there are no real
answer charges just a tiny
amount of the entire bill and
that is across the board so if
you have home service our phone
service you may pay three times
there you don't need a home
phone service as much the
carrier you pay a little bit
more and we try to include I
PCGS of bones and I most recent
change on this as well as
talking about that didn't cover
as well as we would like it I
think I think
The problem is how.
Communications is defined right
now we're in the middle of the
telecommunications call by all
intents and purposes this is a
way of communicating via
telecommunications.
The federal government does not.
Do it that way this is not are
allocated that way so whatever I
pay for zoom or webex or Google
the secretary is not going to
see the surcharge on that bill
the.
The evolution of technology
keeps shifting away from the
original language and that's
part of why we see this decline
in revenue also the fact is most
people have one phone bill may
have three or four people on and
that's still not location just a
little bit of background so
that's why we see that the
current the other part of this
is just the fact that.
More people who are
transitioning to our for such as
these instead of.
Most of you are right now are
not on the phone some of the
work maybe our but most of your
communicating via the laptop and
there's no charge for none of
you were paying for the bill.
Thank you that's very
interesting and something that.
You know Mr chair I can say I
don't think of very frequently
as a follow up to that is there
are did you have
recommendations on.
And and this may be a longer
term conversation but how we can
address that.
Yes I apologize for delay in my
response Mr chairman members
board on I'm waiting for you to
finish to make sure that people
who are watching at home can see
the interpreter as well as I can
When.
When we
Try to address the world
telecommunications and and just
in general the cyber space
Often we make language that
doesn't apply to the next
generation of what.
So
it's very difficult to to hit a
moving target so to speak a
special one the small so how do
you apply such language to
something that so.
Consistently changing if we were
to talk about this two years ago
most of us would not so we were
going to be in New Mexico so the
other Avenue is to look at how
do we change the amount that we
collect at thirty three point
three three percent how do we
change that to reflect current
conditions and reflect the
actual cost of what we're seeing
for example.
The cost per minute for a
caption telephone calls a dollar
eighty one.
So my five cents contributed to.
Not even a minute of
conversation.
Something to consider no longer.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair I have no further
questions thank you very much
Representative Dixon for
excellent questions next we'll
go to representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I was curious along the same
lines as Representative Dixon
and what is the break down if
RubyAnn knows the EDD nine one
one fund compared to the
tellement communication fund is
it.
are they still equal or is one
growing more than the other.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong.
That's the weird thing is the
nine one one friend grew by one
point three when that when that
bill was passed before and so
that's part of why we were
scratching your head and smiling
kind of anything because we we
had the director gone because
we've had this discussion that
was.
Part of our concern because we
were wondering did the one point
three that should have gone to
the telecommunications relay
Fund get incorrectly distributed
to the E. nine one Fund and it's
so we've had these discussions
as I indicated with tear do with
the taxation and revenue
department trying to be clear
was this revenue distributed
correctly
Yes so we were concerned this is
been two years we've looked at
that and and then making those
is better I think the E. nine
one when they get at present a
flat amount and you guys get
present what is that peace need
them.
I think it's fifty one cents for
two four sons.
bill where is we get a
percentage of the total of the
bill so point three three
percent of the total amount that
you someone recurring monthly
the carriers applied that way
and then one is collected you
see a percentage of the total
collection verses a flat rate
for working on.
Okay thank you for that and
Mr chair and so should we should
we should think about changing
its to be instead of a
percentage to be a flat rate and
is that done by rule or is that
done through legislation or and
has this been attempted before.
You Mr chairman members of many
we attempted to to redefine
House applied that didn't work
and that was the legislation I
believe that if we were to
change the amount collected that
would have to be done via
legislation well.
Okay thank you so much I I think
this is not the only department
that this happens in I think the
gas tax that was supposed to be
going back to communities for a
while that was kind of messed up
and so I I know that
I believe it's Secretary Chardon
Clark maybe I don't I don't
remember but I I know she's
being very proactive in trying
to find answers and and being
very helpful but this sounds
like something that we should
probably take a deep dive into
and figure out why this is
happening.
And and get this resolved with
thank you so much for your
presentation thank you RubyAnn
thank you Mr chair thank you so
much of serve Armstrong great
questions next we're going to go
to Representative Hochman Vigil
and then we'll have ranking
member Representative Crowder.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Mr gone for your
presentations been very
informative I just want to flesh
out a little bit more the this
telecommunications relay Fund
issue in the collection of those
monies so going back to your
presentation and just based upon
what I know as an attorney
practicing kind of sort of in
this area somewhat a lot of
these percentages are actually
codified in federal statute do
we have that problem here.
Mr chair representative
Representative Hochman Vigil
the the issue is how we can find
it in our our legislative
session so
the federal government with the
traditional Wheatley
Services in general left up to
each state how they wanted to
refine it however they want they
want to try our parts were and
what that was going to be the
the federal services like for
example video relay services S.
codified budget and that's how
they they they just they
determined through the FCC how
much is built for we do submit
information to the FCC we we
have to do it every year
February and we submit the
amount that we're collecting and
how many Sir how much services
will providing and that's
actually collected and
disseminated to the FCC when
they make their decisions based
on what should happen on a
federal level now I would argue
there's a disconnect between the
federal percent perception and
the state perception and part of
my job is often to advocate in
out and try to explain the world
community needs as opposed to
your typical metropolitan area
so a good example of that is
that like I just said about
thirty percent of the state
doesn't have sufficient
broadband speeds to actually use
IP CTS Services which is
internet based caption call
phone service which is provided
by the federal government and
therefore and and this is
actually been a conversation
that I had and there's an after
action report from the
governor's commission on
disability actually addressing
this that that community cannot
actually access the internet in
order to access those services
they therefore rely on older
legacy technologies such as
traditional religious services
to offset that and the number of
people who actually need the
services and then like I just
said a five cent contribution on
my and to a dollar eighty one
permit called doesn't add up
very well so people are not
actually able to utilize the
services to the level that we
need to so again and.
This call back on the state
level to actually determine
what's the appropriate right to
collect and we're should be
collected from now there is a
little bit early overlap because
we have to follow what the FCC
determines as utility and IP
based technology is not
determined utility so there can
be no collection for more
outside of the language change
that we made.
Okay thank you very much very
much Mr chair Mister gone so it
sounds like you're pretty well
aware of the prop of the problem
the pandemic has exacerbated at
in a and and terms of dollars
and cents can you explain to me
a little bit more about the
conversations you had with state
government about possibly
changing this language codified
in statute and if if you if
legislators are TRD has been
approached about running out
bill.
So.
We initially had this
conversation I want to set a the
beginning of the fiscal year
this as well you can correct me
if I'm wrong about trying to
figure out.
Is is actually a problem of the
amount or is just a problem of
the collection.
the letters that were sent out
doing you know as much of an
answer to that question and so
the discussion became welcome
maybe we need to change how much
was collected to a flat rate
that hasn't been converted into
a legislative bill that I'm
aware of but that's where this
probably needs and of now that
we've done our due diligence
you've actually made the changes
necessary to our agency operates
and make sure that we're trying
to
watch our budget make sure that
we're not we're spending but the
end of the day is we need to
actually see an increase in to
the collection.
Managed on your bill.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr gone I it was kind of
tangentially related to the TRD
bill it's being run this time
and that we figured out that
gross receipts taxes being
charged for growth for delivered
groceries and sometimes it's
just a simple conversation with
Faye US secretary started Clark
to say Hey this is an issue you
know what to do about it and I I
think it's incumbent upon this
subcommittee and and us to make
sure that that happens for you
so that we can make sure we
don't have to go after general
fund revenue a second time so
thank you very much Mr chairman.
Chair on that point yes please.
Well last year we definitely did
talk to
and as secretary starting Clark
and well we've been talking to
to tier data for really three
years on this so we keep trying
to work through it and they did
send out the letters I think
there was some efforts to.
To try and look into this
further but I think as a
representative will be you know
your point is well taken
I know bill is currently being
run on this or anything but
Probably this is that yes a good
one that we need to look at and
and that would be great if if
you are the committee members
can speak further with her I
know on the Senate side Senator
Rodriguez had pulled her in last
year's Secretary Chardon Clark
to speak about this and
what you know we're still I'm
still needing to do some some
work so thank you for raising
that.
Thank you thank you Mr US
president in their all right
next we have ranking member
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman.
Question for the executive
analyst.
It's based on a different sheet.
Okay look at that and as someone
that has to vote either for the
LESC or the exact in a few
minutes
the executive is appealing
because the general fund for
what is our our our ten thousand
dollars less and and that's
appealing when you're gonna vote
however when I look at the three
million one hundred and twelve
thousand.
Other transfers and I looked
down into the narrative under
the first what point where it
says the actual revenue
generated was one point six four
million in FY nineteen and one
point five four million in
twenty which is trending down.
I I wonder what in the world
were they thinking when when
they use the number of three
point one million.
What are they gonna do have that
three point one million doesn't
materialize well what was the
thought process what what
happens to this agency.
If the three point one does not
materialize Mr chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think that
It's a great question and so I
think if you do look at the
actual revenue collection has
come in and I think this you
know has been a problem for a
few years because it does come
in lower the agency does I just
and so they don't spend for
revenue that they don't receive
and so looking at both
recommendations if you look at I
think the actual collections for
each of those years for FY
twenty it was one point five
million and for FY nineteen one
point six for the transfers so
those are both recommendations
are higher than what the
historical activity has been so
I think in the way of your
question on how to right size
the budget it probably is a good
idea to start to shift over to
back fill some of that general
fund for the loss of the of the
transfers and so both of them
are rather higher than what has
historically come in so normally
I think the agency could answer
this better than me but they do
definitely shifted their they
they hold their budget tighter
they just don't spend of that
revenue doesn't come in.
Mr chair and enjoy it thank you
for that that that would cause
me to think that maybe the
additional general funds at the
LFC is recommending would be the
safer then if they came in at
one point six four one point
five for and they have a two
hundred ten thousand dollar
extra general fund they're going
to be better off with the LFC
recommendation in the long term
if the money's do not
materialize
Mr chair just as a comment I
would ask to do LFC and exec I
continue to work on this before
we get to the full committee and
and have a
Some type of good recommendation
for us on on a compromise of
some nature I hate to see this
agency after cut everything down
to the bone
I I don't think that's fair to
them so I I would like to
request that the LFC and exact
come together and and work on
this morning and help us make a
good decision so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you so much Representative
and and Representative Crowdy
your request is is one hundred
percent on point clearly needs
to happen even as we you know
take our responsibility to.
For tax base in the general fund
at this initial point year
recommendation as well taken and
I know Mr about that is zoom in
is been tracking this closely
and we will look forward to
both pieces that have come up
regarding the LFC and exec and
the conversation about
potentially.
Working closer with TRD and
others.
With that are there any other
questions from members.
Seeing none we would go then to
Representative Hochman Vigil for
a motion.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
at this time I'm gonna make a
motion to adopt the executive
recommendation with this one
probably not at this time are
you know it's a recommendation I
think the issue is been flushed
out well on that additional
conversations need to be had I
think with the executive and TRD
I think we should also think
about bringing and our tax
committee is on the house side
additional conversations to be
had I'm happy to make any
introductions are or motions to
the governor's office is
necessary to make sure that this
issue is put on their radar it
also sounds like you've been
talking to the right champion
which is going to be selected
Lopez on this the Senate side so
at that time at this time I'll
make that motions chairman.
Thank you good we we have we
know there's work to do we have
a motion for the to adopt the
executive recommendation is
there a second for that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you there's a motion and a
second motion firms of Hochman
Vigil second from Representative
Sweetser.
And the.
Representative Crowder you had a
question.
It just further clarification on
the motion the motion is to
recommend the executive and I
thought I heard of
Representative Hochman Vigil say
that with the cabbie ought that
this be brought back to the full
body with the resolution on the
difference and on the other
revenues
I'm sorry yeah other transfers.
That it's imperative to me that
that be in there just to protect
this agency.
Thank Representative can you
clarify percent Hochman Vigil
that that's in your motion.
Thank you Mr chairman and
ranking member Crowder yes
absolutely I apologize that is
what I meant.
Okay.
Excellent.
Thank you both there's been
clarification on the motion and
the second.
Is there any opposition to that
motion with the copy out of
coming back to the full
committee.
Okay.
Seeing no opposition there we
will absolutely look forward to
future followed and I I see that
Mr Abbey is been on these
potentially for some of this
time so thank you all very much
thank you director gone and
we we will now will have further
conversations on this before any
budgets are are adopted in out
of the house on this area thank
you so much for your diligent
work.
Which is chair members many
thank you for your time I
appreciate.
X..
Excellent all right we will what
we're gonna say it to finish up
to date with miss us about we're
going to HSD code six zero six
that's the commission for the
blind.
And
Miss us but can you kick us off
with explanation of the
difference please yes thank you
Mr chairman.
Commission for the blind is
agency code six those thank and
it can be found in the LFC
volume two on page two of seven.
And we have with us the the
executive director of the
commission for the blind which
is Mr great trapped and he'll
have either get the hell ants at
the appropriate time.
So Mr chairman and members of
the subcommittee this this
budget is a little more
straightforward like the ones
you've been used to hearing so
at that good so basically
in a nut shell.
The.
LFC recommendation for general
fund is forty six point six
thousand hello the executive
recommendation for general fund.
And in other transfers this is
revenue from the division of
vocational rehabilitation that
as leveraged what by the
commission for the blind for at
at locational services for
for blind and visually impaired
individuals the LFC is slightly
higher there and there is maybe
a technical issue there with the
executive and the executives
language on that.
And then lastly there's a
difference in the federal
revenue here of three hundred
thirty two thousand four hundred
dollars.
So the LFC recommendation is
below that and that tied to that
general fund number so so what
does that equate to so basically
the LFC recommendation is about
to present hello the FY twenty
one operating budget Mr chairman
of the committee is well aware
heard the instructions from the
department of finance and
administration pretty much Mr
the executive agencies came in
at five percent below the
operating budget this agency did
as well the LFC brought them up
to two percent below but then
the the the governor's budget
executive recommendation came in
flat with FY twenty one.
That's where the executive
recommendation is for this
budget it's flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget
across all the expenditure
categories and the revenue
except for there is that
little issue with the other
transfers.
That's I'm really at a high
level the differences here LFC
is that minus two percent.
Fund executive is flat.
And I'm that pretty much all
falls within the personal
services employee benefits
category so that's where you'll
see the difference manifested in
the expenditure side of those
revenues and I'm.
To give you a little bit
more information around that for
the LFC recommendation the.
The LFC is that about.
Present for personal services
employee benefits below the
operating level and in that year
PS help your personal services
calculation the in September
that's when those regenerated
the HSD is expenditures for
personnel work at about four
point eight seven million that
was up fourteen percent funded
vacancy rate so you see that the
LFC recommendation at that five
point two million so it is over
over the the expenditure level
so we're we would be overall
totally cutting into personal
services and benefits so that's
the
The highlight their own personal
services and benefits and that's
really the only difference and
then of course language we do
you spell out in language on the
transfer amount they go back and
forth between the division of
occasional rehabilitation and
the commission for the blind so
DVR commission for the blind so
we would have to adjust there
for that five point five
thousand dollars difference in
other transfers and I don't
believe my counterpart is on
state he might be also my
counterpart for the executive is
Mr Michael Regan forget I think
he's and Senate finance
committee also sits in the fifty
so
is so I think
It's in the in the discussion
Michael and I had I think in DV
are the number actually even in
the executive ties out to to the
LFC wrecked that we probably
have a technical issue we need
to keep that language and that
amount probably for other
transfers.
Additional.
Across all the agents.
So Mr chairman members of the
committee I think that's pretty
much the whole difference here
in New Mexico and I don't know
if indeed wants to add anything
further.
Yes thank you.
Thank you will be asked for
decorate summary and yes I'm
again said the Martinez covering
for Mr Reagan's forgets he's
also covering and Senate finance
for another agency the executive
recommendation is essentially
back to their fiscal year twenty
one operating budget and RubyAnn
cover that well whereas the
executive branch the executive
initially issued guidance to
have a five percent reduction
and then after watching revenue
and and sort of the climate kind
of shift a little bit the
executive decided to go back and
make recommendations flat to the
fiscal year or the current
fiscal year and so that's why
you see that recommendation you
know as we know agencies did
take cuts already to their
fiscal year twenty one budget
some of them standings from
treat you know one to four
percent so it was important to
try to get as many flat as
possible and so that's what
you're seeing in the executive
recommendation so the executive
recommendation if you adopt that
keeps their operating budget
flat and allows for no cuts
moving into fiscal year twenty
to and with that I will turn it
over to the executive director.
Thank you very much for B. and
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I want
to first begin by introducing
those folks who joined us here
today we have doctor Robert
reedy with us one of our
commissioners we have is Lansing
another for a three
commissioners are Treiber would
be worth here with us today but
he became sick today so he was
not able to make it he's going
to recover he just had a.
Sen illness we also have Jim
solace deputy director for okay
sure bill Tatian and independent
living Kelly Romero Kelly Burma
our skill center coordinator
Janelle Gonzales our finance
manager and Kevin Romero or
Getty director for initiation
finance Mr Romero also be
sharing the screen for me so
Kevin if you can go and put up
our first screen which talks
about our agency request we do
strongly support the executive
budget.
We believe that it will allow us
to hire the independent living
teachers that we need to have to
work with individuals who are
blind and visually impaired.
The coronavirus has resulted in
a.
I'm.
Significant impact on our
program that service line
seniors obviously the blind.
Population of seniors are at
great risk due to the Corona
virus so we actually even before
the for shut downs began
reducing even eliminating
services to nursing homes and
assisted living because of the
vulnerability of that
population.
So the reduce legislative
appropriation in general fund
would have to be applied to our
independent living program this
because our vocational
rehabilitation program is
subject to a federal maintenance
of effort penalty so for replied
if we applied those reduced
funds to our vocational
dilatation program that would
have a and amplifying sacked it
would cost us additional federal
revenues and we also faces
federal equipment ever for
penalty.
Kim if you can go ahead and put
up the next page the impact of
the pandemic.
So I want to say that governor
Lujan Grisham declared January
as clinical awareness month.
This is a real concern for us
because comma is called a sneak
thief of sight it's a condition
that really requires
comprehensive eye screening to
be detected and because of the
pandemic or concern that we'll
see individuals who are not
getting the kind of
comprehensive eye exams that
they need to receive so we're
worried that there may be an
increasing conditions such as
glaucoma.
The same thing can be said for
diabetic retinopathy if
individuals are not getting
appropriate diabetic screening
and are not getting the kinds of
diabetic care that they need we
could see an increase in the
number of individuals of
diabetic retinopathy.
The current virus also has a
real
impact on the blind Committee
specially.
three point five percent of the
population over sixty five
legally blind.
blindness is a condition largely
of age.
there is age related macular
degeneration which is a leading
cause of blindness overall.
Diabetic retinopathy is the
leading cause of new cases of
blindness for individuals
between the ages of forty and
seventy two.
Comma as I mentioned earlier is
also leading cause of blindness
those are all related to age and
in addition individuals who are
these are at a one point five
percent greater risk of.
having blindness that is the
blind community has rate of
obesity at fifty percent greater
than the general population.
Obesity also increases
individuals risk for glaucoma.
For diabetes for diabetic
retinopathy and for age related
macular degeneration so there's
a real intersection allocate
between risk factors for COVID
nineteen and line that so we're
very concerned about that we do
expect to see an increased
number of individuals for blind
and visually impaired as a
result of the pandemic.
Perhaps more concerning Lee.
We'll see individuals with
increased numbers of secondary
disabilities those individuals
were require more intensive more
expensive rehabilitation
services.
Those vocation rehabilitation
services will cost more will
take longer to provide.
The blinds Committee is also
obviously impacted in the area
of transportation.
A ride sharing services which
are.
More to the pandemic a real boon
for individuals for blind do not
transport people who were
positive for COVID nineteen many
individuals for blind also don't
have the assistive technology
skills to utilize services such
as lift and uber.
So getting to vaccine sites
getting to infusion clinics.
Getting to testing sites is on
issue.
We have been working closely
with the department of health
the governor's commission on
disability recommendation for
deaf and hard of hearing on all
of these issues making sure that
platforms are accessible as
director com said earlier.
They're also issues related to
telemedicine platforms being
accessible to so in this age of
COVID nineteen blinder
especially impacted.
Kevin if you could go ahead to
the next page some of HSD
programs.
Okay sure bill Tatian program
operated by the commission for
the blind provides support to
individuals to become employed
that is the majority of what we
do we get about five point five.
Sorry I million fifty thousand
dollars in federal funds for
that program that's by far
largest program it is subject to
very strict federal fiscal
regulations those fiscal
regulations.
limits our ability to spend that
money can only be spent on
helping blind individuals to
become employed.
because of the pandemic we have
had few replacements and
hopefully with the advent of the
vaccine will be able to see more
blind individuals getting place
of employment.
One of our vocational bill
Tatian programs is the
vocational rehabilitation
program business enterprise
program the P. program.
That program provides vending
opportunities for blind
individuals on federal and state
property.
We provide the food vending for
example Kirtland airforce base
the federal law enforcement
training center Los Alamos
national laboratory's Social
Security Administration post
office.
Several other federal agencies
NASA the national reconnaissance
agency the federal bureau of
investigation.
all of our vendors have been
badly impacted by the virus
because of shut downs and so
that's been a real impact on us.
Our technology for children
program we operate in
conjunction with the department
of health.
We provide assistive technology
to blind children who are
younger than eighteen our focus
during the pandemic is to really
provide assistive technology
that will help those blind
children to such study from
home.
Our independent living program
older blind program has been
providing services to blind
seniors mostly.
We provide cane travel we
provide assistance learning how
to cook how to
Madam activities such as marking
medication marking Evans marking
washing machines all those kinds
of things.
We have done very very limited
in person services when we do
that we do a screening former
very very careful but this is
been very rare and only when an
individual's actual health or
safety has been potentially
impacted for example they've
been referred to us by a
physician needing assistance
with cane travel instruction for
them to be able to afford falls.
we also have our emergency I
care program which we operate in
conjunction with the University
of New Mexico we provide.
Emergency medical intervention
to individuals who lack
insurance to but for that
merchants seek medical
intervention which face
permanent and irreversible
blindness.
Can you can turn to the next
page highlights.
So I'm very proud that the New
Mexico the commission for the
blind is not under an order
selection that means we do not
have a waiting list for services
for vocation rehabilitation
program we're serving all
eligible individuals in New
Mexico we're a minority of
states it's of agencies it's
able to do that.
what is the impacts of the
federal workforce innovation
opportunity act is do pre
employment transition services
mandate which requires that we
reserve and spend at least
fifteen percent of our
vocational bill Tatian requests
on the provision of transition
services to students who are age
fourteen to twenty one.
That is actually forced a number
of agencies in two orders of
selection we've not had to do
that we've been able to manage
that and we are so providing all
of the I required and in line
authorized pre employment
transition services.
We're also providing remote
instruction as I mentioned
earlier that's difficult to do
for cane travel where we really
need to be out on the streets.
Hoping people to navigate curve
stairways escalators things such
as that using a white cane.
But we are able to provide some
instruction remotely vocation
bills Tatian counselors.
Are more easily able to provide
remote counseling services.
We are providing assistive
technology where we can using
contact free methods if we have
to provide services in person
we're again using a screening
form where we screen both our
staff and our consumer.
Using a form that we developed
in conjunction with the
department of health.
Can you go to the next page
performance measures.
As I mentioned earlier or.
Performance measures have been
impacted by the pandemic we have
fewer employment placements we
also have had fewer
opportunities to provide the
kinds of in person independent
living skills that we would
normally be providing to blind
seniors and others so again Mr
chair members of the committee I
want to say that we do support
the executive recommendation at
this time I'd like to invite
state auditor Brian Cologne to
make any remarks that he might
like to make Cologne.
Thank thank you it's been so
long that we get the a special
treat at that age you director
trap of getting to see auditor
Cologne briefly on his birthday
and and we'll go to questions
from from the committee.
But Cologne please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's
great to be back with you just
twenty four hours later you know
in our office as I mentioned
yesterday during our hearing and
I want to I just reflect on that
for a quick second and say a
special thank you to Simon
Miller who was our executive
analyst to I feel to actually
offer gratitude recognized
yesterday Allison presented
remarks in advance of my
presentation so I was focusing
on Alison and her remarks I fail
to offer gratitude to Simon
Miller so I'm gonna take
advantage of this opportunity to
just say thanks to Simon for his
good work and thank you to this
committee for the hearing I had
yesterday today really our
office at the office of the
state auditor braces three real
pillars that is accountability
transparency and excellence and
I'm here today for just a couple
minutes I spent a couple hours
waiting to share two minutes of
excellence with you.
When I think of the commission
for the blind I think of
excellence you know my father on
today my birthday I turned fifty
one years old which was.
To date two years longer than my
father had passed away forty
nine he had muscular dystrophy
and so I understand what it is
for people have different
abilities and have special needs
or accommodations and having
been that the auditor for the
commission for the blind this is
one of the agencies and entities
that we actually do in house we
talked yesterday about
independent public accountants
and then we talked about the
audit so we do at the office of
the state auditor we have
conducted this audit for a few
years now now what's fascinating
is that this particular agency
has not only had.
A remarkably beautiful audit
each of those years what we call
a clean audit on modified on it
but they have done that in a
time of transition you can take
a look here on your screen of Mr
Kevin Romero when we came on
when I became the state auditor
he was newly appointed to this
position of CFO and he engine L.
have done a phenomenal job
managing and overseeing and
directing and executing on the
finances for the commission for
the blind under the leadership
of attorney and executive
director trap of this
organization is above reproach.
And so today I'm just here to
celebrate that excellence this
particular entity has to undergo
what's called a single audit and
what that means is not only do
they have to do the normal
financial audit procedures that
we do on an everyday basis for
all the agencies for the state
but because they receive the
federal funding they have to do
what's called a single audits so
it's a little more rigorous a
little more test work and a
little bit more intense for the
agency with that intensity with
the additional tests working
with those additional
requirements I'm very pleased to
say that this is an organization
in New Mexico that is really an
example of excellence in
government and I want to say
that a lot of that has to do
with the leadership provided by
attorney and executive director
Greg Trapp the incredible of
Melissa Lewis and ever present
voice of German art Schreiber
and the very engaged to board
members that they have along
with a fantastic staff some of
whom were on this call today but
Mr chairman members of the
committee that is the sole
purpose for my presence today
and I'm grateful actually to
attorney and executive director
trap for give me an opportunity
to celebrate excellence in
service and in New Mexico
government when I show up it's
usually not good news.
He's I'm here to celebrate
excellence at solutions to the
commission for the blind thank
you very much Mr chairman
members the arrest.
Thank you so much Mr auditor
now well we will go to committee
questions we have several
members with questions going to
begin with Representative brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate the presentation it's
pretty impressive HSD hello the
question I have is regarding a
performance measures it's on
page three as P. code six nine
five and it's one of the
outcomes that has an Asterix by
it.
Regarding the average.
Early wage for the blind or
visually impaired person in
fiscal year twenty it was
eighteen dollars and forty two
cents but for twenty one twenty
two it's dropped down to sixteen
dollars an hour so I'm curious
to know what the context is for
the wage earning is it some kind
of special employment and then
why the the lowering of the
wage.
Mr chairman Representative Brown
appreciate that so we are
subject to instances where
individuals have very high
dollar jobs that we help them to
get and in the year were we see
the.
Average wage being higher in
that year we had a couple of
individuals who had very very
high dollar placements I think
one was fifty dollars an hour
and one was even higher so that
kind of skewed that amount of
the dollar amount that you're
requesting is more in line with
what would be an average
hourly wage that we would
normally expect to see
again we we never quite know
it's going to depend on
individuals who come into our
caseload system occasionally we
work with
Chief executive officers from
major corporations who've lost
vision and then when we provide
that individual was to support
the here she needs to remain
employed that's wonderful but
often times they have a six
figure fat salary that really
excuse that particular data
point.
Thank you so much I beginning to
catch on now so how many
individuals are in this
calculation of average wage.
That depends upon the number of
placements which are also see
there in the performance
measures so we look at the
individuals who are
successfully closed.
As a result of the pandemic that
number went down to fifteen last
year.
We hope that that will be higher
normally we see a number
somewhere between twenty to
twenty five
Numbers across the country for
individuals who are blind or
graph disabilities in vocational
Tatian has been trending down.
so that donor numbers usually
based upon a a group of
individuals at somewhere between
twenty to twenty five the
typical average here.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative brown
we'll go next to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair
and welcome Mr trap and your
team it sounds like you guys are
just doing a phenomenal job
and I as a side note I was
excited I had a presentation
from the folks at the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired because it's
in my district.
Part of it so that was a nice
addition to my week
I had a question Mr chairman
and Mr track if you could talk
just a little bit the current
funded vacancy rate at the
commission is fourteen percent
and I'm just wondering
You know if there's something
what the difficulty is in
filling those positions or
if you could elaborate just a
bit on that thank you so much
thank you Mr.
Mr chair representative sends
certainly
so we do.
Work to hire individuals who are
qualified for the positions that
we have
Our vocational Tatian the
counselors we look to
individuals who have master's
degrees and vocational Tatian
counseling or related field so
for some of our field offices
that is difficult we also
Do have some positions that we
use for accommodation supports
for individual staff members who
are blind and we don't fill
those positions Intel we have a
blind person
in a particular office who needs
that accommodations so that
kinda excuse our vacancy rate a
little bit there.
And I think overall so we're
doing fairly well in terms of
our our vacancy rate we are
looking to have additional high
years here which will hopefully
bring that rate down so
that somewhat here
I'd like to see if I can
remember would like to add
anything in response to a
question Kevin you want to add
anything further there.
Thank you executor to trap the
Mr chair representative as Mr
trump was explaining we do have
a significant number of
positions that we use for
accommodations
currently that would be the
largest portion of our vacant
positions we are currently
moving in filling three
positions hopefully within this
next month or so and then we'll
be moving to be feeling another
three so we're on a constant
planned to to fill our positions
as best as possible as budgetary
relief acceptable as possible.
So what we like to do is just
make sure that we have the
budget available so when the
time does occur we can fill the
positions with the qualified
staff.
Thank you.
Thank you so very much thank you
chair thank you Mister trapping
Mr Romero thanks for your thank
you representative next week we
have a ranking member Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Just a quick what I want to make
a comment first Mr trap this is
my fourth year I believe.
And I would like to say Mr trap
you do an outstanding job of
representing your organization
every.
Press your presentations and I
thank you for capital so with
that that said I do have a
question for this S. develop
want to make sure that as I look
different sheet that I
understand.
What I think I'm seeing.
in this this bill on the uses
under the PSEB.
There is a three hundred seventy
three thousand.
Six hundred dollar difference
between the LFC and exec.
Yet there is no increase in the
number of employees on the
bottom of FTE positions there's
no change on the eighty seven
point five for increasing
funding or not hiring any
employees.
If I go back to page four the
same places Representative Dixon
was.
I noticed on column E. that
there is a fourteen point one
percent funded vacancy rate.
And if you add the three hundred
seventy three thousand into that
which is the new funding will
flow into that would not
employees could get up over
twenty percent funded vacancy
rate.
And directly below that in the
FY twenty one funded vacancy in
dollars words eight hundred one
thousand three seventy three
would drive that on up to a
million one hundred and seventy
four thousand.
This is right or not.
Mr chair representative Crowder
yes there is of vacancy rate
clearly that is being held and
and the LFC and executive
recommendation numbers but I
should note also that won't when
we on the first number that you
pointed out here on the page one
the difference in of three
hundred seventy three good
portion of that is is federal
funds so of course agencies can
add to their budget in the back
of the bill the the budget the
General Appropration Act
agencies have full authority to
add in and generated federal
funds to their budget so that
gives HSD some flexibility when
they do receive federal funds
they can I just let you are
correct that we are holding at
vacancy rate in these numbers
and you heard the HSD address
that they do have some current
vacancies the I. agencies are
always helping to fill those
But by the same token.
I did point out in third in the
LFC recommendation under the
third wheel in on page one of
the
The expenditure amount was four
point eight seven million and we
have a course that the five
point.
In the executive so
I think you raise good points
and and just wanted to provide
that additional information
thank you thank you.
Yeah and and follow up question
to that was is any of that
increase driven by a raising of
the minimum wage.
our is there is there is some of
those funds of three hundred
seventy three thousand it will
be swallowed up by the increase
in the minimum wage.
I'm Mr chair representative
thank you in the course thank
you for your comments earlier.
That is a very good question we
do have some.
Employees who are earning a
lower dollar amount making.
Impacted yes the minimum wage
were increased to fifteen
dollars an hour
you know we would certainly work
with our analysts to address
that situation
We
Do you want to make sure that
that our employees of course
have the.
The salary that they need to
compensate themselves properly
for the the excellent job that
they do I asked Mr Ameritech
comment further on that Kevin do
you have any additional thought
with respect to how that might
impact us for some of these wage
calculations.
Mr chair representative we have
to do some analysis and we'll
get we can provide you the
numbers but we would have to see
the employees affected and then
how that would affect the
benefit percentages that we
would have to expend which is
going to eat into a portion of
that amount I just don't have
that number with me right now
but we can provide you an
analysis.
Correct I think also Mr chair
person Crowder those are
primarily employees were
employed through vocational
rehabilitation grant so some of
that increase would be addressed
with the federal funding that
would be available which again
is one of the reasons why we're
supporting the executive
recommendation it would help us
to.
Meet those issues as well as to
fill some these vacancies.
Thank you for your answers
Representative and and Mr chair
thank you that's all my
questions.
Thank you very much ranking
member Crowder I think we're
gonna go with we do we have a
Representative Hochman Vigil.
With an additional this a
question also.
Thank you Mr chair at no need to
ask additional questions I think
that was I I was just going to
ask some of the same questions
as ranking member Crowder so
thank you.
Okay good all right so we I
don't see are there any other
questions from committee
members.
Okay seeing none knowing that
we're always we're working to
try and provide the the maximum
amount of general fund space
will go then for a motion from
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chair at this point
I make a motion to adopt the LFC
recommendation.
There is a motion to adopt the
LFC recommendation is there a
second.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm okay
thank you Representative
Sweetser second that motion to
adopt the LFC recommendation is
there any objection from
committee members on adopting
the LFC recommendation.
Committee with through.
Seeing no objection to that.
We will end up just as a
recommendation of course no
final action on for the LFC
recommendation for HSD code six
zero six commission for the
blind thank you all very much
for being here participating
today and as many members said
for the incredible work and the
continued incredible work
through is terribly difficult
time.
Chair thank you very much.
Thank you very much executive
director.
Thank you okay thank everybody
it we I believe that concludes
our work for today of course
will be looking will be excited
to be back tomorrow
and really appreciate deeply
everyone's time patients the
time and patience of all who
have participated helping us
work through
just as a quick note we did
receive the slides from the
first two presentations where we
were unable to chair the screens
can I apologize for that we're
going to make sure that those
slides go out to committee
members and really appreciate
the committee staff Mr Jones
work to ensure that we could
share the screen for it
subsequent presentations.
With that thanks everybody.
We will conclude today's meeting
Care at around four fifteen PM
for subcommittee be of the house
appropriations and finance
committee thanks everybody stay
safe.
And and happy birthday to those
celebrating today.
Good meeting Mr chair.
Thank you.
I'm.
