I'm delighted contractual
services sure.
Thanks to Rio madam chair
members of the committee on just
continue in contractual services
LFC recommends forty six point
eight thousand more than the
executive to fund website
development and on going support
an audit costs but it should be
noted the executive funded fifty
six thousand in a nonrecurring
special appropriations for these
website updates and
communication outreach just to
elaborate that on that briefly
on that I think there's
something in other about that
that ruby and we'll touch on but
one of things executive budget
that was pulled out a few
nonrecurring initiatives and
transfer them over to a
nonrecurring part of the
recommendations so you don't see
them in the face but there is a
decent amount of things funded
outside the base but with that
central turn it back to review
if you would like.
Thank you for.
So madam we did on the point
that MaryBeth made I think in
your packet you also have the
sheet on special deficiency okay
so we actually tried to pull out
for agencies this year because
in a lot of the budget that
you're gonna be seeing as you
move forward a bunch of the
differences are actually gonna
fall between recurring and non
recurring so you're gonna see in
New spreadsheets that we're
pulling out for agencies that
have nonrecurring funding that
we're trying to show you what
that is so what MaryBeth just
talked about is actually listed
right here for you so there is a
hundred thousand of a
nonrecurring for as you said
data collection reporting a
hundred thousand for data base
and mailing list development and
fifty six thousand in for
website updates and
communications and outreach so
there is that total in the
executive of two hundred fifty
six thousand a nonrecurring
thank you had a little
difference of approach in the
LFC that recommendation is for
about almost fifty thousand
higher in recurring for you at
portion of these items so I
difference of approach and then
lastly
basically in the other costs
other costs are the operating
costs for the agencies so in the
other operating because LFC is a
hundred ninety three thousand
six hundred less than the
executive and both
recommendations do include
supporting travel that the
agency wants to go out and do
listening tour is I. T. support
supplies of course and funding
for a women's summit so it's
just a different degree that
they recommend funding the
different lower in the LFC
hiring the effective.
and we talked about the
nonrecurring we adjusted that
the performance no there's no
performance measures in this
agency that's one thing the
agency did not submit any
performance measures and you'll
see as we go through that pretty
much all the agencies have
performance measures so I'm sure
that they will address that in
the coming year so we have
performance measures and we
already talked about the
expansion position the sixty
four point five so I think
basically it.
And madam chair would you like
just to turn it over now to the
director okay.
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for
providing me this opportunity to
speak with you today
you've heard a little bit about
the numbers associated with the
commission I wanted to just take
a moment to also make you aware
of sort of what the commission
is about and what we what we do
so.
The help out all and reiterate
again my name is Jennifer gaps
executive director of the
commission and we represent over
one million women in the state
of New Mexico.
we have century mandates which
are to research and recommend
methods of overcoming District
discrimination against women in
the workforce to promote methods
to enable women to develop their
skills continue their education
and be retrained.
As well as conducting
conferences to learn more about
the needs of women and appraise
them of their rights and and
available opportunities and then
finally we are also required to
recognize the compliments and
contributions of women in New
Mexico and we have a work plan
in place to implement all these
mandates but of course we really
the funding in order to be able
to do that I will just take a
moment to speak to the
performance measure issue
because we have not been an
active commission for several
years we did not have
performance measures that we
could list in this current
year's budget I have been
tracking them since my tenure
with the agency and in July and
we will have them for next year.
So I'm I'm really here today to
ask for this committee to
support the and executive budget
for the commission the status of
women and I will just take three
more minutes of your time to
explain money
some of the reasons for this
request for the executive budget
are as follows during our
listening tour in twenty twenty
one we heard from women around
the state and their concerns
really fell into three main
areas or three focus areas that
have become the body of our work
in twenty twenty two the first
is addressing the lack of
support for women dealing with
domestic violence and sexual
assault I think we're all pretty
aware of this issue this is
expanding access to programs
that provide economic security
for women and their families
which might include things like
continuing education training
and access to microlending and
then finally the third bucket of
work is expanding access to the
health care needs of women and
their children and this is
really the most critical in
rural New Mexico and on tribal
lands that are considered to be
health care in our state
Yes the amendment in these areas
around these three issues but
with the dissemination of
information are outreach events
like the listening tour we
didn't twenty twenty one like
the community events that we're
currently hosting in twenty
twenty two
and additionally to use our
direct communication sources of
email
social media our website to
provide resources to the women
of New Mexico about their needs
the commission recognizes that
we need to require bonding for
IT of sources not just in New
Mexico state budget and so one
of the things that we have in
mind is to host of and end of
event called the women's summit
that we we want to bring
together legislators non
governmental organizations
working in the state with
funders from out of state and we
feel like this is really a great
way to bring more money into the
state that into the work around
the needs of women.
The the LFC but it will be a
challenge to try to actually
have them in some we would
probably have to postpone that
if that if we are not granted
the executive budget.
additionally in.
Our current budget year fiscal
twenty three we received two
hundred eighty five thousand
dollars and special
appropriations I'm talking
covering the funds for my salary
and the other contracts that we
already had agreed to it had in
place we had a remaining budget
for the entire year of twenty
seven thousand dollars so all
I'll say it too less a little
less than two thousand dollars a
month for just a little over two
thousand dollars a month is our
budget for the entire year.
if we were to receive the LFC
budget two ninety five would be
pretty much in that same
situation we're in right now
which is why we've asked for the
expansion
we're currently operating with a
single full time employee and I
am currently the executive
director of the social media
person the budget you have
graduated to a person and on and
on and on we really desperately
need a second full time employee
for the commission.
For.
And many other reasons I won't
go into for the sake of time we
are really requesting that you
consider providing the executive
budget for the commission in
order to really allow us to work
to fulfill the mandates that we
have been asked to address but I
want to thank you all for your
time and attention and allowing
me to speak today and I'd be
happy to answer any questions I
can for you.
Thank you.
So questions from members of the
committee I have Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you is director gets
for being here I I really
appreciate that also added your.
Your budget I have known about
the the program for many many
years and I've submitted money
to try to get it funding funded.
Several times in.
It's a shame that we haven't
been confirmed excuse me it that
we haven't been consistent
because it's a program that
really needs to move forward I
understand we have a different
process and here we always
recommend the lowest budget so
so bear with us the bottom line
though is.
I would go with the executive
but budget if we could in here
but I because you do need all
that support and I would love to
see the women's up summit
because I think generating the
money that you need to through
through those private funders
you'd be able to self sustain so
recognizing the limitations in
here are you do have my support
and but I have to vote for the
the budget.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr.
thank you for calling the for us
and and
All the work that you do on this
Sir I just wanna be clear can
you what was your you said you
special
The special that was going to on
the last fiscal year was what
hunter two hundred eighty five
thousand dollars and that was
just for
use have one F. T. E. this using
all that funding any reverted
twenty seven thousand dollars
back is that colonel and so
we're representative of the
thank you for the question and
the and I'll try to be clear so
we had for fiscal twenty three a
budget that was carried forward
a special appropriation money
for of two hundred eighty five
thousand after we encumbered the
money for my salary for our
audit for I. T. services for our
web services and a few other
expenses we basically had
remaining in our budget for the
entire year twenty seven
thousand dollars.
For the remainder of our work
have that for the meeting thank
you I I appreciate thank you I'm
I'm writing things and reading
things and putting this all
together
So.
Are you madam chair and are you
are you asking for the the
second you're asking for two FTE
ease I'm I'm routing to
different things are seen LFC
and and.
And then the executive here for
the person FTE positions one and
then we come to the executive
they're asking for two more can
you we can clarify that for us
here our range and
Representative Lujan and members
of the commission for the
committee excuse me at we are
asking for one additional full
time employee it would be
someone who would be able to
assist in the work you know
communicate with state and doing
the work that I need to do with
the state so that I could focus
more on our external programs
and the just to try to be a
little bit clearer what I
provided to you was the budget
we we requested eight hundred
fifty thousand dollars the
executive budget and how we
would take the money and
allocated to the individual
things we would like to do it as
far as our work and that's the
four hundred ninety nine
thousand and then the third
column is the LFC budget two
hundred ninety five thousand
dollars
and what we could and could not
do again the direct answer to
question is only one additional
full time employees I'm asking
for I appreciate that thank you
course again there's some
there's some things on here
think that we needed correct on
the set of this worksheet but I
appreciate your coming forward
and and really do support all
the work that you do and I'd be
interested in knowing more and
please keep in contact with us
about the the women summit if we
get that off and how and doing
with the success in the economic
development aspect of that is
appreciate the time thank you
mentioned.
Thank you Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you for The presentation I
I have a question about the she
provided us the detailed budget
says here madam chair that you
had a listening tour and you
visit six locations in the state
could you tell us what our
locations as work sure and I ate
a public debate amendment
Representative Brown and and
members of the committee I
I began this position in August
of twenty twenty two so I was
not on board for the listening
to our however the locations
were chosen to be
representative of the entire
state as best we could during
the COVID
there were ones that were in our
larger areas like Santa Fe
Bernalillo Los crucis and then
there additional ones that were
in the at northwest and
southeast corners Hey I don't
wanna be incorrect and tell you
which town but they were
specifically earmarked for those
two locations so that was five
and then I want to say the six
that I honestly don't remember
one.
One because you were up as I did
it.
Yeah that we can have anybody
that was on the Madam chair
representative they are they
were all of okay adventure that
really gets to my next question
that I think you just answered
it you had a five thousand
dollar at this expense released
a request to cover hot spots for
internet access and just
curious.
One of the things that I've
learned from meetings and
convening in remote areas of our
state is that often people will
come to events because they have
access to the internet and so
providing access to the internet
is that one of the draws that
will bring women and their
families to locations to these
kinds of meetings we want to be
able to sort of offer that is a
Hey come meet with your
commissioners access the
internet do the things you need
to do and that's a whole nother
conversation of why we we have
that need but that was that was
one of the things we thought
would really entice people okay
madam chair and panel I don't
want to NIT pick here but you
have four of fifteen members do
you think you could to make do
with fewer members just to save
a little on travel costs and so
forth and if so what would be
the the magic number to think
madam chair.
Skills and so Representative
from members of the committee we
are required by statute to have
fifteen members and my
understanding is that that is
because we are such a large
state and regionally we want to
make sure representing all of
the women across the entire
state we've operated for the
last two years with actually
thirteen members and we just had
to that of finish their service
and have left when I wrote it
down to eleven members but we
are statute literally outlines
the number of members and where
they need to come from the fact
that they need to be bipartisan
so we have a the amended to that
as well you madam chair and is
is it gets G. E. T. Z. RT about
teasing for hope GTZ thank you
for that Madam so I'm I really
want this to be bipartisan or
shall we say multi partisan.
Even better and I think if it's
if it's too one sided were not
really capturing the information
that we need so I.
Appreciate it now and just kind
of a micro question chair so
statute allows you fifteen
requires you have feet fifteen
is there a range.
So you must have a minimum
perhaps up to fifteen.
Okay it's of yes Representative
Representative Brown members of
the committee it is up to
fifteen and it does allocate
specific positions right says no
more than eight at any one party
we have a member from the Civil
Rights Commission who serves on
our commission Merioles Leslie
is here today
the.
Thank you sorry the commission
human rights so we have certain
parameters that we must comply
with but not at but but yes
there is some some flexibility
thank you for the answer thank
you madam chair.
Thank you any other committee
questions.
Okay I have if I have one
question thank you RubyAnn and
missed and for and to director
gets are you able to work with
DFA staff for grant support
through their new requests
administration have you utilize
that so we do we are
administratively tied to HSD and
in the past before the date that
the commission was
defended back in twenty twelve
we did receive grants that were
held through HSD
so my understanding is yes that
would we can and I begin the
process to.
Is that
a
right in the grants process the
state grants process so that I
can make sure I can take
advantage of that there's a
couple of interesting challenges
with that process one of which
is that many requests are cost
reimbursement requests and so we
have to have the money up front
in order to be able to pay for
things and then request
reimbursement and we don't have
the ability to do that at this
moment.
Thank you at this point in time.
Entertain a motion.
Madam chair I move the.
LFC
recommended right.
Thank you.
Do we need to any objections.
Action okay yeah so do we need
to do Raul callers just know you
know that I'm I'm good with this
listening as as I said before
madam chair.
Like we agreed budgets.
Do you.
She.
Thank you very much so we're
gonna go ahead and move on to
agency number six so for which
is the commission for the deaf
and hard of hearing hard of
hearing persons.
So for members that is page two
forty six and our volume to and.
Same.
Thank you.
Fifteen.
Okay.
Thank you a review okay and
madam chair the next budget as
you indicated is as I think so
for HSD because it's so boring
your binders.
Asian for deaf and hard of
hearing persons and thank you to
miss Densmore she's gonna pinch
hit for agency says Siachen
who's tied up in the other that
committee so some it'll be Mary
Beth and I again and we also
have with us the director of the
agency Mr Nate income.
And thank you also for the
interpreter here with us too
yeah thank you thank you
so
We will begin with
Really the issue.
For this agency continues to be
a revenue issue this is the same
issue this you all have been
hearing about for years hasn't
gone away and that's what boiled
down to the differences here so
Basically this agency is funded
if you look at the revenues we
have general fund other
transfers.
And a little bit of fund balance
that the executive recommended
that there's a hundred and fifty
thousand.
And the whole kind of issue for
this agency revolves around that
other transfers and what this is
is it's telecommunications relay
service fund.
And what that is is in all of
our our bills that we get with
you you know when your Verizon
or whatever you you the whoever
your provider is we all pay a
tax and a portion of the taxes
spins off to the E. nine one one
funds which you know find the
dollar emergency services and
then another portion of the tax
spins off to the
telecommunications relay service
fund which helps to fund the
budget here.
Now I'm and for those of you who
maybe don't mourn on this
committee before and haven't
heard these issues back in hello
I think it was twenty fourteen
or so it's very okay
the the the statue was changed
and basically the E. nine one
one did a sentiments for their
their distribution saying you
know I think it's like forty
cents or whatever and then the
the telecommunications relay
service fund will when that the
statute was passed in and
changed they did a percentage
amount on a certain product
line.
And at that time the fiscal
impact report had said that that
it was gonna be this agency was
going to get like another three
million dollars and they would
have been totally fine and
totally self sustaining the
problem is that has never
materialized really to that
level we saw some increase and
then it's kind of stabilized and
maybe even gone down some and
director of all talk about that
that part of it is
the way the now in the
telecommunications industry the
way that that pricing is done
it's more like on equipment when
you buy new phones and all and
as opposed to services and also
that's change so that's the
issue so I kind of just wanted
to lay that background out
because it really really is is
what we're dealing with here
sept in the different sheet on
the LFC recommendation for
general fund support is two
hundred fifty one thousand seven
hundred less than the executive
recommendation and the LESC is a
little higher in by that amount
basically in the other transfers
and and the recommendation that
the LFC has been saying for a
while is let's try and look at
this statute revisit it and see
if we can change that the
structure and at so that
continues to be the
recommendation but that would
require working on this all year
and getting some buy in from
everybody and we haven't done
that yet that hasn't occurred
now maybe if you want to talk
about the executive sure okay
let's see.
Okay so the executive swapped
twenty two percent of the
telecommunication relay funding
with general fund revenue but
agencies FY twenty two tell can
telecommunication relay service
actuals
came in at just about one point
two a little over one point two
million it was a five percent
decrease from FY twenty one so
as a RubyAnn and
mentioned
the revenues are just continuing
to decline for this agency from
from the telecommunications
relates
it's it's a continuing issue for
them
and then lastly the executive
recommendation includes a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in fund balance revenue
and just a quick note for you
the agency did not request this
but there is some money in fund
balance they have it looks like
the last number was about one
point seven million so the
executive has used a little bit
of that fund balance to help out
and not have everything in the
general fund
And do you want me to just
finish really and you want to
finish.
In the past the back from Intel
plus the factory and thank.
madam chair just.
Two other just pieces of
information to help that
contacts with this agency
Basically I for.
It's it wasn't the last year or
the year before that I think
that for about three years
before that we were doing
special appropriations in the
back of the General Appropration
Act in the back of the bill to
supplement the agency's budget
now we now we don't typically
want to do that because we're
using nonrecurring in the back
of the bill to use for recurring
operating expenses so we did
that for about three years
because the revenue wasn't
materializing so the legislature
made the decision to do that so
the past two years so FY twenty
two in FY twenty three
but there was at dental support
from the legislature that was
put in for this agency for
general fund so I do want to
highlight that so I think it was
last year the agency received a
fifty percent increase in
general fund support so the
legislature's recognize the
problem they've been trying to
the state general support the
LFC and its recommendation is
that actuals for other transfers
so what the agencies actually
been realizing for the in the
telecommunications relay service
fund and then the LFC Phil did
you like this year not the fifty
percent increase but that you
know the five six percent
increase so that's the situation
we find ourselves in so with
that madam chair if yet if
you're okay I'll turn it over to
director call.
Chair members committee thank
you both have worked very hard
on this is not an easy thing to
deal with the challenge here is
that the the number one takes
fifty wants us.
So let's say you have two phone
lines could.
If you have two phone lines for
the TIRS a surcharge that funds
are appropriation as forces so
the dollar to divorce in this
budget collected that is more or
less what the issue is asking to
go even the nine one one is a
big ask admit that and I and I
accept that but it is it is what
has to happen in order to bring
in the revenue the suspected
there's challenges of.
As well in the fact that the FCC
continues to move for with a lot
of changes you've all heard
about the affordable Care Act
and the that was a big changes
that impacted much of things
well there's also the funding
for broadband that's going to
affect a lot of.
that change and broadband is
going to be at least a five year
implementation before we see our
rural areas start to get really
access to broadband speeds that
allows them to utilize things
that I. PCS which is our base
caption telephone services
that's funded by the FCC is not
funded by of the state.
That really service that for
example in angel fire that's
needed when for example there's
a fire on to contact nine one
services to contact any
emergency services means that
you're gonna depend on
traditional rulers Services that
has to be funded by mandate for
the FCC by the state so that is
issue one the second one is our
equipment distribution program
I've mentioned this in the past
with the issues and technology
evolving that means we see cost
increased to more modern
technology we see some companies
who just are on back order
because they can't afford to
actually manufacture the
equipment and what that meant
that equipment does is for
individuals like myself is make
sure that we can access things
like captioning things like
amplified
the ability to amplify with me
so so I can hear what's being
said it also funds things like
fire alarms visual fire alarm
see see the violence here visual
we if we want to have a
community who who can access and
know that there's a fire
happening these visual for our
best community are here
community and then also part of
the funding goes towards
deadlines services as a species
for service providers which
covers that blind that plus is
that food co occurring
disabilities and individuals or
seniors or over US seventy needs
support services that's been
very instrumental specials are
COVID making sure that the food
biggest sport to get one on one
attention such a mess services
provides statewide
so that's it in the show the
three things that
are primarily going to be
impacted by this continuing
decline that's not to last night
mention our personal or services
employees are contracts.
Such a
one of the contract services
that we have is for Amazon to
petition which would be used for
a variety of things including
this me now we actually do have
a staff interpreter and we
lovers of as much as possible
but sometimes we need
contracting papers for board
meetings etcetera so that's
basically a summary of what the
issue is what we're trying to
accomplish and what we're trying
to address as the age of
telecommunications keeps a
involvement.
So that was seven questions.
This a more general fund with
the reference.
Thank you
Member questions Representative
Trujillo please I'm.
You too you spoke about you're
not receiving enough revenues
how do you generate the
revenues.
So what happens is you have
Verizon T. mobile AT&T Comcast
CenturyLink any mobile provider.
basically does a calculation
that breaks down the amount of
the actual service now back in
the day used to have a minute
charges so you a hundred minutes
a thousand minutes two thousand
minutes you pay difference now
to some of it all a cart
so you get a flat number of the
state sixty four dollars per
bill and then there's a thirty
percent kind of calculation that
happens there that breaks it
down to for example my bill
my of Verizon those reserves for
the phone and then once and for
watch.
the majority of how the
companies are making a revenues
not to is to the.
Additional services like.
What is a plus you get those in
plus those are the stuff that
come with the other part of the
fee but they're not actually in
the calculation and then there's
also the equipment Sir of the
that they do so if you get a new
iPhone the paper wrote paying
more for that than you are for
buying it straight out that's
how they're making their money
is not as much for the actual
service itself which is where
that of surcharges replies so
that means
we have to do a percentage of
the service where's the number
one issue so I just.
I I get it now thank you Mr.
Any other questions yes
Representative Brown thanks
madam chair.
Thanks for the presentation
I have a question about a
performance measures.
It is dealing with the average
number of relay minutes per
month.
What is that change your
financial calculations if at all
Madam.
We're required to provide
anybody and everybody who needs
to use really services the
opportunity during the COVID we
saw the spike
because people using it for work
before using it to make call Sir
doctors lawyers and then we saw
a decline and then you see a
spike again especially during
the holidays it all depends on
how many people are actually
using the services I don't
control that we're not allowed
to tell people what they can and
can't do in terms of using all
services because it's a federal
mandate
but the issue also is that we.
Set up a contract for those
services are two main providers
for the services we asked for
the best price we can get in
terms of the per minute rate and
for example right now CVS this
is captioned telephone services
as a dollar eighty seven this
year and then tear us is two
dollars and sixty cents on Cruz
Minnesota includes anybody
typing a TT why which and those
old technology was still viable
special rural areas
so anybody who types for a state
by Mrs to our citizens for those
five minutes each minute for
those five minutes
if somebody makes a phone call
but they're actually calling the
wrong person we actually don't
see the impact of that cause us
taken off see at the inter state
and inter state funds component
of it so if they call out from
New Mexico we cover somebody's
calling in from other states
they cover so it really depends
on how much you're calling now
how much somebody's calling in
D. C. yes the caption telephone
services a dollar eighty seven
we're gonna see in February a
collection of all the rates
across the nation we're actually
one of the cheapest right now
TRS in California for example is
four dollars and sixty cents
with.
So
I think we negotiate pretty well
I think we cover as much as we
can to make sure we're getting
what we can without going
overboard but the problem is we
can't really assume it's going
to be ten thousand or is going
to be this is going to be that
it's all going to depend on the
uses cases and with COVID we saw
our records and I was just
reality about.
thank you madam chair and thank
you for the answer I I know the
request for FY twenty four is a
ten thousand.
Minutes per month and I think we
have an obligation to fund that
fully and if if there's a
difference in.
LFC and exec on that that we
need to fix that that let me go
on madam chair to my what might
final question and this has to
do with another performance
measures and this is the one
that is deals with number of
outreach events coordinated and
I'm just curious to know madam
chair what the
what an outreach event looks
like.
Everything and anything from pry
prying fifty two shelters
we want to make sure that
anybody and everybody was aware
of our services been able to get
access to services we hear about
things like I can call the
suicide hotline because I didn't
have caption we don't want that
to be an issue we want them to
be aware of what the technology
is available but they can use
for that so we've been going out
more more especially this year
we really take it upon ourselves
to get out there we make sure
that people were the changes to
the equipment the other thing
that we're starting on doing as
a pilot program we want to see
if things like
the tablets and smartphones of
today can make up for was
flocking some other areas of our
start of those conversations and
estimate costs state as well we
really don't want to leave
anyone.
aware of what they can do and
when it comes to reaching out
and touching someone speak some.
Thank you very much appreciate
it chair thank you thank you
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
for your presentation always
good to see your face you've
I've listened to you present
before many times and I believe
it was about six years ago that
I first heard this presentation
and shame on me.
For not addressing the issue but
I really think that we need to.
Take a second look at this.
I'd like to recommend that we
just take a second look and see
if we can fix the problem that
has been the issue for so many
years this is a shame on me for
not taking the initiative to do
that so I apologize for that I
don't really have a question
madam chair thank you.
Thank you I'm and Representative
Armstrong that's a wonderful
segue my only comment was to ask
the commission to be sure to
work with us in the interim to
remind us and work with us to
come up with a way to address
this long standing issue because
you know I'll be honest that
with so many things swirling
around sharing the session it's
easy for us to not remember all
of these things that need to
come up in the interim so please
do that so that we can we can
work to get a statutory change
perhaps and if staff would make
a note in the sub committee
report as well that would be
wonderful.
Representative Armstrong can I
go to you for a motion I see it
no other questions.
Thank you madam chair I move the
LFC recommendation.
Right we have a a motion by
Representative Armstrong in a
second by Representative
Trujillo so our preliminary
recommendation at this point is
for the LFC recommendation thank
you very much everyone and I
believe we are now going to move
on to a six oh three more
African American affairs and
our analyst Mr Shinya is coming
up for.
Thank you Mr Shinya would you
like to search our madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Eric Chenier and will be
going over the
Budget for the office of African
American affairs sitting next to
me is the acting director
Charles read to.
This is the right read redo.
And sitting next to him is or
executive analyst Lori.
Siapa.
With that just wanted to point
out you can find the LFC
Present the LFC right up with
and recommendation in volume two
on page two forty four.
But this one from a budget
perspective is very easy it's
there were no differences
between the LFC and executive
recommendation
And where there were performance
measures target differences
analysts reached a consensus as
indicated and with that madam
chair pass it over to the
executive if they have any
other.
input and then we'll move to
director you madam chair members
of the committee
hello good afternoon
I don't have anything to add to
it was pretty simple to get this
one done so with that I'll hand
it over to acting secretary.
Acting director Mr.
Hello Rita Rita thank you read a
book.
Thank you at director Rita
acting executive director exact
yes so good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee
again my name is Charles reed on
the acting executive director
for the office of African
American affairs I'm coming
before you today to request a
flat fiscal year twenty four
budget for the office of African
American affairs I have been
with all to play a little over
twelve months
when I was first hired in twenty
and January twenty twenty two
there were only three out of the
seven FTEs on staff and that
included at the time the
executive director like most
other agencies and organizations
the COVID epidemic has
challenged all the COVID
epidemic has I'm sorry on triple
a was no exception and as a
result was negatively impacted
on unable to host plan and
community that's listening
sessions for presume community
partnerships for events in
fiscal year twenty one sixty
percent of the report reversion
was in the two hundred category
twenty three percent was in the
three hundred category and
seventeen percent was in the
four hundred have.
In fiscal year twenty to seventy
four percent of the reported
revision was in category two
hundred twenty two percent and
category three hundred and four
percent in category four hundred
the staff vacancy rates in
fiscal years twenty one twenty
two that a direct impact on the
funds that were reverted in
those years the reversions also
had a negative impact on our
offices ability to carry out its
mandate and its mission and the
mission is to act to that to
study identify and find
solutions to issues of concerns
that are relevant to the African
American community under house
bill nine million to mandate of
our office is to increase
awareness of social determinants
that contribute to the
disparities among African
Americans in New Mexico in order
to meet our mandate the office
needs to attract and retain a
knowledgeable and skillful team
of dedicated and and committed
professionals
currently my office is currently
fully staffed with the exception
of the pending appointment of a
new executive director now that
my office is fully staffed is
imperative that we maintain our
current budget level in order to
be able to effectively move
forward with providing targeted
interventions and programs in
the community through several of
that if I campaigns some of
these campaigns are hosting
community events Bill Oosting
our social media awareness
producing content others find
valuable in the community making
informal informational pamphlets
are pursuing local partnerships
organizing educational events
being an information hub for the
office of African American
affairs in being the go to Horry
in New Mexico on matters related
to methods that in.
Prove the quality of life for
African Americans I'm requesting
the community I'm fine testing
madam chair that the committee
approve our fiscal year twenty
four flat budget request in
order to allow all to play the
opportunity to move forward with
its mission vision and goals to
improve the quality of life for
all African Americans in New
Mexico with our flat budget
request would be able to resume
Our our efforts to conduct
community outreach and move
toward improving our performance
measures thank you and I will
for any questions.
Thank you I committee in
question.
The representatives at
Representative Brown and then
chair small.
Thank you madam chair
Thank you very much Mr redo you
had all the hard games on this
panel by the.
I'm I'm looking in our our
spiral found documents I'm just
looking at reversions and for
your agency it says that it's so
your
PS in the our budget for twenty
twenty two is about nine hundred
thousand dollars and twelve
nineteen nineteen or twenty
twenty one there was reversion
of three hundred sixty six
thousand and change and that in
twenty twenty two the year we
just concluded two hundred
nineteen thousand so some
improvement there and not
reverting as much of Madam chair
Mister Ritter was that due to
being unable to fill vacancies
that you basically reverted that
money the page here well it's
for both years at twenty one and
twenty two Madam chair just
based on the information that
might budget and Liz was able to
retrieve the the answer that yes
that was mainly because of the
vacancies okay thank you thank
you madam chair.
Chair small did you have a
question no okay any other
questions.
If I could go to Representative
Pettigrew for the motion.
That.
We were approved the LFC but.
Thank.
Thanks thank you we have a
motion from independent group
and a second from chair small
are there any objections.
So
we're going with that motion I
thank you very much.
We are now going to move on to
Agency six so I the Martin
Luther king junior commission.
And we have that are same
analysts.
And I believe members there is a
presentation at your spot.
As well.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Again this is the Martin Luther
king junior commission agency
six so I.
you'll see.
The LFC right up in volume two
on page two.
Forty eight.
With that there's not huge
differences between the two
budgets LFC recommended I
particularly I'm sorry I need to
introduce so the
Active director is a leader
weights and then
we'll move on L. C. recommended
a five percent increase in the
executive recommended a nine
point six percent increase in
general fund revenue.
For personnel costs LFC
recommendation is sufficient to
adjust to director salary
commensurate with directors of
other similarly sized agencies.
The executive recommended more
in the contractual services and
other categories to support to
support increased outreach and
there were no differences in
performance targets with that
the manager of the server the
executive for we're COVID to
sheet.
Madam chair members of the
committee I have no additional
comment.
Sunday
thank you chair thank you commit
a committee for allowing me this
opportunity I and a no are.
The executive
Asked and presented a thirty two
thousand dollar increase but I
am going to give you a different
presentation because right now I
think the work that the in
Medicaid commission is doing is
extensive and we need more
funding and we need more help
you need an additional FTE
so Mister with our presentation
here statement of FY twenty four
request the O. okay commission
has been operating with
inadequate and adequate funding
since its inception MLK
commission continues to be under
funded are requests are original
request was for two hundred
thousand dollar budget increase
for FY twenty four currently our
funding level is three hundred
twenty seven thousand.
Is a challenge to accomplish the
vision and the mission of the
MLK commission with our current
budget amendment okay Commission
budget is one of the smallest.
Of and the agency of the state
of New Mexico as you can see
from our graph we have been flat
for the last seven years.
Our budget continues to make
remained flat for last past
seven years in those seven years
our efforts to maintain the
required work for them okay
commission as increased.
M. okay commission as it created
for the purpose of developing.
Remoting coordinating and
reviewing statewide plans and
activities for the annual
commemoration for for Dr king.
Saving twenty FY twenty four
request and locate state
commission has been understaffed
since its inception we request
an additional.
FY twenty four for funds to hire
personnel to include an
additional full time employee
expand our ability to conduct Dr
Martin Luther king junior
commemorations to New Mexico
throughout the Mexico.
Increase current staff salaries
to at least.
The mid point of the salary
chart the currently the
executive director salaries
thirty nine percent below the
mid point statewide.
And they are my associate
director is nineteen percent
below made for let me stop right
here I need to introduce my
associate director.
Hi miss Beverly came in from the
back.
I apologize for doing this.
Got to make sure we do that.
At current funding levels hamper
I used the
use
At current funding levels have
for our youth outreach.
Funds are needed to implement
used leadership our youth
leadership program statewide.
There needed to increase the
participation of our students
and our leadership and mentoring
program.
Educates students about Dr
king's philosophy and six
principles of nonviolence and
increase their community
outreach and their families.
Again our mission is to promote
Dr Martin Luther king's
philosophy on human rights
equality nonviolent social
change and and unity our vision
is to create a stronger network
of community organizations
through collaboration
coordination and cooperation we
are increasing our efforts in
these areas by collaborating
with the office of African
American fares.
Albuquerque police department
and other law enforcement
agency.
The City of Albuquerque and the
state in double ACP and I also
APS.
Our statewide in this is Manisha
to.
Of our newly establish youth
leadership program.
Which is statewide.
an increase in MLK holiday
commemorative marches
celebration statewide by twenty
percent.
District distribution of our
quarterly magazine newsletter
with the contents provided by
our youth ambassador our news
and magazine all the articles
written in our magazines are are
written by used throughout the
state of New Mexico which is
very important our goal is the.
in twenty twenty three.
We have our annual youth
leadership conference statewide
in twenty twenty three to
conference will be held in Los
crucis for the first time this
year.
Our goals for this this
conference is to include at
least two hundred students from
around the state.
I Chavis for FY twenty two
twenty three we held them okay
commemorations in six Mexico
city's.
We supported statewide MLK
holiday community service
projects.
We have developed and
implemented statewide leadership
youth leadership programs in
Alamogordo Clovis Farmington Los
crucis Rio Rancho and
Albuquerque.
Also in the FY twenty two and
twenty three prior to the COVID
attendance and annual use
leadership conference we were
growing.
Twenty nineteen.
More than a hundred fifty years
attended our.
From around the state attended
our program post comment are you
are muted the annual youth
leadership conference.
Has been greatly diminished and
attendance and twenty twenty two
due to the lack of funding we
only hosted eighty five use.
Youth that participated in our
youth and leadership conference
for us from Gallup Los crucis
Sapporo Albuquerque Hobbs Rio
Rancho and important to.
I could as you can tell we have
done extensive traveling over
the last year around the state
to and implement this program.
Actually impacted our success
for FY twenty two and twenty
three a favorable audit review.
All FY twenty two twenty three
audits have been completed with
positive reviews.
We organized numerous visits it
with different community groups
statewide.
Statewide participation I
volunteer pool has increased
increased around the state we
have collaborated with new
organizations and departments
throughout the state develop and
implement new policies and
procedures within our our
department and increased
transparency.
What's ahead.
Strategies for the for future
success we need to employ a
highly competent staff.
Establishing called cultivate
new and and and current
partnerships.
We are firm and strengthen
statewide and through the as of
and support.
Are expected outcomes are
increase the number statewide
holiday commemorations and
celebrations increases our youth
participation in our youth
leadership program in our youth
leaders from program and annual
youth leadership conference.
More statewide exposure to
drive.
K. philosophy and principles of
nonviolence as a way of life.
That concludes my presentation
I stand for any questions.
Thank you director Rita no I'm
weights weights on.
I was so proud of myself for
member and.
Okay my apologies
okay at committee questions I
believe Representative Trujillo
yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr wait for or
director weights for for being
here I I've been on this.
In on the tail of C. for many
years and several years in the
past often on I chaired the
subcommittee that and included
the office of African American
of a fit I'm sorry Martin Luther
king and the office of African
American affairs and there has
been they had been all kinds of
of changes and
Issues that made it very
difficult for all of you
function I have seen such
growth.
Since those years that I that
that I chaired that I'm really
impressed what you've done with
a limited budget I think that
The what you're asking for is
not unreasonable it's only two
hundred thousand more.
And I know the work that you do
because but I've been engaged
and involved in many of your
community activities and it's
unfortunate that we've always
under funded to you I I that's
my personal belief.
I I know that you and that you
know the process that we have to
go through in here always going
for the lowest budget.
But I would encourage my
colleagues to consider in the
bigger committee increasing the
budget to up to the requests
that you made of two hundred
thousand dollars because it's a
it's still only five hundred
thousand dollar budget so I with
all the changes that have
occurred that are increasing
your visibility and the amount
of information and work that
you're doing throughout the
state it's only reasonable I
think that we do this so I
appreciate the work your your
agency has done to move this
forward and madam chair I would
encourage us to be considered in
the in the big committee.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you that mysteries for your
presentation
For the rookie on this committee
I'm gonna ask a question that
maybe
I hope does not come across and
any way.
Chair in anyway offensive but
help me understand something.
As I read through to forty eight
and I and I look at the mission.
And then I look at the mission
of the office of African
American affairs.
To me it seems like this could
be merry together extremely well
and and put forward a very
similar for include those two
missions in such a way that we
accomplished set to one
one commission on to and and I'd
like to.
Director executive director of
like and madam chair and like
maybe for you to explain why you
feel
whichever way about that.
Chair chair representative
my personal opinion and this is
just my personal opinion of
The offices of African American
fair stands for African
Americans Office of African
American.
Not too keen brought everyone to
the table.
We and our use program and all
the things that we do we bring
everyone to the table from all
walks of life so to me those are
two separate entities and they
should.
Consider B. B. two separate
entities for that reason and
that's just my opinion.
Madam chair executive director I
appreciate that answer very much
because
the way you put that makes
perfect sense to me and I
appreciate that that was my only
question thank you thank you.
Any other questions from the
committee.
You madam chair thank you I'd
just the executive director
rates great to see you I want to
thank your office was down at a
Martin Luther king junior day
celebration and commemoration in
Los crucis and had the
opportunity so really appreciate
the expanding the presence.
Can I make one more statement.
Are
Group in Los crucis our youth
leadership program in doing a
fantastic job
I don't know Representative
small if excuse me my voice is
leaving if you notice that there
were quite a few youth in in
that program and there are up to
eighty individuals there and
they're doing great work and
Commission green is doing a
fantastic job.
There thank you agree entirely
with with both and was madam
chair it was great to see there
was a substantial and and sort
of all ages use cohort in very
cold rough weather it was great
and I think perhaps it's an area
where staff can look at things
closely even as we stay within
our budget guidelines thank you
very much thank you I have one
question and and then I'll.
Proceed to see about a motion
have you had an opportunity
director weights to work with
DFA As grants bureau as well to
see if there are some national
funding opportunities to assist
with some of these activities
madam chair I've taken a look at
that we will we work with them
we are staff of two.
We just had our Marley became
the functions and it prepared
for that but that is something
that we will be looking for
looking at.
Could possibly be something that
we need.
Thank you so much.
Thank you Representative chair
small thank you madam chair I
move the LFC recommendation
understanding that staff can do
a little bit more.
Great thank you so we have a
motion to take the LFC
recommendation from chair small
and a second from Representative
Trujillo are there any
objections no I see none we'll
take that recommendation thank
you very much analysts and
director weights thank you.
We are now going to move on to
agency number six of six which
is commission for the blind.
Thank you.
Because.
Thank you madam chair
again agency code fixo six.
Commission for the blind and
again I'm RubyAnn and and Laurie
with that is with us from DFA
budget and we have with us the
executive director Mr gray
contract.
So that some who we have here
and then I'm sure he'll
introduce all his staff.
So on this one madam chair
you'll see we have no
differences in revenue or
expenditures J..
So the next to be relatively
simple so at but what we do have
a difference in and and this is
that is an issue if we have a
difference in language so in
reality we have three different
language proposals so there's
the executive with our which
changes up I I actually laid out
madam chair members of the
committee the language just so
you could see it so the
executive changed up a few
things the LFC recommendation is
the same that we for language
that we had every year and then
the agency that commission for
the by actually was looking at a
sort of different.
As I said a language so so I
think.
Megan you can turn it over
anything you wanted to act and
madam chair members of the
committee just for clarification
on the language changes from the
executive it's pretty much
instead of saying the.
Transfers will include of that
amount it's transfers up to.
Set amount in it so that if
there's flexibility in case
the the match of the revenues
aren't fully recognize it's up
to that point whatever the
transferring agency is been able
to
Get.
And that's that's all I have for
clarification.
Thank you and I think that's all
madam chair I can turn it over
with that too
director trap yes thank you very
much I would like to introduce
those folks who have come with
me here today starting with
surely Lansing the chairman of
the commission for the blind.
Thank Dr Robert reedy another
for commissioners.
Mr Jim Sallis are deputy
director in charge of our
vocational rehabilitation and
independent living program.
Miss Kelly Burma or school
center coordinator is Patricia
savage my executive director.
Mr now consolidates my finance
manager and Mr Kevin Romero our
CFO and deputy director for
finance administration I
mentioned Janelle and Kevin last
because we have
are on it just been released and
we have no audit findings which
for HSD as complicated in terms
of our finances and I smiled and
movie answered relatively
simple.
It gets it gets a little bit
complicated we talk about other
reasons for the the fund
transfer but we have numerous
federal grants new agency
federal programs and Janelle
Kevin have done a great job in
helping us have no audit
findings and really a good
reputation with the facts so
what to give you some updates
about the commission for the
blind one of our programs that
we operate is our training
center and Alamogordo.
It's what we call our
orientation center it's an adult
residential training program for
blind people newly blinded
individuals go and receive
training in the skills of
blindness over a typical six to
nine month training period not
to be confused with the school
for the blind or two totally
separate entities.
We have a new director in charge
of our intention Center is Jamie
Sibson who grew up here in New
Mexico she came to us from Texas
for issues a deputy director at
the training center there
really thrilled to have her here
also a report on our apartment
complex at on no word on.
The legislature has helped us
with funding to build a four
plex so because our training
centers residential program we
train individuals for newly
blinded in the skills of
finance and we currently have a
dormitory but we want our
students to be able to move into
a more independent setting where
they can use the skills that
they're learning and apartment
were also allow us to increase
our capacity and do some other
things in terms of improving our
functions down there.
We are really thankful we're
almost at the point of having a
ribbon cutting
and having a sort of certificate
of occupancy so hopefully
sometime next month will see
that I want to thank
The legislature for your support
in making that happen.
The commission for the blind
also now currently has a full
one hundred percent staffing of
our vocation ability ation
counsellors which is really
great it's a difficult position
to hire for that's going to help
us so I'm really thrilled to
report that our overall fate
vacancy rate is thirteen point
nine percent and that will
continue to go down as we have
additional hirings in the wings
here.
governor Lujan Grisham has
declared January February as age
related macular degeneration
month serving the population of
individuals who are seniors who
are losing vision is a very
important part of our
functionality we have
independent living teachers who
go across the state request
newly blinded seniors in their
homes
age related macular degeneration
is the leading cause of
blindness in persons were sixty
five and over approximately
thirty percent of individuals
who are seventy five and over
have some form of age related
macular degeneration the number
of people with macular
degeneration is expected to
double by twenty fifty so that
is a very significant and
growing number.
The commission for the blind
through our vocation rebel
Tatian program are cancers that
mentioned a minute ago help
individuals for applying to
become employed.
That is the primary purpose of
the federal funding that we
receive in other words the
majority of our federal funds
the very large majority about
five and a half million dollars
earmarked exclusively for the
vocational rehabilitation
program we are not allowed to
use those funds on independent
living we get
About three hundred thousand
dollars in independent living
funds from the federal
government one of those
Funding streams as our part the
funds which receive in
partnership with the division of
vocational rehabilitation and
cases down Romero my counterpart
at the division for verification
bill Tatian is here today.
So whenever we help an
individual who is blind to is
receiving social security
benefits and this is where it
starts to become a little less
simple whenever we help that
individual to go off of benefits
that person
Then becomes eligible for us to
claim a reimbursement for so we
receive what's called program
income from the social security
administration that program
income.
is a growing source of revenue
and it's a growing source of
revenue for a couple of reasons
one of those is the increasing
and wages they were receipt
saying so as wages go up it
becomes more practical for an
individual to earn enough to
make it worth their while to go
off budget likewise the
increased availability of health
care makes it more practical for
individuals to go off of budget
we also provider services in
such a way that our consumers
in a very significant average
wage our average hourly wage is
actually at the top in the
country for vocation
rehabilitation programs so that
high average wage the increased
availability of health insurance
has come together with a new
development called the
vocational rehabilitation client
earnings report which is
allowing us to apply for and
receive reimbursements from
people who have been closed in
prior years.
So we're seeing that program
can dramatically increase
expected to double and perhaps
triple.
The reason why this is important
is because we spend a program
income in a way that really
greatly leverages our state
general fund.
And I will start
with a description of a Lori was
mentioning a medico which is a
funds transfer or so about
Six or seven years ago.
I was at a conference with the
then DVR director and sharing
with them how we spend our
programming can.
So we spend the program income
on our independent living
program so we do that in such a
way that would receive a batch
of programming cam Rabal to
relieve or substitute the
program income for the general
fund that has been spent on that
the independent living program
that we leave to general fund
then becomes eligible as a
source of federal match for
vocational rehabilitation
program.
So if we get a hundred thousand
dollars worth of programming cam
and relieve a hundred thousand
dollars worth of general fund
that we have spent on our intent
living program that hundred
thousand dollars can match about
three hundred seventy thousand
dollars of federal vocation
table Tatian funds so I sure
that the idea with the DVR
director and we're able to do
that because we spend more
general fund our independent
living program member I said we
only get about three hundred
thousand dollars from the fence
and older blind and part be
independent living funds.
So around the same time about a
again five years six years ago
DVR had a very very large
quantity of programming cap.
And one of the rules that
applies uniquely to the our
program is a requirement that we
spend program income before we
draw down sources of federal
revenues so we have to spend
their programming come first so
I.
Pointed out the DVR could spend
its program income on the
centers for independent living
which they started to do at the
same time because they had such
a large quantity I said we could
also take about two hundred
thousand dollars of your program
income and if you do that will
transfer to you these are a
hundred thousand dollars of our
general fund which you DVR could
use to match about three hundred
seventy thousand dollars with
the federal V. R. funds.
So the state great so we help
them spend program income and we
help leverage state and federal
funds so the hundred thousand
dollars
start to give your transfer
trust two hundred thousand
dollars of its programming can.
We transferred back to TV are a
hundred thousand dollars of the
general fund they were able to
relieve to DVR they use that to
leverage about three hundred
seven thousand dollars if your
funds so do for TV are there to
a thousand dollars a program
income turned into about four
hundred seventy thousand dollars
of.
General fund and federal funds
the other hundred thousand
dollars we used at the
commission so that ended up
turning into about five hundred
seventy thousand dollars of
combination of general fund
program income and additional
federal revenues so all pool.
We're looking at
that transfer matching an
additional three quarters of a
million dollars which would have
not been matched so that was
very popular idea and Lori and
RubyAnn and their predecessors
had great let's keep doing that
so we've been doing that ever
since will the increase of
program income.
Has created a situation where.
We are now
finding it more difficult to be
able to receive the DVR program
income and spend that in a way
that needs to federal court
admits that we spend program
income before we drive down
additional federal revenues.
So for that reason we're wanting
to do Lori described which is to
make the transfer is optional if
DVR the commission both have
additional program come.
we may not be able to do the
funds transfer but if we can do
it.
they make sense and we just want
to make that optional so that we
can best leverage our available
federal funds and state funds so
we're supporting the executive
recommendation the claims that
includes language that would
make that optional that would
really really help us to best
utilize the available funding in
a way that would really leverage
our state funds in our federal
funds.
So at the commission.
We also make sure that our
consumers are receiving social
security benefits which is a
prerequisite so we have a
contract with legal aid and if
we have consumers that are not
getting social security will
refer them over to legal aid we
pay for that with about twenty
thousand dollars worth of state
general funds we can't use
federal funds on that.
And we help those individuals to
get on social security benefits
I wish the have largely been
excluded and wrongfully denied
by school security
administration and then we help
them to get off and if it's and
then we get money from social
security and we leverage all the
facts okay so I guess we'll bit
complicated but it's an
incredibly beneficial program
for the state of New Mexico
because we help individuals
crossed Medicaid cost food
stamps.
Rely less on public benefits of
different kinds and then they
become taxpayers and that works
great and we did issue a
revenues so that's part of the
executive recommendation.
Another part of their executive
recommendation includes an
increase in the ability that we
have to spend the general fund
so when we spend programming
come and relieve general fund
that relief general fund does
not revert at the end of the
fiscal year and it doesn't
revert because of the
requirement that we spend
program income first if we get a
large quantity of program income
and that comes in at the end of
the state fiscal year and we
have to spend it first then we
would end up being in a really
disadvantaged position if we
were reverting that state
general fund
we would have to spend the
program income in a way that is
very very much less beneficial
to the state of New Mexico and
the blind consumers that we
serve server requesting that we
have the authority to spend four
hundred thousand dollars of our
program of our general fund in
the coming state fiscal year and
we intend to spend that forty
thousand dollars on our
independent living program
primarily our plan is to hire an
additional independent living
teacher so that we can serve
those blind senior staff growing
population we also want to buy
additional assistive technology
right now we provide to our
independent living program
consumers
a device hired as a smart lock
switches this which is a
handheld video magnifier so they
can use it to take a picture of
mail or whatever they want to
read and it.
Transmits that image on to this
little LCD screen we want to buy
a desktop video magnifier that
has a much larger screen so that
they'll be able to see more they
can write more easily you can
write checks on this particular
device to.
Has a stand that stands this you
can write on it but a desktop
video magnifier would be much
more beneficial so we just want
the sorority suspended General
Fund that we have really spent
already once and we by
leveraging programming.
So
Madam chairman of the committee
I'd be happy to take any
questions and we certainly to
ask for the executive
recommendation and without
asking for additional general
fund we just want to be able to
spend the general fund that we
haven't referred to thank you.
Thank you thank you at director
track I am very impressed with
the leveraging of the funds that
you guys do its its
Quite impressive up
Representative small Chairman
small you had a question
absolutely you madam chair thank
you to the Alice thank you
executive director of madam
chair this us well we've we've
got a and a thorough explanation
for the language differences and
I think really the biggest
question is is there an LESC
perspective on the language
differences one two madam chair
The these would be will one year
only language changes applying
to FY twenty four and so if if
there are challenges perhaps the
that would accrue then then
those could be addressed in
future fiscal years.
Madam chair representative small
so
When I press the comments when I
start asking we basically had
three recommendations for
language and that's where you're
seeing the conferring of here is
because the last piece that at
executive director trap
mentioned the four hundred
thousand pieces that.
Not in the executive language so
I knew that that was something
because they had sent it their
language and I knew I knew that
was something that they want to
consider so
I think.
I think we're fine with the
executive language and if the
committee wanted to take the
executive however I wanted to
note that if the executive this
is what was in that published
documents yeah it didn't include
that last piece then we were
trying to do in this towards the
end this was just coming out now
in January so
which doesn't mean that we
couldn't do it I have to write
it up certainly and I can work
with the commission to to do all
of that and we can do for your
hard work think and go from
there so I can certainly just
the language two I do all of
that that that director and the
commission is proposing.
Thank thank you very much just
just give us so what we can and
madam chair it makes good sense
we can we can sort of take
action on what's before us as we
because this is preliminary and
will have additional
opportunities there's there's a
way for staff to to work on that
director executive director trap
which you're talking the the
additional language component
that seems so it seems then LFC
is comfortable with adopting the
the executive recommendation
whenever we get to that point
and I I just echo again
executive director trap the
level of sort of leveraging of
land using language and in this
case promoting independence and
support for New Mexicans is
really impressive thank you very
much madam chair.
Madam chair representative small
I I appreciate those comments
and I I do want to give that
director Center more opportunity
to to operating she might want
to say TV our does support the
language as well Representative
director stoner.
Chair members of the committee
we've worked with commission for
the blind very closely on this
language we are part of it and
we've got a great relationship I
very much appreciate directed
caps guidance thank you.
Thank you.
Right any other questions from
the committee.
The the seeing no additional
questions chair small to like to
sure thank you madam chair I
would move the executive
recommendation.
Yes wonderful so we have a
motion from Germantown for the
executive recommendation
seconded by a representative
Armstrong are there any
objections.
Seeing none
yes we wanted to slightly amend
that motion and also noted noted
that the subcommittee report
that staff will work with the
agency to fine tune beyond the
executive language as described
by the director please I would
modify yes ma'am.
Thank you thank you there are
clarification wonderful all
right thank you I think we're
good then thank you director
trap for joining us and
Now on to agency six six to the
minors hospital.
Yes.
This city okay
let.
We would have thank.
I.
Look at.
One of the thank you thank you
guys.
Members of the committee we are
on page three fourteen in your
volume to.
Okay share your.
Hi.
You know you.
Because of the high.
madam chair agent.
Of New Mexico and of.
Of RubyAnn and then if MaryBeth
there's more and then we have
with us that the E. O. at the
hospital Mr Bo being and that
the act of the hospital Mr
lining they do that and I'll
just do a couple of remarks
about how the hospital the
hospital is that the right phone
for those of you who don't know
where it's at and it's one of
the lucky beneficiaries of the
land grant permanent fund so
because of that this year you
see no differences between the
recommendations and I will not
make that mistake again thing
though it is simple.
It is not.
No hospital.
Agencies.
So as.
Thanks thank you madam chair I I
don't have anything to add this
was very straightforward I would
love to turn it over to CEO for
comments if there's anything
you'd like to that okay.
I'll keep it brief but thank you
for having us here today it's
always an honor and a pleasure
to educate you about the great
work we do up in retirement
miners Colfax Medical Center I
don't know if you know this
institution was established back
in nineteen oh five so it's
actually older than the state
we're twenty five bed critical
access hospital with a four
thirty seven bit long term care
facility that size serves
primarily miners in the we have
a black loan program that's hers
a grant funded to the tune of a
million dollars so that's funded
by the federal government where
we do back on screenings and
mobile outreach across the state
to all minds across New Mexico
not just coal mines but.
Other other mines as well
so with that I think you know
it's there's no shortage of
challenges in health care right
now and it I think when you look
at rural health care there's
probably even more challenges
than that health care in general
and so but I I feel very good
about the work we're doing and
how we're facing those
challenges of our biggest
challenge right now of course is
workforce I having a sufficient
supply of.
Highly trained clinical
professionals primarily nurses
but also radiology techs
respiratory therapist pharmacist
you all of the all of our
clinical professional so but
we're doing it we're doing
fairly well there were holding
our own
inflation is a factor I think
you know hospitals are expensive
to run when you look at
pharmaceuticals and food and
supplies and everything that
goes what with that so inflation
has become a factor making it
more challenging not just for
our hospitals but hospitals
across the US right now we have
a very fragile rural health care
system across the U. S. there's
a lot of concern in our industry
right now about how many many
rural hospitals are going to
keep their doors open
on top of that this year's been
a we have another challenges
we've moved to a new electronic
medical record our previous
system sunset and they were
moving to want they offered
three platforms and we have one
of the platforms but their son
setting that when emerging
Arlen's consolidating into one
platform and we look at that we
said this is a time to look at
all systems out there and see
which is the best one which one
can we afford and make a
selection that's where money
came into play and did a great
job in and now it analyzing that
and make a recommendation to our
five member board that oversees
of medical facts Medical Center
but with that that it's
increased operating costs the
new system is more expensive
there are some benefits from a
double edged sword which we can
better capture revenue our
charges and we believe we're
going to get better at
collecting and and getting
reimbursed because of the
sophistication and in the
benefits system system has so
what we are it's it's a
additional cost but we're we're
thinking we're going to make up
some some of that cost with
additional charge capture in
addition to that's been
challenging year post comment is
really not been any easier to
comment we got hit with you for
is you've heard the triple
Dimmick.
A COVID flu RSV and that's
created challenges for our
health care system in the state
of New Mexico rural hospitals
have even a bigger challenge
because we depend on those
larger hospitals to transfer our
sickest patients it's gotten
harder and harder transferred
this year and so it's it's
really at we've had to take
super patients we've had to
learn how to care for them
in it with the nurses that we
have and we don't always get a
quick transfer out of the tone
is leased as quick as we used to
so that's a big challenge for us
we're on top but but with that I
have to say that we're very
proud of the work we do since
twenty twenty one we've gotten
some top recognition across the
country does not New Mexico we
were a five star CMS center for
Medicaid services hospital in
twenty twenty one with the only
hospital in state in Mexico to
receive that through the
national rural health
association we receive
designations as both the top one
hundred of all critical access
hospitals or thirteen hundred
fifty and across the United
States and just the year prior
to that we were top twenty
critical access hospital so we
did we did get a little bit
there but we're very proud we're
top one hundred critical access
hospital again in the interest
most recently we were notified
again through a company called
charter state do data and
analytics through the
national rural health
association that we were a top
of what they call a top
performer talks about the
seventy fifth percentile for in
patient satisfaction to our in
patient satisfaction survey that
survey is conducted by us by the
independent company problem
press Ganey but the data is
mandated and it goes to the
center for Medicare Medicaid
services as well and they look
at those measures so we feel
very good about the care we're
providing and and do you know
what we're what we're
accomplishing up there for both
are minors and.
On minors and one of the things
that this budget really accounts
for with which we're very
pleased with this it helps us
preserve our maternal child
health services this is you know
they're dwindling small
hospitals are size really are
providing this this care anymore
it it's it's very difficult if
we're in the region I think you
know New Mexico very well the
northeast Trinidad Colorado
cemex nurse hospital does not
provide be Clayton hospital to
our east is not provide be out
of this to regional hospital in
Las Vegas bigger than us is
close their OB program
and then going to the west we
have household across you got to
go through a lot of pretty
mountainous terrain to get to
to tacos from Raton it's
beautiful and I love driving it
but it if you're pregnant I
would want to make that drive so
much to them so.
So anyway
with that I'm excited to be here
to educate you and answer any
further questions I do want to
recognize Lani the great work he
does he has a huge challenge
Maring up a state system it's
not built for hospitals and
hospital revenue and accounting
system and making them work
together we've had our our
audits when I when I before
money where we were for we were
in the range of eight to ten
findings a year
he guides for finding this year
since he's been there I think
and and five years and.
You would do you want to explain
that to we were thank in the
middle of changing over to our
new the medical medical of the
electronic medical record system
so we just didn't have the time
to finish it in time so are are
finding was that we had a little
late on it that was only twenty
we had this year so.
So.
I will take it.
So with that.
Thank you I'll stand for any
questions madam chair and thank
you for inviting us up to date
of representation.
Thank you we do have some
questions from the committee
will start with Representative
brown.
Thank you madam chair I'm so
glad to see you today I have a
constituent who asked me some
questions madam chair just
before I came up to Santa Fe so
I I do I will take a couple of
minutes if that with the
intelligence of the chairwoman.
I'm Sir would you spell your
name for me please your your
surname.
First in surname your last names
B. A. MES okay thank you.
Thank you.
So madam chairman Mr beams is
there a statutory definition of
the word minor.
This been there is we follow the
department of labor definition
of a minor okay I did not bring
that with me today but it's in
our
minor eligibility policy.
Just their chair and Mr was just
off the top of your head can
you.
Tell us.
It basically specifies that you
need to the part are minor
eligibility policy mainly
specificity of need to work in a
money four it's a minimum of a
year you have to show proof of
employment
or some type of records and
evidence that you worked in a in
a money it doesn't necessarily
have to be a underground mine is
to be a surface mine but any
type of money yeah that
qualifies by the to the
department of labor I just
involved with what the
punishments qualifies thank you
Mr
chair how about salt mining with
that that be included to.
As long as as long as it's taken
out of the ground it would be it
would be that would cover the
website in Carlsbad I believe
madam chair so well anyway madam
chair Mister means and and panel
I was assuming that because of
the Ferguson acted eighteen
ninety eight and the in nineteen
ten we have the enabling there
for New Mexico that set aside
some acreage for revenue
production I was assuming that
what they were thinking about
that it was probably just coal
mostly cold would that be
correct chair.
I would I would suspect that
from the history that are I know
of that that was the main the
more the major purpose because
that was the president prevalent
mineral being taken out of the
ground in the RigCount area in
the the constitution actually
specifies a hospital for minors
to be located in Raton New
Mexico okay thank you madam
chair in in panel then so
Just off the top of your head
could you tell us which counties
in New Mexico have mining
operations of some type.
Okay.
And Santa Ana.
Really the.
There are there throughout New
Mexico I mean all the way down
to I can give you the
communities probably easier that
I can you can ease for which you
have Silver City the silver
copper mountain mines down there
Sapporo has find mines as you go
up through Gallup in requests
you have the uranium mines in
some coal mines up there you got
coal mining in questa through
the northern part of the state
it down into the in Eddy county
where I grew up I'm very
familiar with the potash mines
and in the mining operations
down in that area the units of
the state of New Mexico so
throughout the throughout our
county there were.
Is operating I believe in
southern Colorado and shape up
in Trinidad were elected county
but
I think that's pretty much the
scope of the the mining
operations that we cover yeah we
make trips out to every one of
those communities every year
through our mobile outreach
program yes ensured in thank you
for those mobile units I'm
familiar with with the use of
those I've I've heard this
presentation a few years in a
row now and that's so important
you know where the manager were
the fifth largest state
geographically as just a lot of
miles to travel to get to people
and and I just part of the
reason I'm asking these
questions madam chair is just to
ensure that miners of whatever
mineral gets get at is getting
mind are eligible for services
at the hospital
for long term care madam chair
that would mean they'd have to
re locate of course to Raton and
Madam chair in industry in your
opinion are some people not
using long term services because
of the requirement every
location.
It's a very you know personal
choice and decision it is I
would think they would have to
may if I was in that position
you know if you're down Silver
City and if a loved one that
needs long term care you know
you're you're gonna have to
relocate them to return New
Mexico so yeah that would to.
part right now most of our
Representative miners have come
from northern New Mexico we've
to reset admits both request a.
but I would say the propensity
is from that the northern half
of the state.
So madam chair and and panel I.
I think that's sort of a concern
because it it's my understanding
that there are minors in my part
of the state who are not aware
of the minors hospital hospital
in the they could get some help
there and I believe efforts are
being made to change that and I
appreciate that very much and
madam chair and and how we you
know we really want to have mine
safety so we don't want injuries
and I think we're better now
than we were years ago with with
their mining practices and just
safety measures so that probably
means there's less demand for
for services for minors but
anyway I I don't want to take
too much time but madam chair I
just want to make a comment I I
see from.
Hello materials that you have a
funded vacancy rate of four
point four percent and if I'm
remembering my House
Appropriations tutoriales in the
past anything under five percent
is considered highly
commendable.
So madam chair I just want to
point that out now there is a
difficulty getting medical
practitioners and that's true
for every part of the state
and maybe those are contract
employees at times and every by
and large but madam chair a four
point four percent right that's
probably the best that I know of
in state government so I just
want to commend you for that
thank you madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo thank you madam chair
and thank you Sir for being here
and you Sir I am.
A wanted to lodge you for the
fact that you do accommodate the
maternity component of the of
the hospital because everything
you stated is correct I chaired
the health and Human Services
Committee and as with a broken
heart that I heard that the less
Vegas closed its it towards I
also wanted to.
I thought you said you only have
sixty five budget.
We have twenty five beds so
twenty five twenty four bit sets
the maximum allowable to be a
critical access hospital which
is a separate and distinct
designation by Medicare we get
paid differently the critical
access hospital designation but
you can only be license for up
to twenty five bits we have
thirty seven bids licensed in
our long term care facility I
see and madam chair the the you
are being served but with with
visiting nurses for awhile do
you still have the yes we have
become travelers travelers
nurses are agency but we know
that's a confusing term in state
government so they were they're
travelling nurses that come in
and
In in really all of our state
are all of our hospitals
throughout the state are using
are a fairly high degree of
agency or travelling nurses
right now and that's one of the
inflationary pressures that we
have we were I think you know
during the peak of the market
our our pandemic you know the
the traveling companies were
charging as much as a hundred
sixty dollars an hour for
renters.
Yeah the even more than that in
some special.
SSC's almost that was a good
right.
Two hundred for from the
specialty and our yeah madam
chair Sir that's true it's
expensive or trying to address
the the vacancies and then the
final comment is did your do you
still have a consists of the
board of trustees do is visit
pool yes ma'am okay and are
there is a governor considering
appointing people so.
We hope so.
You we we don't know you know I
what the status is at this point
in time and
you know there's need to be a
period of time where people have
the opportunity to applying the
see you might have have
interests that I know if within
our community some people have
submitted application and have
expressed interest so we're
still waiting to hear back from
the governor's office and the
person who oversees supports a
commission so believe it's
Salazar Melissa Salazar so we
are we are hoping that we will
hear something in the near
future can I drop in a
settlement check.
Roy Fernandes.
I submitted to.
Really has been a long supporter
of miners Colfax Medical Center
and
We're both very familiar with
Louise doesn't live to far away
from money so
we know his his commitment than
for his heart lies so thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
I believe we have one more
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation.
Madam chair I'd like to bounce
things off of based on
Representative Brown was talking
about I am
Curious if there's anything in
the statute the relates to.
Any facility that falls under
exceptional.
Under and I might be safety
hazard I.
And then to that point madam
chair and.
Senator
The reason I'm asking is because
as we talk about
mining one of the things that
happens a lot on our state
manager where is we money for
aggregates in the construction
industry and.
As as we talk through the
discussion between yourself and
and Representative Brown.
We talked about so many
different minerals the no point
time did we talk about minerals
that we're taking from from
state land in the way of of
granite
Limestone caliche and stuff like
that and we we still have have
respiratory issues we still have
different issues to go along
with those as well says curious
with with respect to the
statutory requirements for mail
from nineteen oh five is that
covered as well.
It's any minerals that are taken
out of out of the ground in New
Mexico so yes if you would fall
in that as well.
If if we madam chair and
presenters if we look at that
broad definition that would
therefore go and allowing gases
well.
Because it's a mineral taken
from the ground.
Mmhm that we as far as I know
we've never talked about that
part of it.
Madam chair and presenters and
I'd like to take that
conversation further offline
because that that is the based
definition that we're looking at
then that expands the scope of
of your facility significantly.
With with respect to different
things and the maybe may happen
with respect to health concerns
the I continue to hear of your
so I hear less of down there but
I hear appear so I'm just
curious and so how we how we
deal with that and and concerns
that they go there so I'd love
to have that conversation
offline I'd like to see the
detail with respect to that now
the definition actually works
one relates to ensure one
doesn't relate to them show but
if we're talking about minerals
extracted from New Mexico land
than.
You know what is it what fall
is.
How would you like this to
follow up with you I'll provide
you my contact information we
can just have that the
discussion offline and has
nothing to do with your budget
right now I'm just curious as as
with Representative brown to
what extent that that that
definition goes and and and.
How do we.
Have a look at that question and
having grown up in Hobbes and
graduated from Hobbs high school
and worked in the oil field in
summer to put myself through
college you I'm very familiar
with the you know what what that
kind of activity is down there
and we would you know but
nobody's really ever surfaces
question before so I think it's
something that we would love to
have a further conversation with
you see you know how can we
we're here to serve workers
health yeah we want to service
many New Mexicans as we possibly
can and that's why we get out to
every community so well I would
be happy to were not to follow
up with you and have a
conversation yeah and madam
chair and presenters and maybe
something that we need to to to
review from a legal standpoint
on what the true definition a as
of minerals extracted from from
from New Mexico land I'm just
curious as as as we took that
definite as as a those provided
that in those words I was like
well.
Yeah I think that's where you
know I have some thoughts on
that but I do want to.
The with before I really know
what I'm talking which have a
tendency to do something so
appreciate the time I yield
back.
Thank you and thank you
Representative Brown and
pedigree for bringing that up I
think that's it great item for
staff to be able to follow up
with the committee on did you
have another item on that point
and then.
Expenditure for that give me a
second chance here so the oil
and insurance and panel the oil
and gas part of it has been
sending me to the state statutes
I have another bill that deals
with.
mineral extraction and oil and
gas is considered part of that
so but I've never seen of
position paper any kind of
analysis on that so it's
curiosity that's driving me
there may be more injuries in
the oil field and there are
other mining sectors in which
case this would provide health
services for people who have
been injured in the course of
their employment to a year or
longer and so I'd appreciate any
analysis that that you all come
up with as well thank you madam
chair.
Create a and Representative
Herndon.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam was I.
I just had to clarifying
questions money you mentioned
that the sometimes they have
traveling those nurses that come
in there hundred sixty maybe two
hundred dollars my question is
is that costs passed on to the
patient and what is a sure and
will be insurance companies
cover that we have.
Thank you that's a great
question it in the short answer
is the the insurance companies
really don't cover any
incremental costs they pay what
they pay
the the we are predominately
reimbursed by Medicare and
Medicaid we have we do have some
commercial insurance that pays
in reimburses for services but
the services are driven by the
services delivered on a fee
schedule basically and so they
basically pays what they pay as
they needed us to figure out how
we're going to deliver that and
we have to absorb the cost
regardless if we can
bring the cost down of course we
do better in his those costs
escalate it makes it more
challenging for so they do not
directly reimbursed for any
those increases.
On that point madam chair that's
correct it's not a direct one
for one relationship however the
conversation we just had the
Medicaid one oh one and and you
know in the full committee you
heard about.
The overall inflation and how we
have the contracts with the NCOs
the NCOs bid on that they're in
the process of bidding on that
Medicaid contract in the state
and the building inflationary
costs so as you're looking over
all.
At these costs which are driving
all of health care not only in
the state at this hospital it's
in the country we are seeing an
increase in inflationary costs
tied to workforce so those will
be part of the overall cost that
we have to look at and fund so
it's not a direct relationship
just as as director or CFO CEO
sorry being vindicated but it is
part of what we end up looking
at in a larger picture in terms
of Medicaid in the larger health
systems.
Hello not direct but definitely
an indirect impact the problem
with the Medicaid for us is that
were of very rural community so
we do see quite a few Medicaid
patients there and before we
used to get what was to happen
payments for Medicaid and the
tap payments as well the
hospital access payments in the
targeted access payments with
Medicaid we get paid the least
amount of money with Medicaid
they make it up through the
happen tat payments we are
getting we were getting about
three million dollars in
happened tax money
in previous years this next year
coming up it's seventeen
thousand dollars.
Yes there's a reason behind that
to which then we start getting
into the Medicaid but.
Anyway there's yeah.
Different affect this.
During and we have some Federal
Aviation that stuff that's
what's behind that the federal
and that that are limitation.
Just one more.
I don't know that we're
fighting.
Because you know we talk about
the lack of hospitals which you
can be in Las Vegas and that.
Survivors of but for a limited
to the specialty care.
And in our our any other.
Businesses that are using to
women but my question to you is
are there any women miners and
who would.
Well with this category there
are there's not a lot of them
but in there there are there
have been women miners have
benefited and are eligible this.
All right of that is here thank
you for those this is meant to
do passively Ellis.
That we.
Take that question is that
correct.
The second.
I'm trying to sort it out for
you.
We have a motion by vice chair
Herndon to take the LFC
recommendation seconded by.
Chairman small any objections.
Seeing none will proceed with
the LFC recommendation thank you
all very much thank you for
joining us today
I think we're our subcommittee
is done for the day.
Thank you.
Don't come see.
