So we could start with the
analysts on HSD code to sixty
four and then the presentation
of from the officer.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee we
are joined by Brian Travis
fiscal analyst for the
department of finance and
administration.
The.
Starting street opposite the
district attorney
I will share my screen here to
show the different sheet.
Okay so pretty administrative
office of the district
attorney's the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by fifty thousand
which is supplanted by increased
budgeted southwest border
prosecution initiative on the
balance the executive
recommendation already sources
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget in the days
that the executive and LFC
recommendations are nearly
identical in the categories with
the executive providing seven
thousand one hundred more in the
other cost categories for travel
flights and LFC recommending the
same amount but in person for
recruitment and retention for
performance LFC and exec reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
And unless Mr Thomas has
anything to add I can turn it
over to the director of the
ministry.
Are you fire up I need to have
those not in attendance identify
yourself.
We have a quorum committee.
Do a quick roll call.
Representative Allison.
Representative Representative
Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
As a.
Representative Brown.
Here.
Representative Castellano.
President.
Representative capital.
Representative Crowder here.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
President.
Representative Hebbe.
Representative Hochman.
Here.
Representative Eli.
Here.
Representative Lada.
Your.
Representative Psy.D nada your.
Representative Swetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative vice chair small
your.
Madam chair.
More than easier for those who
aren't on the call to identify
themselves but where we have a
quorum so let's go ahead and
fire up.
Our with our administrative
office of the DA.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Henry
Valdez on on the director of the
administrative office of
district attorneys and I have in
the room with me of both the in
addition to Diana Lewis who is
the fifth judicial district
attorney and the president of
the New Mexico District Attorney
Association also a film on and
solace is the CFO up for the
administrative office of the
district attorney's I would
first like to thank.
It.
Mr Abbas for their hard work
throughout the year and in
putting together these
recommendations
our budget I feel is is fairly
simple for this year.
It submitting a flat budget
consistent with what we had
received on in fiscal year
twenty twenty one
stand that it was then cut four
percent by
because of the the COVID.
Situation and that that is the
executive recommendation all we
would appreciate the executive
recommendation because while the
southwest border for.
We would have enough to cover
the fifty thousand dollar
shortfall of that is kind of
our.
The emergency fund that we would
use in case there's
some type of of shortage in
terms of
No someplace needs one of the
things that the administrative
office does is it does provide
computer all the centralized
case management software
computer services throughout the
state in New Mexico and if the
server goes down we have to
replace it there about twenty
five thousand dollars and if we
don't have that little bit of
money to be able to tap into our
then those needs could go
unaddressed I will tell you that
this year has been extremely
challenging for the
administrative office of
district attorneys are we were
still charged with everything
that we would normally in any
year be charged with and that is
to maintain the level of service
for the statewide case
management them all because
court was still going on you may
have been remotely the court was
still going on we went from
having maybe thirty remote users
a day having and I'm dates over
six hundred remote users of our
CMS that put a tremendous strain
on our network all we work to
increase speeds in those
districts for the increased
speeds all was necessary.
We were also tasked and are
tasked with
training for the district
attorney's.
It manages to.
Could not R. two trainees as we
normally would the spring all
district attorney's conference
and the fall of district
conference for are both those
courses would somebody just
attended every class of either
one of those courses would have
had their necessary amount of
continuing legal credits to
maintain their their New Mexico
bar license we did trained all.
Because prosecutors so that they
could keep their license and
current the.
One thing we weren't able to do
all was to provide training for
much of the other staff for the.
At this point staff for victims
the kids that's Gators are we
would hope that we can
accomplish that in this coming
this coming year and so of.
With that.
Members the committee madam
chair the staff questions all
right Henry how many years have
you been doing this been leading
the charge with this agency
Madam chair I took this position
in two thousand twelve.
Okay.
All righty and you do have the
the chairman of the the
association this list Liz she
their kids.
You said she was in your office
with you.
Right next to me okay all right.
All righty good to see you thank
you all for being here so let's
go to the committee at this time
let's start with Representative.
Could somebody have something
else I wanted to say.
Okay let's go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Valdez I was wondering if you
could
Lou explain the the service is
the victims advocates and
investigators are those
positions and contractual
services or other or are they
of personal services.
Madam chair representative Dixon
the victim advocates of service
and the.
Or or advocates and the.
Investigators are employed with
the district within the district
attorney's offices are accounted
for in each D. A.'s budget so
there you they are generally
on all full time positions
although many offices have a
grant funded victim advocates
all what we are charged with is
ensuring that they are properly
trained.
And with our role in terms of of
victim advocacy is ensuring that
the victim advocates are aware
of all parole dates are parole
hearings of those types of
things so the department of
corrections sent off the data on
dates and we send them out to
the various offices on and with
investigators we do the training
on for the investigators we do
it trying to read twice a year
so that they're fully qualified
to be certified peace officers
within the state in New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair Mr Valdez
one other question the
transferred the fifty four
thousand dollar transfer out of
personal services was that will
one of those
Transfers because it's a
unified.
Budget if you could explain that
thank you thank you madam chair
that was my other question.
Madam chair of Representative
Dixon each office has their own.
All agency code their own budget
and so AODA has its own agents
Cotham home budget we often move
money out of our personal
services and benefits because
that is our largest line item
and we are at times need to
expand the money either in.
The two.
Increase and with for some of
the offices the need it or
purchase equipment.
Would you like for instance this
year of COVID hit there were a
lot of offices.
When you get a chance to drive
more copied twice to my club.
It.
And the and so because of
because of those types of things
I I I I will have
my fiscal officer check exactly
with that fifty four thousand
dollar bar was on you start by
transfer of cedar American all
the can address that issue.
Friday Amanda.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think bright
actually has his handout I think
he knows exactly what that part
was for any Francisco what it
what is it.
Bring your unit.
you madam chair members the
committee I just wanted to touch
on something really quick that
are Representative Dixon brought
up you know is looking at the
transfers
if you'll notice in the column
for FY twenty PSEB so in your
volume I think it's page one
ninety eight so.
Previous hearings one of our
analyst went and looked at it
and compare to compare these
numbers we actually found that
this number was incorrect the FY
twenty it's actually the FY
nineteen RRPS in the U. C. E. B.
R. and.
It'll give you a different when
you put the correct number and
it's going to give you different
percentage on the FY twenty one
the percentage of the all but
being transferred the like for
this one it's not that big of a
deal it's not that big of a
difference it's going from.
Three point three percent to
three point seven percent but
all I know with some other
agencies you'll see a bigger
difference but I just wanted
To know that to the committee.
madam chair
Representative Dixon with with
that explanation of what you're
talking about I can tell you
that the money that was barred
out of that particular time in
two thousand nineteen was used
to fund of the.
A forensic interview programs
the just the administrative
office of discouraged had
received at one point some
funding from the legislature to
distribute to the forensic and
every programs and even though a
that language in house bill two
isn't there mandating that we do
it we have continued to give
that amount of money to the
forensic interviewing programs
which of course the DA's offices
throughout the state are
recipients of their work and so
there is a connection there and
we want to support those
entities as much as we can.
Thank you so much Mr Valdez and
madam chair I really appreciate
that answer and so glad that you
could touch on the forensic
interviews that's important work
thank you.
Thank you very much a next will
have Representative Lara and
then Representative Lang go
ahead Sir thank you madam chair
thank you Mr all this is a
presentation I am I am you to to
the to this committee and I'm
still learning a lot but there's
something here that I saw that I
haven't seen before that would
like to ask you about and that's
the southwest border protection
initiative on are those federal
monies are those statements.
Madam chair representative those
are federal monies the southwest
border initiative was a of of
federal governmental a federal
government program that
reimbursed state so that all
along the southwest border all
four.
The money that was expended due
to the fact that we have the
southwest border all and so it
was it was monies that the state
of New Mexico along with Texas
Arizona California could apply
for for reimbursement for monies
that would have been expended
in of prosecuting border related
crimes
you know smuggling cases
those types of things of the.
The program was discontinued
about six years ago on and so
there hasn't been any any new
funding at one point there was a
audit that was done and because
of the audit that was done the
reimbursement was.
Very late getting to New Mexico
and they sold the legislature
did at that particular time was
put money and AODA to distribute
to the rest of the the offices
and this is that portion of
money once it was reimbursed so
there's that fifty some thousand
dollars that's carried over of
the fiscal year fiscal year we
have expended some at different
times but that's what's in the
fund now.
Thank you for that Mr of this
madam chair so it you know I I'm
I'm familiar with the with
education budgets especially
with with the federal money and
federal funds can't supplant
state funds someone that has if
I'm barking up the wrong tree or
that it has any relevance what
we're talking about with this
with this border prosecution
Fund.
Madam chair of Representative
Lotta I I I think it you know
because a program is
discontinued I don't know what
effect that would have on
whether it's a planting or not I
I just do think that
the money that we have in there
is used very sparingly and for
emergencies and to take that
away
and we would have some emergency
come up our options would be
extremely limited and maybe
maybe we won't even have an
option.
I'd like to interject at this
point when you look at the high
I love all of different sheet
and you look at based sources
and uses one way approve each
one of these we approve the
entire budget doesn't matter if
it's a federal amount or a state
general fund about we look at
all the funds and
So it is not necessary lease
supplanting mass but it is you
know we do have the authority to
look at all funds we focus on
general fund because that's
where the primary focus for our
work is but we actually we
actually budget everything for
each agency so.
Thank you for the clarification
madam chair thank you thank you
Mr about this.
All righty let's go to
Representative Ryan lane.
Thank you madam chair and
actually my questions center
around that same southwest
border Fund and so I don't have
any other questions thank you
madam chair.
Okay we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to general question to
kinda.
Guide me through the rest of
this whole process is here I
talk a little bit earlier.
I just want to get clarification
out in front of everyone in the
high level of she for coming out
of LESC over the interim.
They had a recommendation for a
compensation.
That is not built into the US.
And I'm not sure about the
executive compensation package.
I'm not sure.
if the compensation package
placed in the LFC
recommendation.
This is a budget or does it just
flows directly to the employees
through the PSEB I noticed that
on this agency there sixteen
employees there.
PSEB lined is is pretty much the
same.
One of the analysts are both
Alistair someone.
Explained as we look at this how
to use the compensation
recommendation from LFC.
Factor into this process we're
going through today.
And the document on behalf of
the committee that he's talking
about is the high level
appropriations summary we were
given a copy of that when we
went through the consensus
revenue projections that was
early early on in the
committee's work and at that
point which you'll see is the
difference between LESC and the
executive LFC recommend play
compensation level of sixty
million dollars and that so go
ahead and then to.
Representative David on here too
correct me if I'm wrong but the
compensation the LFC
compensation amount is not built
into the individual based
recommendations.
One point five percent increase
in section of the bill is
separate section of the bill.
So whichever recommendation to
adopt that increased isn't in
the individual the ace budgets
last year it was this year it's
not built into the base budget.
It is a question madam chair and
and is Dick Peddie.
Is that compensation also in the
executive recommendation or is
it only in the LFC
recommendation.
Members of the committee as far
as I know the executive does not
have the compensation increased
plants only in the LFC
recommendation.
That's correct.
If I if I could follow up Mr
chair
to work I think you're going
with this Representative Crowder
if you think of the PS and be
line is one and a half percent
of that is.
Twenty four thousand it's mostly
pay and benefits not entirely
but and then numbers when you
roll and the compensation
increase think about adding one
and a half percent to the of
sixteen twenty three for LFC so
another twenty four thousand
To the LFC recommendation for
personal service.
Okay.
Thank you for that I I
appreciate that I know that
we're gonna look at all the
agencies and I need to have that
in my thought process as we go
forward looking at each agency
so thank you madam chair.
Right are there any other
questions from the committee
with this agency.
All right I don't see any other
hands
excuse me Representative Brown.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair to.
Just.
Question about
the it ministry of office of the
district attorney's and this has
to do with some technology help
desk work that's done I'm
looking at page forty seven of
the volume to.
And here it's it's a metric it's
the average time to resolve
information technology help desk
tickets in hours you know we've
all become so technology
dependent
last year so and I'm just
curious why the actuals in hours
for the twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty was two hundred
eighty one hours to resolve
technology issue I guess it went
down a little bit two hundred
ninety three hours in fiscal
year twenty and the budget
respects for
Recommendations of for twenty
one twenty two twenty two again
our it would be seven hours to
results so why the huge
differential what Madam chair
what changed in the operation to
to lower that number of hours
that significantly.
And thank you madam yes.
Madam chair representative brown
we this led to your default.
This to positions that we're
able to fill with programmers.
And so because of those two
positions they were able to work
on not just the development and
and that and I didn't go into
the big spiel about a lot of
what AODA does in terms of the
the case management but there
are things within that case
management system such as the
the the victim notification
system are there is the E.
discovery system and these are
told that the offices use every
day and so they work on
enhancements for those as well
as be able to troubleshoot
things that may happen and so it
was the the the reduction in the
number of hours had to do with
the increase in staff.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
All right thank you again answer
any other questions for Henry
and and his team this this
afternoon.
Right I don't see any other
hands up I need a motion
Representative small thank you
madam chair I would move the LFC
recommendation for the
administrative office district
attorney's we have a motion to
have a second.
Thank you madam chair and then a
second for Representative Lara
all righty is there any
opposition to that motion.
Right I don't see any opposition
so you have been approved the
motion here thank you very much
and ran
we're going to go through each
one of the district's gonna do
things a little different today
we're going to start aware of
thirteenth and work our way
backward so if we could let's
get the thirteenth up already
and I'm going to ask
Representative Garcia or that
is.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
All right let's go to the
analyst on the thirteenth
judicial district.
All right madam chair members of
the committee thirteenth
judicial district attorney
for revenue the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by sixty thousand
while the executive
recommendation keeps general
fund revenue flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget the
LFC recommendation budgets a
hundred hundred thousand in
other revenues consistent with
FY twenty one operating budget
levels because.
Forty six thousand in funding on
the southwest border fund
initiatives.
for the base the executive
recommendation applies a lower
vacancy rate in the LFC
recommendations include sixteen
point six thousand.
More than the LFC recommendation
are tracked attorneys and or
performance both analyst
research consensus on all
measures and targets all with
that manta would you like to add
anything.
Madam chair representative.
Once a vacancy rate that you all
applied before we go to the
thirteenth day.
Members of the committee you
know the executive thank you
very.
I want to know what you implied
in what the
executive applied.
You madam chair members of the
committee for the LFC
recommendation.
You.
By the LFC recommendation for
person the LFC look at
The HSD had a hundred forty
three thousand in funding
the LCS and transferred a
hundred twenty thousand out of
PSDP the agency also gave about
seventy three point two thousand
in out of cycle races in FY
twenty so the LESC doesn't use
up.
This this one doesn't use the
percentage rate is the rate but
that small reduction in person
that's with that from.
You're great with go ahead Brian
madam chair on the executive
side we gave him a seventy point
seven percent vacancy.
Okay all right let's go to the
thirteenth district attorney
place.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Barbara all the newly elected
district attorney for the
thirteenth and as you all know.
I you know there's there hasn't
been a change district attorney
in this district for twenty
years.
So while we are submitting flat
flat budget we're asking that of
course that our budget from
fiscal year twenty one remain
the same I I I know that the
prior administration carry quite
a few vacancies I am in the
process of reorganizing and at
some point I have to say that
some of those vacancies I I plan
to fill I'm hoping that I can do
that with the current budget
that that we have but I think
one of the representatives asked
about victim advocates the
victim advocate services are
very very critical we haven't
had our big positions filled for
two or three years and I can
tell you that the numbers for
the victim advocates are really
untenable I have the Valencia
County advocate caring.
Over six hundred cases the Santa
Fe County caring over five
hundred cases and this of all at
the to navigate caring about
four hundred cases so I I do you
plan on doing some
reorganization but at this point
we you know we appreciate
everything the committees doing
know that it's tough times and
the priorities have to be you
know adjusted to to account for
the comment the numbers.
People that have been impacted
by that so I I do appreciate
everything the committee is
doing and I would just ask that
our budget remain the same so
that we can continue to provide
the services that we are
constitutionally mandated to do
and also I I what I forgot to
mention that I do have my CFO
Lucas.
Thank you and that the room with
me as well as my district office
manager if there are any
questions for them and with that
I will stand for questions from
madam chair or the committee.
All right well thank you very
much
let's go to the committee and
see if we've got any.
any questions from the committee
members.
I do have I do have one question
regarding
For contract attorneys.
How may contract attorneys do
you actually use in a in a year.
Well that they've been used we
have use the last year we had
for contract attorneys I think
right now we currently still
have we have three right three
contract attorneys that is
something that that I hope to
Reduced and that the need for
contract attorneys I know that
in the past the district
attorneys throughout the state
have worked well together in
ensuring or training
complications I've already been
in touch with some of the the
district attorneys in the state
so that I can hopefully be
re establish that kind of
relationship because that will
cut down on the need for
contract attorneys.
There is an issue a couple years
to go about coaching attorneys
from one of one district to the
other
hopefully that isn't occurring
anymore but and there was some
discussion around now let's go
to other questions
representative Garcia thank you
madam chair sorry and lost
service to them but
have a good job of.
All Madam district director
graduation went for number one
madam chair I have a question on
the difference between the LFC
and exec of six thousand three
hundred I've been looking at all
the sheets and we're the ones
that are here just about the
most on our wall of district
attorney's office is.
And you know it's it's
concerning to me given that we
have the largest of.
The largest district in the
state of being which covered in
Shelburne early I mean when it's
simple and
Bernalillo county some of it and
it's concerning and why it is
such a disparity in pricing
given that the normal a sixty
dollar in my district is going
to be
I just want to sleep in he could
be done about the madam chair.
Thank part of that gets back to
the first question I asked but
I'm going to ask the analyst to
talk about this.
Madam chair representative
Garcia that's exactly right the
LFC recommendation took into
account factors such as funding
agency rates out of state races
that we're giving it transfers
out of PSEB the thirteenth
judicial district act time had
pretty high numbers for those
factors of.
I will point out that the
The LFC recreation for all the
district attorney's is going to
be lower in general fund thank
the executive but total the
difference is only two hundred
and seventy thousand dollars so
that difference is pretty big
but it's from those factors
mentioned earlier.
Thank you madam chair you know
we need to get to consideration
what the distributor role just
said earlier about our prior
district attorney admitted for
twenty years and one of the kick
the can on a ward of the many
body for anything but we need to
be sure that we are fair the
incoming people so they don't
inherit a problem that was
already there and when it comes
time for just returning madam
chair to all.
The bill in the spots the work
this is what I would have to
have the funding so next time
are all we're gonna have the
same issue were issued right now
calendar well yeah we can create
vacancy rate is too high so we
really need to look at those
issues instead of our crime no
blame somebody else you know she
just came into office is going
to be pretty tough under Madam
chair.
Right Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just a
quick look at the bottom of the
page of.
Thirteen under the base where it
says the exact.
Hello you can see our state.
Sixteen point six.
The.
I think that should be sixteen
points west.
C..
Madam chair members know
Representative Crowder you're
right we should have my
apologies.
In our madam chair like to
express just kind of a overall
view of process to.
I think I agree with
Representative.
See I.
It's difficult for me to go
through this process.
And to see a lot of the district
attorney's budgets are getting a
slight cut.
Yet most of the budgets we
reviewed have been held harmless
or flat throughout the process.
I hope that some point in this
overall process we can.
We can at least provide a flat
budget I know when we get to
district nine in a minute.
That BA is been cut year after
year.
It's a declining budget and and
that's.
This difficult so thank you
madam chair.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee.
All righty let's go to
Representative Representative
small promotion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC budget for the
thirteenth judicial district and
we have a motion and we have a
second.
We have three hands that are
seconding so that would be
representative Allison that will
call on is the second for the
third thirteenth judicial
district attorney and so we're
taking the LFC recommendation.
And I'm going to ask so is there
any opposition to this motion.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I don't know how to go about
this you know I know were
approved for the LESC but I got
concerns on on such a big hit
for my district school I really
don't know how to address it
other than we I would like for
the committee as a whole to look
at these things to make sure
what I heard and not just my
district any other district is
taking a hit like that and I
think mine is about the biggest
one I read through the whole
page and look for more twenty
three thousand thirty thousand
we're over sixty thousand chair.
We're gonna do Representative a
we're going to have you chair
the subcommittee you and Crowder
after this emotion is done so do
are you affirmative on this
motion Representative Garcia or
not.
Madam chair of we could work on
it yes I'm affirmative okay
already so we have a you we have
a motion for the LFC it's been
approved and when we get into
catch up cleaned up we're going
to look at the same time gonna
ask Representative Garcia and
Crowder to report back to the
full committee on what it means.
And the impact of budgets on
vacancy rates I mean you're both
members of that on this
committee a long time I
understand how these vacancy
rates apply to these budgets I
think it's important if I get
two of you to present that to
the rest of the committee was
the first question I asked when
we came out of the chute today
and I I just think it's
important that we understand
what that actually means and
then how those vacancy savings
or use.
So we're gonna talk about that
when we get to catch up cleanup
for the whole committee because
it applies to everybody at the
end of the day these vacancy
rates and how they're applied in
the budget apply across the
board all right let's go to the
twelfth but if you madam chair.
Real quick just if I can for
So what the committee is gonna
look at all the district three
budgets correct.
Yes we are okay thank you madam
chair that does just a concern
thank you.
Next one is the twelfth judicial
district attorney.
Let's go to the analysts.
Chair members of the committee
the twelfth judicial district
attorney is in Otero and Lincoln
County.
For revenue the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue to the agency five
five thousand one hundred
dollars well the executive
recommendation all funding
sources lacked with the FY
twenty one operating budget in
the based the executive LFC
recommendations are really
really close they're just about
identical with the LFC including
that five point one thousand
that lasted for person that the
executive for performance
analyst reach consensus on all
measures and targets and unless
Mr Chavez has anything to add I
can turn it over to twelfth
district attorney stocky.
Right you have anything else you
want to add madam chair no
comment okay I'll go ahead the
twelfth DA.
Good afternoon
Members of the committee my name
is Scott key and I'm the newly
elected the kind of old DA for
Otero and Lincoln County and I
say that because while I was.
Just an office for about a month
at this point in time I I recall
many of you from three previous
terms that I served from
nineteen ninety seven throughout
three two thousand eight so I've
been through the process.
Quite a few number of times and
and looking at both the
executive and LFC it's it's it's
probably an easy chore in this
case because they're virtually
the the the same.
I wanted to probably just talk a
little bit about the district
to.
And what's been going on with
COVID and you know what's been
going on with the office during
these last few years it is
probably not to a typical for a
many of the districts as well
we're we're south central New
Mexico obviously somewhat rural.
Very conservative and we up we
often have have the difficulties
in attracting attorneys and you
may hear this now from from
other DA's as well in particular
in the rural areas and and
should just that's just the way
it is I I suppose but.
Perhaps in the future we might
be able to talk about to so I'm
not what more equitable
you know salary ranges to
attract people geographically
two some of these districts such
as Otero Lincoln County
because many times what we we
can only attract attorneys from
out of state and that's been.
And what's been going on for
last last few years and while
Santa Fe Albuquerque and to some
degree Los crucis
is it kind of an attractive
place to to get a new job many
people don't know the
attractions of Otero and Lincoln
County and maybe we need to do a
better a a recruitment effort
to.
pop up our our local economies
and and they're tracked
attorneys but to a point that
out just kind of a.
Sometimes that so important to
to recognize on well in
attracting contracting new
attorneys but our budgets are
are virtually the same the
recommendation from LFC and and
the executive of did the the
only other thing I wanted to
tell you and advise you as to
what's been going on during the
COVID is our our district.
Still is maintained on doing a
lot of the jury trials and the I
know our judges are are kind of
proud of the fact that per
capita or per judge we're number
one in the state and we believe
we're on our the route on what
to do and you know how to obtain
that to.
that ever difficult
Think of trying to obtain a
justice in these cases so we
have a hard working crew
with us today and and in this
room even though you can't see
them is our our CFO is the angel
had a loose sorrow and our
district office manager is just
Jesse grant and we're here a
well it answer any questions you
might have it seems that the the
recommendations are are at our
with with the status quo in the
budget so I don't have anything
to add other than to thank you
all for what you do and if you
have any questions up we sure
would like to answer them if we
can't.
Right thank you very much Mr K.
let's see do we have any
questions for the twelve DA.
All righty I don't I don't see
any.
So let's go to Representative
small for the motion thank you
madam chair I would move the LFC
budget recommendations for the
twelfth district attorney.
Okay we have a motion to we have
a second for the twelfth.
Okay we have Representative
Castellano seconds that and is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that the motion is
approved and I like to thank you
Sir for your presentation today
thank you.
All right now the eleventh has a
division one and a division two.
And the paperwork that I have in
front of me division two is
behind of the thirteenth.
Leisten our paperwork that I
have but the eleventh judicial
district attorney as I say has
the two divisions.
I've seen Division one I've seen
him on is there is the division
to also on.
Madam chair.
Okay you okay we have the.
You have division one and
division.
To so.
Yeah let's go with the analyst
was go head do both dimensions
and they will call on those
DA's.
Madam chair members of the
committee our.
Echo two six one of the eleventh
judicial district attorney
division one.
Revenue of the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by thirty five
thousand and budgets fifty five
thousand and fund balance in the
southwest border prosecution
initiative fund.
The executive recommendation
keeps general fund revenue flat
FY twenty one levels for the
base the LFC recommendation
increases funding for personnel
costs by twenty thousand to
improve attorney recruitment and
retention the executive
recommendation keeps all
categories flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget I'm
both analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets.
Would you like to add anything.
Okay let's go to the division
one DA place.
Madam chair thank you restricted
can you hear me OK yes and it
says list sign your name tag
there is of reconcile good to
see you.
Good to see you in thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee
I'd first like to start off just
by saying.
I I never thought I'd say this
but I'm gonna say it I truly
miss seeing you on person and
senior.
But hopefully before this ends
will be able to go over the
roundhouse and see each other
but I would like to take an
opportunity to thank you all for
what you do
it's been a very very odd year
as we all know and I know I have
a representative on this
committee Mr laying there that's
getting to experience his first
legislative session with this
going on so but I do think you
all for what you do I'm very
appreciative of it I would also
like to thank David Abbey for
the work that he does with the
LFC I like to think Amanda and
wish Amanda belated Happy
Birthday but also like to thank
Brian for the work that they do
for us and our office.
I'd like to wish my wife is very
happy birthday on Friday but
even more and don't say that
makes it even more to my wife
and I wish a Happy Birthday to
the madam chair on Saturday so
thank you very much.
You're welcome
Nothing new to report for you
guys to except for the following
we during the COVID one.
Two things have really affected
us
number one there just seem to be
no hiring no movement of people
when it comes to at least
attorneys during the COVID so
it's been sort of again hard to
recruit attorneys.
I'm.
Second thing is San Juan as you
all know was really affected
during the COVID even so the
work we solve later start ups
and everything else so we had
maybe a one month window we're
trials could happen in San Juan
County and I just like report
you guys I am very backed up on
cases some.
A solid ten to eleven months of
cases waiting to go for jury
trial and so it's going to be
interesting response supposed to
have our first one starting up
on February nine so we'll see
how they start to go but we are
very backed up
That being said when it comes to
the recommendations there so
close to each other I think
we're talking about a thirty
five thousand dollar difference
between the two
I'll just say we always
appreciate the more we can get
the better
but I do think you all and I'll
stand for questions.
All righty thank you very much
right we're gonna take the
division two and then we're
going to go to questions so if
we could let's have that a
presenter please.
Are you talking.
We we've already talked to I
thought we had.
I apologize madam chair members
of the committee I would you we
can go over the differentiate
that really quickly for it is
that okay.
Okay so for revenue the LFC
recommendation reduces general
fund by twenty thousand well the
executive recommendation keeps
all funding sources lacked with
the FY twenty one operating
budget the LFC recommendation
budgets twenty thousand dollars
and fund balance not included in
the executive recommendation
that the LFC and Executive
recommendations are nearly
identical in the categories with
the LFC recommendation including
a little over five thousand more
in person than the executive for
performance analyst reach
consensus on all measures and
targets and the second division
is San Juan County.
I can turn it over to the
presenters.
And the second division is to
McKinley County then that would
be.
today Martin are you ready.
I am ready madam chair okay go
ahead.
Background.
The COVID has also.
Yes that our words.
What's the.
We're having trouble hearing you
You having trouble with brought
broadband service or I'm having
trouble with this computer since
I got here I've been interrupted
employers and so on about is
that better it's a little better
go ahead okay so I was just
saying that COVID has
effectively compounded probably
as bad or worse than expected
San Juan County our numbers have
been high on the last several
months is affected some hiring
of issues I will say that I am
new I was elected the last
November some first time holding
a position but I have been in
this office between two thousand
two thousand nine.
So familiar with the procedure
process for the budget is new
submitted by former are D. A.
all of popular.
However the budget is flat.
Ship that the executive
recommendation is to ours we
have the tools poll staff as far
supports them so we are lacking
three attorneys and one chief
investigator who retired last
year.
Once their primary occurred
Senator attorneys left.
So we are we're able to I was a
still to this and since I can.
So we're working our way back.
And as regards to.
Of attorneys there were six you
prior to my arrival my plan
going forward is to not use or
contract attorneys
talent here or if necessary I
hope the other counties are
willing to help us just as we
are willing to help them on on
six and sent one case too
miserable.
This is it was at sentencing
that contract turns funds right
contract expired December
thirty.
So we're going to take it over
but the judge declared a
conflict so miserable thanks to
in the second set we create
that.
So we are otherwise
Ready to rock and roll in fiscal
year twenty twenty to twenty
twenty twenty one twenty two and
we are not pushing it turns no
no it's folks from the
appreciate that so we ask that
the LFC recommendation.
And our.
D. A. recommendation to grant
their consent so I am open for
questions thank you.
All righty thank you Bernard N.
and thank you Representative
let's go to questions we have
Representative Crowder and then
Representative Lang go ahead.
Thank you madam chair just a
question for the analyst from
LFC.
How do you decide when and how
much you transfer of ballots.
Some agencies you transfer fund
balance some you know some quite
a bit some not so much what is
your matrix or or.
Process for deciding to.
Much to transfer of the valves.
Madam chair members of course it
still at the time that the LFC
recommendation was formulated
LFC examined the fund balances
for each district attorney
office and then the recommended
amount is no more than fifty
percent or fifty percent of what
what is.
At the time so the LFC
recommendation doesn't right the
entirety of the fund so district
attorney didn't have any fund
balance so that's why you don't
see this recommendations for
those offices.
Okay thank you for that.
I did notice that some the fund
balance thank you they had an
adequate front office to make
the whole but yet we did not
transfer you fund balance to
make a.
A zero budget I.
So that that's what the question
I don't know that I still
understand.
Yes if there's an exact policy
or something I appreciate no
more than fifty percent but I
didn't know if there is an exact
policy this is this is when you
do that it triggers shared it
stops there so.
Representative Crowder just to
expand on that you're correct
some do have announced that
could have made the whole but
again it was either more than
fifty percent balance what are
LFC was alerted the district was
planning on spending hours in
the current fiscal year.
By the time we got to twenty two
some of that money wouldn't be
there anymore okay in all the
numbers that we're looking at
right now snapshot in time.
Madam chair members of the
committee that is correct but I
can get this updated fund
balances for you as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Okay Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair a my
question is for Mr general
record so it's good to see my
friend on the performance
measures summary were given some
numbers about average number of
cases added to it.
And for FY twenty there were
three hundred to average basis
added to attorneys and then it
dropped quite a bit to one
eighty five.
For FY twenty one budget and
then it looks like it's going to
go up again in two fifty and and
my question is there was a
there's a drop in New caseloads
added but yet looks like were
expecting number case to be
prosecuted increase by about two
fifty five so is that difference
in numbers is that just because
of you're able to.
Higher additional attorney
positions or or what's the
difference there.
Madam chair members of the
community Representative Lane
there's a little factors that
can go into those changes one of
the biggest ones usually when we
lose attorneys are will really
see if I were to lose an
attorney that's carrying you
know well three hundred and I
got to divide those cases up
during the time it takes to fill
the position so that can affect
some people's numbers going out
also.
You know I I would sort of
expect those numbers to go even
higher once we start with the
trials up again in San Juan
Excuse me also you know one good
thing during the COVID is at
least in the beginning it seems
like we didn't have nearly the
amount of rest arrests that
occur
Date the police departments
really you know took COVID
seriously up in our area they
really tried not to arrest
anyone you know.
Things of that nature but went
as things get back to normal we
really expect those numbers to
go back up but I tried but the
biggest factor that we deal with
is simply when I lose my turning
it takes me awhile to replace
some
you know the Farmington and
Aztec Bloomfield market
attorneys or attorneys so we
really got to go elsewhere to
find it's very rare that we have
that students that comes back
from all school comes back to
our area and is ready to work so
it takes a little bit to fill
those spots a lot of times it
could take months so that's sort
of where we sit with them.
Thank you madam chair
in Representative please tell
your lovely wife Happy Birthday
for me and those are all my
questions all right thank you
run.
Your hand is up did you have a
response go ahead.
Madam chair representative Wayne
I just wanted to clarify on the
form that you're looking act and
at age twenty six of your packet
the one eighty five number isn't
an actual caseload number that
is the LFC recommended amount of
caseloads per attorney and
that's based on national best
practices so the one eighty five
that you see is the LFC
recommendation to fifty is the
executive recommendation just so
you know those are the actual
case loads.
Okay thanks Amanda was gonna
Representative Anthony Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
I was waiting for a
Representative Crowder to see if
he was going to ask this
question after I heard him ask
his question I push my right
hand button in the report honor
of versions I noticed that in
fiscal year of nineteen.
The reversion was forty six
thousand six hundred ninety
seven and then in this previous
year it all jumped up to two
hundred and seventy eight
thousand six hundred and sixty
five which is almost six times
as much as the previous years
reversion of what was the reason
for these rivers since.
Madam chair.
We have an answer for that.
you madam chair this is Rick is
directed to division one or
division to.
Yes.
It's just too both divisions I
guess it doesn't designate
exactly where the revisions
were.
Madam chair if I may go first I
know we had a bigger version
last year and.
That reversion.
Our current.
To put it simply one comment
here we tried to take up a lot
of our we stopped hiring we put
people to work from home or work
remotely
and we did a a big budget
adjustment request to buy the
necessary technology so laptops
might fly these things of that
nature and are requests was
never recognized so when June
came
the money was still there so
that's actually a bill that I'm
gonna be.
Trying to to purchase things
this year so I'll be doing
another one but we said on money
trying to buy technology to be
able to work remotely and so.
By the time June here there is a
lot of money that went back to
Santa Fe we needed it but it
just didn't happen.
I hope that answers your
question representative Allison.
Yes it does is there are.
Response from
very dated do you know why
because part of this is your
division also.
Madam chair of members of the
committee my information is our
reversion about with a little
over forty thousand which
doesn't seem to me to be a huge
a huge amount but this is the
date of federal stated we have
the same issues with having some
turns up for work at home by but
then and then not being.
Not being able to hire that was
a huge barrier comment about the
I would say June of last year.
when it got really bad.
Was that a December.
But a lot of issues with being
able to bring people together to
move in from other states and
that kind of thing.
So the revisions in the county
division two
We see a little over forty
thousand.
Okay all right let's see if we
have any other quote of
questions for the eleventh.
I don't see any other hands.
So Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I'd
like to move the LFC
recommendation for the eleventh
just district attorney division
one and division to.
All right we have a second.
Second it.
Thank you Representative Lane on
that second is there any
opposition to that motion saying
now the motion is passed and let
me thank both of the DA's from
division one and division two
offer your presentations today.
So let's go to that.
Judicial district and if we
could seven analysts are out.
Right madam chair members of the
committee
on the go to sixty tenth
judicial district attorney.
Revenue the LFC recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
to the agency by fifteen
thousand while the executive
recommendation keep general fund
revenue flat with the FY twenty
one operating budget.
The LFC recommendation decreases
the personal services and
employee benefits category by
fifteen thousand in FY twenty
the agency transferred eighty
thousand out of the category for
other purposes.
House scene executive analyst
both reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
Amanda would you like to add
anything.
Okay.
And we think this okay great.
Do we have and the tenth there
ready to speak.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee this is Timothy rose
the like to do a for the tenth
judicial district
representing
qua Harding into Baca counties.
On the eastern side of New
Mexico we are the smallest
judicial district attorney's
office we have fourteen
including myself full time
employees of which includes
three full time attorneys
in the district
we need to excuse my background
I know it's informal I'm home
today got my second comment
vaccine shot yesterday and not
feeling too great today.
but it's good to see you that
things are going actually pretty
well on the tenth
Of course we have three
magistrate courts one in each
county in one district of judge
that covers all three counties.
We've been able to transition
from home of most of our
employees and work from home
attend court from home and
through these virtual settings
we haven't had any jury trial
since March of last year that's
been re opened as of yesterday.
And so we have a Senator jury
trials planned for the next
several months of the come would
be that we've been able to cover
our our technology the.
Cause for the transition from
work to home primarily through
the
Lack of or the decrease in funds
that we needed for gasoline
we're very rural area we travel
from county to county which is
about ninety miles in each
direction in our investigators
and attorneys are are all the
time on the road so expect that
the pick back up we do expect to
see so additional technology
cost level we go to this.
A new air we're we're not all on
virtual or not all in the court
room but we have a some people
appearing virtually and some
people
of present in the actual court
rooms
We do see that that
I guess what what will what I
would want to caution the
committee about is what's been a
rebel forces backlog of cases I
do a number of conflict basis
for other districts and I see it
even more in other districts
their money
but nine months of not having
jury trials of seem to reason
that criminal defendants when
they're facing a decision to
plead guilty to accept plea
deals what's the incentive for
them to do that when they know
that there's not ability to go
to trial in the case so we see
these delays and it's taking
longer to get plea deals and
there's going to causes back up
of cases that need to go to
trial.
And in one to finish No.
in their attorneys no more in
particular that there's only a
number of days in a given week
or given month or year the court
consent aside for criminal
trials that takes days and
sometimes weeks to try a case
this can be very difficult of
because they know that not every
case is going to get tried in a
timely fashion so there's the
increase incentive for people to
delay a basis in because even
though of course the backlog so
it I just would put that out
there because I don't think it's
a good time in particular to
make.
Big cuts in the judiciary or the
DA's offices or or even the
public defender's offices.
For that matter.
The more particularly as two of
our budget.
Madam chair
We've had over the last three
years pretty much a full we have
fourteen FTEs with that thirteen
of the pool.
we have most of our people are
career people we have five
people I think that are set to
reach the retirement over the
next five years we don't lose
that many people of we've had
our district office manager
position vacant for the last I
think three years.
We just recently lost one of our
prosecutors which takes it down
of myself into other prosecutors
in prosecuting cases were hoping
to a.
To a hire somebody new we can
find somebody willing to come
down to to come carrier for
Sumner to do that we're holding
off on that opening just to make
sure to see what kind of budget
we have in this if that what
type of the offer we can
actually make somebody to make
sure that we don't have people
that's going to be having to be
furloughed or or something of
that nature
but but overall Committee
members were doing very well
would surely appreciate your
your time in letting us speak to
you today and all the things
that you're doing with that will
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr rose a minute there
when you came online I thought
you were at a hard rock
restaurant with your head in the
garden and the guitars behind
you.
The digital one of the.
Anyway we're hope you feel
better and let's see if we've
got any questions for many the
committee members.
You know I I don't see any hands
up so I'm gonna go to
Representative.
Yes I'm sorry I'm Representative
Anderson having trouble getting
my hand raised madam chair I I
have a just a question of of Mr
rose go ahead.
Thank you Mr rose I heard you
make the point that it is bad
that it takes longer to get a
plea deal and it it made me
pause and think you know I
probably know some people who
might not think that's all bad
could you elaborate on that
point please Sir.
Yes sure
Representative Anderson members
of the committee I've been a I
was a defense attorney for ten
years prior to switching over an
incoming to the DA's office and
and running for DA
our strategy of as if it's
attorney's always delay is good
it's good for the criminal
defendant or for defense anyway
in the longer you delay case the
better
and so it's it's that's just the
way it is
and if you know that because of
a backlog in case Susan the in
the struggle for courts to have
it have sufficient time to hear
cases of prisoners will usually
happen of the court may set a
week a month or week every other
month or like an amicable said
one month of jury trials but
Scott key cases better but I'm
handling one of his
complications up in Alamogordo
and then there's one month the
jury trials but there is a
hundred and some cases set not
one month.
so the court can only try you
know realistically maybe twenty
cases so it's eighty cases it's
not going to be tried that
either need be played out or
continued in those cases go to
the next docket right in this so
if they're not resolved that
creates an additional backlog in
into the number ending story in
repetition and then less you can
get enough court time in person
attorneys defense attorneys
prosecuted for needs and jurors
to to come in and handle those
cases and if you're working
sufficiently and efficiently
than than a defense attorneys
know prosecutors known it in
there for for this though the
that your case is going to get
tried if if you don't resolve
it.
so I hope this.
Mr rose if I could in it to our
I your answer which was
excellent I really appreciate it
because of early in your answer
I thought to myself know that
does really make sense if it was
really just a require a of did I
misunderstand or not and your
explained as been excellent for
making thank you Sir and thank
you madam chair.
Thank you let's go back to
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the tenth due to stroke.
District attorney all right we
have a second for that motion
also in the chair okay we have
representative Garcia for the
second is there any opposition
to that motion I don't see any
opposition so it is an approved
motions so thank you very much
and our hope you start feeling
better Mr rose thank you madam
chair all righty let's next go
to the line gestural DNA start
with the analyst.
Madam chair members of the
committee the north divisional
district attorney that is
Harding quay and Baca County
that's the time sorry that's
Roosevelt curry
increase.
Our revenue the LFC
recommendation it reduces
general fund revenue by twenty
four point nine thousand well
the executive recommendation
general fund revenue flat with
FY twenty one in the face of the
executive recommendation reduces
the agency funding agency right
and included additional funding
for contract attorneys and
tribal the LFC regulation parts
the other costs and.
Actuals services categories flat
with equity twenty one and
reduce the personal services
employee benefits category to
leverage vacancies the HSD had
at the time of requests that
mission for performance LFC and
executive analyst regional
census on all performance
measures and targets unless it
Mr Thomas added I can read over
to district attorney Andrea
report for your comments.
Madam chair that.
All right is this going to end
and then.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for letting me briefly
speak I won't take much time but
as this is kind of a snapshot as
Amanda talked about at a certain
time I wanted to talk a little
bit about what our district did
and I mentioned it in the
November hearing we along with
us got keys jurisdiction the
fifth of through COVID I think
it started approximately around
June to July I think was more
July to the last shut down we
were testers directions for how
to run a COVID jury trial we
were volunteered for those at
that that jobs basically to let
other jurisdictions model after
how we did it and so because of
that we basically were in office
and staffed fully in order to
get that done we tried
approximately fifty what we did
try fifty jury trials during a
between the month I believe of
July and the last shut down
Representative already pick two
or three juries for next week
I was a little shorter than
Scott stirs diction who I think
did fifty seven so we were a
little competitive on that but
we we got all our backlog done
and we were able to at least in
my office get fully staffed we
started out back when COVID
first began leaving some
positions full not really
knowing where cuts would be what
was going to happen with the
pandemic and then when it was
determined that we were gonna be
this tester stiction we bill
dollar positions we we have
forty positions those positions
are full and have been full
I am asking that the Committee
does not take any more money
from us even the recommendation
by LFC of twenty practically
twenty five thousand with a
fully staffed office that that's
a lot of money to me.
And a lot of money to the
employees who been extremely
brave and extremely
understanding that were
essential and that while many of
them did not want to go out and
be that tester sticks for trials
and get in there with all these
people they did it and I'm very
proud of them for it and I just
would hate to have to furlough
even a twenty five thousand
dollar cut could put me in that
position because I am fully
staffed and I don't anticipate
any of these individuals
relieving
so we did our backlog cut up we
we've been doing trials we've
been in the office you know when
a lot of districts were at home
working from home that wasn't us
we were here every single day
besides maybe well every single
day actually we never we never
had to shut down in this office
and so that's why I'm asking
Beijing that you keep us flat so
that we don't lose any more
money which I believe the loss
at four percent which which
heard us but I respectfully ask
members of the committee to keep
this with a flat budget and with
that I will stand for any
questions.
All right we got a
Representative Crowder.
Is this your mid.
Okay there you go thank you
madam chair appreciated in and
out.
R. DA read has covered most of
my questions.
I would be remiss if I didn't
mention the reversion of the.
The reversion or transfer of
PSEB.
Requests for.
Yes was a transfer.
The madam chair will make note
that I think there's a mistake
on the line in reversion is
those two lines are blank in and
I believe there were some very
small reversion no ask maybe our
LFC analysts to go back and see
if we can find that which you
did transfer quite a bit out of
your PSEB and if I don't answer
the question Allison is what is
it up so thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Crowder members of the committee
it's it's a good question the
best I can explain it is that
was approximately in March and
April when the pandemic kit we
had of our senior trial
prosecutor position vacant which
is about half of the money that
we reverted that we transferred
due to the fact that we weren't
sure if there was gonna be more
cuts or what what was gonna
happen so we're being
conservative in that area then
we are that money over we choose
to update all our I. T.
equipment due to the pandemic we
knew we were going to be
teleworking more people are
going to have to be at home so
we wanted to be able to do a
competent job with what we were
dealing with so we took the
opportunity to read too far that
money over updater I. T.
equipment with the vacancy
savings and then as soon as jury
trials begin again we filled all
those positions and we are fully
staffed at this point.
Thank you for that response
thank you madam chair that's all
my questions.
All right do we have anybody
else that has any questions of
this this day.
Okay I I don't see any other
hands here some ago
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation for the line
judicial district attorney.
Okay we have a motion and we
have a second second
Representative Crowder
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any opposition so
it's going to be a pro for the
LFC and course will we're gonna
get closer as a committee on the
US one we have Representative
Garcia and Crowder president
always staff on the whole issue
around vacancy savings because I
think that's going to be
important understand out some of
these things are done we talked
about it earlier and had has
done differently by the LFC
worsens the executive I just
think that would be helpful to
see.
So anyway we do have an approved
LESC motion for the night let's
go ahead move on to the eight.
Madam chair yes Sir.
Madam chair real quick on that
point and we were talking about
vacancies in the district
attorney's.
Of.
That I've answered my question
thank you.
Okay go to the eight please go
ahead staff.
On madam chair members of the
committee peacoat two fifty
eight it's judicial district
attorney.
Revenue of the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by forty thousand
while the executive keeps
revenue flat with FY twenty one
operating budget.
The executive recommendation
applies a lower vacancy rate
than the LFC recommendation
resulting in four thousand less
per person than the LFC
recommendations seven the
executive recommendation
includes increase funds for
contractual for contract
attorneys and travel expenses
and both analyst reach consensus
on measures and targets.
Anything that.
Members of the committee not.
All right I will take this down
I will go to the district
attorney place.
Madam chair committee members
good afternoon and thank you for
allowing us the time to stand
here before you today thank you
for your many hours of.
And this work and services are
elected legislators and all this
pandemic is affected us all and
so there are fewer slices of the
pie to go around and just to
mention a few of the pandemic
affects on this district at
which is the judicial district
I'm sorry Marcus Montoya and
recently elected district
attorney.
Representing Cass county Colfax
County and union counties this
comment backlog also as I will
echo Seneal sentiments from
other district attorneys a
particular to mind back in
twenty twenty for the last
eleven months our district is
able to get approximately six
jury trials are conducted in all
that time that means which is
two or three district judges in
division one we've got forty
trials are waiting and I've got
victims I've got.
Legal support I've got witnesses
about law enforcement and judges
and county detention centers
eagerly awaiting our resumption
of trials that of course trials
is typically are most costly and
taxing service that we provide
in that it requires many more
man hours staff power expert
witnesses and over time and
victims advocates legal support
diligently contributing to the
professional prosecution of
trials
there was a difference of about
forty thousand and
recommendations to again echo
some of D. A. Reeves sentiments
is that when we have some
vacancies on this and it was an
election year and we had some X.
it is and some of that was my
chief deputy Attorney who of
course earns more than all the
other attorneys we have only to
stay over attorneys out of the
ten in this district after the
election so those vacancy is
savings don't necessarily
reflect the full time amount of
money we need to employ a full
attorneys and staff we do have
roughly thirty five FTEs we do
have life time employees and we
are looking as they retire from
the previous administration to
get a higher a lot of those
given that people in the age of
this district to to work here
and serve the community that is
difficult because when I am able
to bring on an associate
attorney.
after a year to the along one of
the associates they want to be a
trial attorney and so on and so
forth trial attorneys want
becomes your trial attorneys
those payments require that much
more money and the minute that
I'm not willing to or have the
budget to promote they're gonna
take jobs elsewhere and it's as
many DA's have already stated
very difficult to bring people
to some of our more rural areas
and even though tested a
tractive place to come and work
it's a more expensive place to
live no new story but just to
kind of echo some of the
settlements
that being said
we are this.
Band together and we got through
the COVID season we did have
some positive in the office of
the closures remote working and
hybrid brick and mortar
appearances we may work but now
we are like all other districts
are slated for three trials next
week through our counties so
that being said thank you again
appreciate your time and at this
time I was ever questions if
there are any.
Representative.
All right thank thank you.
This is current we need to make
sure everybody's view thank you
of Mr Montana The presentation
we do have some questions let's
go Representative Dixon work is
twenty thank you madam chair and
D. A. Montoya.
One question is in a it looks
like the east district that are
of version of about forty eight
thousand dollars could you
explain that and I apologize if
you already did.
Was no similar to I think eleven
one madam chair committee
members and Representative Dixon
similar to where coming out and
getting into for one trials
COVID hit impacted again a lot
of our my accidents and savings
we're based on people very
anxious about the election
looking for other jobs
of course we prevailed and we're
here but I those savings and we
wanted to use those monies to do
a budget adjustment request to
get the printers in the
standards in the computers and
the cell phones are just there
is kind of us a stall on getting
that money bart out of course we
can get out of the two hundreds
that's our largest line item
amount and we're just and
successful in doing that so
we've done that this year.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair.
Ryan did you have a comment you
want to add I yes madam chair
I know of some questions about
revisions are are coming up well
during that time when COVID hit
we ask agencies to really slow
down spending on just because we
didn't know all what was gonna
happen so with some of these
agencies you you're gonna see
some high versions you know as
we last agencies to slow down
spending so
that's all I have to ask.
We have to have any other
questions for Mr Montorio.
I I don't see any other hand so
I'm gonna go to Representative
of small for the motion thank
you madam chair I would move the
LFC recommendation for the eight
the judicial district attorney.
All right we have a motion and a
second from Representative Dixon
is there any opposition to that
motion saying that it's been
approved and thank you Mr multi
approved as education today
thank you madam chair thank you
all.
All right we're going to go next
to the seven.
Staff if you want to fire up.
Sorry.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the seventh
judicial district attorney that
is Patrick C. Harris to coral in
Torrance County so
geographically a very large
district for revenue the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by ten point one
thousand and increases the use
of funds balanced by ten
thousand to help with that
reduction the executive.
General fund revenue flat FY
twenty one.
In the the executive
recommendation includes more
funding in the other cost
categories for travel.
Services well the LFC
recommendation increase person
funding for recruitment and
retention analysts reach
consensus on also.
And unless Mr Thomas has
anything to add I can turn it
over to the district attorney
will work.
Madam chair nothing at.
All right miss Welborn would
please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Clint
Welborn and the district
attorney for the seventh
judicial district caption shares
Sikora imports counties I'm the
only judicial district that has
four counties in my district
they're all very large rural
counties we compass about twenty
one thousand square miles it's
almost the same size as West
Virginia
it also we're the largest U.
additional district not only in
the state but in continental
United States there are larger
ones in Alaska outside the
United States we are the largest
in the in the budget
Executive I understand that the
committee is taking the the LFC
recommendation but I would like
to point out the two thousand.
Is out of our southwest border
funds that we have we have that
money we've.
Kept that money is Mr Valdez
touched on previously with a DA
we have expert witness fees
which often pop up in their kind
of unpredictable currently we
have sixty thousand in that
category but often we've had
expert witness fees as high as
twenty five thousand for the
year and this funding enables me
to not have to go and request
the kind of supplemental of from
the
the legislature and so I I am if
that was to be used as part of
our budget I'd be concerned
about that that we might have
expert witness fees as many of
the DA's of said we have a
backlog of trials right now we
had just a few trials this
summer we had many attempted
trials but we were unable to get
enough jurors at most of those
trials and so those cases just
got postponed and put back in
the I don't know the number
right now that we have pending
but we have a number and we know
we're going to be busy when we
start opening up we have our
first trial is not till March
at six four is open back up in
the I would just reflect what
to bring Chavis said that as far
as our version we were asked by
the executive to conserve as
much money as we could and so we
limited are spending as much as
we could and reverted basically
for the state to be able to have
those funds available to them
and with that I'll stand for any
question to the committee might
have.
All right looking for hands
being thank okay we have one
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that presentation hi
clients good to see you
I was looking at just comparing
the seventh in the eight eight
and
As Mr Robert was saying how
large the district is that it
covers
it just seems a little funny
that there's such a difference
in the dollar amounts yes I just
wanted to bring that to the
committee's attention are the
and we have one more employee.
In the in the seventh also I did
want to ask about the fifty
thousand dollar transfer.
In nineteen.
I believe that was the only one
that I saw and you explain to
the reversion we we did have a
nineteen we use those funds to
I'm sorry madam chair and
representative Armstrong we did
have a a transfer in FY nineteen
it was we use those monies to
purchase new computers and also
I believe the vehicle we spoke
to our analyst at the time about
that and basically got there
I don't approvals the right word
but they felt it was adequate
and that we should use those
monies to do that rather than
try to come up with the money
from other areas it was
transferred out of personal
service.
Okay thank you that that was all
madam chair thanks for doing the
job that you're doing thank you
also.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair
Mr what are I just wanted to ask
a short question the terms of
one of the largest.
District of.
In the continental United States
forty one thousand square miles
in I thought okay here's come
but.
had of some experience with
whether or not the savings could
be achieved.
Why going virtual to the extent
you are able to which made me
wonder about wifi accessibility
in your district I'm really just
searching for somebody who might
have a view on where their
savings or did this cost more to
have fewer trials your districts
are.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I can tell you it was
it was savings of trial report
by phone or by of virtual Google
meets it's so we're not doing
the traveling that we usually do
it also we haven't done that
many jury trials jury trials
thank a lot more time and effort
by all the staff not just
teachers trying also by the
staff preparing the jury
instructions investigators
helping us prepare for the trial
there's a lot more workers into
a trial in the case that
resolves itself by a plea
agreement and so just because
the fact that we haven't had any
trials you know let me say this
money also not having to travel
we're on the road almost at
least one or two attorney she's
on the road every day usually
when our work under normal
circumstances we haven't had to
do that everybody's been working
virtually appearing in court but
I will tell you that appearing
by phone or by virtual is not a
way to to have for it's very
difficult to do preliminary
hearings by phone it's rather
chaotic there's maybe fifty
people on the line you hear
babies crying in the background
and and other things
interrupting and and people
dropping off attorneys in the
middle of the argument dropping
off it's not really in a way to
run a railroads by the same to
deport this way so it's very
difficult we're looking forward
to being able to in in person
again because it's not a way of
functions way.
Thank you Mr Welborn thank you
madam chair.
Right I'm not sure is anymore
hands out of for questions as to
Welborn with that being said is
go to our Representative small
promotion.
Thank you madam chair I move the
other recommendation for the
seventh judicial district
attorney.
All right we have a second also
give them under.
Right we have a second from
Representative Castellano is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that it has been a
approved go to the next district
which is six thank you madam
chair members.
All righty and thank you Mr
Welborn let's go to the six
staff.
Madam chair members of the
committee agents the echo two
five six six additional district
attorney.
Revenue the LC recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
by twenty thousand and supplants
the reduction with Sundowns from
the southwest order prosecution
initiative fund the executive
recommendation keeps all revenue
sources Platt with the FY twenty
one operating budget.
For the base the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
all categories are identical and
both analyst reach consensus or
measures and targets Amanda.
Okay and then Amanda did you
have anything else to add I
needed to the wrong time madam
chair members of the committee
nothing to add I believe we have
district attorney Renteria with
us from the six.
Okay and I'm gonna call on
Representative small to take
over for a little bit here
that's great thank you madam
chair District Attorney
Renteria.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the month to month
plan I'm representing Michael
Rodriguez he was called off on a
family emergency today I present
my chief finance officer and ran
one million my special projects
officer attrition Medina and a
financial specialists actually
will be January represents the
major cities are getting.
Large bird and silvercity but
the county as a grant will
drive.
Our major planned this next few
months is to hire two more
attorneys right now we're
foreshores we think we have the
budget to manage the to to
attorneys we also need to bring
a secretary from the term
temperaments boy.
The budgets that you suggest.
We want to thank you appreciate
the challenges are going on at
work that you're doing and we
want to make sure that you
understand we we understand what
that means that we do everything
we can to the best use of for
four counties and keep
initiatives.
Thank you questions.
Thank you very much Mr Montoya
work will and we hope that that
things are okay a with district
attorney Ventidius family
We will
check and see if there are any
questions.
One again note although madam
chair is as noted a couple of
times
for a signing of
Representative Crowder
Representative Garcia to
To study some of of the vacancy
issues that have come up
repeatedly during these.
During today's hearings saying
no I do let's go two
Representative Crowder for
questions please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for your presentation.
This is an odd question for me
but you seem to be the only be a
that did not have a transfer out
of PSC be added you pull it off.
We have the best financial
officer New World.
raised in this area and she
really understands and really
want to hear and.
All joking aside should really
districts office so.
I was encouraged to see that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Crowder
It's great to see okay
Seeing no other questions we
would then move to
Representative Sweetser for the
motion.
Thank you Mr chairman I do want
to thank you for containing for
D. A. Renteria and I pray all is
well there was this is my
legislative districts so I know
the area well and with that Mr
chairman I would move the LFC
budget.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser is there second for
that that Mr chair I'll second
that excellent thank you it's
been moved by Representative
Sweetser I am by Representative
Garcia is there any opposition
to that motion.
Okay seeing then that approved
budget there for the sixth
judicial district attorney and
think as Representative Sweetser
said
thank you all very much.
So okay will now continue moving
on to
the fifth judicial district
attorney and begin at.
Zero Trancers
We'll go to
Mr Chavez our agency to cut aid
to kick us off all right Mr
chairman members of the
committee debates judicial
district attorney encompasses
any Chinese and we counties for
reading the LFC recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
by thirty point one thousand and
the budget six thousand and fund
balance well the executive
recommendation he's already
sources what would be FY twenty
one operating budget.
He LFC recommendation decreases
the personal services employee
benefits category by twenty
point one thousand the agency
didn't transfer two hundred
fifty nine thousand out of the
category in FY twenty.
The executive recommendation all
categories flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget work
requirements LFC and exec Alice
reach consensus on all measures
and targets and unless Mr
Conason anything that I can turn
it over to you usual district
attorney and president of the
association of district attorney
violence.
Thank you Mr chairman anything
that.
Our Mr chairman Matt.
Okay thank you very much thank
you David we'll go to district
attorney and president lives
please.
Afternoon I'm chair and members
of the committee I thank you all
first of all for hearing from
all of the districts I want to
thank you all for the hard work
you're doing we appreciate how
hard it is for you to do your
job I'm a virtual as we've all
talked about to report I by
Google meets I do have today
online as I'm in the Santa Fe
AODA office but I have online I
CFO dina Switzer and also have
online my dear we and Pat were
present.
I'm I want to start by first
saying thank you for the funding
we received in the past I want
to talk about and last year's
budget I am thank you to branch
have is thank you to Amanda Dick
Peddie for all the work and all
the contacts they've really been
involved a lot with my office I
am I see a photo of what we were
asked Mr to slow down spending
to revert we we did that I we we
reverted a sizeable amount I'm
we could have certainly spent
that money want to hire
employees we could have our
replaced cars are we could have
bought other equipment I'm that
we recognize we has to work as a
team as part of a state agency
to be fiscally responsible on it
under the the COVID times that
we have.
I'm I want to talk about on the
southwest border I'm I believe
that I'm we have on around
thirty six or seven thousand
maybe thirty nine thousand and I
had it but I heard it right down
from me I'm in southwest border
we have I'm already been in the
works on it to move that money
for approval for spending for
furniture as you are aware we
keep talking about the new court
and what is called a judicial
complex in Lovington I'm and so
that's why how we County Lee
County where I'm at I thank you
I'm it had building issues and
so they are they told us April
are we would move on we're
hearing it might be June we
can't move in until the things
are fixed I don't think they're
really too much wrong with the
floor that would be the district
attorney's new offices we remove
from hops to Lovington are we
would have only one location in
Lee County now we have to one in
the Lee County courthouse there
Lovington the other our primary
offices during Hobbs the old
Hobbs police department building
are we planned to buy furniture
I'm and so we hope to use that
funding to do so you know in the
LFC recommendation where that
money would go in place of
general fund I'm we've already
been in the works to spend that
this year I'm so I'm we already
have our furniture order made
out so I I just need you to
understand is how I do read with
she's already got employees and
so it's kind of like in my going
to have to lay off an employee
if I buy furniture the these are
the things that we're asking you
to think about as you can the
next thing I'm I want to talk
about I'm is I'm it COVID how do
we handle COVID in the fifth
Chavis Indian lady what three
communities are each very
distinct I allowed each each
office as supervisors to meet
employ.
Ryan and decide how we would
handle it we always had staff in
each office each office did a
unique tell worker in person
plan it might be week to week
they have fifty percent
employees are in the office
fifty percent or teleworking I
am not be alternating days and
in fact the hobs this I did a
split day where they worked
morning in the office afternoon
at home and then vice versa the
fifty percent because the one
thing my employees could not do
it home we scan the scan and the
paperwork into our case
management system as you all
know we're paperless we do our
eDiscovery for defense they had
to be able to do that from the
office did we could not download
body cam videos dashcam videos
at home people don't have that
kind of band with we had to do
those in the building so people
had to be in the office to do
that we've had positives of
employees in each of the offices
and we've managed to continue to
function I thank you for going
I'm we completed during the June
and to the November shut down
for jury trials we did sixteen
jury trials I'm I did three of
those I am loving ten in
September back to back weeks I
learned a lot about this pre
chorus in the emergency response
team for how to deal with
handling tourism trials are more
than just reading the plan when
you're actually in the court
that many days.
We had three attempted jury
trials one hundred and Lea
County our very first one where
we can get dentures we had to in
any county Oregon in New Jersey
I Eddy County completed a bench
trial in District Court felony
level bench trial during that
time I'm we've already begun
jury trials again this week are
we will have jury trials on it
next week I and in fact
I'm scheduled I'm scheduled for
two next week as of still right
now as I'm talking to you think
that could change but that's
what we're schedule for I'm all
of our staff is very very proud
of our staff for the work that
they do during the COVID of the
dedication they showed to the
quality to make sure we're not
done to make sure victims had
contact with us since we were we
were not having in person
contact with outside people are
we were trying to make sure
victims are could contact is
whenever they needed is for
whatever they needed we did set
up in each office a computer are
in a means for people who don't
have access to do the Google
meets for court where they were
came in in person to our office
in the appeared over Google
needs witnesses or victims for
all the hearings with his victim
simply needed to hear what was
going on families or whether
they needed to be someone who
was testifying at a pre trial
detention or pre live on it
Ribbentrop that we've been doing
I'm we've had one and
magistrates court in Ross will
require the everyone.
The defense attorney the
defendant the prosecutor in all
witnesses appear by video video
for every hearing so now call in
it had to be video they're
people they don't have that
capacity so the public
defender's office there and
Russell are in our office all
had to figure out a way to have
people have appointment to have
personal protection cleaning
protocols for comment I'm
because court continued the one
message I think I wanted all of
my constituents to know was.
The big criminal justice process
never stopped our Supreme Court
make sure that we continue to
operate in all of their district
attorney's AODA we've all
continue to work to make sure
that there's just as the people
are just simply sitting being
held in jail because are not
getting a case concluded that we
all continue to work the thing I
wanted to I use and I did submit
a hand out to the committee and
if I do it correctly with the
will that help I'm gonna share
screen.
Over.
This is.
Okay I think you're able to see
my screen I wanted to point out
that I did that in his last
hearing wanted to take me awhile
to do it next one and I just
laughed and said I'm fifty five
you're lucky I can do this
computer stuff at all I'm so
what I want to share with you is
pre trial detention mentioned
pretrial detention motions I'm
continue to be filed in the fan
and we've been doing pre trial
detention motions by Google
meets are at times of witnesses
and and Tom spark offers where
we stipulate tell report the
information but I'm the fifth I
filed at a hundred and forty two
I during I'm at this last year
that's the calendar year of
twenty twenty so not fiscal year
and I want you to see how that
is progressing I'm we had we
filed in twenty seven homicides
and so I think it's important to
know for the fifth that if you
look at the overall stats and
you can look at our stats from
AODA or you can look at that the
AOC stats from the court I'm
and it has at eight compare will
homicide rate to I the second to
Albuquerque I'm per capita we
have more I and I know that
Albuquerque is is having an
awful start to to twenty twenty
one homicides I it's devastating
to the community I and so but I
want you to understand we we
were following nose with
witnesses and now with the new
rule change I'm we are doing
this preliminary hearing to
District Court and so we're
asking that those be concurrent
so pre trial detention
employment at the same setting
but at times that that that
doesn't work it doesn't work for
the court it doesn't work for
defense and so I wanted you all
to see that each of these the
word.
Doing these are my attorneys
that over not they're trying to
figure out he was arrested I
they're trying to figure out if
we need to follow to get
involved before the person is
released and then it now we're
trying to get set up to do the
pre trial detention in the
prelim in just a few days in
this report.
We don't have dedicated people
to do this I would expect that
every district attorney would
ask you to be able have entities
to have a prosecutor in a staff
member I should be able to just
to pre trial.
I it is something that I asked
for and I continue to ask for
and I know we're not getting
anything new and I'm not asking
for more money but I want you to
understand is you considering
you think about it Thompson
you Sam may have to cut.
Five thousand ten thousand
twenty thousand thirty thousand
from the district attorney's
budget that we are asking people
to do more of the same salary
under conditions with so we
would comment concerns
that then we've ever asked me
one I'm and I think that we all
really appreciate the hard work
that you do I'm I'm gonna and
I'm there are three pages to the
screen am I going to go through
does you will have them they
just outline how many per charge
that we filed our what happened
and we only have a sixty six
percent I'm detention rate of
approval from the courtroom
there's being granted I'm other
districts may have a hundred
percent pre trial detention
motions granted we do not are
you we follow when we believe
that the person is a danger to
the community I and are the
charges appropriate.
The.
The last thing that I'm I would
talk about is vacancy rate I'm I
right now I have positions open
intentionally because our expert
fees were paid expert witnesses
it has gone up again this year
but we were having to use
experts not only on our for avid
homicide cases for sex crimes
cases I'm we are using them for
competency in dangerous mess.
I'm you all may have seen the
report that came out through the
sentencing commission on that
showed I'm statewide how many
emotions for competence Year
raised in and what are the
results if you have not looked
at that time I I if you ever
have a chance I would ask that
you do that because the thing
that has an extremely high rate
of having competency motions
filed by the defense and then
having competency failed we have
specific evaluators Center used
primarily they're all contract
for primarily the judges use a
certain couple judicial district
and so what we've had to do is a
competencies raise we can't
afford to case would you stand
right if that fits the category
for dangerous agency are we are
having a demo value waited one
to see if I next for it says are
confident in the next four what
they can do to help this was
dangerous this we are spending
I'm three to five thousand
dollars per case on that alone
that is huge it is an expense
that we're trying to figure out
how to do this differently how
to get around this and in fact
with some of my judges and done
in the fifth is our starting to
reach out and use different
evaluators and all I'm gonna say
is that using different
evaluators we've had a results
we were I people have been found
competent and they were not
having to have that additional
expense I'm to have to say to
victims which I had to do this
week I'd say the two different
teenage girls I'm the case it's
been pending awhile I'm that the
adult male that was charts we
see S. P. for both of them are I
think that we can't proceed
because under New Mexico law is
incompetent really retarded I'm
intellectual disability but our
statue still Santo retarded I'm
not being disrespectful I'm it
so basically you'll be able to
be a job if there's.
Read it otherwise.
They will be released he'll be
released and I will feel like it
had and Justice that's part of
what's involved when we come
before you and we ask you to
consider our budgets us not only
is that the district attorney
but as the president for that
New Mexico district attorneys
association are we respect
greatly the work that you do as
our citizen legislature I and
are we just ask you to do what
you can for the district
attorney's in this stand for
questions.
Thank you very much district
attorney and and District
turning president loose
I see there are Committee
questions we'll go first to
Representative Anders.
Thank you Mr chairman of miss
Lucy I wanted to ask you a
little bit I was of first time I
heard this afternoon about of a
concept that I had I'm sure
other districts in calendar day
it but in March when everybody
began to work from home the idea
there was no scanning capability
of
is one of those one of those
things you think to yourself Gee
I never would have thought of
that but that had to really jam
up of the flow of
What you do every day and I'm
like I guess my question is how
to is that resolved in New in
short how to do it results.
Chair I'm I and that
representative I'm we had people
in the office at all times we
tried to have fifty percent of
our staff in the office fifty
percent tell work because we use
what's called a QCP of license
for expanding our and to have
this the scanner equipment moves
to someone's house that is set
up with the desktop where is we
provided them with the laptop
and we had them our it was a
Chromebook if we had the remote
in their desktop and so it's as
if they were at work but if
they're not there interstate or
something Desikan but the paper
on skin until they were in the
office and so we tried to divide
the work up we have what's
called a backup system with
staff were if you're in the
office you do the other persons
working there back up but
obviously you can't do all of
your work in all of the years of
the same amount of time and so
it slowed it down slowed down
greatly I'm but that's why we
did the fifty percent we I'm we
had people in the office in
people at home so I know that
the twelfth and then not I
believe kept their people in the
office for on I'm and they
didn't do that quote total work
schedule a bit every DA had to
do what was best for their
employees thank you for that.
Thank you miss Lucy of
yesterday I believe we heard
from the fifth judicial District
Court judge about the case of a
load in bed New Mexico
do you encounter any difficulty
in one do you encounter any
difficulty you are in in a
location other than Carlsbad to
with the highs on the side right
of or those cases.
Waiting for trial are weak
checking up on the site cases
short answer please.
The Carlsbad.
Did not ever get rules.
Really open your.
So I believe for and if you're
worried that we're looking at
well over a hundred jury trials.
I believe we still are backed up
the probably this apple on it in
this in late even a Chavis I and
Leben with I tried to do is
maybe three trials is the courts
could schedule.
It was your industry during that
time period.
Thank you miss Lewis finally of
a question of the LFC analysts
relative to I believe I think if
I did my calculation right the
number four that we're talking
about in terms of furniture seem
small what was the LFC position
on the furniture and the fact
that of spending commitments
were under way.
Madam chair representative
Anderson.
I do think that that's an
interesting question
those fund balances LFC wasn't
aware that there was funding
commitments for those fund
balances at the time that the
recommendation was formulated
that's the best answer I can
provide no thank you very much
for that and I'll pursue that
later madam chair I do think the
the delay in occupancy
undoubtably complicates the flow
on top of the pandemic thank you
madam chair that concludes my
question.
Thank you Representative
Anderson we do have another
question that's from
Representative brown who knows
this area well.
Thank you Mr chairman of this
loose it's really good to see
you again even if it's just
virtual.
I'm looking at your vacancy rate
on your full time equivalents
and yes I'm just trying to go to
my memory here looks like you
mentioned it prevents there is
that correct I see a current
vacancy rate of three.
We have an chair and
representative I ground I
apologize I'm from a from
formalities and.
We have filled positions I'm we
always tried to fill our
positions on simply because it's
pry difficult to function
without the staff I'm I have
seven attorneys are in Lee
County and seven and.
I was counting on it right now I
am short three attorneys and in
that Carlsbad our issues issues
for that office that has a
backlog dignity jury trials
completed in twenty twenty
during the COVID shut down and
in the reopening so I'm we are
always.
All applicants and support staff
and investigators I and I am I
am I for those of you there and
to to that to the committee I I
had asked for additional FTEs
I've done that for a couple
years now they created a new
position I evidence liaison I
and I wanted to create that
person in each of the three
offices that's a person's going
to go get my video some more
point and laugh from the please
get to my office because it's
always an issue without having
that that discovery I I deal
that position in Travis county
our and then I.
Build a I am.
I I move to a full time employee
that would have time she's in
college the secretary I'm in
into that role yeah we hired a
full time secretary so that is
one of the reasons why one of
those other positions was filled
our because I I've got to we've
got to do things differently I
would go to continue with the
funds we have and on a better
way to use up and so creating
that evidence liaison director
make sure I've got my discovery
for law enforcement to my office
to get it to the defense I'm we
had to find a better way to do
that and so that that's how we
did that and support staff know
what those items are we doing to
training so that they know how
to get it from one person and
get it properly in our office to
disclose it so I hope I answered
your question thank you.
Yes madam chair yes you do.
My other question is regarding
your federal revenues a two
hundred eighty seven thousand
dollars and what it is at the
southwest border program or is
that something else is going to
be my I'm excited funding I'm we
are funded through.
High intensity drug trafficking
initiative for three attorneys
one in each county I and so they
only do it how did designated
drug cases.
And those are primarily work to
the task force on it from each
of those counties.
And then just a boat Mr chair so
is that part of program is that
year to year over year or is it
for a set period of time is that
in other words that funding you
can expect to have an outline
years.
It is funded I in no way and
that bunny will be I saw it
again and there will be a budget
determination by dad executive
committee with Honda in may are
it might lead to a
appropriations chairman may I
into the coming in our.
In July if it's approved in if
it's there from that that.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
those answers.
Thank you representative brown I
I just have a quick question
before we go for the motion
district attorney loose you
mentioned something that really
caught my attention that the the
your you are dealing with
significant
murder issues and and so the
district attorney and lose is
that what you mentioned that the
per capita murder rate
was that for calendar year
twenty that that it was actually
equal to or perhaps higher than
the second judicial district or
was that here in calendar year
twenty one what what was that
time frame.
Thank you for that I apologize.
Thank that question has.
No that would have been on yes
it's four year on the lawn no I
certainly we've had our share of
already this year and thank you
and you know we're blessed that
we are not seeing the
devastation that's happening in
Albuquerque right now.
Got it okay thank you very much
district attorney and and also
madam president we deeply
appreciate presentation I don't
see any more hands.
From members as we've pointed
out with others there is a sub
committee that will be meeting
on some of the issues that come
up repeatedly during these
hearings with that can we go to
Representative Sweetser for a
motion please thank you Mr chair
and thank you DA Luz our for the
work you do in your district as
well as president of the M. the
group gathering the the
association of important DA's
and with that Mr chair I will
move the LFC accommodation.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser it's been moved for the
LFC is there a second.
See this I can't from
Representative of Anderson we
are.
Thank you Representative says
feature thank you Representative
Anderson all right is there any
objection to that motion.
I don't see any.
With that then the LFC budget
recommendation for the fish to
just so district attorney is
adopted thank you so much
district attorney lose thank you
for your advocacy is president
and bringing so many important
issues to the committee today.
We're gonna continue to go now
to the fourth judicial district
attorney perhaps Mr Chavez at
now mystic ID thank you Amanda
for you kicking us off and will
run from from the.
Mr chair members of the
committee agent agency the code
two five four four to judicial
district attorney.
Or revenue the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by thirty thousand
while the executive
recommendation keeps general
fund revenue flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget.
The LFC recommendation includes
six nine thousand in budgeted
fund balance from the southwest
border.
Prosecution initiative fund
we're based LOC recommendation
increases personal funding by
thirty nine thousand for
attorney recruitment and
retention.
The executive recommendation
keep all categories flat with
the FY twenty one operating
budget.
And both analyst reach consensus
on performance measures and
targets Amanda would you like to
add anything.
Mr chairman members of the
committee nothing at we can turn
it over to point judicial
district attorney comments
questions.
Good afternoon ladies and
gentlemen madam chair small as
well vice chair on a committee
members and also want to
recognize Representative Mr
Ambrose Castellano is on the
committee as I understand it all
first I'm I'm newly elected but
I'm a career prosecutor I come
to the do this come on committee
on very green is to the process
but I'm I have a passion for
what we do
you know I I listen to all the
other district attorneys and all
the issues regarding all the
crime that's being committed in
our communities and what we're
going to do to prevent that but
also under this the trying
circumstances of COVID on well
let me just one thing before I
forget to I want to wish my
mother a happy eighty fifth
birthday was yesterday on
groundhog day so on I just want
to say that and one great
opportunity and in the I'm
blessed to have coffee with
every morning but to get to the
business at hand I appreciate
all the work that you all do all
units the resources that are
provided to the frontline
individuals whether that's in
our school teachers whether
that's our our nurses are on
whether it's law enforcement or
prosecutors is essential
essential for what we do and and
you have the the the task of
giving that money up so I want
to say thank you on behalf of
all the constituents of the
district I represent what our
son me getting water to the
counties were rural rural
community
but we do have the crime that
everybody speaks so
as we're prosecutor I I work for
district attorney FLOTUS who
succeeded he served for current
sixteen years but as a as a
prosecutor
N. as is chief deputy I was
tasked to.
Handling the homicide cases in
currently look at my pending
cases regarding homicides we
have thirteen defendants that we
are prosecuting homicide.
Now a couple of these come back
from nineteen I mean two
thousand seventeen one for
twenty eighteen and six from
twenty ninety.
All these cases or coming to
roost and it's kind of like the
idea we're all you know we have
added airport you have planes in
the air.
And they got a land got a land
at some point in time.
That's what's happening COVID
has created a backlog and these
plans are certainly at some
point in time they have to one.
And it's and the courts the
Supreme Court is is the other
distributors of indicated we
have not stopped doing business
we continue to do business
virtually primarily in jury
trials were held all held off in
our district they've started in
fact today one more prosecutors
had a jury trial and we're now
waiting the jury part I have a
homicide cases commencing
February fifteen and that's a
case that that would happen in
twenty eighteen and the families
of the victims.
They're they're waiting they're
waiting for justice as are the
defendants the defendant in this
particular case has been in
custody this entire time so this
is all coming to roost all all
all the chickens are coming
home.
So we have obligations that we
have to meet all and their
obligations that we must be on I
can tell you.
With respect to our office I'm
taking a different approach
we're adding a few more of
positions work converting some
of our FTEs from prosecutors.
Because I believe right now we
have ten attorneys on but what
we're converting some of our
FTEs one for treatment on
individual person that will seek
out treatment to address the
substance abuse problems within
our community I'm ready one of
our if he's another FTE were
converting to take advantage of
the technology that's being out
that's out there I think one of
the things that we've seen
through this comment on the lamb
of that the wall facing is that
there is technology that can be
used to our advantage what gonna
be utilized that I've converted
one particular FTE to do that be
able to use the technology we
have to track.
the individuals that were
prosecuting to monitor them and
to ensure that they are
complying because as the court
as well as the committee is
aware the point of taken with
pre trial detention the least
restrictive means means a lot of
individuals and I'm sure you're
hearing that are back on the
streets while the cases are
pending.
And so we're creating an
individual position that is
sensually tracks is individuals.
We don't have to tell services
like mint some districts do so
we're doing it in house within
the district attorney's office.
So there's a couple of things
are some transitions taking
place and within this office the
COVID issue and then just the
workload and and I tell you
about the homicides all
thankfully in our community we
don't have the problems that
some of the other committees are
facing but with regards to
homicide but they're still there
we must address them all with
respect to the to the budget we
appreciate that the LFC and and
and and seconded major
recommendations the virtual
virtually identical all we
appreciate any amount of money
that is provided to our
district.
We're going to ask for the
higher amount but we recognize
that you not at this point all
stand for any questions I would
also like that that I do have my
CFO here miss Carla Martinez
helped.
Us immensely issues you're the
saccharine questions if you have
a thank you.
Thank you so much add district
attorney Clayton
we really appreciate it we do
have questions we'll go first to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation
district attorney Clayton
I think my question is part of
the LFC analysts noticed under
the narrative and Revenue.
The talks about sixty nine
thousand fund balance from the
southwest border protection fund
District four is not on the
border.
Medical stocks.
Madam chair representative
Crowder this actually might be a
better question for either Mr
Valdez from AODA or or District
Attorney list I think that the
federal grants
Burst anyone dealing with border
issues and I believe because New
Mexico's on the border all the
counties qualified but I could
be wrong and.
Thank you for your.
Mr chair is there some.
No.
Representative Crowder
us it seems like perhaps there
with district attorney lose do
you all have anything to add
there I think mystic Patty's
response saying it's sounds to
me accurate but yes Mr about
this thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
All districts were eligible to
in New Mexico are eligible for
southwest border movies not all
districts at the impact from the
board.
As those closest to the border
at all of all districts work
with.
Okay thank you for that I
appreciate it I I just in here.
The show was this district.
From the border.
Is that.
Decision guided.
Mr chairman.
Mr chair representative Crowder
if that's a question for me I
can attempt to answer again LFC
just examined who still had
remaining balances from those
initial grants to those requests
were received several years ago
and they
is balances have been sitting
there for several years and many
of these district cases and some
districts and second down some
not so that's what we insert
recommendation okay.
Grade school.
All.
It is reach out to you sent over
individual.
Each district this district
happened this is.
Mr chairman.
That's exactly correct and sorry
make that clear before each
district has a separate
application okay.
It just was having trouble
understanding that thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
we're going to go to
Representative Dixon for a
question as or for questions
out.
Thank you Mr vice chair and
D. A. Clayton I was wondering
I'm interested in your program
we're converting some of your
FTEs to more specialized
positions and I was just
interested in if you could talk
a little bit more about that and
then
also how the attorney
recruitment and retention is
going I see that there is
additional funding.
Recommended for that and so I
was just curious
about that as well thank you
very yes thank you thank you
madam chair on with the matter
member of Dickson with respect
to the the reversion of FTEs arm
as part is part of why I've been
a drug prosecutor for pretty
much the entire time I've been
working here at the district
attorney's office in the
substance abuse is an issue
within our community.
Unfortunately it touches upon
all families I don't think
there's a family they that
doesn't have somebody that they
know close by that that
substance abuse has had an
adverse impact and so as part of
my plan is to is to create
opportunities to divert people
from the criminal justice system
as soon as possible some of them
it's in the justice system I
mean let's not kid ourselves but
we're trying and so I want to
create an individual or a
greater position that provide
all the resources within our
community we are blessed with
the New Mexico state hospital B.
H. I. your Las Vegas so there
are resources there are
expertise within our community
we want to expand that so that I
have an individual that
identifies all the resources
within our our geographic region
whether that's your son to get
County what kind of what the
county the north the state or
even in the southwest I want an
individual be able to say this
is where you can go to address
this issue because as many know
if the individual has a dual
diagnosis and I'm by no means am
I an expert with there's
individuals that have certain
issues that underline the
substance abuse as well they may
not be able to get to a
particular program I want
somebody in house so that when
defense lawyer says what can I
do with Tom Clayton he's got
this this issue we have a we
have an answer internally so
that I can assist to make that
happen so that's the first
position that were created the
second one is like I said to to
take advantage of the technology
that is out there because we do
know who the constitutional
amendment about the trial
detention and the rules that
were promulgated by the Supreme
Court that there's been a shift
you what's taking place.
And so we want to ensure safety
takes place thank you for
community so this individual
will track through the GPS
electronic monitoring also
through jail recordings I want
to utilize that kind of
technology within one insure the
safety of community to help
prosecute cases so those are the
two positions now with respect
to all.
Attorney recruitment and
retention we have ten attorneys
for local six that means six
people came to our community and
we're blessed to have them they
decided to come to Las Vegas New
Mexico because that's our
primary office we do have an
office in Santa Rosa and one
individual is is there but then
recruit people into our
community and I would never
change living other than here in
our community I love northern
New Mexico I went away for law
school I went to Los Angeles and
experience the big city.
UCLA was a great school what I
chose to come back home but
that's because I have family
there has to be a way to recruit
individuals and I think some of
the other distributors of talk
about it's it's salary is so we
do have a difficulty in
recruiting but at this time
we've only had I think since the
my transition started in January
only had two people decide to
leave our office that's because
I think I work with the crew and
I think we have a next will
include in the left off.
The two people the left office
left for other opportunities not
because of dissatisfaction.
Sure that answers your question
all Madam.
Really get up thank you very
much for those answers thank you
very much Representative Dixon
for the elections.
In moving in those innovative
ways I know briefly we have
Representative Castellano
Castellano who wanna make a
brief comment know that we all
have to keep moving along here
we saw of several more
presentation but Representative
Castellano do you have a very
calm then we'll go to
Representative Sweetser from
motion thank you Mr chairman I
just want to thank our DA for
might my area of being here
today and sharing his concerns
and his great innovation
innovative programs that he is
running now in our community and
I want to say I do my cousin who
I think is is our business Hey
lady mac they're hiding back
there Carla a good afternoon and
and wish mother a Happy Birthday
and thank you.
District attorney pleaded thank
you Mr chairman thank you so
much Representative Castellano
thank you again districts thirty
Clayton next we're going to move
to Representative Sweetser for
the motion states thank you Mr
chairman and I move the LFC
recommendation I second that
motion chair excellent thank you
it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Castellano is
there objection to accepting the
LFC recommendation.
Seeing none the LFC
recommendation for the fourth
judicial district has been a
judicial district attorney
excuse me has been adopted thank
you again district attorney
Clayton.
We deeply appreciate your time
today we're gonna continue
moving we're gonna go now to
District.
The third judicial district
attorney.
These kick us off agency the
petty and then we'll keep on
moving.
All right Mr chairman members of
the committee the third judicial
district attorney is Dona Ana
County for revenue at the LFC
recommendation reduces general
fund revenue to the agency right
thirty thousand the executive
recommendation please general
fund revenue black the LFC
recommendation includes a one
hundred and nine thousand more
in budgeted fund balance in the
executive recommendation again
that money is from the southwest
border prosecution initiative
fund.
For today's the LFC
recommendation for personal
services employee benefits is
seventy nine thousand higher
than the executive
recommendation and that's to
assist in recruiting and
retaining attorneys the
executive recommendation all
categories flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget
for performance analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and unless
Mr Chavez has anything to add we
can turn it over to their
judicial district attorney
Gerald buyers.
Thank you Mr as a district
attorney buyers please the
floor's yours.
Thank you good afternoon Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name is Gerald
buyers I'm newly elected
district attorney for the third
judicial district and dynamic
County and on the call with me
is our district office manager
that Sierra as well as chief
financial officer Julie at the
Cerro
one of the things that I wanted
to touch on with the committee
this morning this afternoon
rather is we are still
experiencing the impact of the
Legislative.
Amendment of the pre trial
detention process one statistic
is that we've had the two
hundred and forty cases filed
with thirty percent of those
being granted and we still
continue to do that and the
effort to maintain a public
safety.
As we've noted previously.
We have to draw from our current
the staff we have to draw from
our current resources in order
to to meet that requirement also
the next item is the impact of
Corona virus something.
That have foreseen but it has
created a one thousand case
backlog that we are experiencing
in Dona ana county of.
I it is it's just sort of
strange but into Indiana county
we could not see grand jurors
because of their fear of Corona
virus so as a result of that our
courts had to seize grand jury
process.
For everyone's information of
the third judicial district at
additionally that felony
prosecutions only by means of
grand jury so we had to shift
gears and switch over to a
completely different process we
did that and absorb all of the
resource impact of it and we
still were able to to move
forward but at a much reduced
rate resulting in a thousand
case backlog we've been
currently working with the court
and within the to resolve that
and within the last three
minutes I received a reply from
the court and reply to the
request that we had made of
being able to open up the grand
jury the court is working under
a significant constraints just
as we are to be able to meet
these obligations and I just
wanted to relate to the
committee that this is not the
time for me to bash the courts
or or to point fingers but we
and our local jurisdictions are
working together to the best
extent possible to meet these
requirements and obligations to
keep the courts open and to make
sure that justice for the victim
and the accused is met in a
timely manner as we're
obligating to as we're trying to
work through these issues that
are impacting us all.
jury trials have re commenced in
third judicial district and we
have jury trials are set as
early as February fifteenth one
note with regard to the rural
versus urban
we have lost one attorney as a
result of the desire to go to a
more rural area because of the
ability to receive higher
compensation and we have lost
two attorneys through the
application process because they
have been made aware of that and
are going to the more rural
areas pursuing the higher
compensation.
With regard to our vacancies we
need to keep four of the nine
they can in order to maintain a
flat budget and we're gonna
request the executive
recommendation within all
conditional request for a salary
increase to assist our employees
are with the anticipated
additional health care costs and
with that Mr chair members of
the committee I would stand for
questions.
Thank you very much district the
buyer is we'll see what
committee questions come up.
As we're waiting for that
district attorney well US couple
questions if we don't see any
come up.
I haven't seen any come up
district attorney buyers so your
down and Anjana County your
newly elect your newly elected
is that correct yes.
Thank you district attorney
buyers and so that thank you for
explaining some of the your
request we see that.
The high funded vacancy rate.
In our calculations I think it's
the the second highest amongst
any of the thirteen districts
but
you clear you know you are
elected in November so I think
hopefully next year especially
as we work to normalize we can
look to maybe see you
improvement in that area.
Yes
Sir
I don't see any other committee
questions stay no other
committee questions we would
turn to Representative Sweetser
I would turn Representative
Sweetser from motion please this
thank you Mr chairman thank you
DA buyers I don't think I've
seen you since you're the a BA
in the six so could this be and
congratulations on your election
and with that Mr chair I would
move the LFC recommendation
thank you.
Excellent there's a motion from
absent Sweetser for the LFC is
there a second thank you Mr
chair.
Excellency that the second from
Representative Lotta and there's
been motion second and is there
any opposition to adopting the
LFC recommendation for district
judicial district three district
attorney.
Okay see no objections the third
judicial district attorney LFC
recommendation has been adopted
districts are thank you so much
for being with us today thank
you for stepping into the job
with a very important time.
And we're gonna keep on moving
thank you this thing thank you.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser law.
Excellent.
And it was a unanimous unanimous
motion great we see the screen I
think we'll probably start off
with Mr Chavez for the second
judicial district attorney Mr
Thomas
Mr chair members of the
committee our agency typically
to the second judicial district
attorney.
The LFC recommendation includes
a hundred eleven thousand.
Under ten thousand which is
general fund revenue more than
the executive recommendation the
LFC recommendation increases the
personal services employee
benefits category five hundred
thirty nine thousand over the
executive recommendation to
support personnel costs the HSD
may face a shortfall in person
funding as two point two million
in federal grants are set to
expire in.
Twenty two are the executive
recommendation applies a lower
vacancy rate resulting in a
reduction to the personal
services employee benefits
category and both analyst came
to consensus on measures and
targets Manda would you like to
add anything.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and nothing at all and
we can turn it over to second
judicial district attorney Raul
Torrez.
Good afternoon Mister vice
chairman members of the
committee.
It's my pleasure to appear
before you again.
In terms of the budget
presentation it's a relatively
straightforward budget maintains
the status quo with a modest
request I think of a one percent
increase for those employees
making less than fifty thousand
dollars a year
the one special item I think I
wanted to address which which
may have already been taken care
of by our LFC analyst was the of
application of the right
authorizing language which would
allow us to carry forward the
special appropriations from
previous years and use those
appropriations for for any
purpose and that's consistent
with last year's authorization I
think that's important and and
before I turn it over I should
also of introduce Carla Martinez
the chief administrative officer
in my district and wrote Melissa
Spangler the chief financial
officer both are joining on the
call interpretable answer any
technical questions you may have
in before open a return to the
committee to answer any
questions you may have I did
want to take this opportunity to
highlight to specials only
because it's it's really our
only opportunity to address
those.
Sorry at seven
I know district
thank you thank you very much
district attorney thought as I
and and we're excited to dive
into things I think the practice
for the come the full committee
to this point has been to focus
on the specials in the
supplementals those will be in
taken up at another time and
I trusted that that.
Obviously look forward to
feedback on those at that
particular time if if if that's
okay that's that.
Thank you vice chair I guess
with that I'd stand for
question.
Thank you
we're going to go first to
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman of I just
a couple of questions one to
either the LFC.
Q. first on page seven the work
they can see right.
That the exact took on this
budget and then I thought well
it must not have been much of of
lower vacancy rate have so
little difference.
Your numbers could either either
analyst comment on that in my
correct or not.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I can take a shot at
that Bryan wants to add he's
welcome to it's not incredibly
big difference the LFC
recommendation is about seventy
nine thousand dollars higher for
person if you look at your PS
help because the second judicial
district attorney is losing a
significant amount in federal
grants their personal funding it
it's pretty they have a negative
but it begins right after that
so it's not a huge difference in
the recommendations by the LFC
does prior prioritize getting
that but it I'm funded agency
right up a little bit ranking
comment further keep like
percentage.
Mr chair and representative I
understand so on the executive
side
We give a three point nine
percent vacancy rate which is
route was she was you know one
point two higher than their FY
twenty.
but.
That's that's right we came.
Thank you if I could Mr chairman
I.
Please.
To the fullest the.
I heard lower you can see right
and then I thought I heard we
went nine percent being higher
than.
Lower number
somewhere I'm not getting a
completely connected on what
the.
Donor impact is of the exact
with a lower pay can see right
that sounds a little bit like a
hired vacancy rate am I correct
on any of the server.
I.
Yes you are you are correct I'm
trying to pull up the exact
number.
You know I believe go to the
next question because the dollar
amount isn't that great I was
just trying to.
Understand of.
Why the difference what appears
to be relatively insignificant
given the size of the budget
then I would like to go to the
next question to the two
analysts relative to is it
common for these budgets to
carry any salary increase in in
the case of the second judicial
district we're looking at one
percent for those employees
making fifty or less.
Mr chair representative Anderson
I I'm not sure if I understand
your question if you're asking
about the raises provided at
last session in during the
special session of the.
That was something that was part
of the solvency measures for
more specific breakdown of
raises provided in district
attorneys offices you probably
have to ask Miss or maybe credit
Martinez.
Before I do to follow up on that
really my question is is.
Is the second judicial district
including a one percent salary
increase wage increase for those
employees fifty thousand and
last and is that common
throughout all the district
attorney budgets.
Okay Mr chair representative
Anderson I understand a little
better in the requests I do
believe that most of the
district attorney's again
request that you're correct I'm
in the recommendations the
executive keeps their the agency
budget lacked so that's not
included and that would be
included in the LFC
recommendation either but yes
the DA's didn't request the
original FY twenty one
appropriation so before the four
percent was sanded and that
number would be included in.
Okay to make sure that I'm not
completely confused with your
very the answer I just wanted to
say.
Is this one percent.
In the second judicial district
for fifty thousand and under.
A agency requests is it a DFA
recommended.
Of funding or is it an LFC
recommended funding for none of
the or or or need to.
Mr chair representative Anderson
ranking correct me if I'm wrong
but it is an agency request that
is not included in either the
recommendations.
If I may Mister chairman I I'd
like to just make one statement
compensation again is only
offered in the high level
through the LFC.
The agencies are welcome to make
those requests but at this point
it is not in the DFA REC
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I I and I
appreciate the analysts response
because it got me all the way
through on that point last
question to the district
attorney Mr Taurus I saw where
during of the summer cares
funding the City of Albuquerque
received up on short of a lump
sum
number and I was curious whether
any of that money found its way
to the district attorney's
office.
Madam chair Representative
Representative instant I I don't
believe so but but at an
abundance of caution I would ask
my a chief financial officer Mrs
Spangler to to address that
correct.
Mr chairman and committee no we
did not receive any cares money
from the city.
Thank you I I was pretty sure
that would be the answer but I
did want to ask thank you for
that answer madam chair that
concludes my question.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson next we
have Representative said Indiana
and then we'll have madam chair.
You Mr chairman it's good to see
you at the eight four as I'm I
looking at where it says you
have a two point two million in
federal grants that are expiring
and I know you've done great in
getting grants to fight crime in
my district are you looking at
other ways to supplement with
grants federal grants.
Madam chair representative seven
Jana we we're actually exploring
a number of grant opportunities
both at the federal level but
also it with other non profits
and and what's the other of
assistance from the private
sector here in Albuquerque one
of the more interesting programs
that that has really helped us
out a lot is to address the
sexual assault of backlog we
actually have a program called
volunteer trial attorneys
members of the local bar who we
who we've trained and and
provided with sort of a a basic
boot camp of how to be a sexual
assault sex crimes prosecutor
ninety I think we have more than
twenty of those attorneys
working working in our office
trying to help us move through
what is a pretty substantial
backlog in sexual assault but we
continue to try and fill those
in and apply for grants all the
time we've had some success in
recent years and I would point
out that a number of those
requests benefit the entire
street the entire state one of
the tech requests that we got
from the department of justice
rationing using in conjunction
with New Mexico tech to
integrate data systems at at DPS
so it's been it's been a good
approach for us it's always
helpful to have a fair amount of
course forty
from the committee so that we
can we can bring that money and
if we're successful in getting
it and and we've had a lot of
luck in support from the LFC in
that regards it's been it's been
good and so we lose we lose some
money and we go out try once
more.
Thank thank you thank you Mr
Taurus thank you Mr
Representative Sonya said
Indiana a next will go to Madam
chair Lundstrom madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman that's one
quick question Mr Taurus and
staff I thought of you I'm glad
you reminded us of the special
appropriation language I thought
we corrected that last year
thank you were able to draw the
funds down.
Madam chair that's correct
that's correct the one of the
original drafts that we saw this
year of limited the scope but
it's my understanding that a
recent email from from from LFC
staff that that's been fixed so
we're we're back on track with
what we what we had last year we
should be in good shape I just
wanted to sort of highlight for
the committee that that that was
one of the important things to
keep in mind because I I think
we have a little under six
hundred thousand dollars of that
special appropriations which we
need to move forward and we need
to have the flexibility to to
offset the costs but I just want
to fight for the committee.
Okay what what is the balance on
that special appropriation you
all know.
madam chair Alaska of Melissa
Spangler from our office I think
it's right around five hundred
seventy two thousand dollars but
but I'm I may be off a little
bit.
Madam chair committee of the
theater is is correct worried
about five hundred seventy five
thousand that we believe will
carry over to next year.
All right all right thank you
very much.
Thank you very much madam chair
Lundstrom.
We seeing if there's any other
questions from committee.
And I don't see any other
questions from committee
so with that we'll go to at at
and excuse me.
I don't see any other request
from committee again noting in
madam chair directed at the
beginning of today's hearings
there is a there will be a
working group addressing some
issues
but we'll go to Representative
Sweetser FOR a motion for the
second judicial district thank
you Mr chair and thank you do a
Torrez and with that I would
need the executive
recommendation.
Okay the executive has been
moved is there a second second
after Mr chairman seconded by
Representative Garcia for the to
adopt the executive
recommendation for the second
judicial district attorney is
there any objection to that
motion.
Seeing none
the executive recommendation is
adopted for the second judicial
district attorney district
attorney thought as thank you
very much for your time today
for your incredible work taking
on enormous challenges in using
innovation along the way thank
you.
That's okay that now we're going
to continue on we're gonna go to
the first additional district
attorney mystic petty would you
please pick us up.
Yes Mister chairman members of
the committee the first initial
district attorney in Santa Fe
and Rio Arriba County.
More revenue in the LFC
recommendation reduces general
fund revenue to the agency by
ten thousand dollars supplanted
by increased use of announces
from the southwest border
prosecution initiative.
The executive recommendation of
the general revenue last with
the FY twenty one operating
budget and funds the agency
requests for all other revenue
sources in the basin the LFC
recommendation budget a hundred
thirty five thousand of the
executive recommendation for
recruitment and retention of
attorneys.
Or performance LFC and executive
analyst reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and unless Mr trump isn't
anything to add we can turn it
over to the newly elected
district attorney in the first
Mary Carmen office.
Mr chair nothing that.
Good afternoon everyone and and
thank you I know this is turned
into quite a long afternoon so I
will try to keep this short my
name is merry Carmichael tweaks
and I am the newly elected
district attorney in the first
you additional district I
represent the people of Santa Fe
Los Alamos and Rio Arriba
counties I'm excited to bring
positive changes to our three
counties and hopefully model
some new and innovative ways of
prosecuting for the entire state
we did submits a flat budget as
as requested this year I would
ask this committee to move to
move the LFC recommendation
forward
I don't really have anything
else to say with that'll stand
for questions.
Thank you district attorney
Carmack this very short sweet
and to the point I think that.
will turn to the committee to
see if there are any questions.
I don't see necessarily there
any questions.
Thank you so much it really a
trend today I think obviously a
a large number of new district
attorneys or or recently elected
district attorneys and excited
to see the innovation folks work
that people are doing seeing now
so.
Sitting no questions from the
committee let's go to
Representative Sweetser for a
motion.
Thank you Mr chair and
congratulations on your new
position be eight and with that
I would move the LFC
recommendation are second.
Excellent it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Trujillo to
adopt the LFC recommendation for
the first judicial district
attorney is there any opposition
to that motion.
I don't see any.
With that the LFC budget
recommendation for the first
judicial district attorney is
adopted and
All righty I'd like to thank the
vice chair for jumping in this
afternoon these it's true this
these are long hearings when we
have of the thirteen different
courts and district attorneys
and what have you but I'd like
to thank the committee for your
your attention today and remind
you that tomorrow we've got or
one of our.
What I consider a heavy lift
agenda and that is your main
Services
The department of health will
start at one thirty is as as we
normally do and
Would be good to take a few
minutes to look at those
agencies get reacquainted those
are specially the Human Services
department that's very
complicated budget and a lot of
pieces associated with it that
encourage all of you to take a
look at that in in your various
volumes and and and get close to
that.
With that being said let's go
ahead and adjourned until
tomorrow at one thirty so thank
you everybody.
Thank you Sir.
