Public records, and then we have
New Mexico Sentencing Commission
departments of Information
Technology Office of Military
Base Planning Military Affairs
Department, Homeland Security
and emergency management. So
first up we have agency 369
Commission of Public Records.
Welcome.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Emily, the LFC analysts for the
commissioner of public records.
Today I am joined with the
director Rick Hendrix as well as
Hendrickson. Hendrix. Hendrix.
Yeah, I misspoke. Um, excuse me,
um, as well as my D F, a
counterpart of Cecilia
Mavrommatis and before going
into the budget in specific, um
Go ahead and
Good afternoon, madam chair and
members of the committee. I will
go ahead and let Emily speak to
our revenue and our base. It's a
one program agency. And then as
soon as she wraps that up, I'll
go ahead and go into detail on
the slight difference we have in
the executive recommendation.
It's really small. It's mostly
attributed to a labor actuals
and we can get into that if we
need to. But
Yes. Okay, Madam Chair, so
starting off, um, the main
difference between the two
recommendations is that the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by 94,000
in general revenues.
The LFC recommendation holds the
General front appropriation flat
FY 24 and appropriates increases
to the agency from the fun
balances.
Are there. Differences include
the executive recommendation
exceeding the LFC recommendation
by 21,000 for the agency's beats
recommendations include higher
recommendations for contractual
services and what the agency had
an FY 24 to its fulfill the
Department of Information
Technologies recommended
security cyber security
measures.
And with that I will turn over
to Cecilia.
Thank you, Emily. And the
reference was there. I'm sorry I
missed that 21,000 of difference
from the executive and that's
just a labor. Um, role in that
the executive found after the
agency submitted. We did pull
some We did Michael some sorry
we did pull some labor actuals
and we added that 21,000 back
in, which is why the executive
recommendation is just
A small bit higher than what the
agency asked for. Um, but with
no other questions, I will turn
it over to Dr Hendricks. Thank
you.
Mm. Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Rick
Hendricks. I'm the state Records
administrator. The state record
center in archives and I
appreciate the opportunity to
Present our fiscal year 2025
budget appropriation request and
for your continued support for
our agency.
I would like to make some
introductions before I begin
behind me is Georgia Chavez,
deputy state records
administrator.
Um, And to my right is Ruben
Rivera, chief financial officer.
They're part of our highly
qualified team, which recently
completed the seventh
consecutive audit with no
findings.
I'm proud of their work on
behalf of the people of New
Mexico and grateful for their
attendance and support today.
Madam chair members of the
committee. You all appreciate
the importance of accurate
record keeping and providing
access.
With the records of state
government in the interest of
public awareness and open
government.
I also know that you appreciate
The important records that
constitute the historical
patrimony of New Mexico, which
we are privileged to safeguard
and make available to the
public.
State agencies, for example,
rely on our agency for proper
records management assistance in
producing documents in response
to it for requests.
In addition, all in Mac rules
and regulations are filed,
published and housed in our
agency.
S R. C A has taken steps to
ensure rulemaking is being done
properly.
With maximum transparency.
The state Attorney general's
office.
I guess that's been recently
rebranded. But the state
attorney general's office relies
upon the records House at the
State Archives and Records
Center in order to effectively
represent state agencies.
District attorney's regular
request. D Wi in domestic
violence cases housed in the
state archives that provide
information used in the
prosecution of repeat the WI and
domestic violence, offenders,
Children's use and family
Department regularly accesses
child abuse cases.
That are stored in the state
archives. These records of vital
in the protection of New
Mexico's Children.
The state record center in
archives, one of Mexico's most
important legal, historical and
cultural resources.
As a central repository state
government records in the
custodian of numerous private
papers and manuscript
collections.
Our agency is a primary steward
of New Mexico's documentary
Heritage.
We are now nationally and
internationally to scholars,
historians, students and
filmmakers.
Madam Chair members of the
committee s R C A is requesting
total.
Based budget increase of
$73,100 in general fund to meet
the
Compliance standards set by the
Department of Information
Technology.
Due to the rise in cybersecurity
threats.
S R. C A has price prioritized
budget for the upgrade of old
software and hardware in FY 25
and will continue to cooperate
with the Department of
Information Technology and its
contractors to reach
cyber security compliance.
Through identification of
vulnerabilities, upgrade of
software and equipment managing
network security, managing huger
privileges and increasing
awareness of management and
staff.
Yes, R C is committed to
protecting the integrity
confidentiality and
accessibility of information
stored, processed or
transferred.
To our agency.
Madam chair members of the
committee. I would like to take
a moment to bring something to
your attention.
Our agency has noted several
inaccuracies in the narrative of
the if y 25 volume two
appropriation recommendations.
Under budget issues hitter,
paragraph two.
We have stated in prior years
that then you Mexico State
archives Fault which stores
permanent records is over
capacity.
Since that time, the the agency
has extended its storage space
and his plan to utilize
additional space located in the
Albuquerque Records Center.
However, the state
The Santa Fe and Albuquerque,
Reppert Record Center, which
store non permanent records.
Continue to receive new records
for storage on a daily basis.
In addition, do it blessed or
sent to state agents, frequently
reminding them of the space that
is available for storage. Any
statements alleging that the New
Mexico state records
commissioner commissioner Public
Records is not accepting boxes
of non terminate records are
simply inaccurate under budget
issues. Hitter paragraph for the
federal grant received from the
National Historical Publications
Record Commission requires
That all funds are utilized for
this specific expenses stated in
the grant.
Which are re grants to local
governments and organizations.
Therefore, these funds cannot be
utilized for the I T request to
cover cybersecurity cost.
Our agency is concerned that
these misstatements have greatly
impacted the Legislative Finance
Committee recommendation in the
General fund, and we hope that
you would take this into
consideration and support the
executive recommendation.
Madam chair members of the
committee. This concludes my
presentation. My staff and I are
happy to answer any questions
and thank you for your time
consideration.
Thank you. Thank you for that,
Um, we have a question from the
representative Chatfield.
Good afternoon. Thank you for
being here.
I live in on a really old
Spanish hacienda, Mike rails or
solid rock.
Uh,
Hmm. That when these places were
patented
The people that patented them
where required to sit down and
writing.
What they had been doing with
that place.
And how they had
Uh, used it in order to receive
a patent from the federal
government. How much water that
delineate your water, right?
I know I know that the state
engineer's office has some of
those
Maybe all of those patent
records.
Housed very interested in some
of those. My family's from New
Mexico been here since the
beginning of time. They were not
the ones that settle on the
place that I own. Do you got do
you all are you in charge of
some of those types of records
of the old
Homestead records whenever you
went for a homestead or a
pattern, and many times those
those people had been on that
place, maybe 100 years before
that.
Uh, easily 100 years before
that, or more.
Matt. Madam chair,
representative, Chatfield, Um
We We? You probably are aware
that there are two kinds of
those records there are federal
and state. Um, and we have, um,
copies of the federal records
and we have some of the original
state records. And in addition,
um, the state land office, um
Stores tremendous amount of
material with us.
So if I'm living on an old uh
Spanish.
Has she in the
That was later on patented and I
want to know a little bit of the
history of that place. I can ask
you.
Madam Chair, representative
Chatfield. I would love for you
to stop by and we'll try to find
whatever we can.
That would be we have, that
would be would be our pleasure.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um
Thank you for the presentation.
I guess I would. I just have a
couple things to add. So
Um, as I'm looking at our lfc
recommend, um, information. It
does have a statement here, it
says. As in prior years, CPR
reports the state record center
is over capacity.
And CPR for the most part.
There's a for the most part.
Cannot collect and store new
records for agencies. Um, I'm
going to ask Lfc, is it
Is that just a a misuse of
words? Or would you like to
address that in any way?
Uh, I'm sure John Courtney
deputy director Lfc.
Um, we went through a quite a
transition in this block during
the interim, So, um, that
information was likely old and
Uh, should have been updated,
but I will say it did not impact
the General fund recommendation.
I appreciate that, but for
clarification and thank you for
bringing that to our attention,
I think we can remedy that
pretty quickly. Um, the other
part.
As a former state employee
myself.
And you I'm looking at your
vacancies, but that's just I
mean, that's specific to you,
But also the agencies have a
coordinator records coordinator.
Is that correct?
And I'm sure everyone is
required to have a records
Layers on officer. Yes. So are
we Do we not? Are they
fulfilling their positions in
our state agencies? I'm sure Can
you repeat that? Are they
fulfilling their? Yeah, that
those the coordination um
liaisons being fulfilled in all
of our agencies to help you with
what your your job is.
Madam? Sure. Yes, okay.
They are because we have some
other information that you know
that they some agencies are
requesting to have their own
files or keep their own data and
information, which and please
correct me. If I'm wrong, isn't
it? We are not allowed to do
that.
By statute, madam. Sure, it's a
complicated question, in a way,
because if what you're referring
to is agencies that want to
store the records safe in the
cloud, if that's what we're sort
of what we're talking about.
There. There is no statutory
requirement that all state
agency store with the with the
state Record Center in archive
In my opinion, that was a
mistake that was made in 1950 59
when when the commission was
established, because it should
be that
So what? What happens in in
practice, it was an agency
chooses to do that. It
completely decentralize is the
record keeping and when I put on
my head as the archive, um, it
would mean that in order for
some future historian to do
research that research would
have to be done with each
individual agency.
I'm not aware of another state
that has such a completely
decentralized
System, and we seem to be
drifting in that direction.
And that was part of the
narrative that I referred to
where it says that multiple
agencies have requested. Um and
they're basing that on the fact
that they're saying they can't
start with us that's never never
been expressed anyone and so I
think what's happening is
agencies may have their own
reasons that they want to do
that primarily to solve.
Storage issues or access issues,
and they want to throw it in the
cloud. Um, but there are other
implications. Very serious
implications. Um, for from our
way of looking at it.
Uh, for
Um
Again for the coordination of
record keeping it also for, um
When they become permanent
records.
And should be in the custody of
the state archives. And and now
they're those particular
agencies are not going to do
that. I appreciate that
expansion on that information,
and I'm basing it based on your
testimony today, so I just
wanted to make that known to for
for information pieces and maybe
in the future, you might find
somebody to help you write some
legislation on that, But that's
I don't see any other questions.
Do we just
Do we have any other?
Questions from the committee.
Then would anyone like to
entertain a motion lfc?
We have a motion to accept the
LFC recommendation.
Second
Second
Thank you. So we
The motion. Um there. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
See none We are going to, um
Accept the motion to adopt lfc
recommendation. Thank you for
your time today and always we
entertain further discussions
about what is going on in your
agency and please reach out to
us. If you need to. Thank you.
Next up, we have New Mexico
Sentencing Commission.
It's agency 354.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
Scott Sanchez and the public
safety analyst for the LFC.
Today we'll be reviewing agency
code 354, which is the Mexico
Sentencing Commission. You can
find information on this behind
Tab three. You can also find
information in the LFC
recommendation. Volume two
pages 119 through 121.
Also here with me today, Linda
Freeman and Doug Carver from the
Mexico Sentencing Commission and
my counterpart from the
Department of Finance and
Administration, Mr Diego.
Um, the recommendations are
largely the same. They differ
only in that the executive
funded an additional $115.2000
and expansions, which it used to
Fund, not just raises for, um
existing MSC staff but also a
staff attorney physician that
was not on the LFC wreck. And
with that, I'll hand it to
Diego.
Thank you. Scott. Madam Chair
members of the commission, Scott
Correctly explained that the
executive or the difference
between the two recommendations
was that the executive included
an additional or some funding
for an attorney position. And
that is because over the last
couple of years, the Legislature
through creation of programs
like the Crime Reduction Grant
Act and other, um
Specifically focused programs
that were sent to the sentencing
commission. They
Uh um.
Have Tech taken on a lot of
additional work, and they need
an additional staff attorney to
assist them with that.
Um, but that I hand it over,
Ted.
Um, Mr Freeman.
Sorry. One additional point for
we headed over started jumping,
Madam chair. There is a
difference in the special
appropriations that I failed to
know.
The executive recommends 2.5
million for crime reduction
grants. LFC recommends 4 million
Good afternoon, madam Chair.
Members of the
Of the committee.
Um, I'm gonna just speak briefly
from the we provided you with
just six slides, so I'm not
going to have them pull them up
onto the power point. Um, um,
just for those of you who are
not familiar with the
commission. The commission was
formally created in 2003 and its
current form that more or less
than had existed since 1977. The
sentencing commission has the
statutory manmade mandate to
advise the executive, judicial
and legislative branches on
policy matters that affect both
criminal
And juvenile justice.
Ah, we are expected to make
recommendations to the
Legislature concerning
concerning proposed changes to
law in both the criminal and
juvenile realms and the
commission. Um and other, um,
recommendations regarding
possible improvements to these
systems.
Um, I'll just mention here over
the last few years we've been
doing work on a criminal code
update.
That, um
In the special language section.
Um, there is a recommendation to
extend that work for one more
year with a bill introduction
next year. We've been working
very closely with leadership.
Um, to explain the work of what?
What we've done to date and make
sure that um that that the
leadership is, um, familiar,
and, um, interested in the
recommendations of our seven
subcommittees that we have
convened over the last couple of
years.
I also have a slide. That's just
a brief, um, overview of the
commission, highlighting a few
things that have changed since
2019 as both, um, Scott and
Diego have mentioned, um
And the passage of the Crime
Reduction Grant Act in 2019 has
made a substantial change in the
work of the commission.
Um we are now dispersing crime
reduction grants to criminal
justice coordinating councils
throughout the state.
Ah, our commission is composed
of 27 members. The drawing room
from across the criminal justice
system includes, um appointed
leaders of the midget. It
includes members appointed by
leaders in the majority and
minority parties in both
chambers of the Legislature and
our chair, Bob Cleave all is
appointed by the governor, and
unfortunately he could not join
us today.
In terms of the crime reduction
grants. I have provided you a
small update on where we are in
the FY 24 awards to date, we
will we have awarded $3.5
million in grants and we've
extended the time frame on a on
five grants that were awarded in
FY 23 that is 36 grants.
So to, um Diego's point each one
of those grants has a
intergovernmental agreement that
we monitor. We make sure that
all of the grantees are adhering
to the agreement and those
intergovernmental agreements and
spending money appropriately.
Um and, um right now we have
three staff members who are
monitoring those grants,
including myself. Um, we have
12. We each have 12 grants that
were in charge of right now, Um,
we also, um, conduct a post
award orientation.
And we will be holding a second
annual convening of grantees
this coming march on March 13th.
I just confirmed the date to
date. Um, we found there was a
lot of enthusiasm from the
grantees as well as the Criminal
justice, coordinating councils
and having an opportunity to get
together and see their similar
ideas on on possible local
solutions that might help with
criminal justice problems, and
there
In their areas.
Finally, I just want to point
out. Um we conducted our first
initial finding from our
evaluation. So in addition to
awarding these grants, there's
an expectation that our
commission staff who includes a
team of three researchers that
we are trying to, um, basically
create some outcome measures
regarding the implementation of
these grants.
So we recently completed their
the first evaluation of the
grants that were awarded in FY
21 and FY 20 to keep in mind.
Um, those were relatively small
years in FY 21 that was five
programs comprising 700
participants in FY 22 that was
four programs comprising 1100
participants.
So as you can imagine, next year
when we move on to our FY 23
where we had 24 active grants
the number of participants that
we're going to be responsible
for doing evaluation on this
gonna substantially increased.
So, um
One initial finding that I would
like to share with you guys is
one of the outcomes that we were
looking at is both filing of new
cases as well as war activity on
current cases for individuals
who are program participants, so
the sheer volume of activity
earned the pretrial area. Um we
have funded some supplemental
activities for pretrial programs
as well.
As some, um, um
Augmentations for treatment
courts and things like that. In
some cases, we've actually
funded the creation of an
entirely new treatment court.
Um, but one of the initial
findings that we have found is
that for all the programs that
we've evaluated program
participants who had warrants in
the year prior so looking at
those who had some contact with
the court and that your prior to
their program participation. We
had a decrease of more than half
in the number of warrants issued
for them in the year following
their program start date.
So, um, that's I think shows
that you know these these these
programs that we're implementing
are making a difference in terms
of cutting down on future
criminal justice, contact.
Um, The last slide is just a
recap of of what our initial
request was. And with that, I
will stand for questions.
Thank you for that. Um, we go to
committee. Do we have any
questions?
Not looking at any questions
here like, um, Representative
Herndon, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you.
Madam Presenter. My question is
around the crime reduction
grants. So we're
What type of grants were they?
Could you just sort of give a
high level overview of what they
were to reduce crime And then
there we the outcomes of those.
Are they in some reports that
you produce that we will be able
to see Madame. Cheers. Thank
you.
Met Madam Chair members of the
committee. Yes, we produced the
preliminary report, which only
has its one year for FY 22. We
have two year outcomes for the
FY 21. We were hoping to
Um, produced like kind of a
dashboard for when we have three
years of outcome data, but we
produced the initial report for
FY 21 and FY 22. The awards were
relatively small because we were
working with approximately 200
to $300,000 for grants. So most
of those grants were very small
scale.
Um, providing just augmentation
to existing programs. With the
exception of the eighth Judicial
district who stood up a domestic
violence court in FY 22. Most of
those had some nexus with the
courts, either via pretrial or
another therapeutic court and
oftentimes what we were doing
was providing things that were
not currently funded in those
interventions like things like
gas cards that can get
individuals.
To their court hearings. Um,
small incentives for reaching
milestones in their treatment or
their participation in the
court. Also, we were funding
things like electronic
monitoring, because many of
these grants you don't you'll
remember where during Covid so
summits in some cases there was
electronic monitoring that that
the court wanted somebody to be
able to be out that they wanted
to have some electronic
monitoring on the on the
individual and in some cases, we
also did.
Fund.
Um, electronic purchases of
computers and cell phones and
things like that, so people can
keep in contact with the court
as the court was operating
somewhat under dish different
circumstances during those times
since then, in FY 23. We saw a
significant influx of money and
the diversity of the grants that
we have funded.
Has gone up and scale.
Tremendously. A lot of the
interventions that were that we
funded since then include things
like a hygiene pantry for
individuals who are releasing
from detention. We funded things
like, um, continuing. Um ah,
Peer support in. Uh um,
following. I'm released from
treatment courts we funded, um
We have continued to fund the
domestic violence court. I told
you about, Um, Pretrial, um, pre
prosecution diversion programs
and some of the district
attorney's office is it's just
really what the local areas want
to apply for. There's a whole
process where they have to ask
the Criminal Justice
Coordinating Council to support
their grant applications so that
these are bottom up approaches
that local communities are going
to their coordinating council
going through that process and
then apply.
To the commission. I hope that
answers your question.
Yes, it does. Thank you. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you. I appreciate that
question. Um
And I just have a quick
Reflection on that as well, Um,
going back to this special and
supplemental the $4 million.
Scott. Um, it's it's pretty. The
comments from that are here from
from our analysts from you in
the recommendations quite
significant, and my question is
So this is, uh it's gonna
So that $4 million would go to
to supplement the work for the
For the act. Is that correct?
Madam shared. Thank you. Yes,
that is correct. The idea would
be that we would be able to
provide additional funding for
more crime reduction grants them
a little closer to the total
amount of demand that they saw
There was $2 million in the
program, and they got $5.8
million in requested.
Showed that there was clearly an
appetite for these programs. I
think that's quite substantial
in regard to just as you
mentioned all all the things
that that you're able to do this
and it's it's amazing. It's a
great, you know, that's us
enacting legislation through
that, but thank you for all your
work. I think that that that you
know of itself is really
substantial. And I'm happy to
see that.
So, um, thank you for for that
work. Are there any other
questions from the committee?
Would would we like to entertain
a motion? Thank you, Madam
Chair. I move that we accept the
LFC recommendation.
It's okay.
Do we have any objections? See
none.
We will, um
Take the recommendation from the
LFC budget and thank you. And if
you have any other questions, I
think, please feel free to talk
with us. Thank you.
Next. We'll have the Department
of Information technology do it.
And that is agency number 361.
Home, Madam chair members of the
committee Cecilia and are back
now with Rogers Obando for the
Department of Information
Technology. I also want to point
out too, that in volume two you
can find the LFC recommendation
on page 128. And so we are going
to start with the
Um, budget recommendation and
pretty much both the executive
and the LFC. Recommendations are
in line. But the only difference
is our is that the executive
recommendation supports the
office of Broadband as becoming
its own agency, whereas the LFC
budget recommendation does not
include this in its budget
recommendation. I said that
twice
Um, And the other difference is
that the LFC recommendation does
not support the transfer of
share from the Department of
Information Technology to the
Department of Finance and
Administration. And with that I
will turn over to Cecilia.
Good afternoon, Madam chair if
it were to be preferred by you
all do you want to because the
office of Broadband is here to
present on their own behalf,
since they have requested to be
an independent agency for fiscal
year, 25 if you'd like we could
save that. Um Lfc recommended
them as a program. We
recommended them as an agency
and we can just touch base with
them after acting Secretary Sam
Bendy, um can talk about do it,
So that way we can kind of carve
out
That difference or how do you?
How would you prefer to do that?
Madam? I think that I see that
the offices here if if we need
them to to, um
Sure and answer questions or be
part of. It's a secretary to if
he would like them as problems
to be part of your okay with
that either way, madam, I'm fine
with that. I'm fine with that.
Thank you. Moving parts. Um,
this year, Madam chair, we can
go ahead and start with the
program after we've gone
through, Um
Those recommendations on both. I
do want to clarify a little bit
on the duet rate structure that
is going to be explained through
our hearings. It is something
that we have not really talk too
much about, but it's starting to
affect that fund balance for
that agency. But I'll go ahead
and let um
Emily, start us off. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes. So on the different sheets,
Uh, we're just as Bu 36100 the
overall recommendation for the
LFC puts 4.5 million over the
executive budget. And as I had
mentioned earlier, this is
mostly attributed to the LFC
recommendations supporting the
office of Broadband and
expansion as part of
The agency as a part of the
Department of Information
Technology. I on the LFC
recommendation puts 5.5 million
over the executive
recommendation in the base,
Primarily because of this
difference. Um and
For expansions. The
recommendations are in consensus
of no funding for the expansion
of the share transfer because
the executive budget um
recommendation built this shared
transfer into program support,
as opposed to recommending it as
a separate expansion, And so
with that I will turn over to
Cecilia.
Thank you, Emily. Um, Barring no
other questions. I will go ahead
and move on to program support
Peace. 771. This is where you're
going to see that share transfer
revenue. So let me go ahead and
read this and then I'll explain
a little bit of why we're doing
that for the revenue program
Support did not have General
fund and fiscal year 24. So you
will see this from a 0 to 650.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by 650,000 General fund
revenues, whereas the LFC
recommendation keeps the General
fund flat as fiscal year. 24
executive recommendation built
the share expansion into the
program Support General Fund.
In the base. Aside from the
executive recommendation,
exceeding the LFC recommendation
in general fund revenues, both
recommendations are in consensus
for the rest of the budget of
program support.
And the analysts have come to
consensus with all performance
measures, and, um
Secretary of Sam and M will be
able to explain this a little
bit better than I could the way
that the do it. Rate structures
are established. They're very
federally governed, and that's
governed by two ends. The
federal government requires
companies to sell I T services
or projects or whatever that
might
Be called, Um, for what the
value of the state of New Mexico
is meaning that an I T
contractor like Microsoft can
suddenly come into the state of
New Mexico and charge what
they're charging the state of
California. They base it off the
state's revenues and their
federal bond ratings.
And because of that, there is
another half to that which is
found in on the circular 87,
which prescribes the state
agencies to only be able to
charge so much to eliminate the
opportunity for these types of
things to be scalped. So since
Microsoft comes in and charges
you X amount of dollars.
You're not allowed to go and
duplicate that price to make a
ton of revenue. You have to
comply by how much The feds say
they can charge you and then how
much money you contribute to
providing those programs. So
what increases those rates or
what allows do it to generate
that revenue is essentially how
much money the state puts into
providing these services out to
Um other agencies. It's kind of
a complex. Um, math problem. I'm
doing my best to try and explain
this, and hopefully it'll get
better through the session and
maybe next year, But, um, long
story short.
It's a return on investment, and
it's it's It's a tough one. So
the 650 What that does is it
keeps that indirect float so
that even though the share team
is leaving or trying to go to D
F a that cost to allow do it to
continue to charge the same rate
stays at that agency, so we
don't have to cut rates and then
reduce our revenue as a state.
Super complicated and so sorry.
That was probably a lot, but I
can get into more detail as
needed for that, madam chair.
Um, and that wraps up program
supports. L pass it over to
Emily.
Yes, Madam chair moving to
compliance and project
management recommendations are
in consensus on the base.
As for the base, both the LFC
and executive recommendations
support a decrease of a F T. E s
and an 85.5% reduction in the
operating budget to support new
FTE and other programs.
Analysts are in consensus on all
performance measures. The only
difference with this is that the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
expansions by 16,000. And this
is because the LFC
recommendation does not fully
support the enterprise project
management expansion, and with
that I will turn over to
Cecilia.
Moving on to Enterprise Services
program, 773.
For the revenue. The LFC
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by
970,000 and other revenues. The
LFC recommendation offsets
reductions in the revenues.
In the base. The LFC
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by
182,000 and personal services
and employee benefits due to the
LFC recommendations supporting
six new FTE positions, whereas
the executive recommendations
supports and eight FTE decrease,
Um
And we are in consensus with
those performance measures, and
here is where you will see those
share folks that do leave, um,
along with the 14 share FTE that
we're going to DFA. The agency
also asked for an expansion
within so that's that net
decrease that's referenced here.
Move into the equipment
replacement. Revolving sign of
both recommendations are in
consensus and analysts are in
consensus on all performance
measures, Madam Chair and with
that I will turn over the
broadband access and expansion
to Cecilia.
Okay, madam. True. This one has
you will see on your different
sheet. Um, you will see zero for
the executive recommendation
here, and that is because the
executive recommendation does
not recommend that. The office,
the Office of Broadway and
Access and Expansion, Stay a
within the department of I T.
And that is because the fiscal
year 25 requests for the office
of Broadband Access and
expansion is independent of the
Department of Information
Technology and in accordance
with the passage of Senate Bill
93.
In 2021, creating the office of
broadband access and expansion.
It is defined as
administratively attached to the
department of I T.
Um as stated in sections of NMC,
which I'm not going to get into
right now, and agency attached
to a department for
administrative purposes Only
shall it goes through the list,
but one of those being exercises
functions independently from the
department and without approval
or control from the department.
There are various examples
across the state of what
administratively attached. Looks
like, Um, there are dates in the
A G A that allow agencies to
come to the Department of
Finance and Administration to
request to be an independent
agency or to create new programs
and by the A G. A department of
I T and the Office of Broadband
did meet those guidelines as
specified in the A G. A.
And they were approved on the
executive perspective for that.
So
I don't know. Um Emily, did you
I will. Let's do this. I will
talk to what the LFC
recommendation has on here. And
then did you print the copy of
the There's two, Okay, and then
I will go into the executive,
which they're on two different
sheets because
Our cost accounting system is
real.
Fun that way, So let me just ask
those two separate sheets for
yourselves and are we have that
We're looking at this. I think
you do to Madam Chair. Yes,
Madam Sheriff should be included
in it would look find it On my
end. It's gonna say Bu 36200
peacoat.
P. 200. And that is what the
Office of broadband their agency
code would be if made their own
agency, And it's in this packet
we have yes.
Pete.
It should be towards the end it
thank you.
Okay?
Absolutely, Madam chair. You do
you have it, Okay. Okay. Sorry.
Just making sure. Okay, so I'm
just gonna go ahead and read the
revenue and then my breakouts
going to be a little bit
different, but you'll see that
on both sheets so
Four p 789, which is the office
of Broadband as still program
under the Department of
Information Technology.
LFC recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by $1.7
Million in general fund
revenues, $2.3 million federal
revenues and 650,000 and other
revenues for $4.7 million total.
The LFC recommendation supports
the office of broadband access
and expansion as being
administratively attached to the
agency and the executive
recommendations supports Officer
Broadband as its own agency. Um
Moving on to the base. The LFC
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by that
same amount, and um, the LFC
recommendation also includes
$650,000 from a transfer from
the Public School Capital Outlay
Fund for the Office of
Broadband, and I Know that there
are other analysts in the room
that can explain a little bit
the PS coc transfer, But from
the executive perspective, there
is a little bit of a concern
there because
The public School Capital Outlay
fund. Um, as far as we
understand it in a in our
On our side. It is governed by a
board and that board releases
those funds, so building it in
as the agencies operating budget
might overlap with current
statute associated to that fund,
But we can get to that after I
finished speaking on that finish
that and I do see sunny here.
I'd like him to have when you
feel like you need to to come to
it. Thanks. Okay?
Um, so moving on to the
executive recommendation, which
will be the opposite of the
sheet that you just looked at,
Um, for the personal category
Fiscal year, 24 was $1.1 million
in the executive recommended
$2.8 million and overall
increase of 141% or $101.6
million of this increased
688,000 of this is General fund,
whereas the remaining
differences 957,000.
In the use of federal grant
money.
These funds support the
transition of therefore existing
Sturm positions, which are not
found in their base currently
because agencies are allowed to
create Sturm positions with
program money or project money.
Um, allowing those four existing
Sturm's to become perms. Five
TSF, a broadband employees that
are currently attached with the
office of Broadband and three
additional positions to support
the administratively attached
functions as defined by statute.
The contractual category
Executive recommendation
Increases of $1.1 Million or
roughly 900% to fiscal year 24.
Of this only $200,000 accounts
for General fund and the
remaining fund is is through
federal funds.
Of the other costs. Executive
recommends an increase of
$191,000 or 242%. Over fiscal
year 24 and of this only
$120,000 is General fund.
Um, and this at the remainder of
that utilizes federal funds. Um
The agency. Might we? We do
expect the agency to begin
receiving a lot more federal
funds, so that's going to be
part of the objective moving
forward, and we did not include
those PS COC funds because
currently that P. S C O C
statute allows the office of
Broadband to receive $10 million
through, um, drawdowns from that
board, so we just did not deem
it necessary to build it into
their operating since it's
entitled to them per calendar
year.
To begin with, but with no
further questions, we can move
on to the office of Cyber
Clarification point that $10
million
So you do use that 10 million
for operational? Um, budget. Is
that correct? I do. We do have
the director of broadband here
to explain what that money for
operational so in $10 million.
That's a huge thing. Madam
Chair. This is part of a larger,
uh, kind of build package that
we're looking at. So we are
looking at bringing over the
entire state Education Network
program from F A
To the office of Broadband
access expansion. Currently, the
staff is with us by a memorandum
of understanding, but given how
smaller operating budgets are
and how very specific our
federal funds are, we cannot
You know? Do you do a drawdown
process to be able to build the
data nodes that are really
necessary to be able to even
run? The RFP s that are
necessary. And so you know,
holistically, um, you know,
state education network has has
been kind of been in existence
over for about eight years.
There's not been a lot of
progress made on it in the last
you know, year that has been
with us. We've been actually
making significant progress, but
we keep running into this
barrier.
Around the money, and so if you
look at it will have a Senate
bill. I don't have a number for
currently, but it will be a
general broadband update and it
takes a look at all of the
statutes. And so that $10
million will be used for the
state education network. But
given that these are exempt
employees from a quasi
governmental agency, we do need
a mechanism to bring them across
and you need to be able to fund
their positions. Understand
that. I just want to make sure
that we are incorporating that
$10 million as as we are talking
About all funding. I mean,
that's our job. We need to know
where those
Those moneys and revenues are
moving. So thank you for that
update. Appreciate it Manager
Madam chair. If that was all we
can move on to the new Office of
Cybersecurity, please.
Yes, Madam Chair for the new
Office of Cybersecurity. The
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
470.5000.
And for expansions, the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by that
same amount for the office of
Cybersecurity and their
expansions. The executive
recommendations supports six FTE
while the LFC recommendation
supports five ft. E and then
with
Now we're the same with it and
the volume
PSM error, but in our volume to
it is written as LFC
recommending six FTE for in
here. For some reason, there
might have been an error. When,
um, getting the information onto
the sheet.
Yeah, it's okay.
And with that we can turn over
to the out to Yeah. So thank
you, Emily. And thank you,
Cecilia. You guys have been
wonderful. Um madam chair and
members of the committee if you
would give me 30 seconds, I
would like to introduce my
staff, so
Jason Johnson is my deputy. He
is the state deputy C i l
And followed by Michael
Rohrabacher. He will play a
major role because he will
oversees the complete public
safety networking
infrastructure. That's what all
the counties immunities and the
state police used to
communicate. So
That's him and Rene nor wise.
who is our public information
officer.
And Melissa Gutierrez, special
projects manager works
exclusively, but me and other
special project
Honors and Gerald
Is our budget director and, uh,
who's my eyes? Foo
And of course, we know Drew and
his team on the broadband side.
True. Did you want to introduce
your team? Thank you.
Grabbing microphone here. I
brought Actually, some of our
folks we hired on to support the
administrative services
department functions. So I've
got a sick or Oh, I've got
Rosalie and I have Shauna over
here as well as Vanessa's right
behind me. She's our general
counsel.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you for that opportunity
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Roger
Simba and, um and I'm honored to
be here.
So we'll quickly go through my
presentation deck based on the
suggestions that I have
received, We have kept it very
close. It's only a minimal
number of slides.
So as you can see, on the
screen, the summary of the
budget recommendation.
Um, on the
Columns to the left. We have the
executive recommendation, um,
just to be transparent and
provide necessary room for
Andrew, so we have both the
executive recommendation with
and without obey.
Obviously broadband access and
expansion, followed by LFC
recommendation, and what is the
difference between the executive
and LFC?
As you can see each one of those
line items specifically called
in terms of the sources and at
the bottom by program right, so
program support, which is our
ASD complaints and project
management. Um, you see, some
Uh, that's that's the $16,000
difference that Emily brought
up.
And then followed by Enterprise
services, Cuban replacement fund
and cybersecurity and broadband
access and expect some briefs
and the executive
recommendations summary what
they're planning to do here
Executive recommendation
includes the $650,000 that we
talked about in terms of General
fund to increase in personal
services are, you know salaries
and benefits?
Um, the new General fund
increase of supports the
indirect past.
Maintaining the same red
structure for Shar billing and
do it enterprise sizes.
Um P 772, which is the
complaints and project
management function, And this is
the function where you know I
will be separating out of to
stand and the office of
Broadband and some of the FDs
will be coming in from Al Based
on the recommendations that you
heard earlier.
Um, but this is a very critical
function for the state.
Right. P 772 provides I T and
project management oversight.
Um, and compliance for all like
the projects across the state I
t ecosystem.
And P 773 is the enterprise
services. Um, and you see that
executive recommendation reduces
202 100 categories by about
970,000 because of the shared
transfer to the effect.
And followed by P. 791 Day
executive recommendation
includes an additional 470 some
$1000
And which under six FTS compared
to, um are very similar. Lfc.
So, um, I may have some asked on
the cyber security officer as I
walked through individual items.
Thank you. Thank you for the
present. Oh, I'm not asking a
question. Continue. Thank you. I
was just passing, um, so moving
on with into slight forum, which
is P 791, which is the cyber
security office.
Um, as you can see the executive
recommendation and they eloped
The recommendation on the F D
agree. It's like total of 14.
There are some subtle
differences in the 200
categories and whatnot. So the
total difference between
executive and LFC is
About 400 seventy's $1000. So I
want to take a moment and past
year because that this is
important to all of us do
understand.
The Office of Cybersecurity has
rolled out a statewide
cybersecurity program, and the
reception has been very good.
And, uh, if there is an
opportunity I would like to sit
with you know that this group in
executive session and chat, more
details, But the point that I
want to make is I'm going to
make a request here for about
$5.5 million
Do we extend our current
Uh, service offering
Right now, we are providing, um,
cybersecurity services 289
school districts.
And they love it.
And also to 31 higher
educational institutions in the
past, and the funny FY 20 for
that money was about 2.5 million
for PD and 3 Million given to
higher education. If the
specific language that is for
this purpose
So this time we got the
extension on the language, but
the money is
Am I So, um, if we can add that
$5.5 million, I can provide that
continuity to 189.
Public and charter schools in
terms of vulnerability, scanning
and management, and the same can
be extended to that 31 higher
educational institutions. So
that's the comment that I want
to make here.
And, uh, with that I would like
to transition to broadband
access and expansion on anything
that Drew wants to add.
Madam chair. I just say that I
think the analysts have done a
really good job pointing out and
the biggest issue for the office
of Broadband Access and
Expansion is making sure that we
actually separate out to operate
independently. Um, the core of
really what I want to talk about
here is that we have $675
million of federal funding that
are coming in.
We have another 250 ish million
dollars of state funding that we
are managing as well and we're
attached, you know, to the
Department of Information
Technology, which is roughly
$100 million agency, and you
know, with no disrespect to my
colleagues over here, the
reality is is that we are
behemoth with a ton of work to
do.
And we've been effectively able
to staff up we've gone from I
was employee number two this
last year. We are now seeing
that 23 employees. We just hired
23rd employee.
So we have staffed up to meet
the demands of the programs that
we run both from the state and
the federal side. But you know,
one of the big issues that I get
asked a lot is like, Oh, well,
the federal funds are going to
go away.
The Internet is not going away.
We are building the future right
now.
We are building infrastructure.
The equivalency is building
water. The equivalency is
building roads.
Once we go out and build to make
sure that every new Mexican has
access to high speed broadband.
You have to understand. 20 years
ago we were using phone lines
right? Many of our our
constituents, Many new Mexicans
are still using phone lines
that's going to change over to
fiber that's going to change
over to co axial cable. Some of
them may even be using satellite
in the future, but the speed
demands are going to continue to
increase, which means that we
also are going to need to make
sure that those networks
continue to operate.
So much of the way that we do
not build a road and then forget
about it. We're going to still
have to make sure that the
Internet
The infrastructure, right is
built. And so this is a long
term, You know agency. This is
not something that's going to be
going away and we need to build
for the future. So I would
actually use recommend the
executive recommendation on this
and make sure that we're set up
for success is we move forward
in the future because we have to
move fast, and a lot of new
Mexicans do not have the
Internet and as it is
infrastructures four or five
year program at least to build
something so
We want to make sure that we get
the Internet out to all new
Mexicans.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you. Do I really
appreciate that? Um
Is there? Is there anything of
Secretary Did you want to add
anything to that? Closing
comments and questions? Thank
you. Thank you, please.
Um So one last comment, Um
Regarding cyber security. Uh,
the market is really, really,
really I don't know how many
really is I can use it's very
tight.
And, um
We are also somewhat does
advantage to find the necessary
resources here in New Mexico for
that skill set.
The pool is very limited.
So
In the 200 categories. If you
can look at it for cyber
security, I have
Some amount of money allocated,
but that there is no
Rational way for me to achieve
even 80% compliance by, you
know, high of those 80% of that
14 ft years, So I would, uh
Request.
That number be at least
$2 million because it's
impossible for me to
Higher that resources, so
basically we have categories
like level 12 and three and then
manager.
And so on.
I can't find any level once.
I mean, I can give you a
personal example. My son just
graduated.
The way current
Generational outlook is and what
they are expecting is very
different than what our school
based structure is. I will say
that out loud, black and white
Those kids are not going to be
taking anything. What we have to
offer.
So fundamentally, there are some
gap in numbers, especially with
those kind of specialist skill
set.
And then we need to have a
mindset to be in public service.
And that is also liking that's
not part of the
Program, so
Um, but that I would humbly
request that the 200 categories
be increased to
$2 million.
Um
Then here are the special
appropriations for Department of
Information Technology. Uh,
these are related to see two and
associated. Um, options.
okay?
Um, that we can gain some
economy stuff kill in our
opinion, So these are funds
dedicated to those respective
agency, but it is being routed
through office of Cyber Security
Department of Information
technology so that we can gain
some efficiency and procuring
those services and providing to
them.
And, uh, this is the
appropriation that we are talked
about. Drew. Do you want to
touch on this?
These are especially madam chair
in the special side of things.
The executive recommendation has
$42 million there. So Officer
Broadband has been tracking all
of the federal and state funding
coming into the state,
Regardless of you know whether
it's coming to the state itself
or if it's going to an Internet
service provider or to another
entity that's going to build,
you know, broadband.
We have been looking at this
from the perspective of the Gap
analysis.
We had a $4 billion estimation
in the engineering that was done
back in 2020 been tracking all
of the funding coming in against
it. We still have a $2.1 billion
problem to make sure that we
actually have enough broadband
right enough infrastructure and
this is goes into technology
like five g cell phones as well.
Not just, you know, connecting
your computer at home or your to
your business.
You know, as we upgrade into new
bandwidths into the cell phones,
you have to build more towers.
And so this is really important
Piece of of understanding. Is
that again As much as $1 billion
is phenomenal. There's still a
long way to go with broadband,
and so
You know as much money as we can
put into this now is going to
save the state later because
there's again economies of
scales where you have a road
being dug up where we can put in
fiber, or we can at least put in
conduit so that fiber can be
blown in later and so, having
money available to run our
programmatic and continue to
build around the need in the
state is going to be absolutely
important.
Thank you. Thank you Drew.
That's all we have. So, please,
we are here to answer any
questions. Thank you. Thank you
again. Did you want it? Okay?
Then I will have a list here.
I'm going to start with
Representatives starting Yana to
start us off with questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. It's
always good to hear from you
guys. Um Okay. So first, let's
start with the 5.5 million so
that money goes to higher Ed and
PD, and it's for scanning and
managing and all those things at
the school level in the
university level.
Thank you, chair and members of
the committee. You are
absolutely correct
Representative. So as we put
this statewide program, um um
Part of there's like five
distinct group in the statewide
program.
The state executive branch
agencies and all its political
subdivisions are
Um, it's the offer is open for
all political subdivision to
participate in it.
I have the extended the offer to
council services and also to the
judiciary.
So we are waiting to hear back
from them. Let's leave it at
that, and that the other
specific groupings are 187 plus
school district, both private
and charter schools and, uh,
Public. Suppose
And then 31 higher educational
institutions and the local
government like 33, counties and
106 minutes of allergies, and
then the tribal. So this is what
makes up of my universe now.
That was a significant growth
from bar Beaver when we were
taking baby steps with 76
executive branch agencies and I
can I took 40 years to bring
that together. But I can say now
we have understood what this
process looks like The
compressed the time and we have
already rolled out Some of these
programs to
All of them and that
In that district grouping right
to all entities. No questions.
All of them are participating.
So in FY 24. We were blessed
with the funding from these, um
Um sources
To, um, provide the security
scanning service for 189 school
districts and that 31 higher
educational institutions.
And the program is progressing
really well. I met with the
Council of Presidents all the C
I O sour after those
universities and then also, um,
we are doing an excellent work
with the school district.
So with that said, we would like
to continue that program because
it provides one continuity. It
helps the school districts
identify what the issues are so
that they can go fix it. And the
same with, um, the higher
educational institution because
they can use the funding to go
fix what they cannot right now.
So since we are providing the
Scanning, they can eat.
Recycle that money to go fix the
actual security, cyber security
holes so that they can improve
their security posture. That's
where we will be spending that
$5.5 million and this will be a
very valuable Adam as part of
our fiduciary responsibility.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, So we know before you
before you were doing this
schools all over the state have
been hit higher. Ed had been
hit. So this makes a huge
difference, right? Absolutely.
Thank you. Chair and members of
the committee and representative
there was no standardization. It
was haddock that was no single
pane of glass reporting.
If you want to ask me out. Any
one of the members in the
committee would have asked me
what is the status? Roger's
response would have been. I
don't know.
Because we never had as
Yes, standard is way of
practicing cybersecurity. How's
it now? We have those processes
in place. So it is. It is rolled
out, and we are getting
telemetry based on both scans,
and we can have a better
understanding of
What the posture looks like In
what the maturity of those
programs looks like across the
ecosystem so we can take a risk
based approach because we may
not have all the money in the
world to go fix every single
problem, but at least it will
give us an opportunity to take a
risk based approach and
prioritized and say, Okay, these
are high risk item that we
wanted to be addressed.
And and besides Madam Chair
besides that the money just to
bring them up. Yeah.
Huge. I mean, absolutely.
Okay. Um, yeah, so the funding
will be very valuable.
To get the continue the going
because we did it and you know,
23. We did it in 24 just trying
to ask for the same amount to
get the thing going for F I
thank you, and that's the $5.1
Million 5.5. Thank you. Okay, So
let's talk about, um
The your budget and your FTS?
Yes. So
So, um, thank you. Chair and
members of the committee and
thank you, representative there
of the asked that we had for
Department of Information
Technology.
Um, opera operational side of
the house and then office of
Cyber is 16 totally to eat, then
goes to do it and and six goes
through office of cybersecurity,
and since I already talked about
cyber security, pass there and
give you some insight down that
we want to use the 10 FPs and
the Department of Information
Technology Side
Right while they're for that,
those 1050 years we are going to
Look for the monies within the
department, right? We are not
asking for any general fund
there, but anything that you
guys can throw out as will be
valuable. But the significant
adult about four FTS will go to
words supporting Drew and his
the efforts because
You need to understand this
department was set up a while
ago. And right now it's about
$100 million. I'm just drowning
off for ease of discussion. $100
million operation. But when you
have officer broadband, which is
like $750 million plus operation
We need to scale it.
And that did not happen in the
past. Now, I realized that the
department realized that and
since this is my second go
around and hitting the function,
I want to fix it. I want to help
him and that on the same page,
so that is why I'm asking the F
D. Just on the program
management side alone. It's
going to be for FTS that will be
Working with our CFO to assist
with the procurement process for
broadband and office of cyber so
So it is better than where we
are today. But there is always
room for improvement, and we can
always add more FTE to gain some
efficiencies so that we can
provide those efficiencies
across the ecosystem. Um
Hopefully that answer your
question, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So you said
they're specialized positions.
Do we allow any of these
positions to work from home too?
Because I know what this younger
generation working from home is
more important than anything on
a job have seen all sorts of
things so glad you touched on
that. But I'm gonna address this
in multiple different ways. So
Every recently we started on a
hiring campaign, you know, here
we are on par with our exceeding
some of the expectation, so
right now do it. Vacancy rate is
close to 10.6%. Am I saying that
10.8 So it's about 10.8% so
Right now, Nine positions are
advertised and 25 different
positions are in various stages
of hiring, including background
checks. Awful. It reissued
interviews completed, in fact,
Um if I'm happy to share this
statistics, um in four days we
completed 60 plus interviews for
a different positions, saying
that correctly, Jason
Yes. So
Amazing amount of work is being
done by our staff. So, um
Um, to answer to to address some
of the things that you brought
up a representative, So the good
thing is now we are seeing
applicants from out of state
applying
So, um, we got lucky before we
could address the canal items
that you brought up, they are
willing to move.
Okay?
So this is not a trend that we
have seen right? We are also
seeing that trend because we are
getting the resumes and full of
candidates are coming from
From a larger geographical
location, then that what we
would typically see either from
Albuquerque are in satisfied, So
I think even the, um the
candidates are little bit of
deceptive.
To be in person.
Alright, so hopefully that
addresses said what? Um Having
that flexibility has its pros
and cons.
All right. My left.
The digital trunk radio system
Subscription for emergency
responders. What? What? Okay, We
know why Lfc didn't want to do
that. Or is it somewhere else in
the budget?
Um
If I may.
All right,
Emily? Yes. Sorry.
Yes, Madam Chair. Um, if you
look on page 21 in your pocket
for these special and
supplemental appropriations for
the Department of Information
technology, you will see that
the LFC does not include this in
its recommendation because it is
a subscription for subsidies for
local and federal agencies. And
so it would just be covering the
costs for local and federal
agencies. And the LFC just did
not agree with the use of the
appropriation.
So is it something, madam chair
that we've done before or no.
Um, if I may, Madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you. Um, this has been a
legislative process that we've
been through last legislative
session.
Due to, um um
Lack of time or whatever reason,
this build, never had a chance
to be hurt.
But, um the, uh, the municipal
league and the counties and all
the law enforcement agencies are
very much eager to get this one
going. It's a subscription fee
is about $20 out of you know for
this discussion is $20, but
radio
It's not a large amount.
Um, but they love it many after,
uh
Emergency responders and the
services that they currently
have. I mean, many of the
municipalities
They may not have this as a
available additional resource.
so that's why the state offered
to pick up that subscription
costs.
Um and, um, I have the public
safety radio director to add any
additional comments on that.
So, Michael, do you want to add
more to it?
Yeah.
Good afternoon, madam Chair
members of the committee
representative. The The thief is
$20 per radio for external. Uh,
Radio users, so non state
agencies so think federal tribal
local entities that wish to use
the system. The idea of the
subsidy came about as a way to
maximize participation in the
system and maximize
interoperability between all of
these agencies.
And currently, that's
The plan is to subsidize that
the user fees what is so if we
didn't what would happen or what
would they do it themselves or
they would be required to pay
the $20 fee to do it $20 per
radio per month.
The radio. Is that okay?
Correct. Add more. Do you have
something?
Madam? Sure, Uh, representatives
are Indiana. So that's included
in the specials, which I believe
HFC is taking up on Saturday.
You could absolutely address it
at that time. Um but kind of as
Emily said, um
The, um
Reason LLC didn't recommend that
was because it was a local
government subsidy rather than a
state government requests.
Thank you. Sorry, Madam Chair
Representative just to give you
an idea Numbers currently, as of
December, there were 6877 radios
that were state or federal,
Local or tribal. Thank you. So
much for your thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you and
Since you brought up the the, um
$5.5 million in their son is
still here, and I know that we
have sunny if you want to speak
650.
$650,000 to the public School
Capital Outlay Fund. How does
that
How does that work with the
Their budget request. If at all.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair for the
question, stunningly, with lfc.
Just to give you some context,
The public school capital, a
fund pays for PS FAA employees
and
I believe about five of their FT
or currently
Under the jurisdiction of the
Office of Broadband at this
time, they do not.
They're not.
Being administered or working
for PS today. They're working
100% for the office of
Broadband, and they are getting
paid out of the fund.
Um, that's fund.
In the Odyssey recommendation is
being asked to be moved to the
office of Broadband's budget
because
Functionally. They are working
for the office of Broadband at
this time.
Um and the
Capital, a fund act. There's 10
million that is used to provide
broadband at schools now during
the pandemic, the Legislature
expanded the use of that fun to
pay for a statewide education
network to help connect that
last mile of Internet to
students when their remote
In their houses for school. Um
and so the legislative intent
there was to
One. Make sure that even though
there's lots of broadband
activity happening across the
state that the school portion
doesn't
You know?
Become inefficiently laid over
what's already happening at a
statewide level, so to be very
strategic about its statewide
rather than being siloed to just
schools.
So the intent for that 10
million was allowed to be
incorporated as part of the
larger broadband picture that
helps answer your question. It
does. I think that you know we
just coming out of covid and
just the real big expansion of
broadband. Thank you for that,
for those comments, and next I
have representatives ended.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, presenters and Mr
Secretary. I'm just I am
interested in a clarification.
During our last hearing earlier
in the summer, the, uh
Woman who said as the head of
broadband talked about.
There being 256 schools that did
not have broadband connection is
I'm quite. I'm asking for
clarification.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you for the question, so
that is not correct. Currently
there are four schools that do
not have do not have fiber to
the premise right Fiber to the
school.
Um, now
That is covered by the rate
services.
And this is a federal program
that's existed for 20. Plus
years. The rate also funds fiber
to libraries, which there are a
few more libraries that are not
connected around the state by
that, and this is actually part
of that PSF a program that that
we were looking to bring over in
its entirety, and I just want to
be able to add one other
clarification in here is that
You know how the MOU is
structured because Psf A is a
quasi governmental agency, and
these are exempt employees. We
had to structure it in such a
way that those employees still
follow all of the hand Employee
handbook. They're paid for by
TSF A. They're not covered under
the classified they're not
executive branch. And so this
has become a very convoluted and
painful memorandum of
understanding to really execute.
And we're reading this kind of
in between. And that's part of
why we're running this bill to
make sure that we can bring the
entire program over and that way
we're housing it in the office
that we can have an apples to
apples, you know, classified
project managers versus Project
managers in the executive and
disparate disparate pay, So
that's an important point. So
there are four schools that are
currently uh
Do not have fiber.
The state education Network.
kind of takes what what Raja is
doing on the cybersecurity side
and takes it to another level,
and this is really important for
the expansion of broadband
across the state in the long
term, so we are building nodes
or data centers, essentially
where you can go Locator
aggregate.
And when we actually achieve the
having universal broadband
across the state, their Internet
service providers are gonna want
to work on the latency,
Basically, the time in which it
actually takes, you know
information to go back and
forth, so not just the speed
that's offered to customers.
Where we're going with
technology. We're gonna need
lower latency systems, which
means that we need more co
location points. More data nodes
across the state. Uh, and the
use of the state education
network to have the e rate
funded for the schools and build
a separate cabinet where all of
these Internet service providers
can co locate their, uh and, you
know, work on having lower
latency systems and connected to
one another.
That's going to help build
resiliency rings and help build
a stronger Internet across the
state of New Mexico, And so you
know, it's kind of a bigger,
complex issue besides just
connecting schools to fiber we
want to actually put them into a
ring unto themselves. Hook them
up to these nodes, right. This
co location points and make sure
we build an Internet for the
future.
Thank you for that. We just stay
there. Just a moment, Mr Madam
Chair. Well, this for
clarification of the four
schools that do not have fiber
or they connected to an Internet
in anyway, Madam Chair. I'll
have to double check with with
my team Video of Eureka from the
State of Education Network team,
But off the top of my head, I do
they believe that they are
connected through like older
technologies T one.
T one lines to their schools, so
it was just a slower Internet.
just not not the fiber that's
offered through the rate
services. Alright, and when
further clarification on that,
madam chair and Mr Presenter
with respect to the Internet
connection that these four
schools where are they? You
know, Madam chair. I do not have
that memorized. I know that
there are projects that are
currently underway and slated
for forgetting fiber. The
premise
I can get that list to you,
though, Okay? And then, uh,
rather than them being connected
to the slower madam chair
Internet mechanism there are for
example, like we have hot spots,
which are much faster than those
slower Internet. There is no way
to help make those schools
faster. I don't even know where
they are. And I'm most concerned
about what type of school they
are Elementary
Middle school high school.
Madam chair and representatives
like they said, I'll be glad to
get the list for you. I just do
not have that team member with
me today, so I don't have that
memorized off the top of my
head. I will say this that cell
phones so those hotspots that
are enabled by cell phone
signals by wireless signals,
Those towers are often backed by
fiber optics. And so if there's
not fiber to those communities
Ah, you know the speeds are
offered, you know there may or
may not be availability of a hot
spot for those communities, and
this is part of the bigger issue
that that were, you know, seeing
across the state of New Mexico
anyone this is
What we're doing is part of a
bigger effort. For instance, the
e rate funding that is available
recently, Congress has allowed,
the expansion actually correct
me. Sorry. I need to correct
that FCC has allowed the
expansion hotspots on Busses and
be able to fund Busses so that
some of those kids in rural
communities when they have, you
know, two plus hour commute can
actually do their homework on
the way home.
And so this is certainly
something that we are certainly
aware of, but to have that hot
spot you really have to have
fiber, especially when you want
it to be five G speeds and
Um Mr Chair when the question
was asked how long it would take
these schools to get the
broadband connection once you
determine where those schools
are, would you? Please also
include a projection of when
they would be the Bible and
might be connected managerial.
I'll be glad to reach out to our
state education network team and
have them get the information to
you. All right. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Presenter.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have a representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh,
Mr Up. Probably want to start
this conversation.
But saying that I think what you
all do is essential.
But the other night my phone
rang.
It was my son, he said, Walk
outside and look up.
And I did, and there was a
beautiful string of pearls going
across the sky.
Yeah, and it was startling.
So I live in a really remote
area. We started out with dial
up and it was so slow that my
computer would lock up.
Trying to get it Download. I and
I'm working with maths and G. I
s and it just didn't work.
So we subscribe to satellite.
Well, guess what? The satellite
was very unreliable and not that
fast.
So
Little time goes by and we get
fiber optics. Oh, man, we loved
it.
We got that fiber optics, we
start doing well.
Not too long ago.
They came in and redone my
system.
And then at least quadruple the
speed I was getting over the
fiber optic system.
Amazing speed.
Which is all good.
My fear is
That by the time we get what
we're doing, dawn that it will
be obsolete. And I know your
fear is the same. So tell me,
Tell me how you feel about that
Mr. Chair, Representative.
Thanks for the question. You
know, the technologies are
diverse in the landscape of New
Mexico's diverse
The biggest
Yeah, and really gold standard
in Internet is fiber optics. It
is glass and it shoots lasers.
And so we're really talking
about what is the capability of
of physics here so we can send
things at the speed of light
minus a little bit of drag on
the glass going places.
What limits that is going to be
the equipment on either side. So
as processors, you know, get
better as equipment gets better.
you know, we are able to
increase those speeds again.
That's maybe a separate issue
from the latency that I was
discussing.
So speeds are going to continue
to increase the demands much as
you see with electricity, right?
We get more devices, more things
that are connected Internet of
things we're going to continue
to need more and more and more
and so to your point about
building out
The reason why we prefer fiber
and the reason why the federal
government has backed fiber is
because the conduit can last 100
years the fiber itself can last
25 or 30 years, if not longer.
State actually uses the argon
system coming down from Colorado
and goes down to El Paso. It's
along.
Along the railroads. That's been
almost 25 years. We're getting
ready to renegotiate the
contract. That fiber is still
good. That conduit is still
good.
What's going to have to be
replaced on either end is going
to be the equipment right and
that's going to have to be
upgraded. And those that lasts
usually 678 years. You know to
to do that, And so there's going
to be a need for that. And I
think just kind of one other
elements. You know that I want
to put out there is that the
reason why rural communities do
not have it is that there's not
a business case, and this is
exactly why the federal
government and why the state has
put money into seeing these
grant programs.
And we will build those
networks. But there's still a
small number of residents in
those areas. There's a small
number of businesses in those
areas, and at some point you're
going to have to maintain the
systems or upgrade and so much
like the rural Universal Service
Fund for the phone system, you
know, or you putting more money
into two redoing. Uh you know,
roads, we're going to still have
to do the same thing in the long
run in these rural communities,
and we're going to look at every
operational efficiency that we
can
To try and make sure that you
know that doesn't cost as much
as it could. So we're being very
mindful as we build these
networks and we're looking at
the best possible designs and
awarding funding to the best
possible designs.
Madam chair.
See you see who was the chair
there? Uh huh.
I agree with you.
And in my concern, probably, you
know that I live in an extremely
remote area.
Why I have fiber optics. I have
no clue.
But it's great.
And probably my fear is not so
much the the fiber optics going.
Out as the
Cost to put it on Indian lands
and really far away places.
That there's other players
options more viable, but that's
a
That was a great answer. I have
one more.
Saying the threat you
The state Land Office and
Department of Transportation.
You know a lot of us that sit
around this table. We set off
some other boards and things do
so. So we hear some of those
problems hit us before before we
get here Do you got do you all
have a working relationship with
the State Land office and the
Department of Transportation?
To deal with the
Uh, right away costs of going
across those lands because
I would say a year ago that was
a serious problem.
Madam chair and representative.
That is an excellent question.
so the state Land office does
have to monetize when you buy
the Constitution have to
monetize state lands. They have
worked with us, and they have
reduced their costs to try and
minimize that and help expand
broadband more quickly. We've
worked with them on trying to
figure out how to make it free.
We have not been able to do that
yet.
Um, you know, we see very much
the public benefit of having
broadband Internet for all new
Mexicans. Um, we have not gotten
there with State Land office,
but we continue to keep them in
in conversations so that that is
kind of 11 issue. I will tell
you rights of way when it
whether it is federal.
State level local jurisdictions.
You know, it's a two year
process through through most
issues, and that's something
that the office has been tasked
forward by this body to
actually, you know, be a central
hub. Told will tell you that we
spend their time scratching your
brains a lot. You know on this
one, and it is it's hard. It's
difficult. There's a reason why
it hasn't been done.
We've been trying to tackle low
hanging fruit and so to that, To
that end, we actually worked
with Dottie last year on a on a
bill that got passed to allow
them to do rulemaking on
reducing or making free costs
for Internet service providers
to go into the state right away
on on those those roads, and
they have told me about the
rule. They're getting ready to
get that out to their committee
for rulemaking.
I don't want to get out in front
of them, but I'm very optimistic
that it's going to be beneficial
to deploying broadband across
the state. So yes, we have a
great working relationship on
the personal side. I also worked
for Dottie for a year. I also
previously had worked for state
personnel when, when Secretary
Sarno was the acting director
over there, and he and I have a
close working relationship.
So I'm very well connected. And
I talk, you know if multiple
times a week with with high
level staff at D, O T. Um and
one other point I make about
Dottie is that the Federal
Highway Administration requires
that there be a broadband
coordinator for each state, and
so we worked very closely also
with broadband coordinator for
department transportation, and
we invite them to come to our
office.
Frequently and vice versa. We
meet them with meetings and have
regular meetings set up with
them.
So what, of the things that we
face?
When I was dealing with it was
that some of these right away,
owners were wanting.
Uh, free access.
To the
By Brock Peaks at certain points
along the line.
And is that still a
So, Madam Chair representative,
you know, certainly, you know,
having handholds and
interconnecting fiber right from
a local provider, you know that
you might subscribe to to a
middle mile. Uh, you know
provider
You know, uh, it's it's
basically one of those things
that they have to put in
contracts with one another. And
you. Currently the state is not
set up. Officer. Broadband is
not set up to be a middle mile
provider. We do have provisions
in our in our statute that we
worked on last year that we
could be a middle mile provider
of last resort. Meaning that you
know, should someone not want to
provide Middle Mile network to
get
Homes connected. We cannot be
the last mile in that same
statute. We cannot be the last
model provider. We cannot go to
the home, You know, Want a local
I sp to do that? But in that
middle mile, you know, we would
have to put out an RFP. We'd
have to make sure no one else
wants to do that right. And then
there would be options for us to
be able to sell that, you know,
for at cost, or, you know slight
margins on either side.
To someone who didn't want to
operate that in the long run, so
there's there's other
opportunities out there. So you
know for the right now there's
so much work to do. We're really
leaving it to that. We are
funding. You know the companies
and especially the electric co
ops and the telcos the local I s
P s, um you know some of the
more urban areas the Comcast or
certainly already there, and
it's and it's easy for them to
extend their networks. But you
know, we are working very
closely with the industry and
you know, that's not. We don't
see that as our role in the long
term.
Man. I'm just gonna finish with
a
Was a statement, not a question.
Uh, I also I'm on the electric
co op board. There's been an
attempt out there to put some of
that.
Uh, hang some of that on our
cold but where that leaves us,
and we do not have an expert.
This past week. You can watch T
V and CR crews out there in a
blizzard with the snow cat
trying to get electrical service
back to the people that we
serve.
But we do not have a person.
That note would know how
To fix that line. If it had
fiber optics hanging on it, it
adds a whole new layer to our
maintenance and to our costs and
to our responsibilities, so
You're welcome to respond if you
want to. I'm not meaning. That
is the question. I'm just
telling you, that is the issue.
Problem with co ops is it adds a
lot of
Suspended chair. If you don't
mind. It told me for a moment
just about it. Thank you. So,
you know we worked very closely
with the electrical Association
in the last three months. I've
met six times, you know, with
the electrical coop Association.
Um, I'm personally a member of
Kit Carson up north. So you know
for me, this is you know,
You know, Thank you for what you
do on the board, you know,
service to those rural
communities is absolutely
essential. Uh, And you know, I'm
not saying that this is an easy
solution. You know for
operationalized in this, but you
know to me this is where an
electric co op can have a
contract with an Internet
service service provider if the
electric co op is not the
Internet service provider
Ah, and, you know, figure out
what that maintenance or that
repair looks like What does
service level agreements look
like? Um, you know, that's
something that I'm not looking
to get into the middle of that's
contractual between between two
private entities, right? Um so
you know for me that that's
kinda straightforward that that
you know you guys can work that
out to make sure that there's
connectivity.
You know, both in the electric
side, and in the broadband side,
it's a necessity.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. An X I have
represented Villa Cruz.
Thank you, madam. Sure.
A lot is happening with
artificial intelligence. And
I've also seen I've also seen
news pieces where quantum
computing is around or over just
over the horizon the next five
years or so.
What provisions are you making
for?
Either. Both
I'm gonna turn this over to the
secretary, but I will say it's a
very fascinating topic
and madam. Sure, as briefly as
you can possibly be, just sort
of were assured that you're on
it. Thank you. I think thank
you, Chair and members of the
committee. Um, so I am working
with the Senate Science and
Technology Committee.
And there are that is a bill
that has been introduced and I
have parted with the draft
language.
It's being drafted. So it's with
the bill drafter. Um it will
provide some basic starting
points for us to work on.
Um, because it's it's wrapped
topic. Um, there is data privacy
involved. Did a security
involved? Uh, that could be bias
that could be followed based on
some generator material that
they can generate. So we are
currently working on doing some
kind of a pilot at this point.
To understand. Like, you know,
One of the things that I'm
currently working on is to
evaluate.
They? I do understand. Mm essay
right through that ministry with
a code and then can it be more
friendlier, closed loop system
because there's too wide
Um
Concept open loop and the close
look, they will open loop is the
one that you see as large
language model that goes,
studies the Internet and comes
up with solutions and things of
that nature but for the state
for state government purposes,
it would be more of her close
loop system so that we can point
a. I
Um badly. It is data intensive
to understand and come up with
patterns that we did not
recognize us humans because
these machines can throw a lot
of computing power and come up
with patterns that we may have
missed it and it can. It can be
a wonderful wake of for us to
gain some efficiencies that we
are currently not in a position
to utilize.
So definitely there is room.
Um, for some good, potentially
especially in state government
as it relates to, but with the
abundance of caution because
Privacy.
Its key and we do not have us.
Structure that addresses to the
best of our ability. I'll does
not provide all the necessary
clarity's
There is lack of data
classification things of that
nature, so all that needs to be
taken into consideration before
we open up that can of forms.
Hopefully that addresses Thank
you does. Thank you, madam.
Sure. Thank you. I appreciate
that. I'm sure will be
addressing that in the
Interim throughout the budget
process, then on that on that
note, and I appreciate the
information, it's all
fascinating, and we would love
to hear it all. Um, but to get
back to our budget, I just I
think that we're looking at that
$5.5 million we're looking at
You know, for the cybersecurity
and after hearing from our madam
chair from science and
technology and her comments
Which are very significant and I
think there are a couple other
Obviously the significance of
moving
Um
The office. Um
I think
I think we need to create a
workgroup around this agency.
And I would, um
I would entertain any emotion if
there are no others that want to
speak to the agency. Now
Emotion, emotion. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'd like to move
that we accept the LFC
recommendation, but to include
the working group composed of
members of this, uh, committee.
Thank you. I have the motion and
second. Are there any
objections?
Okay with that, then we will
adopt the LFC recommendation for
the budget and I would assign
representative Deb cer certain.
Liana, representative Chatfield
and myself to this work group.
And I want again. Thank you for
this. I mean, there was a lot of
discussion.
When we put this bill forward to
create this office, whether it
was going to be, you know, stand
alone and all those sorts of
things. And so now it's come to
this point, so lots of good
conversation to be had. Thank
you.
Thank you. Thank you. Chair.
Thank you. Members of the
Committee and thank you team.
Thank you. We'll get started now
with the office of the military.
Base planning.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. My
name is Julie San I'm the LFC,
analyst for the Office of
Military based planning and
support for this agency. Please
refer to tab for and that agency
code for 91.
Um, here is a table with me is
Richard Glover with the Office
of Military police planning and
to see Lira, D. F, a budget
analyst. So for this agency, the
LFC and the executive
Recommended recommendations for
revenue are identical and
actually support the agency's
request for an essentially flat
budget in expenditures. We
increased other by $400 for some
additional office supplies now
pass it over to Cecilia for any
additional comments.
Madam Chair Julius A. Did a
wonderful job explaining. I have
nothing further Tad So, with
that I will pass.
Madam Chair. Good afternoon. Um,
just briefly go through this
since it's a flat budget. Thank
you. Um, B p was set up for
those who don't know to combat
brag.
And to increase the value of
military installations to both d
O D and to the state of New
Mexico.
There's no brag currently
contemplated.
But the value proposition is,
um, getting more competitive.
And D O D rather than closing
bases. What they're doing is
Choosing new locate New
locations, new facilities and
mission expansion.
Based competitively on quality
of life issues and D O D
priorities. While there isn't a
brag, our focus has been on
making sure that we try and
address those quality of life
issues around the base because
what's good for the base is good
for the local community, trying
to address both those, so I'm
gonna go through just a couple
of things real quick. I talked
to LSC about
In terms of quality of life
around the installation.
What they're looking at is
childcare.
Education.
Health care.
Housing and spousal employment
spells. Employment goes beyond
just professional licensing.
It was like a community that
looks to hire military spouses,
for example, military dependence
to work, so that's all part of
the process.
And that's compounded.
Bi annual priorities at the D O
D issues.
This year for 2024, and I'm just
going to read through these real
quick.
Um, what do you do? You would
like states to employ around the
installations is military access
to quality family childcare.
Multi spouse, employment and
economic opportunities defining
the armed forces, and that's a
simple one. Space forces knew
many states have not recognized
yet officially, so it's just
getting that done.
Military community
representation on state boards
and councils, so that there's a
voice on other issues important
to the installation.
State support for military
families with special education
needs military family anti
discrimination status. State
response to military
interpersonal violence and
concurrent juvenile
jurisdiction.
I'd like to add that
Um Senator Ivey Soto has been
working with the commission.
And his drafted up and omnibus
bill to address all those issues
and the single bill so it will
be coming around he's worked
with the installations he's
worked with experts and has
included the commission in that
I'm not sure what the status
that is right now, But I I have
a draft that I've looked at is
about 40 pages, but it appears
to address all the issues that
are of concern to the DLD.
That will go a long way towards
the D O d of value ating whether
to increase personnel and
missions in low That's all I
have. Are there any questions?
Thank you. Thank you for that,
Um, over review that that's
really interesting, and I'm sure
that we will be looking at that
bill. If it gets to us, Um, as
it implies, there has to be some
budgetary references in it. So
we will we get that? Um, but
really those those are things we
keep hearing about everything
you and I want to commend you
for
For that work. Um and I have a
question from
From my representatives. Indiana
who's also a veteran. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. So, um,
thank you for the Thank you,
madam Chair. Thank you for the
presentation. So I'm going to be
the house sponsor of the same
bill with that senator, and he
informed me We don't have a call
Mr for the governor to make it
put it on the call. So if you
can do anything about that,
because the bill is
We're in discussion with it, and
it looks good and then but
without the call.
There's not much we can do so if
you could put in a good word
that we would be much
appreciated. Okay, Secretary.
um I'll do that Lieutenant
Governor is the chair.
Of the commission. His
representatives there, so he's
aware of this.
I will.
Put a couple of bugs in people's
ears to make talking to the
current in partnership to do it
also, so hopefully thank you,
Madam chair. Thank you. Thank
you for that comment. Thank you
for working on that. Do we have
any other questions from the
committee?
See. None do have emotion.
Oh, thank you, Representative
Chatfield.
Did you have a question?
Okay. You want a second, Dad?
All right. We have emotion from
Thank you, Madam Chair. We have
more motion to approve the LFC
recommendation.
Have a second from
representative Chatfield so we
will move the recommendation for
Lfc. Thank you for your time and
good luck with with what you're
working on. Thank you.
Moving along Now we have a
military affairs department. Uh,
that is agency
What
Okay. Do we have I t in the room
where we need
We have a presentation.
That needs to go up. Thank you.
Awesome.
Scott, when you're ready, All
right. Good afternoon, Madam
Chairman. Name is Scott Sanchez.
I'm the LoC Analysts. Public
safety now will be reviewing the
budget for the Department of
Military Affairs, which is
agency code 705. You can find
information on this behind have
seven.
You can also find information on
the LFC recommendation in volume
two page 386 through 389.
Here with me today, General
Miguel Aguilar, um from the
Mexican National Garden that
Anderson general of the
Department of Military Affairs,
and Diego, and then it's my
counterpart for the Department
of Finance Administration.
Differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
Recommendation Increases General
Fund by 1.4 Million, or 4.4%.
Whereas the executive
recommendation includes an
increase of 1.6 million, or
4.9%.
The LFC also also recommended
$95,000 in expansion, whereas
the executive recommendation
includes expansions of $209,000.
Um
Beyond that, I will hand it to
Diego.
Thank you, Scott. Madam Chair
and members of the committee s.
Scott said. The overall
difference isn't significant,
but
Uh, the primary difference, said
I would like to highlight today
is, um, that the executive
recommendation included funding
For the job Challenge program,
and there will be located in
Albuquerque.
However, because that program is
not intended to or not scheduled
to begin until January of next
year.
The executive recommendation
only provided a couple of the
requested positions and only
funded them for about half a
year in accordance with the
start of the
That's got did you need to
mention the language?
Yes. Thanks to you for the
reminder if you look on your
different sheet packet, I
believe this is going to be the
Uh, second page you'll see under
language. We
Would like I'm sorry, would like
to recommend the inclusion of
language that's previously been
in hospital two relating to, um
just in general pay. We just
need to make sure that that
language is reflected in the
hospital to again this year,
with the year changed obviously
to fy 24.
So if the committee moves to
adopt the LFC recommendation, we
would also ask that they include
this new language.
Thank you, sir. Madam Chair on
that point. The executive
recommendation included similar
language. Um, although it kept
the year and fy 23 or calendar
year 23, but it included an
extra clause in there that would
provide for the agitation and
deputy adjutant generals to
receive the same compensation
package that
You all would do statewide and
with that, I'll hand it over to
the general.
Thank you, Madam. Chair members
of the committee Miguel regular
the attitude in general, um,
understanding that I stand
between you if you're commuting
from Albuquerque and driving in
the dark, I'll try to be fairly
quick in the presentation, so
I'm gonna skip through a bunch
of slides. Um, and if we can get
to one more
Okay, So what? I wanted to just
talk about here real quick in,
um
The appropriation request as far
as FTS are concerned, um in, you
know, the only thing I really
want to point out is you'll see
100% General fund positions at
Should I switch? Can you hear
me? Ok, Okay. Uh, what? What? I
what I wanted to point out is we
show 1400% General fund FTE
Vacancies of those vacancies
include our National Guard state
active duty seasonal positions,
So those are not intended to be
filled 100% of the time and
they're really driven by the
source of funding and what we
can do to bring them in.
For the most part, um and, uh
And so most of that is doing
well there. 27 FTE s that you
see in the 25 75% Federal fund
is our Youth Challenge Program
or Job challenge program.
We have made significant strides
in adjusting the classifications
in the pay of our youth
challenge. Cadre, um in in the
last year, um
In those positions are starting
to fill. Um the pay is is
commiserate and competitive with
law enforcement in southeastern
Mexico, and so we're hiring, uh,
very well qualified cadre. Um,
and they're happy and willing to
stay. We've got a career path,
So thank you for what you've
done in the past.
Um most of these vacancies are
job challenge. Um, now what? I
what I will just say about job
challenges. The the course is
being is set to begin in
January. 2025.
But
We have to have staff trained
and on the ground in January of
2025 in order to be able to
conduct the course. And so, um,
the the initial ask, um from
dogma was the $250,000 was the
match for the Master cooperative
agreement for the federal funds
that are coming in to establish
that program.
Um most of those jobs have to be
filled prior to the beginning of
that course. And so, um, we
The the LFC recommendation that,
um, that really, I think enough.
Just flip over to
Uh, job challenge expansion. The
L C recommendation that doesn't
provide that 250 K. It's It's
part of an agreement that we
made with with Department of
defense for this program to
match the $750,000 that they're
going to give us And so if we
don't have that we have to have
that match in some way. And so,
um
Today if we got nothing
Um, what I would have to do is
either non conducting January
2025 because I couldn't hire
staff in time, which I'm not
suggesting we do. Um or I have
to go into our are fairly small
budget by, UH, state budget by
comparison to other agencies and
figure out where I get that
money from
Whether it's our our
reimbursement for life insurance
policy to guardsmen or leave.
Um Bacon sees in 100% general
funded positions in order to be
able to hire all of the staff
required to do to do
Kick off this program, which I
think is going to be a
significant, um, program for our
our youth.
Um, the other funding requests
that we asked for. In
In Tricare. Uh, we're going to
push the next year in a longer
session.
Um and, um
And there. We didn't see support
for the recruiting, and, uh
Budget two to assist with
recruiting and preparing kids,
So that's really what I wanted
to get to as far as the budget
is concerned.
For D M. A
Thank you so much.
And that's the short version.
That's the shortest version I
could come up with. General. Did
you want to introduce any of
your folks that you get way too
much attention as it is, Um, but
I, but I do have you know my
state programs director A bunch
of our staff from the military
side. My aid my XO, um and as
well as a bunch of folks who are
And that's the short version.
That's the shortest version I
could come up with. General. Did
you want to introduce any of
your folks that you get way too
much attention as it is, Um, but
I, but I do have you know my
state programs director a bunch
of our staff from the military
side. My aid, my XO, um and as
well as a bunch of folks who our
budget and our C, our CFO. I
don't want to take a bunch of
Well, I appreciate the
presentation and making short,
sweet and being cognizant of our
weather conditions today. Um and
I just wanna really thank your
staff and and a lot of work.
That they've done with our the
calf canyon fires and the other
fires in our state. I think that
And I think I see
Representative Castano back
there trying to be incognito.
Welcome. Um
In, um as he's a representative
and that that area in that
district one of them, I think
that
I think that it's really
significant amount of work and
and the call to duty. If you
will, sir, for that, um, that
emergency and the significance
that this agency played in
helping us with our state with
what was going on there. I want
to just give you a personal
thank you. Thank you.
Recognition of that. Um, Ali.
Thank you. I want to say thank
you to you and all your diligent
work and
And pulling things together. I
know it wasn't easy. So thank
you. For that. We do have
questions. We have one question
from representative Herndon and
looking on the way.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Mr Presenter.
I just wanted clarification on
the funding requests. You said
you needed it right away. But
now this budget
Wouldn't be released until July.
1 would you be asking for
something earlier? Helped me to
understand how this affects you
like
This very moment.
Um matter, Madam Chair
representative and it I don't
need it right away. Um, the this
is the ask the ask was $225,000
initially in matching funds to
for the federal match for next
year's budget.
They used the Job Challenge
program in Albuquerque will
begin in January of 2025 so
midway through the year.
Um And so this would this would
provide full funding to be able
to hire the staff it I mean, it
seems it seems like a small
amount of money. Um, in
comparison to some of the other
things that you've got over
today. Um, but, uh, you know,
whatever we can get, uh I will
have to come up with that
$225,000.
Regardless of the budget in
order to hire the staff that we
need in order to start that
program on time. Anything that
is in gets me closer to that to
25.
Including the executive
recommendation would be greatly
appreciated.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Mr Presenter. Just wanted
application on how quickly you
needed, but the Department of
Finance Administration
Um
Finance Authority. I'm sorry.
That's what they're there for
money to you.
Until he comes to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative
representatives suddenly gonna
thank you, Madam Chair. Mine was
thank you, General. And your for
your presentation, guys. Um,
mine was along the same.
Same as represented Herndon. It
is, it does seem like a
significant, insignificant
amount, and it's for both
challenges are just one. What's
it for?
Madam Chair representative
Narayana, the the the the Job
Challenge expansion is just for
the new program. So in our base
budget, we have the funding that
we need in order to continue job
challenge, which is you have
been around for a long time. Um
And so it might. Frankly, it
might have been, uh, poor
communication on our part.
As we went through this process
of we start the program in
January, But the reality is I
got to have trained cadre and
staff that are ready to take on
those kids when they get on the
ground. January 2025
Okay. I'm Madame chairs. That's
something we can do You think
thank you. I really do
appreciate think those
parameters are different. You're
dealing with some things that
are that we don't normally deal
with this type of deadlines
regarding the federal matching
Um, so I think it's something we
might want to look at. And
specials are have further
discussion about this if we're
going to I believe that
representative Herndon brought
up a good point about that. And
talking with D F A and some of
the things that they're they're
doing as well. But I think it
deserves a further conversation.
So
Um
I'm gonna look around and say,
Does anybody else have any
questions or
Comments, too.
The agency.
Not seeing any. Um, I think
that's a good point. Are you do
you have any other questions?
representatives and this is
something we should be able to
fund.
I like where you're going with
that, And I think that we should
We should put a
Uh, work group together to
discuss this or to take
consideration of this so that
If we don't have any other
comments or questions when we
entertain a motion Thank you,
Madam Chair. I move that we
accept the LFC recommendation
with the caveat that we included
working group to further the
dialogue around this topic.
Of emotion.
Thank you motion with the second
and objections.
Seen in We are going to move the
lfc recommendation with us. I'm
gonna have the small workgroup.
Um and I would ask
representatives are in Yana and
representative Herndon to be
part of that. And, um
With that? I thank you for all
your work, everybody that came
to visit us here today.
I want to thank you for
everything you do and all your
service. Thank you for being
here. Thank you.
Once going to be some familiar
faces for this next one.
It is now we are moving to
homeland Security and emergency
management. Uh, that is agency
795. I'm going to step out and
so we're representative dela
Cruz will be, um, taking over
the committee. Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Please proceed with
the presentation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. One second
when we get there, presentation
pulled up. Sorry.
Alright, I'll go ahead and start
if you're okay with that, sir.
That afternoon. My name is Scott
Sanchez. I'm the LFC analyst for
public safety when we're looking
at the Department of Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management Agency code, 795,
which you can find behind to
have a seven. You can also find
more information on the LFC
recommendation in volume two
pages 413 through 418.
I'm joined by General Miguel
Aguilar, acting secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security,
Emergency Management. Um Randy
Morello, the state Fire marshal
and Diego Jimenez from the
Department of Finance
Administration.
The differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
recommendation included an
increase of 176.3000 in General
fund or 4.9% revenue, whereas
the executive recommendations
included 1.6 million in
additional revenue increase of
4.4%. The LSC recommendation
included 137.9 million for the
base budget.
Whereas the executive
recommendation included 141.9.
The L. N C also recommended
530.3 million expansions, which
the executive recommendation did
not support.
With that I'll hand it to Diego.
Thank you, Scott, Mr Chair and
members of the Committee. Um,
try to explain this. So, um, the
General fund appropriation that
the department requested.
Was for a federal grant match
from the, um
Uh, emergency management
performance Grant.
And so as the LFC
recommendation.
Left them flat.
I believe it miscalculated what
the federal revenue should be.
So on the different sheet that
you're that you're given. I
I don't believe that's a very
true accurate representation of
of what
Of what?
The LFC recommendation does for
fiscal year 2025.
Um, according to my
calculations, um, so I should
mention that that the NPG
granted I mentioned earlier is a
dollar for dollar match. Um, so
when the executive recommended
an additional 1.6 million in
general fund that was
accompanied by an additional 1.6
million in federal revenue.
And well at the same time.
The department closed out some
projects either.
This year or in the previous
year, so there was a big
decrease in federal revenue. Um
and
That is not explained at all in
the difference worksheet, but
The primary point is that the
LFC recommendation
On the different sheet, I
believe should
Reflect a 1.8 million
Dollar.
Reduction from the FY 24
operating budget, which
ultimately is about two point
2.8 million below what the
executive recommendation, um
included
And that would be nearly
catastrophic for the agency. I
mean, they they're already
closed on the current year on on
being able to pay the salaries
for the employees that they
have.
They would not be able to make
it through FY 25, even if they
didn't hire any any additional
personnel for next year. So if
if the committee does opt to
Um, adopted the LFC
recommendation. I would
The executive would would
strongly urge you take a
stronger look at what
The federal revenue and and
hopefully, um
Provide some general fund
infusion to get that federal
imagine and
Not not reduce their budget
beyond what it currently is, Um
That's on the homeland Security
side. Um
In the state Fire Marshal's
office program. Um
The LFC recommendation.
Was based on on what the
department requested, which was
based Winston's flat with what
they what the revenue that they
received last year from fire
insurance tax.
However, at the time that that
was submitted, they had
incomplete data.
And
So
What the executive
recommendation did is, um
We basically took a three year
average. And that turned out to
be about a
$22.6 million increase. Um
Everyone has a couple of years
that revenue from Friday fire
insurance tax has really
increased dramatically.
Um
So I believe that the executive
recommendation is is a more
Appropriately reflective revenue
estimate of of what
About the office can expect to
receive for the following.
And across both programs. LFC
for the most part, recommended
all of the expansion positions.
The executive did not.
Um, include any of those really
in the in the recommendation,
and that is primarily because in
the homeland Security program
They've had trouble hiring. Um,
For years, There's been fairly
high vacancy rate, so instead of
adding money for new positions,
the executive added money to
fill the positions that they
currently have.
And on the state Fire marshal's
office side.
Um
Both recommendations supported
the request for the operational
budget.
And by doing so, it was a fairly
substantial increase to the to
the operational fund.
And by doing so, that means that
the Fire protection Grant fund
is negatively affected.
Because we have a relatively
stable, um, revenue picture the
the office.
Basically operates out of three
funds. There's the the operating
fund, the Fire Protection Fund
and the fired and there
The Fire Protection Grant fund.
Um
The Fire Protection fund is
Based on a formula we don't have
a lot of flexibility over over.
How that money What over what
amount is spent out of that
fund? Um
The operational fund, obviously,
as you are, as appropriators get
to determine how much goes into
that fund.
And the Fire Protection Grant
fund gets what's left over so as
we increase, either one of the
other two funds the Fire
Protection grant fund decreases.
Mr Chair. I hope all of that
made sense. Um um, If not, I
hope the General General can
help explain it. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
I'm gonna I'm gonna skip
through some of these things
that I think you've seen in the
past. Um and and I'm going to
focus on this one slide in and
I'll start with the Fire
Protection fund. I have the
The state fire marshal here with
you to answer any questions you
may have about it. Um, but you
know the we are, um we
appreciate both. Both the LFC
and the executive being about
the same. I think it's a matter
of projections. Um, and in in
supporting that fund, so nothing
significant to say about that,
although I think the fire
Marshal may be able to answer
questions if you've got anything
about it.
When it comes to the general
front from DHS cm. Um, I think
Jango did a very good job of
explaining the impacts of what
would happen I have about 34
vacancies. Um, in DHS cm right
now, um, this agency
Must must do more, and I need to
do more to recruit.
Ensure that the people that we
recruit are appropriately paid
because right now we have some
positions. It's classifications
where at the county and
municipal level
The subject matter expertise,
the years of experience that we
need at some point to come to
the state level.
Um, is not competitive.
And so we're going to set up
about making sure that that we
look at every position that it's
classified appropriately is
competitive to draw the
experience that we need.
That will cost some money.
Um and if if we were to take the
LFC recommendation of this
coming year,
We are essentially not hiring
anybody.
Um and
And
We? We can't be postured for
that. We're happy to have snow.
today. The forecast for the
weather is great. Um, hopefully
the fire season will be good for
us, Uh,
But we don't know.
Um, and this agency, um more
than any other must be posture
to deal with whatever.
Mother Nature or man made
disasters thrown at this state.
Um and I need to be fully
staffed in order to do that.
Um and I'll stand for your
question. Thank you, General.
Thank you. Presenters. First up.
We have with questions,
representative. Sorry, Nana.
Thank thank you, Mr Chairman,
and thank you, General and
everyone table. Um Okay, So you
have 34 vacancies that you need
to fill.
But because they don't have but
because their dollar amount or
their pay pay grade isn't isn't
high enough. Is that what we're
talking about what we're seeing?
Kind of Mr Chair representative.
So two things one
We've we've had a hard time
recruiting folks.
Um, and so some of those
positions may not be
competitive, which is why, when
we advertise them, we may not be
able to get folks
The budget. Where we're at right
now is Diego. I think very well
stated.
I couldn't hire them today if I
wanted to, or very few, um and
and and in the next year, we
need to be able to get everybody
hired as as best we can to be
postured to do with the state
needs us. So, um, with with with
the current LSC recommendation.
Going to be stuck about where we
are with Manny. We may lose
somebody and hire somebody. But
we can't go beyond We're not
able to hire all 34 that we
have, even if we could find the
recruits. Okay, so I want to ask
them Lfc Representative, Um
So what? What? What? What's the
thought on this process? Why?
Why is it
Mr. Chair, Representative,
Sanjana. Ultimately, the lfc
recommendation, um, can be
changed by any action to this
committee feels is necessary.
and as part of that process,
we're happy to work with the
counterparts to make sure we
adapt whatever is most
consistent with your desires.
With the expansions, Madam Chair
or Mr Chairman? Sorry.
Um, what do those added Ft's at
all the expansions because lfc
did did have those right? Yes,
Madam Share representatives,
Haryana. The intention here was
to address what has been
acknowledged as in need of the
department for several years
running where which is that they
have in numerous audits been,
you know flags for having
insufficient financial controls
and whatnot, And they have a
great staff that works really
hard.
But what we understood was
necessary was you know when
They brought individual to help
service and acting kind of
Deputy Cabinet secretary.
Somebody help oversee their
budget, um and during the
process of putting together
their request, they identified
the need for this additional
administrative staff, and we do
understand that there are
significant vacancies already
within the administrative
services division, but
consistent with the agency's
request, you know, try and in
line with L C budget guidelines
to find an appropriate way to
increase General fund revenue
for where it's going to have the
most impact. Those were the
positions that were identified.
Is
Potentially having them being
the most help to the agency.
Okay, so, man, Mr Chairman, um,
General regular. Uh, how many
would you absolutely need?
This year or for this budget.
What could you live with? If you
can't get all 34?
3530
Mr Chair representative. Think
Um
You won't like my answer. Um,
11. We acknowledge that in years
past
Some of the way that things were
managed. We're not. We're not
well, I'll tell you this for the
first time. I think in many
years we turned in. Uh um or
audit got in on time.
Ah, and that's that's not
Me. That's a bunch of people
behind me and those that you
don't see that that have really
gotten together really getting
after it, But some of the
primary folks are here.
Um what? What? I told the
executive when I was asked to
take over Homeland Security
emergency management is that I
owe
Them And you and new Mexicans.
The answer for what a homeland
security emergency management
that's postured.
To prepare, Uh, train ex
exercise conduct. Um and recover
from an emergency. Looks like
And what I will tell you
intuitively in the first few
months is that
Even even the F T. E s that
we're asking for is likely not
enough to do that.
Um, but I think we have a
conversation that we need to
have between how this agency was
structured initially, um in in
an environment where we didn't
foresee covid in a pandemic.
That we didn't foresee Hermit
Speak Calf Canyon in the years
of recovery.
Um and and now will start to
look at
What do we want? This emerged
this agency to be postured to
do.
Uh, And what are we willing to
accept, and I think as as a
minimum, it's it's something
along the lines of where we
currently are that we may need
to restructure some of those
positions. Um and you know, and
for the next few years as we
look at the millions of dollars
that are coming into this state
and the recovery effort effort
for her misspeak Calf Canyon in
and of itself.
Um there is a lot of work that
needs to be done to ensure that
that funding is is being brought
in and executed as quickly as
possible to restore those
citizens lives as as best we
can.
So, Mr Chairman, So with your
background with the National
Guard and all the things you did
with that, and this, I would
like to see us fund you where
you need to be.
Um, because this is so important
to our state. You know, we don't
know what's gonna happen with
with fires and floods and all
the things that can happen with
climate change. So, Mr Chairman,
I would like to be able to do a
special little committee to look
at this and really helped them
and since no one
None of the pigs. One of the big
guys are here. Let's just do it.
No. Whatever you think
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and, uh
Thank you, General Regular. My
question is just very simple.
I'm looking at the at the
transfers out of personal
services and employee benefits.
The reversion is, actually so My
question is with respect to the
The positions that you were
asking for, and I'm also asking
the LSC analysts like Were they
not given bar authority? Why
couldn't they use this funds?
These funds for purposes of
filling the positions that
they're looking at?
Mr Chair. If I may respond to
that first, um are you
Representative, Do you have a
copy of the Executive
Recommendation book? Is this the
executive recommendation? But,
Mr Chair, Mr Chair
Representative, and that's the
LFC. Volume three. That's what
we provide. I believe that
document shows reversion of 1.4
Million in fy 23.
Okay, that is correct.
And and the lfc record or sorry.
Excuse me in the executive
recommendation book, We also
publish a table of reversion.
Um, we actually published two of
them.
The one
On page 198. It provides what
the total reversion was and
provide some additional context
that that the LFC table does
not.
For the Department of Homeland
Security that actually only
reverted about $70,000 from
their operating budget and
everything else.
Was reverted from from emergency
order funding that would
probably five or more years old,
that that ultimately they
decided that
Um
That the projects were ready to
be closed out and and they
reverted the funding. So there's
a big discrepancy there.
As I mentioned $70,000 is all
they reverted from their
operating budget.
So
Mr Chair and Mr Lfc analysts.
Why are they so different?
I'm asking you why they're
different.
Madam Chair, representative
Harder. I'm sorry. What was the
last party system? Why? What the
reversal amount so buried. Are
you following with the LSC is
stating and that they
Yeah, I'm sorry. The executive
made a mistake. Mr. Chair, a
mistake, representative. I
believe that we take the
information we get from
Sure from share to put this
together. Um, again, I think
methodology can be questioned,
You know, depending on the
perspective, but I've not seen
that.
Book and I'd be interested to
see how we got to those numbers.
Yeah, Mr Chaired.
That's it.
What Scott said is correct. Um
My understanding is that the
methodology is that they just
that lfc version of the book.
um, just pulled from a certain
account code that agencies used
to revert money back to the the
General Fund.
Um, We also have that number.
Actually, the total number I
have for their fy 23 reversion
was almost 2.5 million. Um, but
if you dive a little deeper into
the data you can see
Where the money is coming from,
Um, and that that context is not
provided in the LFC
recommendation book and
ultimately, why'd the executive
decided to make these two tables
that that we produced?
Well, Mr Chair. I can see why
The general is very confused
about the money that he asked.
So thank you will be looking at
that. I follow you that we
should look at that a little bit
closer so that we know exactly
what is that on the table could
be on the table.
This.
Represent representative. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. General. Do
you believe that you can you can
feel these positions quickly, or
can you spend this money so
nothing is
So, um, Mr Chair, Representative
Sanjana Yes.
Um
If if we do it Well, I can tell
you that, uh, on 1 July where we
have all these positions filled.
Uh, no.
Um, because you know, it'll take
a little bit of time to do that.
And in some cases, we may have
to take a hard look at how we've
classified those positions to
ensure that their competitive
Um, but but what I really want
is I don't I don't necessarily
want to
Take all the expertise from the
municipalities and counties but
at some point and you know, as
as we have experts in emergency
management that are built over
years.
Um, we want to have an
opportunity and a draw to bring
them to the state level and
practice their expertise at the
state level. And so in order to
do that, we've got to make sure
those jobs are competitive, But
But we're you know, our staff is
working hard at looking between
now and the big in the beginning
of the next fiscal year.
At where those positions are how
they're currently structured.
Are we maximizing them to the
best of our ability? Um and and
what do we need to do to make
them competitive? Um, to make
them effective in in be
efficient in the use of that
money? Uh, And then and then we
can decide. Okay, so
Do anymore. Do we not need more?
Or we may decide at some point
Maybe maybe it was 30 versus 34.
But my my experience tells me
we're probably not where we need
to be.
So with that, Mr Chairman, um I
believe you.
He's general. I've worked with
him quite a bit. Um
I believe he could probably
could do this. Um, So, um,
That's the only question I had
salt. Leave it with you.
Thank you, representative.
Ah!
Panels. General just briefly.
You have 34 vacancies right now.
Is that correct?
Mr Terrible. I believe. That's
correct. Um, from the number we
looked at yesterday provide me
with a brief sample of some of
the vacancies. What are the
titles of these positions?
Um, I don't know if someone's
got that list for me, okay?
And I don't need the whole list.
Just a sample. Maybe five vacant
positions. I'm curious as to the
the job titles and what they
would you can usually tell what
they do by the job title.
Um
Yes, he's pulling her up. I know
right now are our bureau chief
That's over intel. Um, is
currently vacant. Um
Response and Recovery Bureau,
emergency management
specialists, grant account court
accountants and auditors. I t g
I s specialist Um you know, most
of our I t positions exceptional
One that just been building
filled had been vacant. In fact,
we're contracting I t, which
frankly, for emergency
operations center, Probably not
the best plan.
If if we're operating 24 7, we
probably need to have it staff.
Um, we've gotten instructors.
Um, you know from the Fire
academy, which falls into the
other budget, and they're okay.
but it's it's those types of
positions.
And
Do you have a H r component to
your operations?
Mr Chair. Yes, we do.
Have you done any kind of an
analysis as to pay
How it comes, how it competes
against other agencies, state
local etcetera.
Mr Chair. Not that not that I
have seen as as these positions
that are hard to feel and are
most critical. Um, we were I'm
asking them to do is essentially
that which is figure out. Um
what are the other counties and
municipalities pay, especially
the larger ones that have a
large staff And then what are
the surrounding comparable
states pay?
And then try to look at how do
we get those? Those positions
competitive? I think that's
important to do because you want
to know that you're either you
know, you want to know where
you're at.
You know, in terms of pay, It
may be just that we're not
paying enough. That's always
kind of low hanging fruit.
But they're also can be other
things. I work from home or
hours of the day that people
have to be there versus you know
for
I don't have to tell. You
already know.
My point is that it's worth
looking at and not just always
assumed that it that it's pay.
Um
I would entertain a motion at
this time if we could get that
motion from representatives are
Indiana.
I thank you, Mr Chairman, I
moved the lfc recommendation but
that we have up a working group
along with that.
Thank you. Do we have a second?
Thank you if we could have
representatives in Yana,
representative Herndon and how
to meal work with you, we will
be reviewing all aspects of the
budget. Just you're aware this
is just the process. As you know
that we go through and I can I
think you can tell by at least
this committee that there is
concern around your operations
to make sure that you're
effective.
So thank you for your
presentation. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
Well Committee. Thank you. I
guess we conclude I thought we
had one more.
I don't think we have any public
comment. Anybody in the public
that would like to speak up
It doesn't look like it.
