Hello.
Response that was you we can
hear you.
Hello.
You get to talk on this.
You have to take.
Hello.
What we can hear you we can hear
you.
Okay this is John Connor CEO and
and I at that point with the New
Mexico livestock board.
We can hear you Mr Connor.
All right thank you good
afternoon afternoon
representatives I'll get to see
you.
Well hello stranger than me how
are you Victor I'm doing good I
miss you my friend.
Yeah okay where are you now RLD
and the deputy superintendent
here now also.
A month and a half maybe now
almost two months now.
In your life in your job I DO I
DO I love the folks I got to
work with good.
Good.
Saliva is well with you as well
hopefully you know the world
continues to move in a positive
direction I can see you in
person again soon.
You know what it's about time
for that big change.
Everybody get out and get some
sunshine is garland.
She understands what it's like
to be outside getting vitamin D.
E..
Representative Ezzell have you
been.
just way too busy more than I
care to admit to but yet it
keeps me out of trouble.
Hello Mister this Hey how's it
going good to see a the fear
will.
Representative is I'll get you
can get outside but just on that
those dogs out.
Now.
Opponents of all time with your
you talk about your morning when
the doctor told them to close
the gate they didn't close the
gate and what do you know it the
dogs got out.
What can I say sometimes there
were some teenage children.
Erin off.
Not as much not as much stress
as at times but it does I guess
I guess they all come with the
level of stress.
Well.
Whenever there's an important
outside the gate they want to
get out there so what can I say
yup.
They are Australian shepherd so
they're smarter than most people
you know that down to.
I do you probably smarter than
me from time to time I would
doubt that.
Get more exercise and meat here
these days although I'm trying
to catch up there.
Well but they like to appear
whenever called to get some that
they have worked hard all day
long and that's not always the
case.
Tell tell tell him I tell the
commissioners say hello.
I will I will do that I will do
that.
Is we had some bad news recently
so he is not here he is back
home in Kentucky right now so
while you and him and your whole
family in my prayers thank you
very much Representative.
I don't want.
This.
What.
Representative her hair
Representative Hochman Vigil
could see about.
They're going to see like the
long hair then good luck.
Just save me a little money you
know how the barbershop.
But.
Product so welcome to my world
well the my pain.
Yeah now yeah that's that's
that's true that's true it is it
does it is harder to to to
maintain a question.
Do you like being back in the
thick of things I do I do it is
it is a great department to be
back into the thick of things a
lot going on a lot of important
priorities we touched so many
important industry in the state
that it is been a real honor to
get to be here and I'm just very
grateful very grateful to get to
work with the superintendent and
the team here
Feel like work feel like we're
your guises long lost family
because we used to be down there
with you guys and now we're just
now we're just hoping and
praying hoping and praying that
you don't forget us.
Right this is I apologize for
being on okay so we're gonna
thanks everybody really excited
for today's subcommittee be
hearing
and I really appreciate staff
getting us ready I apologize for
being a minute late we're going
to go ahead we know this is
gonna be a robust hearing let's
start with agency code for
twenty that's regulation and
licensing
the process is just to level set
we we're gonna start with our
LFC.
and then go to our
the
Department financing authority
analysts then go to agency staff
and so grateful to see
director red is here and so
let's go ahead and start off
there is gonna be agency code
for twenty Mr Shetty a can you
kick this off please with the
different sheets.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Eric Shannon I'm the LFC
analyst for.
The regulation licensing
department.
and we've also got Donna Rivera
the executive analyst and then
also and we've got
superintendent your hero and she
can introduce for folks when she
when she gets a chance to go on
this is.
Have a multi program agencies I
know up until now some of the
smaller agencies might have been
LFC covering the whole thing but
I think
on this one myself and Donna
will kind of flip back and forth
between the.
The pages on your defeat state
you have a for.
So I'm gonna go ahead and start
on RLD and that's agency for
twenty just in case you're
you're looking for and some
packets and there are you can
find the LFC right up in volume
two on page one fifty six.
Okay so starting off revenue
primarily in the cannabis
control program for the creation
of a new manufactured housing
program the executive
recommendation would increase
general fund revenue by about
sixty point three percent.
The LFC recommendation would
increase general fund revenue by
about six point six percent.
There were also minor
differences in other transfer
and fund balance right.
LFC recommended spending would
increase by a total of about
five point four percent and
executive would increase
spending by about seventeen
point three percent.
Primarily differences were in
the personal services category
where the apartment has nearly
three million funded vacancies
in FY twenty two.
Additionally the executive
recommendation supported
agencies request just separate
manufactured housing from the
construction industry program.
Creating a new separately
graduated manufactured housing
program and providing funding
for each program.
The LFC recommendation did not
support the request for the new
program.
For the cannabis control program
executive supported one hundred
and thirty two percent increase
in spending I would grow the
program nearly six times larger
than the alcohol and gaming
program.
Given the tight labor market
pass expenditures medical
cannabis program at U. H. LFC
recommended a more modest rate
of growth.
The executive recommendation for
cannabis control division funds
a program to meet the
Legislative requirements of the
recreational cannabis program
differences in language will be
discussed by program.
and where they were performance
measures target differences the
analyst reach consensus as
indicated towards the end of
your your package with that
that's the end of that first
section the roll up and I'll
pass it over to miss Rivera for
to start off on page three.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I am going to just
it's quickly summarize by an
observation that the six percent
six point six percent
recommendation by the LFC is
actually accounting for large
reductions in the recall not
even the request but from the
operating level within a bunch
of the other divisions so the
six point six percent actually
is.
Act of other agencies taking
huge reductions to me that
amount but with that I'll start
with the construction industry
division which is the department
code is P. five nine nine.
LFC recommended a one point one
percentage increase and the
executive recommended a two
point two percent increase in
general fund now the LFC
recommendation which includes
the one point one percent
includes both manufactured
housing and construction
industries division the
executive has the two point two
percent increase over the FY
twenty two amount that includes
having manufactured housing
funded for the agency requests
as a separate P. code.
the LFC maintain federal funds
and fund balance of the FY
twenty two levels the executive
recommendation for those two
funds are in the manufactured
housing division differences in
expenditures for the program or
minor and the executive
recommended last for contractual
services spending because of the
contractual services being moved
to the other key code for the
manufactured housing.
the executive also recommended
less I'm sorry recommended funds
for personnel costs the base
level FY twenty two plus the
nine new positions desperately
needed for the construction
industry division which includes
things such as plan reviewers
inspectors and permit counters
with that Mr Chairman I will go
ahead and do you want us to go
ahead and referred to the agency
by key code or go through all of
it.
Thank thank you Mr.
I expect that we're going to
have a number of questions so I
think I'd rather just go by P.
code and then use the questions
from committee members of which
again I expect there to be many
to help guide us into the more
nuanced discussions okay thank
you.
Expressed.
All right I'll go ahead and move
on to page four and that's the
next program there.
Our financial institutions.
LFC recommended maintaining a
total revenue levels
commensurate with the FY twenty
two operating budget well the
executive would increase total
program revenue by eleven point
three percent.
LFC also recommended replacing
general fund revenue with
recurring mortgage regulatory
fund balance revenue.
LFC recommended enough personnel
costs funding to fill about five
Bacon FTE while the executive
would feel about Tennessee.
Both recommendations supported
the agency's request for new
positions to examine financial
institutions growing I. T.
services and protect.
Members from potential complex
financial threats.
Because the program has twenty
two of thirty nine FTE filled
LFC did not support increasing
FTE forty nine.
Up both recommendations included
languished use mortgage really
really regulatory fund balance
revenue however the executive
language included three point
four million and that doesn't
match the executives racks so we
would have to make an adjustment
on that if the executive
director to be adopted.
with that.
We'll pass it back to miss
Rivera.
Mr chairman I just like to
clarify but that the executive
recommendation does include
three point four million per the
agency requests regulatory funds
not necessarily as all and fund
balance but it is that much of
their budget is indeed
regulatory funds and the LFC
analysts to myself if necessary
can work to resolve that offline
but
With that I'll go ahead and go
to the next division which is
programs support the office of
the superintendent.
And this is pretty
for programs for the LFC
recommendation for general fund
is two hundred and eighty eighty
nine thousand less than the
executive which is two hundred
and eighty nine thousand in
their current operating level of
support and the exit the LFC
says given funded Baker for
funded vacancies in the FY
twenty two operating budget the
LFC recommended enough funding
in FY twenty three to fill one
vacant positions where is the
executive recommends full
support for the agency.
Go ahead.
It was the.
I move on to the boards and
commissions that's some page
seven.
Thank.
There were no differences
between the LFC and executive
recommendation on this one.
I'm sorry we might I think we
might actually skipped over a
page here I think we need to be
on page five.
Just the alcohol and gaming
program I'm sorry that's
correct.
So recommendations largely
maintained revenue with the FY
twenty two operating budget
however LFC recommend it the LFC
recommendations seventy five
thousand less than expected.
Of the LFC recommendation
maintain personnel costs
commensurate with the twenty two
operating budget while the
executive would increase
personnel costs spending six
percent.
To facilitate the tobacco
products for purpose of the.
So so we did the boards and
commissions I think Donna you
would need to echo the
securities right.
Thank you thank you Mr Saini a
Mr better did you want to add on
alcohol and gaming yes Mr
chairman if I could just add
that the executive
recommendation provides funding
at the current operating level
there is no increase other than
an increase in fund balance
which is for specifically in on
tobacco settlement position
tobacco products and force and
position and so there the agency
would plan on using the tobacco
settlement funds for that and
with that
I'll go ahead and go to the
cannabis Division is that
correct no securities Division
sorry.
the securities division which is
he coached six one seven or page
seven.
Of your different shades I'm
sorry that's page eight on on
ours here that we have oh sorry
okay thank you.
Thank you eight.
The LFC recommendation of
general fund is eighty six point
four thousand less than the
executive.
Executive again recommended the
based FY twenty two operating
level the LFC support LFC
recommendations point to
maintain fund balance revenue
the LFC recommendation for
personal services is to this
efficient to fill one vacancy
well the executive
recommendation would fill.
Two vacancies and both the
executive recommendation
included notwithstanding
language to use one point five
million from securities
enforcement and education fund.
And that again is because the
agency has requested in the
Executive supported Fund using
those funds within the
recommendation.
On.
Hey.
Mr chair do you have a okay yes.
It does act on securities do you
have anything that Mr sending
no.
That's it.
Okay moving.
On the Mr Chairman on
page nine you'll find that
manufactured housing.
But LFC did not support creating
the new manufactured housing
program well the executive did
the executive recommends funding
at FY twenty two operating
budget was.
And I'll pass it back to.
Mr chairman I'll go ahead and
move to the cannabis control
division Commission I'm sorry
cannabis control division.
And as you know this is a big
part of the differences between
our recommendations the
executive supports the HSD
fully of which does include
getting the new program up and
running sufficiently to meet its
statutory requirements that you
all that placed on them and that
includes a six point five
million in general fund a good
portion of the amount of revenue
that the agency uses.
from the licensing from the
medical those specifically if
you'll notice in other financing
that goes back over to
department of health that's
point five million two point
five million dollars
both recommendations included
that recommend you know the
other financing uses.
The LFC supported an increase of
one point four million of
general fund given the tight
labor market and past
expenditures in the medical
cannabis program at the
department of health the LFC
recommends a more modest rate
growth in the base six out of
the fifteen F. T. A. are
currently vacant the LFC
recommend two point five
million less than the executive
for personnel costs and the LESC
recommendation would
sufficiently fill an additional
six vacancies the executive
recommends increasing
contractual services
expenditures two hundred fifty
three percent and other
categories spend insurers.
The executive recommendation
also increases the two point
nine million for thirty five
additional positions for FY
twelve FY twenty three these new
positions and other support
include.
costs.
Go policy budget operations
compliance and I. T. computer
set as well as a software to get
the agency up and running and
with that Mr Chairman I would
also like to add that a big part
of why the agencies had a
difficulty in filling positions
is because right now a lot of
positions are classified as term
which is very difficult to hire
for people when people see a
position that is classified as
term so with that Mr chairman
I'll turn it back over to
yourself for these LFC analysts.
I would just a Mr chairman I'd
like to just point out of a few
things we look at the alcohol
and gaming.
The budget.
A budget we have a total of
about one point four million and
there.
and that's for two industry
alcohol and gaming and that this
recommendation would increase it
On the exact side maybe about
six times.
that of alcohol and gaming and
then I of one other thing I
wanted to point out is on page
starting on page eleven you'll
see the performance measures
page eleven twelve if you flip
the page thirteen.
You have helices person services
calculation.
I would just point out and call
and and is in November.
That there is about roughly
about three million and vacancy
savings are
in FY twenty two in
funded vacancies so in other
words the department could fill
about thirty five FTE with
current funding right now.
and with that Mr chair I'll pass
it over to the
superintendent for further
comment.
Thank you both superintendents
are here thank you so much for
all that you do and thank you
for for being here today.
Please go ahead thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee it really is an
honor to be here before you
today I was looking forward to
being in person we did this
remotely last year so I was
really looking forward to in
person so I I miss seeing you
all and was hoping for some
little time I I do want to just
clarify a couple of things you
know we had an executive order
that was directed towards our
agency almost specifically to
help reduce regulatory barriers
for licensure and we've taken
that very seriously we actually
have been working on that for
many months prior to that
executive order coming out we've
made a lot of different changes
in
of the the boards and
commissions specifically to try
to remove some of those
regulatory barriers I'm grateful
to Representative Hochman
hundred Hochman Vigil and Gail
Armstrong last year for helping
us to remove some of those
barriers in the health care
licensing what in that research
that we did we discovered that
two of the biggest markets in
New Mexico our finance and real
estate and this department has
responsibility for both of those
in in regards to licensing and
oversight so we recognize that
the regulation and licensing
department is a key piece to
economic development in our in
our state there were there was
of it just as a correction the
reversion that was reported when
our budget was reported of three
million five hundred and thirty
seven three hundred twenty nine
dollars was a mistake that was
something that we caught during
our audit period and the actual
reversion as three hundred forty
eight dollars and one hundred
twenty six dollars on there was
some money that was being held
in a suspense Fund it was
actually C. ID
Revenue that again was corrected
during our audit period one of
the things that we've been doing
over the course of the last year
and a half is to change our
online old systems in our paper
systems for applications permits
and inspections to an online
sales force platform we have had
some hiccups amount and that
absolutely was one of those
hiccups that didn't get
discovered we've put into
something into place some
Protections to make sure that
that doesn't happen again we
have some double checks that are
happy I mean to ensure that the
funding that comes in is revenue
is going to the right code so I
think it's no surprise that you
know for twenty I think we were
just and that was our that's our
agency code I think we were
destined to have cannabis it was
written in the stars for us
before for twenty even became
you know kind of that a popular
thing but I'm gonna let Victor
talk a little bit about cannabis
I want to start with the
financial institutions division
first I think it's important to
note for the committee that
financial institutions overseas
state chartered banks savings
and loans associations credit
unions independent trust
companies mortgage loans
companies and originators money
service businesses small loan
companies collection agencies
and re possessors escrow
companies motor vehicle sales
finance companies and out here
cemetery trust they're operating
in New Mexico we do have a total
of thirty two positions for that
division at this moment only
five of those positions are
vacant.
We did have one more position
that was gonna be fulfill we had
a division director coming on
next Tuesday unfortunately due
to some personal issues he had
to pull that
he had withdrawal from that
position so we're still looking
for another person to fill that
which would really only left us
with for frontline positions
with those twenty twenty sep
sorry twenty seven positions
that are administrative in
nature.
That really leaves us with a one
to six hundred license types so
that's one employee for every
six hundred licenses that's a
significant amount for each
employee to have to do so we've
talked a little bit about and
within our request for the
funding we're asking for
financial institutions that we
have the state the Conference of
State Bank supervisors
accreditation thank put us on
probation last January and that
is not a result of what has
happened under our watch in our
administration this is the
result of years and years of
under funding for the financial
institutions division back in
twenty fourteen there was about
eight thousand seven hundred
licensees as of last year that
was over sixteen thousand
licensees funding for financial
institutions has not
significantly increased to cover
the cost of insuring that those
new license types and those new
licensees are properly
regulated on there were eleven
recommendations there were
sixteen actual five of which
when they did the audit they
closed but there are still
eleven open all recommendations
from the C. SPC accrediting
entity three of them are in the
mortgage industry four of them
are in the banking industry and
the other four are
recommendations that are equal
to health so there related to
files.
All of those risks that we need
to address and we need to
address them quickly we we need
to have some highly trained
qualified cybersecurity
individuals on staff we estimate
that we need to cybersecurity
individuals to help inform and
to help oversee the financial
institutions that as we've all
seen ransomware is a real thing
and and it can hit and we need
to have cybersecurity of
experienced people to help
inform those financial
institutions that is the highest
risk that they're saying that we
need to take care of we also
have some medium risk in those
medium risk your that we don't
have enough inspectors and
examiners they estimated that we
needed at least four new
examiners to examine the banks
in the mortgage examiners
industry they said that we
needed an additional six we
think that we can get by with an
additional four and then if we
need more in the in the next
year than we would ask for those
so a total of ten positions to
for cybersecurity for for each
of the banking examiner and the
mortgage examiners we tried to
be incredibly realistic about
what we could accomplish we also
are having to increase the
salaries when we make offers for
the positions that we are
feeling and the reason is that
throughout the last year what we
uncovered and when we really
started to dig into why is this.
Division having so much trouble
with person is because we're not
offering enough in comparison to
the industry so we've been
looking at what is the industry
at salaries and how can we were
never gonna need still meet
those salaries and we recognize
that we have other things that
we can offer at in regards to
stability stability retirement
benefits we can offer all of
those things and so we're trying
to be more realistic about the
salaries that we bring folks in
wet so is is more than happy to
help us to continue to move that
forward but we absolutely need
the funding to do that we also
have for entities in
receivership and and that was
something that was new
information to me when I took
this position I didn't realize
that we also have receivership
we have the desert state life
management from Albuquerque this
is a special needs trust company
that was taken into receivership
in twenty nineteen we service
the de facto trustee on
approximately seventy special
needs trust this requires
significant personnel resources
including legal support we're
Iglesias receivership for
defunct escrow company since two
thousand nineteen Roswell escrow
services in Roswell we also have
two older receiver ships that
have been significantly
completed but are still open
with some additional legal work
that's required and that's the
New Mexico title escrow in
Farmington and the member is
Valley escrow service and
damning each of these matters
were originally filed in twenty
twenty one but it's going to
take us a little bit longer to
close those out we just do not
have the resources to take in
anymore receivership which means
that should there be other bad
actors that are discovered it
will be very difficult for the
agency to carry through the
legal responsibilities and then
the oversight if.
We have to take them into
receivership.
Highlights of the financial
institution and why we ask for
the resources that we asked for
we also asked for additional
resources in construction
industry I just want to point
out that the legislature in
twenty nineteen I believe I
actually voted for this bill
senator Wirth and Representative
at the time Rudy Martinez
sponsored house bill forty nine
that amended a section of the
manufactured housing act and
what it did is it required the
division director B. hired
specifically for manufactured
housing a lot prior to that
required that the division
director of the division
director for both manufactured
housing and construction
industry with that twenty
nineteen eighteen amendment
effectively made them two very
separate divisions now they work
hand in hand and they work
collaborative the together and
in many instances they
absolutely do share resources
when that makes sense for the
industry but asking for their
budgets to be changed this was
the first time that we've had
the opportunity to do that since
the twenty nineteen but bill was
passed and became law we do
think that it's important for us
to be able to report to the
legislature and report to the
executive how much it costs each
of those industries to fulfill
the duties that are mandated to
do having a joint budget makes
it much more difficult for us to
do that.
C. I. D. last year issued forty
six thousand four hundred and
thirty three permits and did
eighty eight thousand three
hundred and ninety two
inspections that's again almost
one employee if you take off the
administrative support for that
division that's almost one
employee for every seventeen
hundred transactions.
that manufactured housing did
six thousand eight hundred and
forty permits and seven thousand
one hundred and ninety two
inspections that is a look a lot
more manageable we still think
that we need some additional
staffing in that division.
At this point we have only seven
vacant positions two of which
are management positions at the
deputy director level and the
remaining five our our bureau
chiefs that we're trying to
decide at this moment whether or
not we can it can can we can we
make it through with the with
the bureau chief or do we need
to put that person on the front
line out in the field those
decisions are going to be made
within the next week and and if
that's the case then we'll
reclassify those positions on
chairman to frontline workers.
We've got up a whole brand new
manufactured housing division
director he comes to us from
and other state but he already
has a twenty one plans strategic
moving forward which includes
things like trying to work with
the industry to figure out how
do we economically without too
much burden bring any fractured
houses that are pre head up to a
fire code and make them safe
with that I'll go ahead and turn
it over to Victor to talk about
the cannabis control division.
Thank you superintendent Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
be here I know the other
presentations on to try my best
to be brief and to get to the
point I want to I want to begin
by really highlighting where the
needs and where the executive
recommendation comes in on why
such a great need is on
expanding the programming we
heard earlier for Mr Shenyang
that the that this increase
would have quit would amount to
a six time larger budget than
what is currently for the
alcohol the alcohol division
within our department but it's
important to note that these
divisions are very separate and
that goes to the root of why it
is exactly that we need
additional budget support to
ensure that we're meeting the
goal and the legislative
requirement that is set forth
within within statute and that
way and I know the rules that we
have promulgated by the deadline
that was also legislatively
dictated alcohol and the alcohol
and get the uncle Division of
our department does not deal
with compliance first and
foremost in the same way that
the cannabis Division has been
tasked with doing it compliance
no one will disagree that is a
very important sector unit of
the division to ensure that all
licensees are operating within
the statute within the rules and
regulations and to ensure that
the illicit market truly does
not go forward currently we have
thirty four we have a we've
issue we I'm sorry currently
we issued a total of twenty
seven licenses already to date
that is current as of today and
we have another two hundred
eighty five applications that
are for that are within the
system that we are currently
reviewing if we are to truly
have an effective compliance
operation that we need to have
the support to ensure that we
are we are providing that
monitoring that guidance that
that information is tracked with
intercedes sale system and for
that we're requesting an
additional ten more compliance
officers that's the other
important distinction here is a
no position is that you know
that that when he mentioned the
department of health the.
Program that the department of
health running rand is very
different from the one that we
are running because of the sheer
size of the of the effort that
is ongoing currently today the
department of health legislative
compliance and oversight of
thirty thirty four licenses with
the total fifty three promises
again we have already nearly
doubled that amount of licenses
that have been issued with
twenty seven licenses which
again include eight micro
producer licenses often times
these license types are gonna
gonna gonna need additional
assistance additional compliance
additional oversight in addition
to the compliance section which
is the extremely important again
to protect the health safety and
welfare of New Mexicans the
other thing that we've been
tasked with doing is ensuring
that we have a speedy licensure
system that we are standardizing
plan tracking imported importing
that into their by tax system we
are monitoring the use of
pesticides we're making sure
that applicants meet the letter
of the law and the intent of
what the their letter of our
roles and to do that we need to
make sure that we have the
licensure support within our
debate within the division to
ensure that that happens with
these two hundred and eighty
eighty five new applicants that
we are currently reviewing our
current licensure team does not
meet that we currently only have
three individuals who are hired
and that we have that were that
were previously existed from the
department of health to handle
this licensure system and it's
very clear in the two months
that I've been deputy
superintendent that that is not
nearly enough to provide the
level of service that this
industry is requesting and that
is necessary if we are going to
meet the economic development
goals that were set forth within
the legislative process and the
legislature in the passage of
the campus regulatory advisory
act in in particular it's also
important that we have a
licensure system that ensures
that every single new Mexican
who wants to have access to this
to this new industry has the
ability to enter it and that
proved that ensure that requires
us to have the support to help
them navigate that process that
additional support will also be
within that licensing structure
and it's very important that we
have the.
Cassidy to provide the support
the resources the guidance
necessary so that they can meet
that mission it's also important
when dealing with the health and
safety that we have.
That we have the the appropriate
I. T. support to handle the bio
track as well as the sales for
systems for both the compliance
and the licensure sides of the
units of of the division we're
requesting and is additional
additional additional staff to
be able to monitor that to be
able to make sure that we that
we have individuals we're
coordinating closely across
departments with taxed Rabb with
other with the department of the
environment those positions are
critical to the mission of the
or your update of the department
of the division and of the
success of the cannabis
regulatory advisory act in
addition to those in addition to
those to those choose to you to
units it's also important to
note that the legislature
through the cannabis regulatory
advisor act again the department
the the the requirement that we
license educational programming
that we license at all training
and education programming that
goes through for cannabis
establishments for cannabis
businesses in order to do that
we are going to need additional
staffing support as we continue
to promulgate the rules so that
we can have that if in fact so
that that so that we can meet
the letter of that statute in
addition the legislature also
give us the requirement that we
ensure the social equity the
social equity the diversity and
the economic development
priorities be put at the
forefront as we continue to
develop this new industry if
we're going to if we are going
to be able to make a success
we're gonna need the staff
support to ensure that those
specific those specific licenses
that meet those requirements
that they also have the support
to make it through that process
and that and that that that that
that goal that the legislature
sat becomes a priority.
If we continue to the the the
stakes in this division are
extremely high if we are going
to wish to see the revenue
generated to the state of New
Mexico we must be able to have a
fully operational division
unfortunately what is conclusion
colluded in the LFC
recommendation does not get us
anywhere near the point of being
able to operate a functioning
division that's going to be able
to me the health safety welfare
requirements the licensure
requirements I think you all
deserve and expect us as the
state of New Mexico to ensure
for this new for this new
division and for this new
industry in addition to that
it's also important to note that
we are we are as previously
mentioned by Mister Vera we are
responsible for transferring two
point five million dollars of
the revenue that we generate
from our licensors to the
department of health to continue
to run the medical programs
program and so that continue
that puts an additional strain
on the revenue that we can use
for the division and requires a
necessitate an additional
general fund spending which is
reflected in the executive
budget and with that Mr chair
Mister chair members of the
committee I thank you for your
time and I believe in the
superintendent are available for
questions at any point.
Thank you very much the
superintendent Trujillo deputy
superintendent ray as.
We really deeply appreciate the
work that you are doing and
diving into the particulars and
we have a lot of questions will
go straight to those first we
have Representative Crowder and
we're gonna go to Representative
Sweetser first Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the it's good to see us
superintendent Trujillo I I too
wish we could involvement in
person that would have been much
better but
my first question is is going
to.
Well first make a comment my
thought process to my when I
look at this I look at R. L. D.
as a whole I did look at the
individual departments and so
the numbers that I have in my
mind I'm gonna present have to
do with the with the whole
department.
And I heard you mention.
About some revisions reversions
they were transferred back and
there are
volume three on page two oh nine
Eric.
Of under RLD it shows that in
twenty one.
Thirty one million one hundred
thirty two thousand dollars
reverted from this department.
In my curiosity is is that an
accurate number or I I heard the
the superintendent make a
comment that about there were
some errors in in the
initiatives is that number
anywhere close for the
department L. as a whole so Mr
Chairman representative Crowder
one wanting to clarify on the
reversion there is it the the
department reverts
Money back from licensing fees
for certain licensing fees and
certain
other fees revenues that come
into the into our L. do that
automatically go back to the
general fund so that's including
a lot of different things
including those things that
automatically revert.
I appreciate that but it doesn't
answer my question is is the
thirty one million it could be
COVID money that came to the
Department it could be.
I don't know what but is is that
anywhere near is is that.
Just a typo is it
Can you give me a break down of
that thirty one million so I can
understand.
Representative met Mr Chairman
representative we're happy to
provide you that but Mr chair is
absolutely right the majority of
that thirty one million is the
revenue from the fees that we
charge those are supposed to be
report reverted to the general
fund on a monthly basis we
weren't set up to do that this
last year and so it ended up
being more of a one of lump sum
we're moving in the direction of
being able to do that on a
monthly basis now but the
majority of that funding will
get you the breakdown and I'll
make sure that it gets sent to
you is the fees from
construction industry
manufactured housing on the only
ones that have non reverting to
fees are the professional
licensing I believe under the
boards and commissions division
of financial institutions and
securities I believe the rest of
the agency when we collect fees
though those are all
automatically just reverted to
the general fund.
Okay thank you madam secretary I
appreciate that I I would still
like to know what the total
reversion wise if it's anywhere
if it's in a multiple millions
that would matter to me
That that's just the start
number that jumped off the page
when I went to look at this I
also noticed that and I thank
you very has covered a couple of
times in the.
Funded vacancies and and your
funded vacancy rate that you
know you have sixty four point
four five vacancies throughout
the.
The umbrella of our regulation
licensing.
Your funded vacancies there were
thirty five point three two they
were funded vacancies and and
LFC that is nineteen more to
that your funded vacancy in
dollars was two million nine
hundred and seventy four
thousand dollars.
A funded vacancies and yet I
noticed out of your PSEB or
personal service employee
benefits you transferred almost
a hundred thousand dollars out
of their.
For for some purpose I'm not
sure what always catches my
attention when we allocate
monies for for pay for employees
and is transferred out use for
different purpose it catches our
attention and and so I was kind
of looking at that.
Just to.
Get overall picture of what's
going on
I'm kind of hung up on that
thirty one million dollar
reversion December so I'll stop
there a list of all my
colleagues have to say are
asking and see if we can.
Make a good decision here
awhile.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
we're gonna go to Representative
the two.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
good to see all of you all I
wanted to commend you on on
working to reduce some of the
red tape I went in to get my
hair right before I came up here
and might cosmetologist said
that you had had reduced
something and I don't know quite
the details but when when salons
rent to someone there was
another layer of paper work that
you had to do and and they were
actually giving a little round
of applause that you are away
with that so as to does for you
sh so my question is to do with
the separation of the
manufactured housing and see I
do and I guess that's really for
Eric on January I have a huge
manufacturing facility in my
district I thought we were kind
of moving to separate
manufactured housing from C. ID
and I guess I'm just trying to
get my arms around why LESC did
not endorse that agency requests
so Eric can you can you fill us
in on a little bit of background
there.
It Madam chair representative
Sweetser yes I mean it all came
down to budget came down to
priorities you know making sure
that we're funding cannabis
control division
manufactured housing if you look
at it the.
The C. ID budget construction
industry budget is is basically
flat
the department within their
request and also the executive
recommendation didn't do any
reduction out of C. ID to move
that over to manufactured
housing to the new department so
there's no there's no this this
is that overall increased entire
budget it's you know it's adding
another one and a half million
dollars to the budget
and and so that's that's kind of
where we saw it it's also
you know there's multiple
programs in this department that
we budget through
there's you know there's plenty
enough other agencies out there
that have say two divisions our
state to commissions are to
boards or whatever happens to be
that are budgeted under one you
know appropriation within house
bill two we just didn't see it
as the right the right time or
or
You know we we saw it more as a
You know if if RLD is having
issues with how they want to
split up the bonding between
construction industry and
manufacturing back manufactured
housing that's something that
they can work out internally
it's less of a legislative fix I
think that's that's kind of
where we were coming from.
All right thank you Mr chair
thank you for that Eric I was
just trying to get my hands
around since we we did put a new
Division had in there it does
seem like maybe the move to
separate at and maybe I'm a
little sensitive to this because
almost every meeting I go to I
get attacked
my.
Shortcomings in C. ID.
And that in people are on
waiting lists and things can't
get done a blonde so so I'm
thinking you have one for
manufactured housing people if
they could get out from under
that negative I'm Bella that
might be positive but I do think
it may be something we want to
look at a little bit more
closely so I'm thank you Mr
chair all like my colleague
listen to the rest of the
comments thank you thank you so
much Representative Sweetser
next we're gonna go to
Representative Ezzell and then
Representative.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
I guess my questions fall under
the same line as Representative
Sweetser why are the two
combined Mr Shinya eight the
construction industry division
the manufactured housing
I'm I'm seein because there is a
new head under manufactured
housing that there might be some
I don't know bravest egos when
everyone thinks they're doing
the job right yet that other
industries that you've loved in
together.
Might be taken the hit for this
I just really have a problem
with that.
and I would like it I'm like
Representative Sweetser this
needs to be looked at so if you
would please Mr chairman Mr
Shinya if you would consider
taking a closer look at that
because.
In my mind it's two separate
agencies.
That's just way I'm saying.
Mr Chairman.
In.
I would like to.
Visit with
Victor right yes and Mr hate
Linda Trujillo about this under
the cannabis control division of
that's okay Mister chairman.
Go ahead please that's why there
regards to answer questions okay
at the question is.
As far as the recreational
marijuana goes.
Cannabis goes you know my hello
voted on that and everything
that I have been getting some
calls on it I have people that
are concerned about the water
situation what is this going to
do as far as their ability to be
able to grow this is it going to
take an educated water right to
grow it.
Is it going to be can they use
their if I live out in the rural
areas can they just use their
allotment that has been
established by the office of the
state engineers to grow this
other people are calling what
will happen to.
Well my water be contaminated
from the growing at this
recreational marijuana
especially in light of the
number of
Licenses that are going to be
issues can and can either of you
all give me an.
Answer to that.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative is out
first let me begin by thanking
you for your recognition about
the separation between
manufactured housing in the
construction industry division
and the importance of looking at
that there your question on on
recreational cannabis yes those
those different types of water
rights are ones that we are
looking at and considering on a
separate note I want to just
introduce this opportunity to
introduce our new director of
the cannabis control division
that was my my at my fault and
not introducing earlier Kristin
Thompson who is here on this
call she myself the
superintendents are all
available to yourself and
constituents who have questions
about navigating that process
and making sure that they do
have access to that industry and
that we're doing everything we
can to make sure that no
regulatory bird bird and no
requirement which it's alleged
the Water Rights our legislative
requirements under the cannabis
regulatory act the data that
they're not being predicament.
Related one has water you know
cannabis actually issues is not
a fear or risk of contaminating
water in fact it's actually
known to remove chemicals and
harmful metals from the soil and
oftentimes in the agriculture
industry cannabis hand different
types of products different
types of of of cannabis our used
to cleanse the soil and so
actually it's a very beneficial
product in crop to to the
agriculture industry to they can
communities that you serve and
one that they should absolutely
have the ability to participate
in and so I I I I I absolutely
would be happy to discuss this
further answer any other
questions and needs to
participate with your
constituents and maybe I I get
to take a trip out your
community I would love to do
that too.
Mr chairman Mr Reyes thank you
very much for that response
alfalfa also claim since the
soil to.
And cattle Eaton our seceded
llamas and.
Get some shape and everything
else up but my question is.
What is the office of the state
engineer consider is this going
to beneficial use that's my
question if they are if they are
using the water that they have
been appropriated from the
office of the state engineer for
an individual home she's which
is three and a half acre feet
per year.
That.
Are they going to be able to use
that water to grow the
recreational marijuana is the
state engineer weighed in on
this are you all including him
in your in your dialogue and
miss Thompson I did not know
that to working with Mr right is
on this so that's a good.
Contact that I need to have any
comments from you all would be
appreciated Mr speaker Mr
Chairman and Mr ryu's miss
Thompson.
Mr chair Representative Ezzell
the answer to your question is
is yes and the second question
about our our collaboration the
about a collaboration with the
office of the superintendent
I'm sorry the state office of
the state engineer is yes we are
in close collaboration they are
the ones that make the ultimate
decisions but that is also a
place that we can help navigate
and ensure that your that
individuals in that specific
situation are are given you know
the fair shot Affairs check that
they deserve.
Okay Mister chairman of the Mr I
just I do appreciate your
answers on that I know that
there's a big distinction
between the smaller grower and
then those that are growing it
out in the forms because if it's
a small facility it will be
integrated House situation but
as I explained to one of my
constituents.
Get all your ducks in a row
before you do this because if
you use all that water for the
growth of the recreational
marijuana and then you don't
have health water you're kind of
up the creek proverbial Mr
chairman thank you very much
thank you for your responses.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell next we
have Representative at a.
Thank you Mr chair.
I think it's important to
understand legislative offices
are all still closed most
employees are not back at their
desks right now and I'm just
curious I've heard nightmare
stories I I want to note from us
secretary as superintendent
excuse me Trujillo how hard is
it to get employee hired to get
their computers get their email
get everything in place so hard
how long does that take the
state.
Mr Chairman representative
that's a really good question
we're actually at a little bit
over seventy five percent of our
staff being in the office we
serve the public and we have to
be here to serve them face to
face so even throughout the
pandemic we had construction
industry of manufactured housing
they were here every day we had
to set up some appointments only
you know we're we had a security
guard downstairs that we're
taking name we don't three
people in the building at the
time it works for us so but even
at the height of the pandemic
our staff were still coming into
the office and working to serve
the public so we we are able to
get computers we did put in some
orders for some extra computers
towards the end of the fiscal
year and that's because the
order delivery for computers is
incredibly slow at this point
but we do have computers here
were able to get those set up so
we are getting all of those new
things set up I think we're
we're just more challenged and
getting employee is is that
there really is a lack of people
applying for a lot of positions
on like other state agencies
we've had some challenges with
HR with financial and and with
positions where individuals can
get a higher salary in the
industry those professional
divisions that we have the
financial institutions and even
quite honestly Representative
the construction industry
division because those require
highly skilled qualified
individuals to do electrical
inspections to do plan review to
do mechanical inspections so you
have to have people who have got
a lot of experience in the
industry and have the training
and the certifications and
what's happening is out in the
industry there's a lot of
building going on there really
is a lot of building going on
and we know that.
With the on the infrastructure
bill that was passed by Congress
recently they'll be a lot more
money coming down to the state
and so we're trying to prepare
to we're gonna have to do some
things to train people and we're
working with higher education to
ensure that those programs are
available but those are kind of
the things that we're struggling
to get employees but nothing in
relation to whether we're in the
office or not we have been here
and and I've been coming here
since last July.
Mr chair representative I can if
I can I just briefly to that as
well.
Just just very briefly I also
want to know you know that the
it was brought up earlier the
current positions that we have
taken to specifically within the
cannabis control division those
are positions that are recently
been what we're recently opened
and and became available have
since closed at the beginning of
the year and have now all been
interviewed and many of which
have been offered made offers
and so we have in specifically
in cannabis there's an extreme
interest from individuals who
want to be part of this industry
want to be part of this division
and so we have no we don't have
an issue and recruiting
individuals to fill those
vacancies.
I have one more thing I'm sorry.
Please go ahead but the that's
the quick I.
I promise Mr Chairman
representative I meant to say
this earlier to we have a
specific agency rapid hiring
event that's going to be this
Thursday from two o'clock to
seven o'clock over the state
personnel office we have twenty
two vacant positions that we're
taking over there.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
both of those questions I'm just
I just know I've heard horror
stories about how long it takes
to get an employee hired in this
state once they've been approved
and and then to get their
computer there officer email all
of them all of those things are
just seem to be just take
forever so I I just want to add
that so when we look at these
you know vacancy list I think we
have to keep that in mind and
them and I also want to add Mr
chair that the number one issue
in my district it is affordable
housing and it doesn't matter if
it's a construction you know
constructed houses or
manufactured housing we don't
have any of it there there is
there is no housing in in Rio
Arriba county and the lab is
hiring two thousand new people
in the next two years and we
have no place to put them we are
working with the lab and working
with Land Grant Committee
communities and working we're
working with any person who has
available land to see if we can
do housing construction so so I
to agree that you know I
I think it's two separate
entities that we ought to look
at in support and I guess you
know overall.
I just want to say we knew when
we funded the cannabis program
that we didn't have enough money
and and we all know this we
talked about it there wasn't
enough money to implement the
program that we design
legislatively and then I'll now
that that
You know it's it's come back to
get together so I and I think I
think I normally listen to the
LFC and look at those things but
I think I think this agency is
clearly under funded with the
job description it has been a
analytic though there Mr chair
but I think we ought to take a
good look at the executive
recommendation.
Thank you very much
Representative at a next
Representative Armstrong and
Representative that's
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
curious of to know the.
Same exact things that
Representative Sweetser and
representatives our breaking up
with the manufacturing
Being so the the the agent being
so important to as as as CHD and
having them in the same area I
would think just causes
confusion and
I would really like to suggest
that we take a second look at
that and see if we we can't make
that a better separation
good to see you superintendent
Trujillo and and Victor.
Appreciate what you guys too and
C. ID specifically has been
really doing really well in my
area you know there they've been
attentive and I just want to let
you know how much I appreciate
it and that's it thank you Mr
chairman thank you so much
Representative Armstrong next
we're gonna go to Representative
it's.
I thank you Mr chair I'm and
thank you superintendent and to
Victor rest for the
presentations I actually I'm
gonna reserve my questions
because I've sort of been asked
and answered and just comment
that
I am concerned about making
providing enough money to ensure
that the rollout of the new
cannabis
Program is done well and so I'd
like to flag that and thank you
all for your work that's all Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon.
okay I have a couple of
questions and then
so so we'll go into those
so I analysts and and
superintendent deputy
superintendent the
Eight Mr Cheney eight it seems
like the really that is been
discussed the comparison for the
cannabis regulation division is
with alcohol and gaming the
first time we have cannabis
regulation division the column
is alcohol and gaming that
that's correct yeah.
You Mr chairman members I I
would say there's kind of two
right that you that we kind of
look at right there's that
medical cannabis program
that use that part of it's still
over at D. O. H. the rest of it
came over to
RLD and then there's also yes
the alcohol and gaming
and I'm not saying that I I
don't think the LFC rex sees it
as an exact comparison but it's
probably the two closest proxies
to of what we're trying to do
here okay thank thank thank you
very much Mr chair we heard
It from from both the
superintendent and deputy
superintendent that the duties
for cannabis.
Regulation division are are
vastly.
Higher than with alcohol and
gaming that alcohol and gaming
primarily licensing and the
duties within cannabis
regulation much more diverse
much broader and so I guess
that.
It seems to me that.
It is not at the the comparison.
Is understandable but but the
whole the just really not in in
the same sort of area.
unfortunately and and so as we
parse out those duties that
we've heard about during the
hearing today that there very
well could be because there are
far more additional duties
additional
bonding requirements
As it relates to to the
manufactured housing in that
split from its kind of own
separation.
deputy superintendent ray as and
and superintendent Trujillo.
Well there what sorts of
benefits does that separation
bringing to.
Bring to the work that you do it
R. L. D. O. will it have time
budget in terms of getting
things approved on the grounds
faster what would it have any
safety benefits of being able to
apportion time appropriately or
is it just a.
Really administrative change.
That's a really good question
and I just want to clarify
though the alcohol and gaming is
not alcohol and gaming longer
gaming left regulation licensing
department years ago which is
why the the the name of that
division was changed alcoholic
beverage control on they do
oversee to industry one being
tobacco on the other P. alcohol
that you is no longer with the
department in regards to the
this the separation of
construction industry and
manufactured housing it's much
more than an administrative
thing first and foremost it
comes from the actions of the
legislature took back in twenty
nineteen to really distinguish
that those two divisions are
incredibly separate divisions
with incredibly separate and yet
you know coordinated efforts on
the it really comes down to us
being able to do two things one
report to you all to the
legislature what the cost is to
to run each of the requirements
under each of the authorizing
acts that's a really important
thing for us to be able to
report out and it's not we can't
do that at this point with the
with the budget being combined
and so we've been trying to
separate out and Mr centers
right we've taken some of an
administrative action internally
to help us get that but the
other side of that is is that I
have many questions last year
during the sixty day session
from legislators asking what did
we do with the three hundred
thousand dollars that was
actually appropriated to
manufactured housing and and we
were not able to identify you
know specific funding that was
provided by the legislature with
a very specific purpose and
intent so we could ensure that
the money that this committee
and that the legislature as a
whole appropriates for each of.
Those separate acts and
functions is going to the
services that that their
intended to.
Okay.
Excellent thank thank you very
much superintendents Trujillo
for going more deeply into that
the other I guess the other to
to kind of get at the get close
to wrapping up
the other main area which is in
on the financial institution
side you went into significant
detail about that
I don't necessarily think that
there's any more to capture
their except to I I think for us
to consider as we move forward
in this process if we get if we
foresee additional
responsibilities and some of
these areas and the wide range
of financial.
Institutions and others that are
come under our of the.
The and technology
superintendent would chew noted
which is that it seems right now
the lack of sufficiency for.
Regulators is actually.
Putting.
The the regulatory function in
question right the folks who say
you're there do it you're you're
doing a sufficient job
regulating.
The superintendent we're being
told that were on probation is
that that's what I took from
what you said there is that
accurate.
And that is absolutely correct
and if we if we can't turn this
proverbial ship around and
really step up and provide the
cybersecurity on positions that
we need to find what you're
gonna be much higher salary
positions and the additional
examiners for both the mortgage
banking then we run the risk of
not being able to charter banks
in New Mexico.
Okay.
Thank you superintendent for
that and really that's a great
segue that into the.
so we have these three core
areas the question the number of
members of asked that but then
the if if an as we knowledge the
significant areas of need and
that the case being put forward.
The fundamental challenge of
hiring generally in the
challenges in our current
environment they're gonna have
to be addressed at a detailed
granular level not just that
it's.
Redoubling efforts are this and
that but hopefully a strategy
and some of these areas.
And specifically.
When it comes to some of these
areas that cross in the cyber
security and others.
I think it's very fair in in
members probably will wonder as
I do if there's any coordination
with department of information
technology some of the other
cybersecurity functions within
the state whether they're silos
that that have to exist.
Things that we maybe don't can't
necessarily cover today but that
are are going to be relevant to
understanding how
You know how we move forward
here.
and I don't know superintendent
deputy superintendent briefly if
you want to address that all how
you foresee with your budget
request.
That prioritized hiring at this
granular level do you foresee
being able to bring.
A plan back.
Or or be in conversation about a
plan with the ability to to
identify specific positions and
strategy for how those would be
shelled in the the fiscal year
twenty three cycle.
Representative Mister chair
Mister chairman members of the
committee thank you for asking
that question we actually have a
strategy and the strategy that
we implemented is is is a
multilayer strategy we
identified one of the vacant
positions one of the positions
that were having troubles
keeping people and and we've and
and which divisions have the you
can see is that are unfunded
that we just can't feel and
we've actually moved positions
from it from division to
division to division we've re
classified positions that are
not positions that are necessary
anymore and we we move to pay
band I think we only have like
one thirty five pay band left in
our department so our strategy
is a multilayer strategy that
we've been implementing for at
least the last six months and
for the last few months that
deputy superintendent races been
with us he's really taking the
lead on ensuring that we're
moving all about forward with
each of our divisions so we've
tried to ensure that the
resources that we have according
to the best of the highest use
possible and that's how at this
point we ended up with the
special hiring
rapid hiring event just for RLD
specifically for our agency
specifically to try to fill the
positions that we can feel and
like I said they'll be twenty
two positions and so I'm happy
to talk about the strategy of
what we're doing to try to use
the resources that we have to
get boots on the ground and to
get people serving the community
great thank you very much
superintendent.
I I I was given a note that
Representative Brown had a
question we have Representative
brown and then we're we're going
to conclude our questions with
madam chair.
In requests input at first
Representative Brown states.
Thank you Mr chairman and
I have just a couple of thoughts
uh what does that regarding the
splitting out of budgets for
construction industries division
and the manufactured housing
program
I I'm in favor of doing that I
live in part of the state this
had a lot of population growth
and we're building a lot of
homes and apartments and.
There's a big demand for
manufactured housing as well so
I have received a number of
complaints about C. ID and it's
a point of consternation for for
a number of people and maybe by
separating them out a little bit
and we can have a little bit
higher.
Customer satisfaction in terms
of the the services so I I do
support that and then I just
want to I've just been kind of
project dating a little bit
about the cannabis control
control division and you know
the state of New Mexico
basically stood up a whole new
industries and I'm just
wondering if down the road some
time probably not now but maybe.
instead of being under RLD the
cannabis
Operation and and how that's all
structured and and run and given
oversight could eventually be an
enterprise agency with payment
of license fees and other things
right now it probably needs to
be under our I'll do that you
there's so we say high hopes for
The production of revenue
through cannabis sales and I'm
not one of those who voted for
it but maybe some day that could
become an enterprise agency
there may not be a good idea but
I thought it expresses.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown madam chair
please.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you Department for
being here I've been listening
to some of the discussions
regarding your your budget and
I've been jumping between the
two sub committee so I apologize
for not being are on board with
everything but I just want to
ask first of Eric there's not a
problem in the world with
breaking at construction
industries and manufacturing
housing isn't it just a matter
of getting a new fund called and
setting up the budget separate.
Madam chair it's it's kind of
two fold so it's it's that but
then there's also that it's it's
a base increase above what
you know right recreation of one
and a half million above.
It happened before you know
construction industry is flat.
Alright it didn't request
decreasing construction industry
to move that money over to the
new manufactured housing so
would be a base increase that's
that's the issue there I want to
just ask you if we care if we
took the LFC budget and we
separated about where we could
potentially look at M. S. two
separate budgets and gave the
agency a second look at it
because it looks to me like
they're just maybe it was done
through our or request or
something they're moving money
from construction industries
into the manufacturing housing
but we just separated out just
as a working a working document.
Madam chair yeah we can we can
do.
I think we need to look at that.
At the current budget then we
can have them take another peek
at it.
The other question I had for the
superintendent.
I'm looking at your are of
looking at the difference on the
cannabis control division.
And I and I heard you say
Madam superintendent that.
You have done a person review.
That you have looked at risk
classifications can you tell me
how many of those funded
vacancies have been
reclassified.
Madam chair I'm gonna let W.
radius speak to that he's been
much
since you came on I've been able
to kind of step back a little
bit and he's been much more
involved in the cannabis control
division I need to know
specifically and I'm talking
about all on funded vacancies
and I and I've asked each one of
the agencies during the Iran to
come back and and let us know
how many of them have been
actually reclassified.
Because at the department of
secretaries have the authority
to do that it doesn't have to go
through spoke so whoever's gonna
answer would you please.
Madam chair I'm gonna let Victor
answer that Mr Chairman madam
chair we actually do have to
take re classifications through.
so if we have a position we want
to classify you have to get
permission from CPO and from DFA
to do.
Really because I know many
agencies that don't do that so
Mr Raskin you explain to me what
you free classified.
Matt madam madam Mister chair
madam chair members of the
committee I I will get back to
you with the information on what
what current vacancies
department wide have been
reclassified and whatever which
one of those positions are
currently on funded I don't have
that information in front of me
but I will absolutely get that
back for the committee I can
tell you specifically within the
cannabis control division there
have not been any re
classifications the vacancies
that exist our new vacancies as
soon as the vacancy occurred
even sometimes before we posted
that we we went Respaut to post
a job to get it posted and and
there are now all closed have
been interviewed and are many
the majority of which are
pending offers I right now so
those will likely not be
vacancies for very much longer.
The committee to look at your F.
P. help shape.
If you look at column and.
There's almost three million
dollars available there funded
vacancies.
Now true they go throughout all
the different programs.
But that's why we want to know
we want to know what actually
gets reclassified or I guess
sister Department goes to a
different process I and I'd like
to have you explain that to me
Eric I know we've got others
that just do it because they
need to do it but you know I I
understand if it is a rural but
we we have we've got.
Different different dollar
amounts here that is available.
And in manufactured housing the
funded vacancy is zero I guess
that one is fully fully staffed.
But yet construction industry
and management is nine hundred
forty two thousand.
So
we just need a better understand
of these I the funded vacancy.
Because I'm not interested in
just dumping a whole bunch of
money into HSD if I don't know
exactly what we're doing with
the current funds that are
available particularly for
person and what that person
looks like.
I'm looking at the difference
worksheet.
For talks about the base.
We say the executive recommended
increasing contractual service
expenditure what's that for.
If there's broad categories of
policy budget business
operations compliance with those
B. line staffer with those being
regular staff.
Madam chair part of the reason
that the construction industry
has changed a little bit is
because we were using C. two
funds to implement the online
I'm licensing permitting system
and now that those two to funds
have been used to spend
implemented now has to come back
over to the agency to pay for
the license fees for.
Okay madam chair can I
Your earlier comment on the
personal services calculus.
Yeah I mean I think that was
quite a bit of what went into
the LFC recommendation is
looking at all these vacancy
funded vacancies throughout the
the rest of the agency and
saying well they have a lot of
different funded vacancies there
they have the funding to fill
these positions they could fill
these positions before they
could be spending this money but
it's but it's a it's already in
the in the base budget
at and that's why some of the
funding was kind of
Re prioritized within different
areas to try and.
Meet the needs of the agencies
so in cannabis control and other
places
While still funding at the
adequate level.
That's that's kind of where the
LFC recommendation came.
Thank
I'm sorry please continue yeah
I'd like to interject a little
bit the vacancies you're talking
about in construction industry
if I was just looking at a
person action request from C. ID
in particular and for the
remainder of this fiscal year
there really after the include
the you know the amount
projected for the currently
filled positions there's really
only a fifty five thousand
dollars balance available to
fund those vacancies so there's
not a lot of.
The way in construction
industries division in
particular they actually have a
high turnover rate and it's
quickly filled I know the cost
of filling up but that's one
reason why depending on when you
catch the vacancy rate for that
particular division the number
of high vacancy rates of the LFC
is listing I'm wondering how
many of those are within that
boards and commissions division
which is other state funding so
you know I would most of the
vacancies honestly are within I
think a lot of the various
positions within the boards and
commissions which are other
funds.
Well let me ask you.
Ma'am what vacancy rate are you
using for building your budget.
I don't use one particular
vacancy rate for the whole
HSD each code has a separate
vacancy rate madam chair what is
the what is the aggregate
vacancy rate you're using.
For R. O. DA aggregates sorry
give me one second
Sorry.
You know Mr chairman I don't
want to keep trying appear
hearing here
but what I would like to suggest
is that you pick a couple of
people to to look a little
closer at some of this person
stuff I would strongly suggest
that
just a couple of people maybe
yourself on the answer is that
there is a difference here but
if we if we had the LFC staff
working with the Department to
separate out construction
industry with manufactured
homes.
Representative the base base
budget now what I'm taking
another look at this I would be
very helpful for me I think what
would also be helpful for me as
we got on board and clearly
understood what these vacancy
rates are what's being done
about it and what we really need
to see.
So that's my suggestion and when
the subcommittee report comes in
front of the committee I'm gonna
be asking now so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you of
licensing and regulation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much madam chair
and it's an excellent suggestion
I want to.
As we're gonna go to that Matt
madam chair we're gonna go to
that also want to note
Representative Crowder had
wanted to make sure that it
would just on the radar screen
of course that there's a seven
percent.
Hey increases being ended by
both the executive and the LESC
as as relevant as a very
relevant detail on this with
that
let's go ahead we're going to go
to vice chair Hochman Vigil for
the motion prior to doing that
in given the practice in the
need to adopt the lower general
fund recommendation I do wanna
ask and see Representative
Sweetser myself and also
representative Armstrong can
work more closely with
the LFC DFA and analysts as well
as the.
The superintendent yourself in
the deputy superintendent to
fill madam chairs requests in
terms of one separating out see
I. D. and further drilling down
on the person differences.
So with that let's go ahead to
vice chair Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time I move that the
subcommittee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved we have
the.
The subcommittee of the
subcommittee at and
is there a second for that
motion I'll second that Mr
chair.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded is there any opposition
to that motion with the clear
understanding that the
subcommittee will be bringing
follow up back to all of the
members of this subcommittee
madam chair to you of course and
to the wider Committee at the
appropriate time.
Okay seeing no opposition we
have adopted that motion with
this clear provision
thank you all very much for
taking time we knew that we had
to spend the time on with our L.
D. today and really appreciate
this opportunity next we're
going members of the committee
thank you.
We're gonna go now to our a
second
agency this is going to be the
board of nursing it's agency
code four four nine this is
going to be.
Kelly if you could please kick
us off.
Mr chair Kelly Klein legislative
finance committee we've already
introduced part of nursing the
directors on director Sasha pool
as is my DFA counterpart Donna
Rivera this will be a quick
presentation since only one
program.
Overall the executive
recommendation for revenues was
close to the FY twenty actuals
well the LFC recommendations
supported the request to
increase revenues from license
fees executive recommendation
for person was eight point three
thousand above the LFC resulting
from a slightly lower vacancy
rate the LFC recommendation for
other costs supported the
board's request for work related
expenses such as travel on the
executive recommendation was
closer to the FY twenty two
operating budget we have
reconciled performance measures
as to expansions both
recommendations supported
expansion FTE for an additional
investigator you'll see
recommendations supported the
board's request to fund this
investigator at forty six point
four thousand while the
executive recommendation
included seventeen point four
thousand above what the board
requested for this expansion FTE
with that I will turn it over to
Donna for any for the comment
thank you Mr chair.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee the executive
chose to fully fund including
benefits so that the position
would be hired and filled
accurately insufficiently for
salary plus benefits.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much Mr betta
that's code now at to the board
of nursing would you like to
offer anything.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
just a gentle reminder that in
the The New Mexico board of
nursing is the enterprise agency
being fully self funded
We are experiencing both an
increase and licensing and and
increased in complaints that
require investigation and
investigations are becoming more
complex that is the reason why
the one vacancy that I have had
for a while is going that
position is going to be
converted to a licensing
position to assist in that area
and the request for the
additional new FTE as for an
investigator position.
And with that I stand for
questions.
Thanks thank you very much we're
going to go first now we're
going to go to questions for
Representative Sweetser than
representative Armstrong.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you all for The
presentation
and municipal director bill I
was just the state here that you
had a request for applications
and I was hoping you could
expand that because we keep
hearing everywhere there's a
shortage shortage shortage so
tell us what's really going on
there it's.
Mr Chairman
Representative Sweetser
understand of that you know I
don't have a full picture
because I don't have information
about you know what the vacancy
rate is at hospitals and things
like that and by the time I get
that data it's a little bit old
because it's coming from the
work force
the health care workforce
committee so I just looked at
the numbers that we have issued
in the first
half of fiscal year twenty to
which just ended in December and
we've already issued new
licenses and certificates
whether it's you know new to the
discipline or new to the state
we are actually have issued
sixty two point seven percent of
the number of licenses that we
issued an all of fiscal year
twenty so I think that there is
definitely all larger push to
get you know nurses into New
Mexico and we're doing this
with
You know all hands on deck right
now kind of approach and then
that's why I'm looking to add to
reclassify that one existing
position that I have to a
licensing specialist.
So thank you for that and thank
you Mr chair I would be
interested to know if they are
new to the profession or new to
the state are those numbers
broken down anywhere or or is
that something maybe we should
be looking.
I'm just so Mr chairman
Representative Sweetser does
numbers are sort of did I mean I
can find that information don't
have it prepared for today for
you unfortunately
but it's kind of one of those
things where
It's we are getting more nurses
you know that New Mexico
nursing programs across straight
state cannot produce right now
enough nurses that we need so I
would probably say it's a one
third new to the profession two
thirds new to the state sort of
mix but that's just the an
educated guess on my part
And I was going to say something
and I forgot sorry.
I am Mr chair director bill I
appreciate the educated guess
and just a little bit and let of
what's going on so
maybe offline you could share
that with me I'm just curious
because as I said we've done a
lot to try to to bump up that
pipeline and encourage people
and we keep hearing we need to
do more more and I'd like to see
what's working recruiting or you
know recruiting new are
recruiting from out of state
whatever it is I'm glad it's
working so thank you director
for thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser now
we're actually gonna go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman
Director pool the legislature
has appropriated additional
monies for nursing program
expansions
I'm just curious how much you
think that will increase your
workload on the board of
nursing.
I'm.
Mr Chairman Representative
Armstrong I'm sorry I missed the
first part of that question.
Yes let me repeat it
the so that the legislature has
appropriated additional money
for nursing program expansion in
the state my question is how
much that will increase the
workload in your estimation for
the board of nursing at.
Mr Chairman Representative
Armstrong thank you for that
clarification of your question
the you know if if the nursing
program you know was permitted
to you know how to perceive the
expansion money and could double
the number of applicants to you
know for their nursing program
you know it would take to two
and a half years to have those
individuals actually reach us
for licensure so it's one of
those things that there would be
increased work but it would be
to to to three years down the
road same thing if for some
reason a new school wanted to be
created you know new nursing
program would to be to develop
like let's say at eastern New
Mexico university and partylist
they don't have a pre licensure
nursing program if that's what
they wanted to do it would take
a little bit of work on the
front side to help make sure
that their proposal is meets up
regulations and
And after that it's kind of a
wait and see until their
students would start coming and
so I would be a little bit of
work but it wouldn't be a huge
thing right away I would expect
the workload to increase in a
couple of years.
Okay I I just realize that the
Caption on my photo says on
Representative Gail Armstrong
so I've actually Representative
Brown and I don't know.
Yeah so my other question is do
applicants apply online for
their license or is that a paper
process
Mr chairman Representative Brown
deepest apologies that is an
online process and we actually
allow our online needs on our
our licensing system allows
schools to verify educational
records electronically also
which reduces delay in receiving
transcripts with degrees posted
usually we can get those that
education verified about two
weeks earlier than it would take
to get official paper
transcripts so we have been
online for several years okay
thank you thanks for the answers
Mr chair back to you.
Thank you so much Representative
Brown next Representative
Ezzell.
Mr Mr chairman thank you very
much.
Director PO I do have a question
and this was brought up during
the special session and lots of
instructors have reached out to
me of how many first off how
many education funds are there
in the state of New Mexico and
it doesn't have to be.
Number specific but an estimate
I'm Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell we have approximately
twenty three programs.
Twenty three okay thank you very
much for that information but
the question that I've been hit
with it is been coming from
these nurse instructors and is
there pay commensurate with the
in.
As for as far as what the
students will be receiving once
they have graduated the training
to me that is a big concern if
we don't have the instructors
that are training these nurses
we don't have any more nurses
coming into the profit into the
programs.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative you sell there
are
There is some so.
Faculty salary you know
instructor salaries outside of
the board of nursing's purview
that being said I think that
there are some difficulties with
Faculty salaries attracting
doctors are you know a hospital
and that sort of thing it's it's
a balance of you know it's a
balance of also you go from
working I'm in the hospital you
know year round and and part of
being faculty as you get at
least a couple of weeks off you
know over winter break some
schools only meet have classes
for nine or ten months out of
the year so faculty get summers
off so you know it kind of
depends on you know what sort of
numbers you're looking at for
salary but it is it can be an
issue with that faculty and
staff are not offering enough
money to attract people from
hospitals.
Mr chairman and director call I
agree with what you just said
that
it's very troublesome to me
whenever I'm reading here in the
book that there were one
thousand six hundred twenty six
certified nurse practitioners
that were from out of state we
have the same going on within
our state that these nurses
might be traveling elsewhere and
they're getting paid I don't
know a humongous amount of money
for maybe three months stand for
six months stand out of state
but our our instructors
imperative for us to keep our
nursing forces up and going so I
I just want everybody to be
aware of that there is a concern
out there from the instructors
Mr chairman thank you very much
Mr thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative the.
Okay I don't see any other
questions from members so let's
go ahead and then go.
I commend the.
Thank you Mr chair Senator like
to move the executive
recommendation for approval.
Okay.
Okay that we have a motion for
the executive
recommendation understanding
that there's no general fund
impact your is there for that
most.
Thank you Mr chair great it's
been moved and second by
Representative Sweetser is there
any opposition to that motion.
Okay seeing opposition we've
adopted the executive
recommendation for the board of
nursing and that thank you very
much director pool now we're
gonna go to HSD code four six
four this is the board of
professional engineers and land
a lancer.
The
agency it's been can use.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee again my name
is Jessica it's been I'm joined
again went on a Rivera on the
board today we have a period
Valdez the executive director
and crystal headed up
administrative operations
manager and they have they may
have some additional board
members that'll let them
introduce for the the committee
starting with the different
sheet for HSD this is agency
code four six four.
and you can find information
about this agency and volume two
pages one eighty three and one
eighty four which is also listed
on your date sheet.
starting with revenue there are
no differences in the
recommended revenue sources for
the legislative and recommend
and Executive recommendations
both the legislative and
executive recommendation support
the agency's request for all
categories this reflects an
eight point two percent increase
from FY twenty two of this
increase can be primarily
contract attributed to a fifty
thousand dollar increase for a
new I. T. licensing system and
to increase the annual
scholarship distributions by
about twenty thousand analysts
have also come to consensus on
performance measures and all
handed over to Donna and cancer
any comments and then over to
the agency.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman No comments.
Thank you Mr Mr about eight.
Mr it we at we have a hard time
hearing.
You all there can you try try
again knowing that there are are
no differences in the
recommendations.
That's.
Yes.
What.
What were.
It's it's Mr Valdez make it
might be a directional Mike but
it is very hard to hear you if
let's try one more time.
In just.
Okay it's very staffs but keep
going and just be the that's be
brief not again there no
differences in the
recommendations.
For.
With.
All senator was.
And it also.
The
board refused to.
All university.
Optional for most.
The question.
Thank you so much Mr Valdez and
and we could hear you well at
the end there.
Let's go now to committee
questions we have one is from
Representative R. one member on
the board Representative Dixon
please.
I thank you Mr chair and the
thank you Mr Valdez I have a
question specifically about the
scholarships and I was wondering
if the state board has passed
our universities to provide
annual reporting on the
scholarship awards and the
outcomes.
Our New Mexico State University.
All of this policy.
Opportunity for publishers in
the spring semester.
All.
So.
Questions.
The
we help with all questions.
News for about bill does and
that thank you chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon.
Okay seeing no further questions
we'll go to vice chair Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time I move we adopt the
LFC recommendation.
Is there a second.
Thanks.
Representative Hochman Vigil
second by Representative Dixon
for the LFC recommendation is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing oppositionparticularly
the LFC recommendation for HSD
coach or six for state for
licensure for engineers and land
surveyors thank you all very
much we'll continue with agency
code six six eight this is the
natural resources trust the and
Caitlyn one will
because top plates.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon again I'm Caitlin line
LFC analyst at my DFA
counterpart Andrew Miner is here
and presenting from the agency
we have the natural resources
trustee Maggie Hart Stebbins and
one more time this is agency
COVID six six eight I'll briefly
go over the different sheet
there is a small difference
between the two recommendations
but overall both recommendations
reduced revenue due to lower
projected expenditures from the
natural resources trustee fund
which supports contractual
services for damage assessments
and natural resource
restoration.
Recommendations also use general
fund revenue it's replaced the
use of fund balances to support
agency operating costs.
In the base budget the LFC
recommendation increases the
person budget to support one U.
F. T. E. R. water resources
professional well the executive
recommendation funds that
position as well as a management
analyst.
Both recommendations reduce the
contractual services budget
which funds after resource
assessment restoration work from
the fund balance as I mentioned
before and again that is based
on the agency's expectation of
restoration work they will do in
FY twenty right.
The larger increase to other
costs funding recommended by the
executive will support the
office lease and costs related
to new FTE and staff reach
consensus on performance
measures at all I have I'll turn
it over to ensure if he has any
additional comments and then to
the agency.
Thank you
Mr chairman members the
committee again Andrew Miner
from DFA here Kalin explain the
difference as well so I have no
further comments and all the
turn it over to the trustee
Maggie Hart Stebbins.
Thank you yes the great to see
you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I'm
really grateful for this
opportunity to just briefly go
over our budget I know we're
late in the day so I will be
quick I am joined today by will
center who is our water
resources specialist with no R.
T. and they'll grant them with
the New Mexico attorney
general's office to provide our
legal counsel
slide one we are a small agency
there are currently four of us
And we are administratively
attached the environment
department and we received very
excellent legal services for Mr
Grantham who is with the
attorney general's office we do
not pay his salary but we he's
an integral part of our team so
I always including mess as the
agency slide number two just as
a brief explanation of what I
would R. T. does
you know we work closely with
the environment department when
there has been a release of some
kind of hazardous substance
environment department is
responsible for insuring that
that says is clean up to protect
public health and then we are
responsible for restoring the
natural resources to that
at their peak contamination
condition I think the most
important people on this slide
is that we are responsible for
ensuring that communities are
compensated for the loss of
those resources and the loss of
use those resources in this at
and the services they provide
so slide three just a quick
overview of our current and
potential natural resource
damage assessment you can see
there throughout the state slide
number four shows you the
settlements that have been reach
sense the office was created in
two thousand thirty one million
eight hundred ninety thousand
dollars again those settlements
are are scattered throughout the
state slide number five this our
partners we work closely with
many of New Mexicos tribes and
pueblos local governments NGOs
this so when water conservation
districts and
in federal agencies as you saw
in
last slide
are our project our current and
past project locations again are
located throughout the state
Slide number six I think is
important because it kind of
ways that well does lay out our
budget request when I joined the
office of the natural resources
trust in at the end of two
thousand nineteen our damage
assessment fund was essentially
insolvent and so all of our the
research and the assessments
that go into building cases had
essentially come to a halt
again thank you to the
legislature and governor's
office in twenty twenty you
appropriated you gave us a
special appropriation of
two point five million dollars
that allowed us to restart our
work I'm at appropriation was
reduced to two million in in
during the special what would
allow us to do was reach
settlements with from oil
reached a settlement with the
goal king one of the defendants
in the gold to my case to
restart work on some of the
previous cases and our
allows has allowed us to come
close to closing the fort
Wingate depot case and begin our
negotiations with the do on the
white sands test facility case
that has been languishing for
awhile
As you can see from this chart
on page six
That appropriation led us to
bring and about one point one
million dollars we anticipate in
twenty twenty two that we will
close at least one more case and
another or two in twenty twenty
three and what that means when
when our team reached a
settlement it brings funds into
the state and increases
significantly our work what I'm
in terms of working with
affected communities to
implement rest natural resource
restoration projects so I'm you
go to slide six that is just a
very general overview of our
requests are total FY twenty
three request is five million
two hundred and seventy five
thousand dollars
Really that the most significant
change is we have requested to
introduce to help us with that
workload that I outlined in
slide number six.
slide number eight is a
spreadsheet that shows our FY
twenty three AM the executive
recommendation compared with
previous years
the executive has recommended
and eighty one point one percent
increase in our general fund
appropriation and a slight
reduction in funding.
Slide number nine is a
comparison of DFA
recommendation versus LFC
Consistent in that
recommendations for are used to
fund balance the significant
difference is DFA has
recommended I'm three hundred
forty three hundred forty seven
minutes.
Three hundred forty seven
thousand dollar increase in our
general fund appropriation
that's eighty one percent
increase LFC has recommended a
hundred ninety five thousand
dollar increase at.
forty five point seven
percent
Again DFA recommends or has it
you know accepted our request
for two full time equivalent LFC
has recommended one and the
chief that difference in some of
the other cost is a reflection
of
The added costs that new staff
will bring to our agency.
slide number ten is I'm just a
very basic or chart it shows
the two positions that we have
requested a water source
professional and a management
analyst and again to
Cover our order to handle the
increase in assessments and
increasing cases that
we anticipate growth in FY
twenty three.
We have also site site number
eleven we have requested a
special appropriation for our
assessment fund it would
increase the trustee Fund in
anticipation of new cases that
we would like to bring around
the state
they are assessment fund is
important in allowing us to
pursue additional multi year
basis weird that responsible
party is unwilling to pay the
cost of the damage assessment
and R. T. needs to front that
money needs to do the research
to complete the damage
assessment
before we enter into settlement
discussions so forty
so often there is a lag between
the expenditure of conducting a
damages estimate and a recovery
through either settlement
litigation I'm.
I wanted to be quick
slide twelve I'm happy to answer
any questions
Provide any information that I
may have not included I think
one slide you know I've added
some supplemental information
I think that slide sixteen and
seventeen gather more
significant I like to point to
those as an example of what and
when our T. the complexity of
the cases that we take on that
that's those are to fly to Los
Alamos K. to give you an idea of
what we are dealing with so with
that
again thank you for your time
I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you very much trustee hard
Stephens we first have we're
gonna go to the members
Representative Crowder and then
Representative Ezzell
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman just two
very quick questions come from
page two oh nine and R. volume
three.
The Stephens I I don't know if
it is appropriate for you or
someone with you can answer but
I noticed each transfer twenty
two thousand five hundred
dollars out of your personal
service deployed budget what
what what was it transformation
would use those funds for.
I am going to have I do not have
an answer to that question Sir
Representative chairman
Representative Crowder but I
will get back to you I will talk
to our staff.
Get back to you I don't have
that information right now okay
and and I kind of didn't think
you did but I needed to just my
second question it is probably
gonna have the similar answer I
noticed that you also
the.
Natural resources that reverted
eight thousand two hundred nine
dollars if they were unable to
spend and I was curious what why
couldn't you spend those funds
so if you could provide those
answers for me I'd be very much
appreciated I will be happy to
do that at Mr Chairman
representative Crowder we did
have a we did have that we are
executive director and retired
in
March of last year so we did
have period of time we we were
not paying and executive
director salary so I believe
that is where that eight
thousand dollars came from that
reverted.
Okay thank you very much
appreciate it look more to your
message thanks Mr.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
let's go to Representative
Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell did you
have a quite all right yes I did
I'm sorry I forgot to and New
Mexico.
The director Stephens your
supplemental information Your
restoration projects anticipated
for the year twenty twenty three
it says the white sands test
facility.
Isn't that a federal.
Establishment right there and
what.
Or will you be working with the
Feds on this server talk to me
about that because I'm very
concerned that we might be is
overstepping some boundaries
here.
Mr Chairman representative is
out thank you for that question
of.
Senator own RT's cases do
involve engagement with federal
entities Los Alamos we are have
a claim against you know II for
natural resource injuries fort
Wingate white sands test
facility is another case where
DOD and NASA or the defendants
so we are we have nearly
completed the damage assessment
where we have calculated what
the injury has been to
ground water in that region as a
result of NASA's seventy not
passes that committees and we
are preparing and to enter into
settlement negotiations with
DOD and NASA so if we were to
it's close that case whatever
settlement funds come to Ellen
R. T. we would then be in the
position of identifying
restoration projects identified
by the community
and implementing them.
Okay thank you for the rest of.
For that.
There Mr chairman I guess that
brings me to my point whatever
you're talking about.
Ground water contamination and
there thank I do hope that you
do get involved with the city of
Clovis the United States
airforce of the problems that
they're having their I think
it's very important that
community Mr chairman thank you
very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell
briefly trustee hard Stephens.
The there are some changes in
fund balance and support from
the LFC there.
Some additional support although
not all the way up to the
executive level right now of the
two positions that you're asking
for which position is would be
likely filled in which this
position would not be filled
under the LFC recommendation.
I'm Mr Chairman.
I believe I am confident that we
will not have a problem filling
the net the water resources
specialist position
when we were filling the
executive director position we
had
Dozens of applicants ten of whom
were great enough that we
we interviewed them and it's.
Several of them if they were not
chosen for that job they would
still like to come to work for
us do so I think we have a great
pool of talented individuals who
could fill that position I think
the Management analyst might be
a little bit more difficult I
think you have talked today
about the challenges of hiring
Talented finance people across
state government that maybe a
little bit more challenging but
you know if I were to predict
where we would have more
difficult it would certainly be
with a management analyst.
Understood thank you thank you
very much Jesse hard seven
really interested appreciate
just appreciate that feedback
and appreciate all that you do
and serving in really across the
state and some very challenging
cases bringing better on the
ground conditions for New
Mexicans with that let's go
ahead and go to a vice chair
Hochman.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time of the LFC budget
recommendations
okay there's a motion for the
LFC budget recommendations there
a second.
A second Mr chair great mood in
seconded by Representative
Sweetser there any opposition to
adapt to the LFC budget
recommendation.
Seeing none the LFC budget
recommendation has been adopted
thank you again for us the art
student and
will continue on now of with the
New Mexico livestock for this is
agency code five zero eight and
this one if you would start us
off again please.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
the livestock worried again
agency code five zero eight my
India bank account or are on
this is don Abera and from the
agency it we have executive
director Belinda garland deputy
director Sean Davis and CFO and
you still that they may have
some other staff joining them
and if so all let them
introduce as needed the full LFC
recommendation for the last four
can be found in volume two on
pages two oh seven two two nine
I'm going to present the summary
of the different she and then
don and I will alternate drive
over.
Go on revenue both LFC and the
executive recommended a general
fund revenue increase of nearly
four hundred percent along with
the significant reduction in use
of the agencies are balanced I
still part of that general fund
increase is replacing use of
some of the agencies funds are
are part of the as you'll see it
later is also for the creation
of a new program and this
agency.
Overall the LFC recommendation
increases revenue by twenty one
percent compared with the FY
twenty two operating budget and
the executive recommendation
increases revenue by nineteen
percent.
LFC recommended slightly less in
person funding the needs
dedicated and slightly more in
the contractual services budget
both recommendations increase
the other costs budget done to
do that livestock inspection
program.
Afternoon thank you Caitlyn
for the livestock inspection
program both recommendations
replace a large amount of other
state funds with general fund as
mentioned earlier the executive
recommendation includes
increase creasing General Fund
slightly higher and is offset by
slightly higher reduction in
funding and revenue the LFC
recommends larger general fund
increases smaller reduction and
fund balance revenue.
LFC recommended increases mostly
in other costs with the rest
increasing the personal services
budget contractual services were
kept flat executive increases
primarily in the person budget
well contractual services was
reduced slightly.
That are performance measures on
this particular division.
Thanks Mr chairman I'll now at
discuss the knew it needs
inspection programs since he is
sixty six on the next page on
the meat inspection program is a
new division within livestock
board that's being funded in FY
twenty two this the school year
with a nonrecurring
appropriation for program start
up costs after several years of
running the program the state
may receive reimbursement from
the federal government for up to
fifty percent of program
operating costs.
But for FY twenty three LFC in
the executive recommended
general fund appropriation to
support the program the
executive recommendation is
about one hundred and sixty one
thousand dollars higher than LFC
is.
LFC recommends personal funding
to support line FTE well the
executive includes funding for
eleven FTE and executive also
recommends additional funding
and the other costs category and
the difference in FTE
recommendation largely comes
down to a lot of the discussions
we've been having at over the
past day here in regards to your
difficulty hiring and and what a
realistic expectation is for
getting the program up and
running in the first fiscal year
and I did just want to mention
quickly going back to the
livestock inspection program I
it feels mentioned earlier that
the LFC is recommended person
increase is for targeted salary
increases for livestock
inspectors it does not support
any additional FTE but it does
provide a salary increase that
LFC it discussed with the agency
so that's all I have thank you
and then list on has any other
comments we can't turn it over
to director garland.
I just like to also offer that
the executive follow the agency
requests did not recommend more
other revenue since the board
livestock board likes to have is
trying to regain a fund balance
necessary for when there's a
pandemic or emergency regarding
the livestock that would need
emergency measures to be able to
address it so they would need to
fund balance and they're trying
to get that back up where it
would be sufficient to be used
in an emergency and that we also
recommended support for the in
pay band increase for the
inspectors as well as the base
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
read that director garland
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good afternoon
everybody so I'm gonna start
with the inspection side of our
agency so I do first of all want
to thank Donna Rivera and
Caitlin one for really putting a
lot of work and effort into this
this year there's been a lot of
really good communication and a
lot of good collaboration on
trying to get us to that affect
the budget that we can work with
this year so I thank you both.
So on that what I'm going to we
would like to give you a little
bit of information on some good
things that this agency has
produced during this past few
years and there are some things
that we're striving for so I
think to start off with wondered
introduce our deputy director
Mister John Davis he's going to
give just a short will talk
about some of the affecting
Law enforcement activities that
we have to have on cruelty cases
and some of some of our
inspection numbers as well so
I'm gonna turn it over to Sean
and then we'll talk about a few
other things.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
do I have the ability to share
screen is that something we can
do are now.
Hi this is Richard Johnson House
Appropriations you should be
able to share
I've opened it up for
participants.
To enable you to do that.
Very good thank you Sir.
On the screen.
Here just a minute I'll show you
some of the cases that we have
worked through we currently have
twenty nine law enforcement
inspectors with three waiting to
go to the academy that's up from
twenty seven.
Inspectors that were certified
in twenty twenty and twenty five
and and twenty nineteen so we
have a few more officers working
with our a lot of vacancies that
were filled this year we have
nineteen brand inspectors we
have a couple retiring.
Recently and so we do have a
couple of agencies there we have
thirty contract deputies these
inspectors and deputies
they inspects two and a half
million head of livestock as
your primary job it we did that
in twenty twenty one about two
hundred and seventy five
thousand of those are expected
at auctions
that's just one of their duties
that seems like a very large
number for a small agency like
ours but they're very effective
efficient and what they do an
inspector averages thirty five
hundred miles of driving to get
these task done on top of that
the during twenty twenty one re
recovered five hundred thirty
head of livestock they were
simply not aware they were
supposed to be either on the
neighbors are on highways or a
In the shipment updated
belonging and that that
recovered about take the four
hundred forty nine thousand
dollars.
About so.
Very effective again in doing
what we do for the industry of
the state of New Mexico our
total road stops this year were
down because of we're still
trying to.
Deal with the COVID issue but we
still did four hundred thirty
four traffic stops this last
year.
Twenty nine citations issued
with forty eight four verbal
warnings.
In thirty eight in two trailers
three hundred and nineteen of
those traffic stops were in
compliance.
Our incident investigations
which I want to show you just a
little bit about what those are
about we had five hundred eighty
five estimation thirty six of
those investigations were staffs
a hundred and eighty of those
investigations were cruelty and
abuse of that's that's about a
normal year for us when it comes
to investigating animal cruelty
and abuse and I just want to
show you some real success
stories it shows how well we
work with are a our our partners
at rescues and so here's a horse
that was seized by Warren in
Eunice New Mexico sent to the
rescue the our shelter rescue
and sorry else
here's another horse that was
picked up near Las Vegas this
was in a band and our with a
broken job it was rehabilitated
or shelter it's really
fascinating how fast the
turnaround to be on these
recoveries of these animals.
We have a of course here at
dharma or stressed you down
south that was abandoned again
picked up by our inspectors and
taken to to that rescue and the
and just a wonderful recovery
for that our there's an old old
our thirty five year old our.
Leaving out it's it's live in a
new condition that you can see
there on the right.
That's that picture was taken
very recently at the perfect
harmony rescue
I can't say enough good about
how well the rest use work with
our inspectors are staff
this was a seizure from a few
years ago I just wanted to point
out that every once in a while
we run into some cattle
situations and the and that that
does happen from time to time
thankfully not very often.
This happened in chaparral New
Mexico during a normal.
A warrant to check on some
animals to see if they were
being cared for these as we
heard some pot belly pigs that
you can see we're at the very
very terrible condition and we
picked up those pigs.
We literally had an inspector
stay up at night with those pace
to ensure they made it through
the night and that inspector is
a contract the day before us and
she she really kind of fell in
love with the pace here's the
worst paying in that picture
that's participate thirty days
later.
And so you can see a little
speed a little care goes a long
way and that's what we do here
at the livestock or there's all
of the peaks Center recovered.
A recommendation from that
hello scroll back up to some
talking points for the other
folks are going to talk but.
I'd like to close with our law
enforcement specter Spanish for
my annual training period for
our law enforcement credentials
this year and we're up to date
on training and qualifications
or gate we're good there and
I'll turn this over to a back
table and.
Cheers.
Thank you John I appreciate that
as you can see the pictures
speak louder than words so.
So I want to kind of talk about
some of the things that we were
requesting and our budget
increase and first of all I
would like to reflect what this
one's stated about that a lot of
the budget proposal that is out
there from LFC and DFA hard to
bring us back to where we are
now actually
And no longer using our fund
balance we are projected to use
our one point one million five
hundred seventy eight thousand
two hundred twenty dollars of
our fund balance that this year
and this year that will bring
our fund balance down to under a
million dollars so we would like
to try to build that back a
little bit in order to be
effectively responsive to any
type of outbreak that happens
and within the livestock
industry
when I took this position a
little less little over two
years ago we recognized some
problems that we need to work on
one of the problems was our
fleet we were coming to the
legislature's every year and a
crisis mode saying that we have
vehicles that were spent a
fortune on trying to keep them
running down the road instead of
effectively managing our fleet
and rolling a certain number of
vehicles every year so this
budget that's being proposed
actually by both agencies will
allow us to now begin to rotate
tender ten to fifteen vehicles
per year which will be crucial
for us to keep our plate and a
productive state and then
effectively managing our assets
as well another thing that we
recognize is that we were really
not feeling all of our vacant
positions so now we are right on
this past year we have worked to
fill every vacant position that
we have within the agency with
the exception of two inspectors
and those positions were held
open in order to fund the to
investigating positions are to
FTEs that were given to the
agency in twenty nineteen
so with this budget we believe
that now there is that funding
for those two investigative
positions and that we can
possibly look at reclassifying
or at least filling the other
two inspector positions.
We are we did in our budget
request asks for extra general
funds in order to give our
inspectors pay increases.
State person has recommended to
us that we try to get our
inspectors closer to mid range
in the pay band because
currently right now most of our
inspectors are at the very
bottom of the page that so what
the pay increases that we
proposed we're going to be about
halfway to to mid range it won't
bring them up to mid range but
it will be about a half a half
way increase for our inspectors.
Another thing that we did ask
for that's not being supported
in was another FTE for another
investigator position we believe
that our investigators are
really giving good results to
our producers out there you had
recovery from larceny cases were
in doing inspections on park
possible larceny cases from
illegal branding basis so maybe
in the future we can we might be
able to discuss that one another
position that we are actually
let me go on to something else
and I'll come back to this also
this budget will support and we
have an increase in the cost of
our fuel just to operate our
vehicles as you all know just
running your own personal
vehicles the cost of fuel has
almost doubled so that is put an
extra financial burden on the
state agency.
So.
Also there's like I said this
will put the rotation of
vehicles back into our budget
every year so one of the most
important positions that we did
ask for that maybe we can look
at reclassifying with the budget
that's being proposed we can
take an inspector position and
maybe possibly right reclassify
it is into an emergency manager
position.
Of COVID has taught us anything
this past few years is that we
need to be prepared and so an
emergency manager in order to be
prepared and have plans set up
for any type of outbreak within
the livestock industry we
believe this crucial so at that
juncture in the US I'm gonna
turn this over to Mr roster and
he is our New Mexico state that
Marian and he's going to give
you some information on that so
Dr.
And don't forget Dr muted don't
don't forget on mute the.
Thank you director Kerr that Dr
garland drive sentiment excuse
me.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to share with you
what keeps me awake at night
remind you as I have.
Past when I've spoken with the
committee that we have the
largest land cattle port in our
southern border Senator is.
Twenty twenty we brought in over
six hundred and six thousand
head of feeder animals for
Mexico twenty twenty one where
over five hundred and thirty
four thousand animals are Mexico
is free of foot and mouth
disease but we're not worried
about an accidental introduction
what we're worried about is
bioterrorist activity up four
animals get unloaded on the
Mexican side if they're
introduced to the virus there
thank you go through importation
and crossing following day your
incubation period is to fourteen
days so we've got animals that's
still look perfectly healthy
coming across loading into
trucks and heading proceed
what's multiple states all right
it's it's it's master plan for
wiping out the.
Catalan dairy business in this
country are creating.
Huge losses attentional the
hundreds of billions of dollars
to regain our our trade ability
with multiple countries.
So.
We.
Really.
Desperately need an emergency
management coordinator hi we are
working off of a twenty ten re
written.
Foreign animal disease plan so
we need to add to that important
bill two years ago gave us a
hundred and fifty four million
dollars us being that the USDA
producers state veterinarians
they started with a depot for
foreign animal disease vaccines
primarily put mouth disease is
the one that that there is a
vaccine for you probably heard
about African swine fever
knocking at the country store
it's in the Dominican Republic
it's in Haiti.
Geared up.
Process to try and keep that
they're not allowed on the
mainland
there is no vaccine at this
point for African swine fever.
So.
In this state is three four
billion dollar business from our
point of view Jareth cattle in
their products and beef
industries are the largest
producers within the livestock
industry
yeah we need to plan to protect
these animals sorry we need to
come up with some of these plans
we need to be able to if we
haven't for bed have an outbreak
of foot and mouth disease hi
senator faces a likely ground
zero for to come through because
of the ease of the potential
bioterrorist activity.
So we need to be prepared we
need to be ready we've got
myself into feel better in their
hands.
Data entry person hi we
desperately need the other
positions so that we can cover
the planning have somebody that
can write the response plans and
train on them and then we can do
exercises so we can involve the
better Neri community at large
because anyone of these diseases
hits the state.
We can't handle it as an agency
alone it will be shared with the
government hi with the federal
government and it will be using
twelve veterinarians from within
the state and neighboring states
depending on how widespread the
the outbreak is.
So are you we.
That emergency planning position
is is incredibly important hi
the fix for the issue to get us
caught up I'm reading our our
plans is to fill that position
in we're looking for ways to.
Balance the budget to do so I'm
happy to answer any questions hi
I said wait many hours on many
nights so be happy to have
conversations with anybody at
that point but let me answer any
questions I can for you.
Thank you so much.
doctors Everman we're gonna go
now to committee questions first
we're Representative Crowder and
then we have Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you Mr chairman and our
first question is is for Caitlin
There's been quite a bit of
discussion about pay increases
for existing employees in
addition to hiring new employees
for the meat inspection program
up approximately how much
percent wise of an increase is
being contemplated within this
budget for pay raises for
existing employees.
I I couldn't find it invite into
it maybe in there I just didn't
see it.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Crowder I think
that it was it was not found in
the lame too because I'm I'm not
sure that we have an estimate
from that the agency just in
terms of how many inspectors
date and they are going to be
able to increase the salaries
for so I might want to ask you
to turn it over to a director
garland to see if she has an
idea but basically the request
was
Funded at a level that LFC
recommended a level of funding
you will allow the agency to
begin doing those salary
increases that they deem the
highest priority with importance
placed on targeting them for
it's the highest needs of what
will really depend on how many
inspectors they currently have
that are below mid level and you
know what it's going to take to
bring them up so I'm sorry I
don't have and it's okay so he
was gone.
Thank you
Mr chair Representative Crowder
when we when we did our
calculation for our budget
proposal we come up with
two hundred forty six thousand
eight hundred and nine dollars
and that was an increase of
about ranging from ten to
fifteen percent which I which
again that brings them up about
halfway from the bottom to mid
way to me to the.
Mid section of the page.
A doctor.
Okay so I I I believe I heard
you state was garland approx we
ten to fifteen percent would be
the average somewhere in there
yes Sir okay.
Caitlyn and and this garment.
Are you aware that the state
executive and the LESC are both
recommending outside this budget
process a seven percent pay
increase.
Is gonna send on K. state yes so
I'm asking a question that you
know when you're getting up in
the twenty percent pay raise.
Then it gets to be substantial
but it those are both
contemplate both executive and
LFC are contemplating seven
percent across the board pay
raises for state employees I
assume everyone alive starboard
is a state employee is that
correct.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Crowder all of our employees our
state employees except for a
contract inspectors but they are
right.
I just as a COVID server adds if
we gave them a ten percent out
of our budget and they got
another seven percent that would
bring them closer to the mid
range were CPO is recommending
that we put them.
Okay I I just wanted to talk
about a little bit try to
understand it.
Make sure that everyone is aware
that there's there's the pay
increases in this budget but
there's an outside rate
increases drive but as well and
then my second question for ms
garland goes back to your
Twenty twenty one performances I
noticed that you transferred a
hundred and seventy thousand our
personal services employee
benefits.
in twenty one you know what that
funding was used for.
Mr chair Representative Crowder
I believe our CFO is sitting
right back behind doctors
imminent he can answer that
question for you.
Thank you Mr yes Sir good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee we did that was
one of the transfers needed and
twenty twenty one
We waited towards the end of the
year and if we had any salary
savings we have to move that we
did at the end of last year FY
twenty want to move into twenty
two.
And so we used some of that
money for the move.
We use all that money to pay for
we have a large increase in fuel
as the director pointed out.
From starting from March.
April may June we had about a
fifteen percent of the fifteen
thousand dollar increase in our
fuel expenses due to the cost
the oil prices going up so we
had we had to use that we also
used for contract workers for I
need to do some.
Upgrading our IT department so
we didn't use that money right
away we tried filling positions
throughout the year with and and
we did not fill some positions
and so my bacon we then use that
money but our goal was to fill
vacancies first so
because you.
I appreciate that thank you very
much I I'm curious though I
noticed you also reverted two
hundred thousand which is
slightly more than you
transferred out of the SCG and
I'm curious why you use that
funding instead reverting it.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that two hundred
thousand was a special
appropriation of from two
thousand twenty and so what
happened with that appropriation
is it was not specifically to
help with personnel costs.
Including possible raises the
problem with.
The issue with that special
appropriation as it was
appropriated and
in two thousand twenty so we
have eight in June to spend it.
we could do.
Raises okay and you so nor
unable to use it and and the
agency thought about all the
ways we thought we ended up
agreeing that.
It was only meant for those
races and so we get.
So it wasn't that Mr chairman I
understand was a timing issue
you got the money you did not
have time to spend it exactly
director Lee Alcon wants to
utilize all right I appreciate
that very much thank you Mr.
Sorry thank you very much
Representative Crowder next we
have Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
and I appreciate all of you all
being here today people need to
understand that this is our food
source for the state of New
Mexico and why we were pushing
and I know that Representative
Armstrong was a very strong
advocate in this on getting the
processing plants the inspection
set up because of the federal
lack of federal help here in our
state it's a shame that we
cannot raise our product which
is beef.
For.
Thank you this.
That we can fill out of our
packing houses here they have to
go out of state before they can
come back.
I do appreciate you all taken
the lead on this where we can
have our inspectors be unable to
go into our processing plant so
we can't serve the citizens of
the state of New Mexico with our
product.
Question to that I do want to
point out to the committee but
if we are doing inspections as
far as infectious diseases
going.
These are the people that went
in there several years ago it to
some alright whenever we have
the outbreak could be H. feed
one down there that could have
been devastated devastating to
the whole equine industry of our
state they got that would stop
we're also talking about this
particular stomatitis scabies
ringworm that African swine
fever scares me to death.
We have to be very mindful of
what is going on at our borders
do we want to have to shut down
all of our producers throughout
the state no we don't which
brings me to my next concern
right here where we do have to
go forward.
Right I do raise cattle for a
living most to be although that
it's been really really tough
and up until last year we had
less than three inches of rain
in the seven year span and that
really really hurt but whenever
you go to make.
Reservations to have your.
Being processed.
Packing house in our state right
now which only does that there
is I think there might be two in
our state but there's the rest
of the packing houses.
You have to book seven to eight
months out to have your beef
process.
Well folks can we really afford
to feed a Finnish beef
especially if you bought one
from a for a terrific thank you
can we afford to feed it that
much longer until its process I
don't think so it's it's not
there.
Whenever Mr Davis whenever
you're talking about the cruelty
cases.
This is something else I want
the committee to understand it
was you guys that busted the car
till and that was a cruelty case
as far as equine went because
they were transporting cocaine
and I'm not going to get into
very many details but they were
transporting cocaine inside
mayor's.
That that's not a case of
cruelty to animals I don't know
what is so Mister Davis my
concern question is that my
concern is.
Are you working in conjunction
with the New Mexico racing
Commission and our five
racetracks in the state of New
Mexico
that is repeated.
for banned substances that are.
People not all people folks this
is less than one percent but if
those people have the second or
third offenses on band finances
what are you all doing to stop
this cruelty to that eight one
athlete.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative the sale we do
have and yet have in this last
year a couple of calls from the
racing commission to investigate
not specifically drug use but.
The cruelty and and tied kind of
to that
they go hand in hand as you
noted there and so we we did.
Send inspectors and those
inspectors work with the racing
commission investigators and
just like any other case we take
it to the district attorney and
see if we can get some movement
on it from the district
attorney's office of the the
county that's that that's taking
place and so I can't report that
we had a great success and
either one of those cases but
sometimes the visibility and the
pressure from someone
you know it corrects the action
to some extent Dr talked quite a
bit about a few cases that we
had that involved
some some outside resources that
were at brush tracks and those
horses were were found to be
with our class most this and
some other diseases that we had
to deal with this year to but
yes you're right we we should
work with the racing commission
and we strive to do that.
Mr chairman and so on thank you
very much for what you just said
there but when it would take it
to a District Court sometimes.
That may take it seems like for
free can ever and therefore I do
have a concern.
Mr chairman and and Sean I do
have to ask a question are you
do in any sort of inspection by
the or a buffalo because I know
the transmittable diseases
between that species in the
cattle can be devastating to our
cattle herds and I know that
there is getting more more
prevalent by Senator slash
buffalo herds throughout our
state.
Mr chair representative you so
yes we do inspections the same
inspections we do all beef and
dairy cattle we do have
authority statutory and we do
conduct inspection on bison.
Just as kind of a note that you
know the big ranches that have
provides a really well run
pretty well and we make sure
that you know we're not bringing
any bikes from out of state were
I mean come from but.
Just as a side note USA be sent
rules will thank you just a put
up process quite a few by and
sometimes as many as seventy a
month there so it's a good
industry for our state to.
Mr chairman of I I do have to
plug the.
Does the livestock for because
their work is under appreciated
by lots and lots of people.
But every time that any of our
renters call them they're always
first out there especially
whenever it's inspection to move
a herd of cattle or in the case
of livestock thanks I do
appreciate you all very much and
the hi I am going to support
this thank you.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
So Mr Chairman would you like
for me to give a little update
on the meat inspection on what
we've accomplished this year.
The.
Thank you director garland I
think if you want to do so and
please be brief with me so I
have an additional that agency
but I is this is a clear
priority for the body and I know
championed by many of the
members on here on this
subcommittee as Representative
as I mentioned and so please
give us a brief update if you
would.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee just briefly unit
as you all know we received
fifty five hundred thousand
dollars and special
appropriations so we are in the
process of utilizing that money
I have worked with my HR manager
to create the director for the
MPI program the meat and poultry
inspection program it is
currently being advertised it is
being advertised as a temporary
position if we get this
reoccurring funding I'm gonna
change it to a permanent
position I believe will have
more applicants more qualified
applicants for this position we
are also working on a business
ops position I'm just waiting on
DFA approval for that to get it
advertised as well in order to
assist the director and
expanding this program up so
we've also attended some
meetings and we have be began to
introduce ourselves to the USDA
food service inspection services
our agency under the USDA USDA
which regulates the meat and
poultry inspection programs
so we think that having those
types of connections is
essential for setting this
program up as well we it is
important for everybody in the
legislature to understand that
we do need to fund this program
until we stand up and become
compliant with FSIS we have to
meet nine elements in order to
stand this program up and start
requesting refunds from them
just briefly those compliance
issues are statutory authority
and food safety inspection
systems pre and post mortem of
sampling of to meet staffing
training and supervision humane
handling compliance with our
rules that we are in the process
of propagating of lab methods
and quality assurance civil
rights and provide.
Intial accountability those nine
elements are required and
audited by the FSA has on a on
an annual basis so as you can
see we have a lot of work ahead
of us we believe that we've got
a really good start on this as
well and we're excited to go
ahead and get our rules
promulgated they are at records
and archives at the time being
reviewed of oil we're close to
having those put out for a
public hearing and brought
before a board for adoption.
So.
I'm sorry I'm just gonna just
make one last statement all quit
so just so you know as well
there is a special
appropriations out there for two
hundred seventeen dollars for
our agency this is the purchased
servers which will be an upgrade
which will be required for us to
be working with the federal
government on the meat
inspection programs so thank you
for your time I really
appreciate it we do ask that you
adopt the LFC written on
proposed budget and
we hope to see you all soon.
Excellent thank you director
garland thank you truly at
really an incredible
presentation from you and your
team today reflective of the in
the the work that you all put in
and I think it's a great
education showing us that it
really spans all areas of our
economy also you know going the
the
on the safety side the
inspection side the the what
you.
Mr Davis pointed out in terms of
many of these animal cruelty
cases really shows exemplary
work and I think honors the
increased support that the
committee is looking at and has
looked at in the past with
leadership from anyone's
Committee so thank you very much
with that appreciate your
request for the LFC a
recommendation also noting that
is it.
Higher overall of those lower in
general fund
which is which is a good thing
for us so we go now to vice
chair.
With that Mr chairman of that
option the LFC recommendation
three all second.
It's been moved by
Representative by sure how can
be helped second by
Representative Armstrong is
there any opposition to adoption
of the LFC recommendation.
Okay seeing none.
You we have adopted the LFC.
Thank you director garland Mr
Davis doctors Everman and and
all of your team.
For for being here and doing
what you do every single day.
Not not excluding weekends.
Thank you all can appreciate
your support.
Thank you okay.
We're gonna move to our last
hearing agency for the day this
is agency code seven six the
this is the parole board miss
Allen right and will give a
we'll get us started.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee as stated I'm
Ellen Rubin LFC fiscal analyst
and I am joined this afternoon
by Diego Jimenez the executive
budget analyst for the parole
board as well as systemic sorely
the your executive director of
the Board and I believe of the
chair of the board Abram and I
it is also here with us this
afternoon
while reference you to volume
two pages three forty seven to
three forty eight forty two on
the LFC recommendation at this
time to gonna turn it over to
Diego to present.
The recommended.
yes thank you.
Good afternoon.
Hold on.
Mr met yet the echo please sorry
about that.
Thank you Mr good afternoon as
miss rated San Diego humana's
the executive budget analyst for
the parole board and you can see
on the differentiate the
recommendations are really quite
close with the difference of
only about one and a half
percent
emendation are one hundred
percent general fund and they
both proposed increases for the
agency at the legislative
recommendation proposes an
increase of about eight point
two percent well the executive
recommendation proposes an
increase of about six and a half
percent.
The legislative recommendation
exceed the executive
recommendation by a total of ten
thousand two hundred dollars the
recommendation different and to
any categories first is the
personal services category.
Those recommendations contain
increases to accommodate.
I need insurance costs and they
both contain funds to fully
staffed the agency but the
legislative recommendation
provided an additional six point
six thousand Ford for
compensation increases.
And I contractual services
category the legislative
recommendation and created three
point six thousand team
contracts and administrative
help that the executive did not
recommend.
But.
In the other category are equal
and include increased funding
port per diem due to the
appointment of additional board
members.
And that regarding performance
measures the analysts have come
to consensus on our targets
which you can see on page two of
your sheet.
But that all ended back to
Michigan for further comments or
director excellently for the
agency Madam.
Thank you I have no further
comments at this time so I'll
hand it over to director makes
certainly to make his
presentation thank you.
To me.
There we go we got your
director.
Thank you it's a pleasure to be
in front of you all today to
some like old times I'd like to
thank the legislature for the.
Help you've given us over the
last three years and I've been
executive director standing this
committee back of this agency
back up on its feet I'd like to
think LFC and DFA for all the
help they've been giving us and
it is true that there
recommendations were really
close
we expect except the executive
budget there's no increases in
FTEs and we just want to
reiterate that the agency is
meeting it's for all of it so.
targets but on top of that we've
done things this last year like
Thousands of files in six
hundred and thirty four boxes.
To.
Archives and records that were
stacked in our office it's a
decade worth of of past files.
And we were able in this last
the.
Six months to completely
take care of that situation.
We've in the.
The.
To the new regulations avoiding
litigation we have dramatically
decrease the amount of
Scratches meaning the hearings
that were never held.
Keeping people in prison longer
And
The main thing that this board
we've got a great new board with
new members we're almost fully
staffed on the board and the
main thing that this board is
really looking at is following
the law if you can remember.
In the before.
This.
Administration this agency was.
Announced publicly that it
wasn't going to follow the
law in certain circumstances and
we've turned that around and I
have a great board now
I want to really mention my
board chair Ableman I who you
all know probably better than I
do he's done a tremendous job
With the board and the.
Really that's all I have to say.
Thank you very much director
McSorley
thank you to our analysts.
Let's go we're gonna go now turn
to the committee I see
Representative Dixon for
questions.
I thank you chairman and
Thank you
To I apologize Mr McSorley said
secretary our record direct
thank you thank you
I was just wondering I'm I was
looking at the
scratch data and was noticing
that the Lee County correctional
facility had a particularly high
cancellation rate and I was just
wondering who is actually in
charge of preparing the
documentation for the meetings
is that the prison officials who
is that thank you.
The settlement Representative
yes it is the corrections
department we don't have any of
that information to let supplied
us including a proposed parole
plan and the I I do realize that
there's been a lot of problems
down at the Lee County and the
corrections department to their
credit is taken steps lately to
try to alleviate that situation
it'll take us a little time
before we can figure out if that
has worked or not but they're
working on it in I applaud the
corrections department for their
help you know being one of the
private institutions.
There's only so much the
corrections department can do.
Great well thank you for that
and I'm glad that time you guys
are working on and the
corrections department is being
helpful with that so that was my
only question thank you director
and thank you chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon
I don't see any other questions
so we go to Representative
Hochman Vigil for the
recommendations.
Mr chair at this time I'm of the
executive recommendation be
adopted okay there's a motion
for the executive recommendation
is there a second.
A second Mr chair great it's
been moved bye bye serve Hochman
Vigil stated by Representative
Sweetser is there any opposition
to that motion.
They now and we were gonna adopt
the executive.
Okay committee that that brings
us to the close of today thank
you so much thank you to all
participants I do want to
couple quick notes first to
Representative Ezzell
Representative Ezzell we just
learned about the passing of
your mother in law and want to
extend just our deepest
condolences and really care for
you and your family in this time
you know and just it's and you
our love our condolences and I
know that's on behalf of all the
committee and also all of the
staff.
Mr chairman thank you thank you
very much for the she was a
remarkable woman she would have
been ninety eight yourself last
year
she did quit driving last year
but she loved her college
football and she is going to be
greatly missed by all of us
thank you so much.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Okay.
The.
But and Committee thank you all
for the work today
as we all this that will have a
full committee hearing beginning
at nine AM tomorrow will stay
connected as we work to make
sure that everybody has the
right link for that.
In potentially.
Well just stay connected with
committee as to that some of the
other logistics there with that
thank you all so very much for
being with us this afternoon
we'll turn everybody loose and
see everybody tomorrow morning
thanks all.
