Here.
Right?
Here.
Figure role in it is here.
Here.
Here here.
Okay. We have a quorum. Great to
see everybody. Also wanna note
there's a lot of crimson in the
audience and on the diets today,
so great to see everybody. Um
yeah.
That's how we always start our
HDFC meetings. Round of
applause. Okay, members, uh,
we're gonna go quickly through
things. Uh, And, of course, take
all the time to discuss what we
need to discuss as members are
called This sort of concludes
what gets us much closer rather
to concluding a three week
process where we come in a week
earlier.
Begin work to go through every
single agency with deep
gratitude for the D F a lfc
analysts all of our partners in
the agency's We've heard a lot
of
Different conversations. Of
course, we've had deep deep
input, including from public
stakeholders, who have done
public comment either in person
or online. And today is the next
big step. Their this sort of
gets us into ketchup cleanup,
where a number of items that
members have flagged either
individually as workgroups.
Or otherwise is going to be
addressed before we go to that.
I want to ask Director Sally to
take us through the bar
requests. These are the budget
adjustment requests. Uh,
remember, we've asked for a
little bit more time to go
through these. And so now,
Director Sally is going to take
us through those.
After we go through each piece.
we're going to, uh, ask for and
accept the motion to accept the
work of the committee and truck
from their director. Sally,
please.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman, You
should have two big spreadsheets
and one pager.
For the budget adjustment from
last night.
Um so House Bill two typically
includes two sections that allow
for agencies to adjust the
current year budget, which in
this case would be fy 24, as
well as to make adjustments in
FY 25.
What are
There is provision that will
provide blanket Budget
adjustment authority to move
money between salary and
benefits, contracts and other
costs.
To give agencies flexibility
throughout the year that if
money needs to be moved to a
different category to get the
job done, then they can do that.
Agencies sometimes have special
revenue funds. Um
That will be exceeding the
amounts that you're
appropriating in Section four of
the bill, and in some cases, you
will give them broad authority
that they can increase their
budget to bring that revenue in
up to 5% whether that's through
other state funds,
appropriations or through
transfers beyond that, they need
specific budget adjustment
Request authority, and that's
what you see.
Um, in this packet, and then you
also see some of the guidelines
that, um, staff used when
they're analyzing these
recommendations, Ideally, if
it's a revenue source that we
anticipate and know about,
analysts will try to make sure
that's an agency operating
budget. So we avoid, um, needing
to do budget adjustments. But in
other cases, there's an
anticipated revenue.
Um and you then you're
authorizing agencies to use that
for we usually recommend using
that for specific purposes, so
I'll go through briefly FY 24
and fy 25 and just hit on a
couple of items and then open it
up for questions, Mr Chairman,
So a good example is on Page
two.
Line 11, the Ethics commission.
Receives money from some of the
work that it's doing within MSU
and it needs budget adjustment
authority to bring in this case,
a small amount $5000 into its
budget. You won't see this bar.
Budget adjustment authority in
FY 25 because it's been budgeted
FY 24 is a good opportunity to
allow for some more flexibility.
Uh, normally, we do not
recommend allowing, um, agencies
to transfer funding between
programs. But if it's going to
help relieve the need for us,
supplemental because they're
short in one program, but have a
surplus in another. This is a
good
Method to use to allow them to
move money from one
Category or from one program to
another, and you can see that on
page three line 14 for cultural
affairs.
Mr Chair.
Um okay. So, uh, line tell us
someone I think the line here
This is line 14. It turned the
page. Okay. Line line number 14.
The code is 50500.
Yeah, it's for FY Page five.
R R Line page numbers are
But just well, yeah, turn the
page. Let's go by line number by
number. This is number 14.
Everybody there. Okay. Great.
Go, Doctor, silly. And then if
you go to line 18
Early childhood education and
care department.
This is an example of where the
department is providing home
visiting services. Um
And and family infant toddler
services that are billing.
Medicaid is the third party
payer and bringing that money
into their budget if they are,
in fact delivering more services
beyond the amounts that you
appropriated and Section four.
This allows them to bring in
that extra revenue to continue
getting the job done and
delivering those services.
That covers FY 24. Mr. Chairman,
if we want to move to fy 25
Unless there's stopped for
questions, Mr Chairman.
Is there. Okay? Representative
Luhan and represent had a meal,
so just going back to line 18
for the bar language early
childhood.
The recommendation is
I'm not to recommend Is that
correct? The recommendation is
on the far right. HFC
recommended language. It
supports the department's
request.
Okay, So when we're looking at a
jfc wreck was if you don't see
anything in that box that's not
recommended.
So it says not okay, members.
Look, look, look to just look to
the right. Remember we so we
sent these forms home on
Wednesday.
The recommended language that
would appear in the budget for
FY 25.
Is the support and intervention
program, the early childhood
education and care Department
may request budget increases up
to $1,500,000 from other state
funds to support the families
First program.
If we are to accept this
recommendation, this budget
adjustment requests language
will be included in the FY 25
budget. Correct. It will be in
the hospital to Yes. Great
question. Remember, I think the
key is to look under this far
right column if the recommended
like recommended language will
appear in that column. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Represent brown, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don't
wanna lose sight of an email I
received. I'm not sure if it's
fiscal year 2425.
Apparently, Um uh. Senate Bill
two passed last year. The
governor signed it in April,
providing $40 million. It's
federal money for regional
recreation centers and quality
of life grants. I'm hearing from
my district that they only have
6 to 8 months. Essentially to
get these grants, um, completed
and they're asking for a two
year extension, given the time
frame, so I'm not sure where
that goes exactly. But
I hope we can. At some point.
Consider this.
Mr Chair. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, representing Brown
that would be in the
reauthorization. Uh, portion,
but
Okay, Director, Slick. Keep on
going. So we're on.
Uh, we're we're online. 19.
Let's keep going from here.
Okay, Mr Chairman. I'm ready to
move to FY 25 if you and the
committee are ready so at ask
members any other questions up
to line.
We've got it.
Up to line 30.
Any questions there?
Thing, none. Let's keep going.
Fy $25 fy 25, you'll see a
little bit. There's more budget
adjustment, um, pretty standard
length.
Most of this is pretty standard
year to year. Mr Chairman and a
good example of that is online
12.
Like the retiree Healthcare
authority if their claims are
coming in at a higher amount
that is budgeted in, um Section
four. This allows a bar to be
able to pay those healthcare
claims. We don't have a specific
amount, which we wouldn't
normally want, because we don't
know how much more that would
be, but this allows them to
adjust their budget for other
state funds.
Okay. Thank thank you very much.
So, members. Let's go, Um
Well.
Go through the lines. I'm just
we're not going to go through
each and every line of first.
Something's gotta concert down
there and
ST
Hold on for just a second.
Whose choice of music that was
but thank you. Thank you, Member
Armstrong. Let's go to
representative de la Cruz,
please. So big, fairly new
Fiscal years. 2425 correct
Yes. This this would be for our
FY 25 so the upcoming budget
that would govern that time.
Thank you Just want to confirm
that. Thank you. Absolutely.
Thank you Represent pedigree,
please.
Thank you Chair. And to me,
That's 24 means and in June 20
or June 30th of 25, 5, 25 and so
forth the following year.
Just so I'm clear on that.
And everybody else's.
I am curious about the turn, Mr
Chair and director
Um
From other agencies.
Or other state funds.
Chairman. Does that mean that
they can
Rotate.
From a different funding sources
and they originally had
No, Mr Chairman, this would just
allow them to adjust up or in
some cases down, Um, the amounts
that they would be receiving
from those specific special
revenue funds or from a transfer
that had been authorized by the
Legislature from one agency to
another.
Chairman. I'm not sure that
Um
That truly answering my
question.
And I know that was an attempt
to do that.
Um, but
My concern is
It's it's within a department.
They can pull from another state
funds from a different
department, or it's just funds
that they have available to them
within their own agency. Could,
Mr chairman that they have
available within their
departments budget?
Mr Chairman and director.
Do we have a minimum and the
maximum amount set for every
department?
Is it the same or can it very my
department and agency could
Mr Chairman. The, um
Broad language that I went over
at the beginning. My
presentation limits every agency
to 5%. Whether it's other state
funds or whether it's from
Um, transfers.
Every agency is limited to 5%.
In order to go above that 5%
calculation. They need specific
authority that is outlined in
these many of these line items.
Thank you for that answer. So
Chairman, I think probably
Hopefully, the last question,
you know, on on what The answer
is so if I look like it
What's gonna soon be the
healthcare authority.
Huge budget, federal funds and
everything so that percentage is
based off of the whole part of
pie.
Or just general fund revenue or
just
Mr Chairman. It is based off of
For each program and the
healthcare authority. However
much is appropriated in other
state funds for that particular
program, so one program might
have a lot and yes, 5% of you
know that amount would be in the
raw dollar amount, much more
than, say, another agency that
doesn't have very much, um, and
it's calculated for each program
and for each of those revenue
streams.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, director. So if I look at
the health care authority as a
whole, even though they have
different departments if I read
Other funds.
That means that we could
literally pull from one
department to the next because
there's a parent company,
there's a parent.
At the top.
And so
You may have a different agency
codes within healthcare
authority, But, um
I'm just trying to wrap my head
around. It works, so that's why
you'll see Mr Chairman.
More of the small agencies
asking for, um, specific budget
authority because they don't 5%
is not very much for them.
But if they've got if the aging
department is operating a
conference on aging
And they generate more revenue
that's in the budget they're
able to bring in a certain
specific amount that you're
authorizing for them because the
5% wouldn't be enough to offset
the cost of of offering that.
As an example.
Okay?
Oh, I appreciate that. Thank
you.
Thank you Chair. Absolutely
Thank you very much. For episode
Pedigree Represent Garcia,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman
Charles, and that would
represent just asking you said
5% over.
Of what they're needing on that
bar adjustment, right?
Mr Chairman? Yes. If whatever
amount you appropriated for that
particular agency and program
In other state funds, they're
limited to increasing that to 5%
of that amount. German and
Charles
Who oversees this and make sure
that they're not getting over
that 5% because I had last year
through the communities, you
know, I heard that some agencies
were spending millions of
dollars on
shouldn't be spending, right?
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman,
representative by law agencies
are required to submit a budget
adjustment request.
To, um, the state budget
division at D. F a
Who then also provides review as
well as a copy to LFC for a
review, and we check to see
whether or not that bar is
following the law as well as
whether or not the spending
items that they're looking at
doing follow the intent of what
the Legislature wanted to fund.
Um either DF DFA can deny a bar
and then it wouldn't go through.
LFC can object to a bar and have
a hearing on it. Usually the, um
the raising the red flag of an
objection and agency will try to
work with them to find an
alternative. If there's
something that we think is
outside of what you all really
authorized through House Bill
two.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Charles
I know they're supposed to
follow law. But are they? Yes, I
know that some of these agencies
were spending a lot of money
that donor authorized to spend
respond.
Let's make sure and keep the
zoom off.
Okay. If go ahead, Director
sleep, please. Sure. Yes, sir.
Mr Chairman and then
Each month already.
The the LFC.
Um, gets a report that you all
review every bar that has gone
through for the previous month
to see what adjustments were
made and how they were going to
spend that.
Um So yes, there are multiple
layers of oversight for these
budget adjustment request all
throughout the interest involved
in a crime is nine years.
That's strange.
We don't have any control, okay?
I think we can keep going. It
sounds like there's sort of
sometimes. Yeah, outside noise
coming in, but
We can keep going with that.
Okay. Represent Garcia back to
you, please. Them. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and child, though the
region I brought it up because
you know there's questions that
come up on that and other
expenditures from agencies, you
know, and I just want to make
sure
That everybody has the same
opportunity.
To do what they need to do
without taking advantage of the
situation because you know,
there's a lot to look at. You
know, a lot of agencies are
doing it and you just wanna
little bit better oversight in
that. Yes, sir. Mr Chairman, and
sometimes there can be
Um, an agency could have legal
authority to do something and
spin something a certain way.
But it may not be the most
prudent act and other folks may
have a different
Um
Viewpoint on whether that was a
prudent use of taxpayer dollars
And thank you, Charles. That's
all that. Thank you. Thank you
very much for Tim Garcia. Next,
we're gonna go to Vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Director Sally I have a question
about Rose seven, the state
investment counsel.
Um, I was just curious about the
latter portion of the
recommended language, both from
the request and HFC, which is
unexpected physical plant
failures that may impact the
health and safety of workers or
visitors to the agency.
Yes.
It just seemed weird. It there
was a wannabe request. It's
pretty standard for the
management fees, and I think
they
Needed it for possible.
Changes to their physical plant
where they do business.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Vice
chair, Dixon. Okay, members. Are
there any questions on specific
lines or specific bars?
Okay, we've had the I
appreciate, uh, members asking
to have these for a couple. Yes,
Representative Delacruz, please.
Will there be time and I don't
want to interrupt the
proceedings with some question
that is outside of the
specificity of what we're
working on right now. But we'll
therapy point of privilege of
source to ask questions about
aspects of the budget later.
Thank you, representative like
Cruz? Yeah, we're gonna go into
sort of the meat and potatoes of
our final budget. Uh, catch up
Cleanup so absolutely.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions so I would ask for a
motion to adopt the HFC
recommended bar language.
Mr Chair.
Oh, I would move. The committee
adopts the KFC recommended our
language. It's been moved by
Vice Chair Dixon second by
represent Brown there any
opposition to adopting that
Okay, please show represented
pedigree and opposition. Thank
you, Okay.
Okay. Thank you. Members for
that Now we're gonna go to our
work group.
Recommendation presentations.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. So, then
the next set of documents that
you have before you are in a
package that looked like this.
But so let's hold members make
sure Yeah, it has.
HSC.
With a binder clips.
Here. We got it.
Cool. Okay, Director
Mr Chairman, Um you all for each
agency hearing except for I
think school public school
support took preliminary action
on an agency's budget so that
you can see when we turn to Page
two.
There's a column preliminary HFC
total.
From there you had staff work
with D F a. The agency sometimes
or ad hoc workgroups, um, or
more formal workgroups to say
what other changes need to be
made to this preliminary
recommendation, which most of
the time was the LFC
recommendation?
And so you'll see that
Next column. HFC changes
And so what's documented in this
packet are all the different,
um, suggestions that, um you all
had to bring back to the full
committee to make decisions on
adjusting an agency's budget. So
that's what's in this package.
You'll have another set of
changes that you will discuss
after we finish with this packet
for, you know, additional catch
up cleanup adjustments.
So from this packet, you can
tell as it just an example um,
that the recommendation after
the preliminary action for, um
HFC was to come back and to do
some changes to the courts as an
example.
We can go down to
Yeah.
D F A at 1.3 million.
With some adjustments for their
staffing in internal
administrative needs, and let's
let's stop there. Thank you,
Director Sleeve so members here
on line 29. There's the
Then the change that director
sleepy noted for the addition to
the administrative Office of the
courts.
Above that we see the addition
for the Supreme Court as members
of roll call. This is for
security for both the Supreme
Court and the appeals court.
Which was obviously a very high
priority.
Director sleep Can you tell us
the line for and then?
Department of Finance
Administration here Lines 68.
That's correct, Mr Chairman, And
then there were some adjustments
for
R L D
And, uh, PRC Online's 93 and 94
and Mr Chair members just as a
reminder, Charles said it well,
but, um, these these changes
were all either things that came
out of a hearing or out of one
of the work groups so we can go
more into that. We did reprint
all the workgroup documents for
you as well as the public. So
those are there and I can help
crosswalk those back if we need
to, as we go through
Thank you very much Amanda and
members, so that's sort of
everything that's behind these
initial pages are the work
groups in the documentation of
the work that we all did. And
you all did as members in
conjunction with L. S. C and D F
a staff.
So then, Mr Chairman, let's turn
to some of the bigger ones in
the document for
Child Well being and health and
human services. You can see the
the brief that was circulated.
Amongst folks, but let's turn to
page nine.
And this is the Medicaid budget.
Where about
10 million was added.
For
Uh,
Some of the recommended
increases included, Um, after we
got the Medicaid projection.
Were able to ascertain and you
can see the negative 40 million.
That wasn't an adjustment to the
agency's based budget because
it's running a surplus this
year. That really allowed the
committee to work with the
administration on many things
that were in mutual interest,
including bumping up the
Medicaid provider rates a little
bit higher.
But really also shoring up the
base of the program.
And coming to an agreement that
the growth that was assumed for
DD waiver. Um in the executive
wasn't as much or as costly.
I'm so able to close the gap
there. I think they'll probably
still want to do some in the
Senate. But, um
You know, strong movement there.
There's a much more detailed
Break out of the entire
department on pages, 10 and 11.
The recommendation also
addressed some of their
administrative request that you
had heard both in Medicaid and
in programs support, so there
was a significant there was some
movement to rearrange things and
then add some money. Um, for
those priority things that the
committee had brought up and
that were important.
Thank you, Director Slee. I
represent Montoya for questions.
Okay. Well, okay. Sam Garcia,
please.
Mr Chairman, do we wipe past
this whole page four?
No, we can come back to that. I
think we went to one of the
larger, You know, I just had a
question on on line item number.
165 I think on the Spaceport
authority.
Okay, please.
Mr Chairman, Uh, Charles is to
my understanding at the
Spaceport Authority Lost
Virginia Lactic longer they're
going to cease operations to
Mexico. How much of effect does
that have on what we're trying
to do here?
If Virgin Galactic, um
Broke their lease.
Um, it would be. I need to get
the specific amount, but that's
you know, about $2 million
Because Charlotte came out on
the on the newspaper that they
will seize the operation in
2020 for getting in Mexico. They
put Mr Chairman they put their
wouldn't do it temporarily halt
to operations, right? So once
you do that they're going to be
out of here. So that's a that's
a big issue. Thank you Represent
Garcia. I think in
clarification. It's my
understanding that the least
remains in effect.
And we'll continue to remain in
effect, so I, but I appreciate
pointing out the potential risk
but there Yeah, I think we, uh
The least remains in effect. Mr
German, the digital least, does
remain in effect, but the
paramedic of the fatter is
there. They're not going to be
no employees. They know they're
gonna see. I'm just bringing
that up because you know, the
state has spent a lot of money
and that speech bored and
interest to concern. Thank you.
Thank you very much for Garcia.
Okay?
Um are there additional so
director sleep? Can you take us
through Amanda take us through
some of the other highlights of
some of the work group action on
13 and 14 is the health
department with an addition for
facilities operations of a
million dollars.
Page 15 early childhood, Um
Department.
The staff work together with the
department and HFC staff to do
rearrange within, um lfc.
There was you can see online 53.
Um, movement from
The amount that they think
they're going to need for
childcare systems to move that
into some of their quality
initiatives instead.
And then there's the increase
that's represented here in
general fund is coming from that
year mark that voters approved
from the constitutional
Amendment. That's investment
income that's going up that
flows through the General fund.
And then there's a
recommendation that there's a
companion bill to increase the
distribution for this next year.
Um, from the trust fund that
this department benefits from
and that legislation would need
to pass in order to find those
things you see on the front
lines 51 to 99.
Mr Chairman of a turn your
attention to page 17 Children,
Youth and Families Department.
This continues to be another
good example of where you can,
um, still provide resources for
Uh, really high priority and
needed agencies without building
it into an agency's based
budget. Um
Workgroup looked at this
department's budget and decided
not to increase General fund
from the LFC, but instead
increase money coming from the,
um
Government accountability that
the expendable trust
Um, to help with the agency.
focus on evidence based
practices to help with training
for hard to staff or hard to
place. Kids in treatment, foster
care and foster care and one of
the central things that they've
been struggling with. There are
different types of interventions
out there that have shown to
really help.
Um families that are willing to
take those kids into their homes
be able to manage challenging
behaviors, um, as well as
increasing some of the amounts
that were already in there for
their prevention and early
intervention, spending,
Mr Chair if I could. I'd also
just these. These are printed
front or front to back two
sided. So, um, I just also want
to note aging and long term
services was in this packet as
well, um, that the workgroup
discussed.
And this was another one that
LFC staff and HFC staff. Mostly
all of the staff worked really
closely with the agency to come
to a sort of consensus on what
to add. There was a total of
500,000 added to aging and long
term care services. And, um
A bulk of that. Well, All of
that was both from things that
you all flagged, including
memory care. I know that was a
big issue for the committee. So
that was added in, Um I think
senior Olympics and some food
services was added in so that
all came from the work group and
from things that were flagged in
this committee. Thank you have
historically said Thank you
efficiencies, then on page
Skipping over the page 20 Mr
Chairman. Quick second represent
Allison. You have a question?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Yeah. On
the department of of Health
Page, 13 and 14. Can you show me
where it was money allocated to
the health councils. That will
be coming. Um and then another
set of packets. Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank you
Represent Alison.
Okay, let's keep on going. Page
20 Mr. Chairman. There was a lot
of discussion with the committee
on the need for increased FTE
for labor relations to be able
to keep up with complaints
around. Um sick leave, so there
was 800 added there. This is
another department with some of
those pilot programs are being
funded through the expendable
trust.
Um, for the B pro be proud and
as well as the internships or
apprenticeships
exhausted.
Hmm.
Also, um Charles, I would add
another one in this economic
development sort of policy work
group that came out directly
from the workgroup that we that
we had a couple of days ago or
yesterday was an additional
400,000. You won't see it here.
I think it's on catch up
Cleanup, but an additional
400,000 for local tourism. So we
did note that you won't see it
here, but you'll see it here in
a minute.
Then Mr Chairman, turning to
page 24, the Environment
Department, you see an increase
of 3 million? Yes. So we're on
economic development and
tourism. Amanda, can you restate
what you talked about with what
will be in ketchup cleanup on
tourism.
Yes, Mr Chair. Thank you. Um, I
got a little ahead of myself.
Um, this is a separate documents
and ketchup cleanup, but because
it's in the workgroup document I
wanted to flag something that
the economic development work
group discussed was adding
additional funds to the tourism
Department for local
infrastructure grants. Those are
coop wealth. They're not
cooperative grants there.
Grants that go to local
communities that go directly for
interest infrastructure to
increase tourism to local
communities, So you'll see an
increase from that. Not in here,
but it was part of the work
group discussion.
Mr Chair. I'm just looking here
and there was somebody in there
for national advertising for
route 66. There was quite a few
of us that were concerned about
local route 66 funding going
into tourism. Ah, I just wanted
to that happened or didn't
happen or Mr Chairman. You
adopted that in the specials.
last night, There was an earmark
of language for that.
In the national tourism
Marketing appropriation. Thank
you represented Chatfield.
Okay. Um any other questions
seeing none. Let's keep on
tracking. So the 3 million and
environment I wanted to bring to
your attention just said
Let's skip forward that's
undefined.
To page 38.
This was another one. Mr.
Chairman, where you, um
We had direction to see if we
couldn't rearrange some of the
Corrections Department budget.
Um, but stay within the LFC
recommendation, and so you can
see on line 13.
Increasing funding for or
decreasing the amount taken for
vacancy savings.
They don't believe something
Decreasing the amount, um for
medication assisted treatments,
and that amount seemed like the
department wasn't going to use
it for that purpose. There's
also there was opioid money that
was in other state funds for the
same purpose. Um
That was moved over to Human
Services Department for
Behavioral Health Services.
And then you can see at the
bottom that that's a revenue
neutral movement of bringing
more money up in their personnel
where they still felt they had a
need. Despite the
The high vacancy rates as well
as the virus that we've seen.
Okay. Any questions there on
with corrections? Great to see
that we're addressing some of
the agency concerns within that
sort of rearrangement. Uh, let's
go back, Director Sleep
Sauvignon it. Can we go back on
the, um go briefly through some
of the action around State Land
office.
Energy, minerals. Ah, you
touched on environment and but
can we go back through
Environment department and the
pay issue there, please.
Yes, Mr Chairman.
You can see on lines on page 24
lines.
4, 24, 35 and 44.
Uh, $3 million worth of
appropriations to the 200
category for personnel.
From the General fund.
Excellent. Thank you.
Amanda, if you want Can you
touch on the state Land office
briefly, and this was something
that was done in open committee,
but I think it helps.
Show some of the work.
This is on page 23.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Um, I'm getting my
pages in order here.
Um yeah. So for the state Land
office, this was one of the few
that the committee as you
mentioned in open committee
adopted the executive
recommendation. That was in part
because it's non general fund
revenue and because these were
high priorities for you all. So,
um, I have it on page 23. There
is a very nice summary of what
the executive recommendation
that you all adopted included
that includes an additional over
lfc about 619,000.
For personnel, um, about 53.5000
more for contracts and 33.1004
other costs and this really hit.
um some of the commissioner's
big priorities. Thank you very
much. Amanda. And another thing
committee for us to I think Be
proud of here is that in
addition to going with the
executive rep, which is the will
of the committee?
We raised the performance
targets across a wide range of
areas, whether it's sort of on
the remediation sign or the
revenue generation side and that
really, I think Director asleep
kudos to the LFC staff for sort
of going with, uh, that
performance metric part.
And it's sort of if we're going
to increase funding. We expect
increased output.
Okay any any additional
questions before we please
represent Herndon?
So, Mr Chair, Mr silly if I'm
looking at this document, where
will I see the transfer the
funds from workers of
compensation to workforce
solutions in the amount would be
in a million dollars.
And what line item just had
appear on.
Can you get me to the page
number, please? So the page
number that I'm looking at is
20.
But what I don't see is how that
funding is coming into this
budget.
Well, because Mr Chairman is
coming in as other state funds
and this document is only
reflecting General fund
appropriations. I see. Thank you
very much.
Thank you Represent Brendan.
Okay, let's finish up going
through these workgroup packets.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman, I want
to get you
Public schools.
Would you reviewed very early
on? You did
The specials for public schools,
and this is starting up the
workgroup packet on page 49.
So you've done all the non
recurring items yesterday, Mr
Chairman, and what's remaining
for today is the recurring items
and that's on page 51.
And the recommended change to
this page is only online 27 from
LFC.
And that's an additional 10
million to get closer to the L.
E. S. C.
For targeted flexible funding
through the funding formula for
districts to choose to do,
either C T e mentorship early
literacy or community schools
kind of key.
Um, reform planks that the state
has been implementing in
response to Yossi Martinez. So
$20 million for that, Mr
Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Doctor. Sleep some Sheffield.
So, Mr Chairman, just a minute
ago when I was sitting here I
was handed this slip of paper.
Uh, concerned if the CT funding
was available made available
To the schools that were
innovation zones and
The wording.
I guess the wording was issues
something I'm gonna expert on.
But
I just wanted to ask that
question and
To respond. Get your response.
So, Mr Chairman, um
Those CTE appropriations that in
the LFC recommendation were
spread across different line
items were consolidated into a
single line item and increase to
$40 million, which was that the
committee had won it?
Okay. This year, the
department's been funding a
variety of different CTE
strategies out of the $40
million. You appropriated. Um
and I would anticipate that they
would continue to do that.
So you will give them
flexibility for that, and I
would add Director Sally
representative Chatfield we at
the at the end of all of this
process, and we have always to
go. We'll appoint a small
technical review committee that
does not change Dollar amounts
but can look at some of the
language. We've heard a language
concern that was brought up, so
that's another potential area
where we can address this.
Thanks for playing presented.
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Did we
address Charles? Do we address
the after school programs that
believe the lfc cut that by 75%.
I know there were several
questions about that. I don't
know.
If the after school program
Mr Chairman.
The
Actually, those were actions
that you took yesterday on the
Section five.
For all of those PD special
appropriations.
Okay. I missed that. Mr. Chair.
I think I was dealing with the
migraine yesterday. So you
remind me of, uh, did we
addressed that yesterday? Well,
there's
Um
Tens of millions of dollars in K
12 plus, which is a broadly
flexible
Extended school program that
district could use for after
school programs you in the
specials yesterday Another 40
million was added if school
districts continue to add more
time to their calendars and
generate units. Um so I would
say that it's in in both of
those pots was about $100
Million combined and recurring.
And non recurring for K 12 plus
So thank you, Mr Chair, so they
so a portion of that money is
tied to them extending hours
instruction time portion of it,
but not all of it. Yes, sir. Mr
Chairman.
Gary. Thank you.
Representative Garrett then
represent Luhan some of your
chair and in relationship to
what representative Montoya
said. And what Mr Sully said.
Some of that will do in that
small technical language.
Check. Is that correct? Like on
Section five.
Hmm. We can review particularly
if they're on the language only
we can review that as part of
the technical subcommittee over
the weekend. Thank you. Thank
you.
Representing the time, please.
Okay?
Okay. Lets go,
Sanchez represents Sanchez and
then representative. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Uh, question. Do we do
anything on the Hispanic
Education fund? Finally, I don't
think they have gotten any
funding watches. Mr. Chairman,
Um, that act requires basically
a study to be done annually and
the department we feel is
adequately funded to be able to
carry out the purposes of that
act as well as I think there's a
advisory committee.
Eddie.
Okay, so
In terms of the fund.
They need that study to put
money in the fund.
No, not a fund The act.
Yeah. The provisions of the act
requires study along with an
advisory committee. Okay,
programmatic things that are
necessarily tied to it. I saw
that we put our money into other
Acts. Refunds. Um
I just had a question on that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Sanchez. Hernan,
please. Thank you. Mr Chair, and
Mr Sully. If we go back to page
51 line, 27 that you
Under public school support.
And my question with regards
with respect to the funds,
their entitlement schools, there
was a great deal of concern
about community school
coordinators. So when I read
this, the
Allocation of the funds for
community schools. Does that
include payment for this
community school coordinators?
And which can you get me into
that line item again? Lying 27
on page 51.
Yes, that isn't a
That is a strategy of trying to
get school districts to build in
the operating costs For many of
these two
That is yes. That doesn't pay
for them. Yes, and and that
would be at the discretion of
the school district were trying
to get them to use their
operating money.
To start embedding these
strategies into their overall
operations, rather than relying
on a separate grant to fund
those positions. Okay, Thank
you, Mr Tear, and Mr Sully
deadline does. It also include
for dual credit?
Programs if
If they were
Counting CTE in their dual
credit, So say you had an auto
mechanics or a welding kind of
thing that would be in
partnership with the community
college. They could use that.
Yep.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you Represent Brendan.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Delacruz. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. I'm
Probably not in order of what
needs to be
We're working on, so I'm just
afraid not to ask. I'm gonna go
ahead and do it now chair.
That's okay. Uh, two questions.
Mr Salih related to sexual
assault services. I know that we
increase money for that. Uh, but
is it recurring? That's the
bigger question.
Mr Chairman, Um
In here. There's a half million
dollar increase to CR V C and
this packet and then in another
packet, you'll see another half
million and then you also see
you adapted special
appropriations last night. Thank
you didn't recall that Miss
German and and secondly, related
to ls is they're funny for
Ehlers.
Because last year we were able
to help individually, But this
year we can count the same way.
Mr. Chair representative. Could
you clarify a less? It's a
disease. Okay. Which the which
Department? Mr I'm not familiar
with with any any item for that.
I don't know. We may have to
follow up with you on that. I
believe that there was a
request. I'm not sure that it
made its way here.
So if we could do that we can
check on that. Thank you. Mr.
Thank you. Representative
accrues. Next. We have represent
pedigree, please. Thank you,
Chairman. Um, Director, please,
if we can follow up on
representative Herndon's
questions
I feel like I heard chairman
that we want them to embed into
existing funding.
And and I'm concerned.
With respect to that was
Where they increased within the
SCG or somewhere else within the
the school budget to accomplish
that.
And so that's that's how it was
handled with respect to the
formula.
I just
Whatever we do, I don't wanna
Use whatever reserve school may
have.
So, Mr Chairman. These are new
dollars that are represented on
that table and there in addition
to dollars that you've been
putting into the formula over
the past couple of years, and so
it's creating a growing pot,
where the states saying you
decided the local level how you
want to use it within these
broader parameters, Um four
things whether it's CTE at in
Hobbs, and maybe it's community
schools in Albuquerque.
So
Giving kind of
Narrowing the field of, uh, you
know, being able to provide that
flexibility but within the
funding formula and not having
to have as much money in
specific grants run out of Santa
Fe, it
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Director.
Thank you very much for percent.
Pettigrew, Representing figured
out, please. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I'm going to go way
back to page 35.
And this is courts.
Administrative Office of the
courts.
Yeah.
Line nine We added $1 million
per jury and witness costs and
if I remember correctly, the
request from the court, um
Said there were $7 million short
and court fees to cover jury
costs. So how far is 1 million
going to get them?
It seems low.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Figueroa. That's an excellent
question. Um, as you recall the
LFC recommendation in the
executive recommendation for the
administrative Office of the
Courts were quite a bit apart
around 7 million. I think so.
Um, we had several meetings with
leadership from AOC leadership
from the Supreme Court and the
Court of Appeals, and we worked
with them to get a number that
we could do this year.
So we could still use the last
of those fees and fines that we
know they're going to run out
of, but they still have a little
bit this year. We're going to
add about 3 million in recurring
dollars into the AOC budget,
which is what you should see
reflected on your high level and
then next year we'll continue to
address that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Amanda.
Thank you very much upset.
Figured out, okay. And thank
you, Um, any Let's keep going.
we're working through. We're
working through the workgroups.
They're still in public schools.
Are there any additional
questions?
On our public school support.
Okay. I don't see any. Let's
keep on going. Think that's the
end. I think that's the end of
the big ones that I wanted to
cover with the committee. Mr
Chairman, Okay?
Ah, great. Thank you. Thank you.
Director stlead. Thank you,
Amanda. Thank you members for
great questions there.
Um, are there I don't see any
additional questions, so we'll
go to a motion to adopt the HFC
workgroup recommendations.
Mr Chair, I would move. The
committee adopts the KFC work
group recommendations. Okay,
It's been moved by vice Chair
Dixon second by Robson Garrett
Is there any opposition to
adopting those recommendations?
That again. Please. Please show
represent pedigree and upset
Montoya and opposition.
Okay?
Okay, let's keep on now. Okay,
members, So now we, um
We're going to move to
The uh ketchup cleanup Final
agency review.
Director Sally if you can orient
us, Amanda, Thank you for
orienting Mr Chairman. The
first, um set of line items that
you see are for supplementing
the recurring section four
budgets, which you just did.
And I'll let Amanda go through
some of the highlights here.
And then after that, we'll go
through the non recurring
adjustments to what you adopted
on Thursday night.
Okay? And it vice chair makes a
great point. Let's give a little
bit of a second to catch up. And
we'll, uh this is gonna be the
HFC ketchup cleanup. Recurring
fiscal year. 2025. We're gonna
go through first on
Recurring and then non
recurring.
Mike suited. Let's hold on and
make sure that members have it
if we need
Yes, that's it.
But barely
Asking
Okay, give us just a quick
second. We're gonna make sure
we're oriented. I want to make
sure that every member has a
coffee of what we're working on.
Okay, do we? I think everybody
we all have these sheets now.
What we're gonna do. Members is
go through all of the recurring,
uh, catch up, Clean up items.
And then we're gonna go through
questions.
And then we'll go to the non
recurring. There's a more non
recurring as we would expect, so
we'll probably break that up a
little bit so that we don't sort
of put it all in.
With that. Amanda, please take
us away. Great. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you members, So
I'd like to just start again by
thinking all of you. You all
have worked really, really hard
in this committee. Um, there's
been rearranging there's been
adding, and, you know, it's been
very long days and a lot of hard
work and great questions from
all members.
But we've also worked really
hard. In the interim. We've had
lfc meetings. We've had lots and
lots of meetings. Um, When I
came on in August, we started
having meetings with other
committee chairs to talk about
priorities. Early on, Um we've
had meetings and ideas come from
both sides of the aisle. And so
a lot of what's in here reflects
that, including feedback that
we've heard from you all during
the committee hearings.
So, um, as Mr Chair said, I will
go ahead and start with the
recurring appropriations. So
your first line item there.
Number two is $6 million to the
Legislature. And that is for um,
that is a placeholder,
essentially with the ability to
provide for legislative district
staff, including salaries and
benefits.
As you all know, this has been
something that many bills have
been brought forward for. You
know, the last couple of years
there was a study and a lengthy
floor debate about this last
year. And so this is a starting
point to start to consider that,
um, you know to get staff
remembers especially our rural
members who have a lot of ground
to cover, so that's item number
two.
So so item number three is, uh,
for the economic development
Department. This is $5 million
for a new division to the
department and that is attached
to legislation. Um and this
would this would create a new
department at the agency that
would work with the climate and
energy water initiatives, which
I know has also been a big
priority.
Number four is a little bit more
of a technical one. This is
$200,000 to the Spaceport
Authority Spaceport authority
was one of the few agencies we
heard that actually had a
general fund decrease The
General fund decreased to the
spaceport Authority was about
$400,000. So this doesn't
increase. Um, that agency all
the way to its FY 24 funding,
but it gets them about halfway
there.
1000 politicians. Number five is
other state funds. So that's why
it's in a different column, and
this is to the Cultural Affairs
Department. This is, um this is
another item that has to do with
rural libraries and other major
priority for you all. As you
recall, there's about $28
million in the Rural Library
Endowment fund right now.
But none of that money was
originally budgeted to go out to
rural libraries this year. So
what this does is it budgets
948,000 to get, um each library
about, you know, roughly
$16,000. There's about 55 of
those were libraries, so that's
just to get that money out this
year.
Your next line line six is just
the language that needs to go
along with that appropriation.
Our love This line seven is an
additional $250,000 to the
Livestock Board for personnel
costs. Um, it's been flagged by
many members that the
responsibility of the Livestock
board has increased and their
personnel costs need to increase
along with that. Um, so that's
why you see that here today.
Um, line eight is I believe a
technical adjustment. Charles
can correct me if I'm wrong for
the department of Game and fish.
It looks like yeah, the
department had requested to
spread, um, money differently
that was getting from the legacy
Land of enchantment amongst the
categories differently. Mr
Chairman, Technical
Yeah, And I believe Mr Chair
that the same is true for item
number nine, as well as item
number 10. Those are technical
adjustments to correct in the
bill, where we see those funds
come from
By the same for line 11.
This just removed the reference
to Medicare and the rate
increases that you just passed
for.
Medicaid, behavioral health.
There are a number of behavioral
health services that there is no
Medicare billing code. And so
this provides more flexibility
for you know, residential or
other types of substance abuse
treatment services to make sure
they benefit from the rate
increases as well. Okay. Thank
you, Charles.
If you move on to Page two,
there's a couple more Charles
might have to help me out on
some of these more technical
ones for healthcare.
So this one is just clarifying
on page 12.
The um, health sciences Center.
Um, in the in the budget, it's
assumed they're going to put up
$150 million to be matched with
federal funds that then we'll go
back to the health Sciences
Center for things like graduate
medical assistance.
This is language just
recognizing that it It's enough
money to help cover salary
adjustments for those residents,
Um, in their graduate midst,
medical resident Thank you,
Charles. So moving on down to
line 15 for the Environment
Department. There's a $200,000
increase. Um, this was for an
existing request from the
department.
For software for the Water Data
Act. This came directly out of
the environment working group
this morning. We know that the
water data act as a priority for
members, so this will be
recurring, uh, recurring
increase to the department to
help support that partners
Number 16 for the Corrections
Department is an other state
funds reduction. You want to
talk about that?
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman. This is
just to catch up to the
recommendation to shrink the
amount of money for medication
Assisted treatment at the in the
prisons and shift that to
community behavioral health over
at the human or the healthcare
Authority department.
Thank you, Charles. Um and then
number 17 gets back to one of
the questions we just had We see
5 million or $5,500,000 to the
crime Victims Reparation
Commission that is again
recurring dollars, and it will
go towards victims of violent
crime. That was a big priority
of this of this committee as
well. Uh, Charles, can you touch
on the technical adjustment
there?
Yes. This is just clarifying the
proper name of one of the
research and public service
projects at the Health Sciences
Center at the at U. N. M.
There's a couple of words that
keep showing up in our system
that we can't get rid of. So, Mr
Chair, Mr Chair members That
brings us to the end of the
section four catch up cleanup
adjustments and we can take
questions now. Okay. Thank you
very much. Let's go directly to
questions from someone, please.
Thank you, Mr how many of these
line items are contingent upon
legislation passing this year?
Mr. Chair, Representative Luhan.
I don't have it off the top of
my head, but it looks like
Two or three. Can you identify
those Mr Chair?
Mr. Chair, Representative.
Luhan. Um, we're gonna do this
live. It looks to me like line
three for the Economic
development Department. Um
That's the only one that I see.
Mr. That's the only one
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair was
That
Thank you. I want Yeah. Was this
something that we went through
through interim?
This this bill, Mr. Chair? I'm
trying to identify it. Like
where it came up,
Mr. Chair. Members of the
Committee. Um I don't know that
this specific bill number was
went through during the interim.
I do know that the discussions
about having a centralized
location to do climate and water
activities have been ongoing. In
the interim. Um I also know that
this has been discussed both at
the governor's level. Um and
with many members wanting to see
that
Centralization and especially
through the lens of economic
development.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So is this
a governor's bill?
Uh, I don't know if there's a
message for it represented
Johan. We will have to get back
on that. I have been told that
there is a message from the
executive just don't recognize
this ever coming up, so I'm
questioning it. Um, thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much.
Representative Han Montoya,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I'm
confused on, uh
Line to, um
We the only bill I'm aware of
that even mentions legislative
staff.
Was a study.
That was included in House Bill
One last year. The feed bill
So, Mr Chair. I just I don't
know how this is getting here
under ketchup clean up. This
needs to have a bill for this to
go into this. This is not a I
don't believe this is an
appropriate way for this to end
up here.
Without discussion. The only
discussion we had Mr Chair was
in
The feed bill, and it was only a
minimal discussion as to whether
or not this was something we
should even look into. Um so I
just question Mr Chair. How did
this end up in here under
ketchup cleanup?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Montoya. I do know that there
have been several bills again.
Um, I will also note that there
is existing structure at the
Legislature for year round
staff. That's not in statute.
Um and again. This has been
flagged by many members as
something that
The Legislature is considered
many times and I
I don't think that there needs
to be a bill to do to continue
to use the existing structure at
the Legislature. But I can
continue to look into see if
there is another bill attached
to this. Thank you. So thank
you, Mr Chair, and I appreciate
that. I'm I think you're having
to answer a tough question that
you should not be having to
answer.
This is a decision that was
made
and it was seems to be made
unilaterally.
And that is that is really not
appropriate. This is a big
decision. This is something that
our constituents care about, Um
If we're going to extend and add
staff, like this year round
there at least needs to be some
debate about this. This is not
something that is widely there
was a only thing that that
happened, Mr Chair.
This year was a survey that went
around asking if we even wanted
this, and it was all over the
place. There were some people
who there were several
legislators who stated they did
not want to include more year
round staff. There were other
legislators who wanted your own
staff for every legislator.
Um, this is a wide gap.
And on top of that there is a
specific dollar amount put in
here. There's been a decision
made.
Without discussion, so and
going. Is there a question The
question is, um, Should this not
be contingent upon legislation
Thank you represented Montoya a
couple of things I think we
should refer to first members.
As we know this has been
debated. Uh,
For a while here at the
Legislature. There was
legislation passed last year has
been noted in the feed bill.
Members as well Recall,
particularly for those folks who
are on the Legislative finance
Committee, where we included a
modern modernization
subcommittee that this and other
modernization components were a
topic of the September 28th
meeting. It was presented at the
Legislative Council in mid
October. So this continues a
robust public dialogue.
Uh, Secondly, as was said by
Amanda, there is an existing
structure for year round staff
managed internally within the
Legislature, where the funds are
directed to so this builds on
previous legislative discussions
legislation that's passed money
that's been appropriated for
that legislation.
Continued work in the interim
through the LFC with the
modernization subcommittee,
bringing it into the bipartisan
Legislative Council continuing
forward today, So, Mr Chair
From fire.
So let's let's let's assume for
a second.
That that is all.
Not debatable that that is that
that that that's agreed upon
which I don't believe it is.
We landed on a number here.
Of 6 $6 million
Six. Yeah. Six.
That is not correct. Six. No,
You're right. 6, $6 million
million dollars.
How did we land on that number?
Someone made a decision to put a
number here without debate
without discussion. This is part
of the again the part of the
legislative process. Part of I
would say represent Montoya. The
balance between the House and
the Senate, where in oftentimes
parts of legislative efforts are
shared between our two chambers.
So there is nothing. Um
Unique about the House
appropriations of Finance
Committee continuing work that's
been done by the Legislature
taking work coming in from the
summer with the LFC and working
to have, uh, a budget item
attached to Mr Chair in the week
leading up to the session in our
meetings.
And during our meetings since
the beginning of the session.
This is not been discussed by a
single workgroup once again,
catch up, clean up his work that
we do and work groups that we do
in collaboration.
Once again. This is a number
that is placed in here
unilaterally without debate
without discussion without even
going over which one of the
options this particular item may
pertain to.
This was this was this is why
there was such a debate on the
floor over House Bill one last
year, which was the feed bill,
which was just to have a
discussion.
As to if we may want to have
year round staff.
This I know was not discussed
with Republican leadership.
Koreans where this is a
unilateral decision, which is
what brings the entire
appropriations process into
question when something is done
like this in this manner.
And why so many people of both
parties feel they're locked out
of the actual appropriations
process. When we
Are able to just someone. And
once again, I don't even know
who and it's not. And I'm not
been told that yet today,
someone making this decision to
put this in here.
Unilaterally without debate
without discussion, and it it
brings like I said, it brings
everything into question and
thank you very much represent
Montoya. This continues, ANC
will go back and total up the
hours that we've been meeting as
HFC in Open committee. I
appreciate deeply every single
member for their work in open
committee, which is what we've
continued to do.
As we've committed to going back
question after question, which
makes us a better committee
makes us a better Legislature.
That's what we're doing. Now
That's what we've done, and I
think it's pretty clear as we
continue to go through. This
list will get into the non
recurring portion. The flags a
number of member items that have
been brought up as recently as
yesterday.
That have been addressed in this
ketchup cleanup process. Thank
you, Mr Chair, I I would just
say that I believe this is the
first moment that this issue has
been discussed by this committee
during this session.
Okay. Uh, I'm gonna go to
representatives Sarah Nana, and
then we'll keep going just real
quick. We did have a had a We
had a subcommittee. I believe
that we did talk about this. The
Bieber study. Um, there was a
beaver study that recommended
this. There was a Legislative
council commission that
recommended this there. We have,
um, talked about this. We've
done numbers through when we
were running the legislation.
There has been a lot of talk on
this, but so adding numbers. We
don't need a bill.
As far as we were, we were told,
and we do need staff. I mean,
overall, we did we We pulled all
the all the legislators who
wanted to join in the poll. They
did. They gave us
recommendations. They said what
they wanted, but it has been
discussed over and over again,
and it has been studied by the
Bieber's and Legislative
Councils Commission.
It's not like we haven't heard
this people. Thank you,
representative. Additional
questions Represent pedigree,
please.
Thank you. Chair,
I would be remiss to
Not say something about this. I
feel chair that
Um, representing Montoya wasn't
repeating himself.
And therefore should not have
been spoke over our House Rules
Committee rules. Masons are very
clear he should have been
allowed to finish his comments.
With respect to the way this
House of representatives routes,
and that's the first time
chairman that I've ever seen
that happen here and just be
remiss not to defend my my
colleague, and it wouldn't have
mattered. What side of the
island was,
Um
I will agree with
representative Karen Yana that,
um
This was talked about a lot
during Legislative Council.
The LFC process.
The only meeting that I missed
was the December meeting and as
a non voting member of LSC. I
was not invited to the
workgroup.
To have the other discussions,
so I don't know what happened
inside that.
With respect to this, I do feel
like the report that came out
had three very specific options.
Don't feel I will agree with
representative Montoya that we
don't feel like we've had that
conversation in here, and I
think that would have been a
good, robust conversation to
have on whether or not we want
to put 6 million when I can.
Explain. Come up with 20
different departments right now
that, um don't have money and
supplementals and section four.
Anything that could have used
$100,000 here or $100,000 there
and so some days money with
respect to that.
And how we don't feel like this
is a good number and I don't
feel like this is something that
should be in here and catch up
completely up today.
I do appreciate the process do
appreciate how open we we have
our conversations very much so
that I don't feel we had an open
conversation about this. Thank
you for your time. Thank you
very much for Officer pedigree.
Representative Brown and then
ranking member Armstrong. Thank
you so much, Mr. Chairman. Um,
question for Amanda. I believe I
heard you say that there was
currently a structure for staff.
As far as I understand it. It's
capital. Based for the most
part, could you answer whether
they're currently any district
Legislative staff? Mr Terror in
Canada, Mr. Chair
Representative, Um, you're
correct the current structure
for both minority and majority
leadership staff is based at the
capital.
Um, there is not to my knowledge
District office structure. Okay,
Mr Chair, and I raised the
question because to me, this is
a big big change. Um and I would
really like
To put this question point blank
to my constituents. Do you want
your legislator to have a
district office district staff
and so forth? We have a long
tradition. Mr Chairman of
Kind of doing things mostly on
our own. And for me, that's a
full time job, and I don't mind
it a bit. But this is something
that whether there have been,
you know, subcommittee
discussions or whatever. I don't
believe there's been
A real call for widespread
public comment on this because
this affects a lot of things.
So, Mr Chair. I don't like this
in a way because it is $6
million. And, yes, there's been
discussion.
But I honestly believe we need a
roll call vote of every
legislator on this.
Um, so I would like to see a
bill. Um and this be contingent
on a bill passing, so I
appreciate I know I took the
survey as well. But that's
that's all preliminary. I think
that's not calling the question
on this issue. Thank you. Thank
you Represent Brown. Remember,
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Um, as much as I do
appreciate the thought process
of possibly having staff
Um I too believe that it's it's
an issue for it to be in this
particular area.
Um And and I do, Uh, I do have
concerns I am on Legislative
Council service.
Um, but I don't remember ever.
Voting on a particular there was
three options.
And I was not on the working
group, which other others were
And I just was curious.
Um
If they if there's any idea on
which one they're going to pick,
and it's just wait to me. It's
way too wide open.
In the direction So thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much. Ranking member Armstrong,
Representative Garrett, Mr.
Chair. I understand that
representative representative
had Anna was working on a bill.
I don't know the status of that.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garrett.
Okay? I don't know. If there are
there any additional questions
Representative Han, please. Yes,
Mr Chair. I mean, just in
debate. Now, I will question
again. Line Item three. I don't
know how it got into if we need
to put it in a different section
in our budget, but I don't
understand how it's part of
catch up clean up when we were
To me. It may be clear
clarification for ketchup
Cleanup was for us to go over
everything. We went through
through the budget, and this was
never part of it. I don't know
what this is. I haven't seen it
before.
Um and it says it's hb 237 or
similar legislation. I don't
know how this goes in this
section does it belong in a
different kind of get some
clarification? Thank you, Mr
Chair Directors elite, Can we so
making
Funds contingent upon
legislation is something that is
done.
I guess, you know, represent the
Han this response to the
governor's call, as well as
other legislators call to better
invest in decarbonization in
growing our economy and
Um, those have been very robust
conversations as part of our
natural resources working group
and others respond. Mr Chair.
That's all for debate. Because
this is the bill that hasn't
gone through any committee.
Interim or correct, so I don't
like my question is why is it on
catch up? Clean up? I can
understand it, and I've seen
things in other places. I just
don't know It's my understanding
that we went over the budgets to
catch up clean up from
everything we've been doing for
these last three weeks, so I'm
perplexed because I haven't seen
this anywhere in the budget. Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative. Um so, as you
all know, I've often been
chasing you around to sign
things.
Not, um, ketchup cleanup is
designed for things that can't
make it into the workgroup. For
whatever reason, um, things that
pop up. It's not a typical for,
um, money that is contingent on
legislation to be in ketchup
cleanup if the legislation or
similar legislation doesn't go
through the money doesn't go
through. Um, it's a pretty
typical process, especially in a
30 Day session. It's very
difficult to capture everything
with the limited time that we
have in the Senate does still
have another shot.
Really all of this. Thank you.
Mr. That's the explanation I
need. I need to understand what
we're I mean, That's
Not what we experience in doing
this tonight. I haven't seen
this anywhere or have had debate
on it. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Okay. Um, Are there
any other questions over
representative Chatfield,
please would have been pretty
convenient for me at the time.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Just a comment, Not a question.
I'm gonna stay away from the
process and I'll just say that
I've have not been in favor of
staff because discovery I think
people would begin to think that
that person represented my view.
I don't really know anybody that
knows how I think or knows how I
feel about any certain subject.
So I have a
I have a kind of a Tennessee to
be afraid of hiring somebody to
to speak for me or help do my
job. You know, I need to. I feel
like that. As big as my district
is. It's a driving contest. I
show up. I listened and I try to
represent my people and and I
try to stand up for them and
bring them what they need in the
way of roads and services and
and, uh
I would. I would, uh, not want
someone else to do that job for
me, because that's that means,
uh,
I think they would if they
wanted someone else to do that
job for me. They would elect
someone else. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you Represent
Sheffield. Okay, let's go. Are
there any other questions on any
of the recurring items?
Okay, let's go to
the beginning of our non
recurring ketchup cleanup. I
know this is Let's go quickly
through these. Okay. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Um, I will.
Go ahead and start back up with
the non recurring ketchup
cleanup.
So starting on line two. This is
a $5 million to the Department
of Finance Administration, local
government division for, UM, a
wastewater treatment system in
Dona Ana County.
Line number three There is
Department of Finance
Administration. Um $1 million,
additionally to the law
enforcement retention fund.
That's a piece of legislation
that passed. I believe last
year, um for law enforcement
retention, another Department of
Finance and ministrations online
for, um, this is $5 million into
the Firefighter recruitment
fund. This has been a priority
for
Um, many of our members and so,
uh, the governor's ask was 35
million. There was some concern
about you know what exactly that
went to and in conversation with
you members. We know that there
there is legislation around this
so that $5 million was added to
accommodate for that on line
number five for the Department
of Finance Administration.
You're gonna see a negative $25
million
This negative $25 million is
reducing the Opportunity
Enterprise Fund appropriation
that you all authorized
yesterday. You know, this is
where it gets a little
confusing. But yesterday we saw
a $200 million appropriation to
the Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
Um, about half of that was for
commercial development, and
another portion was for housing.
This committee raised concerns
about funding. Um, the
Opportunity Enterprise fund at a
high
A level versus
Um, existing programs, for
example, at the mortgage Finance
Authority, so this reduction to
the opportunity Enterprise Fund
response to that.
Any online number six. We have,
um, a negative, uh, to the
Department of Finance
Administration. A negative $40
million. This was something that
you also saw yesterday. It's an
additional reduction to, um,
that line item for regional
recreational centers in quality
of life grant statewide.
This was not an executive. Ask,
Um this was in addition for lfc
and, um, this was re
prioritized given that we have
been hearing and understand that
a lot of those grants have not
been gone, have not gone out or
have been requesting
reauthorization. So this re
prioritizes that funding
On line seven for the Department
of Finance Administration. This
is a um language only item.
there was an existing
appropriation for $10 million
for transitional housing. Um,
recognizing needs across the
state. Uh, this allocates 5
million of that 10 million to
northwest New Mexico, where
there are several high priority
projects.
For line number eight for the
tourism department. This came
directly out of one of your work
groups. This is what I was
alluding to earlier 400,000
General fund revenue for grants
to tribal and local governments
for tourism related
infrastructure projects.
Are you for Line nine here for
economic development. This is a
million dollars for, um, a fund
at Economic Development
Department for Climate and Water
Authority Project Fund. This
would be seed funding for that,
Um, which the department is
aware of and excited about.
For line 10, also to the
Economic Development Department.
This is a bipartisan initiative
that has been discussed for
several years, appropriating
$500,000 for local economic
development site readiness. This
would go towards studying what
industrial parks what sites
around our state either need
help, or
Are ready to go for some
economic development projects.
For line 11. This is $100,000 to
the office of the superintendent
of insurance. This was flagged
yesterday and this is for
legislation. House built 33 for
prescription drug price
transparency. Um, this
legislation does have a message
from the governor, and, um, as I
understand it passed out of the
health committee recently with
overwhelming support on both
sides of the aisle.
For line 12 energy, minerals and
natural resources. Um, this is
$10 million. This This is an
existing special appropriation
that you saw yesterday. Um, and
this increases. I believe the
the LFC recommendation was zero
for this. Initially this
increases it to $10 million for
the purpose of contracting and
providing services related to
administration and operation of
programs making low interest
loans. This is also
On a topic of conversation for
members.
Goodness, background check line
13 for the state Engineer. This
was a huge flag from you while
yesterday So there is an
increased in increase of $5
million for Indian water rights
settlement that brings the total
for Indian water rights
settlement to 20 million. If you
recall, the initial LFC
recommendations started off with
five so this is a really
significant neutron ship funding
for that.
Line 14 for the Department of
Health, and this is for tribal
art for health councils in areas
of greatest need. This was
another flag from members
throughout throughout our
committee process and throughout
the interim
Think about this for line 15 for
aging and long term services
again. This came directly out of
what we heard from you all
yesterday. $5 million to the
Kiki Saavedra Dignity Fund for
expenditure in fiscal 2025 and
subsequent years. This is a
major priority for our seniors.
Line 16 for the Department of
Environment $7 million to the
Water Quality Management Fund
for Implementation
Administration of surface water
and Groundwater permitting. This
is an existing This is an
infusion to an existing program
to help build out those critical
programs.
AH line 17, you'll see to the
Department of Environment $2.5
million that is for a geothermal
project Development fund. Um,
both of the next to that you'll
see here are contingent on
legislation. So the next one,
you'll see number. 18 is very
similar, but it's for a
geothermal project Revolving
loan fund.
Essentially alone number 19.
This is to New Mexico State
University. This is $2.5 million
to the Department of Agriculture
for soil and Water Conservation
districts. We know that this is
a bipartisan critical desire for
members for our soil and water
conservation districts.
Going back to line 2200 and
$50,000 to the
Corrections Department for
women's health products.
Can probably 90 days And then,
um, I'll come back to that one
in just a second line. 21 Crime
Victims Reparation Commission is
1.5 million from the General
Fund to the Crime Victims
Reparation Commission. That was
another question. We just had,
um for law enforcement advocates
for victims of violent crime,
and then I'll pause after this
one so we can go over the whole
page line. 22 is
To the public Education
Department. $2.3 million for
dorm operational funding at the
Santa Fe School for Arts. Um,
this has been a priority for
many members. The Santa Fe, a
school for art serves Children
from all across our state, and
that commute that drive back and
forth can be very difficult for
them. This has been something
that a lot of members of flagged
and then I will go back. Sorry.
I know I went over it quickly to
number 20.
To the Corrections Department
for women's health products.
This is something that came
from, um, our stakeholders are
community members and some of
our legislative members as well.
This would provide one time
funding to the Department of
Corrections for Women's health
products. Currently, the
department provides women health
products, but it is frequently
not enough from reports that
we've seen and there is no
offering of a variety of
products. And so this one time
funding
Would sort of pilot how much the
department needs to spend on
these critical needs for our
women inmates and then we can
address it in the one time or in
the recurring budget in future
years.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Amanda. Let's go. First upset of
Garrett represented Pettigrew
and keep on going, Mr Chairman,
and thank you, Amanda. I am
concerned about number 22
fabulous school. No doubt about
it. Um, it's this so that they
can. Students can stay there on
weekends. Just
I was spoken to about that.
Mr Chair representative. Yes, I
believe it's for operational
costs for for those critical
times, and I would add represent
Garrett, in part, the further
because this school serves the
entirety of the state for
students who live far away from
Santa Fe. The inability for sort
of that weekend stay means
they're either they can They
choose to go to this school.
And sometimes their families
have to move from far far away.
This this really does open up
additional opportunity for
students outside of the metro
areas in this corridor to attend
the school, Mr Church. Totally
understand. Um it's a good
thing. I just want us to
recognize that this will be a
recurring thing then because
it's for two years now and then
two years then
And already I have been
approached by performing arts
school in Albuquerque asking if
they can do it, so I think we
just have to. It's that old
dentist. Well, they're not
unanticipated consequences there
anticipate consequences so
Love the program. I've been to
the school great job, but we do
have to consider the ultimate,
uh
Consequences. Just saying
Absolutely thank you for
presenting Garrett,
representative Pettigrew and
then ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you again, Chairman.
Thank you, Director slowly in
Amanda's for sitting up there
and going through all of this.
It's a, um
The, um Can we go back to line
16 chairman and give me the
depth of this because the only
piece of legislation that I know
that's out there right now.
Only request 600,000.
But oh, here we go.
Uh, I I think
I would add to this. You know,
this summer, we toured the
produced water research there at
New Mexico State. Kay Bailey
Hutchinson Desalinization plant.
There's critical work that the
Mexico Environment Department is
part of, including on surface
water permitting, where larger
chunk of funding is pretty
important for them to keeping in
Mexico as a leader within both
protecting our surface waters
and also innovative use and re
use of water, So that's why, um
And I think also going back and
director asleep. You can add to
this we've heard from the
environment secretary that
there's a lot of things they
want to do when they prioritize
the salaries that we just heard
about in the recurring budget,
and so they many of these other
priorities were unaddressed
because their focus was on
employee salaries and bringing
folks up.
Director Slee Anything, Dad.
Thank you, Chairman and that
helps clarify and I understand
the discussions. Um, I didn't
make the trip down to El Paso
because most part of the design
and construct construction
process of that so
Didn't need to see it again. Um
Dangerous. I am concerned
because we do have
Permit.
Out there for cleaning brackish
water. Um, in the northern part
of the state that we can't seem
to get off the environment
Departments desk.
So I'm just curious about that.
The work that New Mexico states
doing in this I think it's great
work, and I had long
conversations with several
members of at New Mexico State
about about this, So I was just
curious where the where the
numbers came from, and I do
appreciate that.
Um to representative carrots,
Point Online. 22. You know when
I went to school if I want, if
if I wanted to use and stay over
the weekend, there was
Um, why aren't the fees just
Uh, great question representing
Pettigrew on this. As I
understand the creation of this
charter school specifically
disallowed some forms of
funding, including utilization
of the school equalization
guarantee for these sort of
purposes over the weekend. So,
uh, thinking answer in this
school was brought online.
Um, sort of, even as or right as
we are getting into the great
recession.
Where it was very difficult for
any new fundings, um, sources to
be utilized. So there it seems
like the agreement for the
creation of this charter school
depended on sort of restricting
their funding. If I and I'm I'm
I'm sharing my knowledge and
understanding which
To the degree that it's accurate
and do appreciate that answer.
Chairman And so would that be
the reason why it's in non
reoccurring because maybe
there's going to be an attempt
to redo the charter. Mr
represented pedigree. I think
that's part of the thinking is
to look at other, more
sustainable ways so as to
represent Garrett's point. It's
not something that comes before
the entire Legislature every
year. That's right.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay. Ranking member
Armstrong, please. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I was curious how much
money is in the Firefighter
Recruitment fund. Do we know And
don't they take a portion of
the, uh, premium tax?
This is not the fire protection
find. I think this would be a
new fund that's being proposed.
It's my understanding for a
different purpose than what the
Fire Protection fund is used.
Okay, So this is a new fund.
Correct? Yes.
Okay. And then that's my
understanding.
Okay. Thank you for that. And
then, um
One of some of the language, um
like like line 11 where it says
for house Bill 33, or similar
legislation is that typical
language to put or similar
legislation. Mr. Chairman,
Representative? Yes, that is
standard language. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Ranking member Armstrong.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Brown, then representing Johan.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um I'm
going to go to line six. And
this is regarding of $40 Million
and I appreciate the
clarification I received from
the chairman here so and since I
raised this question earlier, I
thought I'd just amplify a
little bit. So this is looking
at fiscal year, 2025 and, um,
zeros out anything that would be
given in 25, but for 2024
There's still the possible
There's still 40 million. And
that is, we hope going to have a
deadline extension. So just
clarifying that, Mr Chair?
Absolutely. You're exactly
right. And then, Mr Kerry, do
you have a question regarding
line 20? This is for the
Corrections department.
$250,000 for women's health
products, and I'm just curious
to know Mr Chair.
Amanda, if you can tell us what
is included in the phrase of
women's health products, and we
don't have to go into too much
detail here. But I'm taking it
sanitary items Would that be
correct? Mr Terror, Mr. Chair
Representative. That is correct.
Yes, I have to ask this
question. But Mr Chair does that
include a border efficient
drugs? Mr. Chair, Representative
Brown.
Not to my knowledge, but I can
double check on that definition
for you. Um, Yeah. Mr Chair and
Amanda. So corrections $250,000.
That's a lot and that's for
every woman inmate in every
prison in New Mexico. I take it
I? I just I just think that's
really high. So I for that
reason I'm just a little, um,
funneled, I guess be so much
anyway. That's it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much
represented Brown resemble a
home, please. Yes, Mr Chair. I
just wanted to get back to the
firefighter fund.
That that bill did pass the fund
passed through.
Session last year and was pocket
veto teens back now and
Because it was unfunded.
Last year. So now it's there's
some funding for so I just
wanted to, um, say that and also
wanted to ask Mr. Chair, um,
line Item five with reduced
We reduced the opportunity
Enterprise volume fund
appropriation by 25 million.
Bringing the million bringing it
to 175 million.
Just language reflects 100
million to four.
For commercial enterprise
development projects and $75
million for housing development
projects. I just again for
clarification, too, if this bill
doesn't pass, and we are does
pass, and there's an amendment
changing language, and we have
this language. Do we just adjust
it in the Senate? Or how does
that work, Mr Chair?
Thank you.
Mr. Chair representative. Um,
typically, if funding like this
is tied to an appropriation, and
the appropriation doesn't pass.
Um, yes, the money it's would
not. It would not go to the
department. Um, there is ability
in the Senate side. You know,
for whatever reason, if the
legislation looks like it's not
going to, They have full ability
to change anything in this.
Thank okay. That's that's what
I'm wondering. I just
But it's the language changes it
off. From what we have here. We
just adjust it. I guess I
understand the the finance part
of it. It's the language part of
it. Mr. Chair, representative,
Um we don't know what the Senate
will do. Um, so what we try to
do is keep a close eye and
listen in.
And be in contact with them over
there. There is an opportunity
once they make their changes for
us to revisit the bill. Okay,
before we passed, that's when it
happened. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you very much represented Luhan,
Vice chair Dixon or actually
represent figure out, please.
Thank you, Chairman. My question
is about
Line 14. I'm going to take a
page from representative Allyson
and say this is the tribal and
community health councils right
Life 14 line. 14 Yes, is for the
health councils in areas of
greatest need. Yes, My question
is about the language of
greatest need. So this is for
some health councils and not
others. And is it the D O h.
That will be determining where
the need is.
Thank you, representative
director silly.
Mr Chair. Yes, that's correct.
Represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I like to
look at line nine again.
It's um, a million dollars. It's
for a climate, energy Water
Authority Project fund
contingent on the ACT Enactment
of House Bill 237, or similar
legislation of the first session
of the 56 lessons, and I think
that ship has sailed has it not?
Representing Brown. That is an
excellent catches. We rely on
you to do. This will be
something that we need to take
up in the technical Adjustments
Committee. That should be the
second. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Mr Chair. On that point. The
same problem as in the previous
page. Thank thank you for
flagging.
Kate. Uh, are there any other
questions on lines one through
22 Page one.
Alison,
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm going
to refer back to line 14 again
for the health councils.
The description, the language
says for Health Council in areas
of greatest need.
All 14 kill health councils are
areas of the greatest need.
Let's take that language out.
Double that of mouth.
Then we'll take care of all of
them. Thank you Represent, were
we start? We've we've funded at
least half of our share here and
appreciate we wanted to make
sure that there was priority
given for the most rural areas
where some of that where we've
heard testimony that health
councils are in the greatest
need.
But here are your point. I think
we've for the first time this
committee is committing
significant funding to Health
Council. Perfect taken from
okay. Vice Chair, Dixon. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Um, I wanted to
flag um, line 13 and just make
note of my appreciation.
That we have increased that I
think that's a sizable amount
That will certainly, um, drawn
notice of our federal partners
so that they ensure that so they
know the state is serious about
the Indian water rights
settlements. And then, um, we've
sort of been over this. Um and I
appreciate the clarification
from representative Luhan for
line four, but I didn't know if
that, um, line needed to have
contingency language as well.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon
or vice chair, Dixon. That's a
great point. I think this will
be another one. Charles and I
were just saying that we'll look
at for technical review.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Okay, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. No
question. Do you want to see?
Uh, thanks for the committee
for, uh,
That was representative Dixon
just said on the on line 13 and
also online seven for US
supporting shelter for
Batter women in Mexico,
especially there's a big need
northwestern New Mexico from we
handle a lot of native American
around us that are having the
same problems. Thanks.
Absolutely. Thank you Represent
Garcia. Okay, let's go on to
Page four.
This is gonna be lines 23
through 33.
Director sleeping on it. Yes,
sir. Mr Chairman, So the first
one is for the, um panic buttons
in public schools.
Line. 24 is a reauthorization
for the, um
For the oversight of Mesa lands.
Um and then
line 25 and 26 or technical
nature. It's moving this
osteopathic medicine.
Project from
MSU to the higher Ed department.
The next line is a would be a
new project through FY 27 to
help, um with implementing
existing livestock, Um, Mexican
Wolf compensation program
through New Mexico State.
The next one will be New Mexico
States online, UM, program and
then an extension for the
reforestation center
appropriation that was made
Um public health dashboards at
New Mexico Tech.
Security improvements it
upgrades and other
infrastructure uses and northern
And then lines 3233.
And if you wanted to bleed into
Page five, these are all
technical. Um, either there was
a Riaz that dropped out from the
it recommendation or there's
technical drafting changes for
Riaz I T projects through line
40
stop there.
You got pretty street. Thank you
very much. Direct your sleep.
Are there any questions on those
projects? I want to thank you
represent figured out, please.
Sorry, Mr Chair, 31. Why isn't
that one capital outlay
combination? These are for, um,
items that are kind of in
between.
Jefferson Hambleton, major
capital outlay and and heavy
maintenance.
So there's appropriations, for
example, for building renewal
and replacement and higher
education institutions, and this
is this is those types of as
well as I T upgrades, and this
is a similar type of approach.
Thank you very much upset of
Armstrong said Brown, please
Are we still in the first
session somewhere, Mr Chair? No,
No, we're good. Um, so I believe
this recreation center
appropriation is in D f A. And I
don't see any link. My still not
looking in the right place
for the previous appropriation
that needs to be reauthorized.
Uh, that will have to
That has not been flagged yet
for ketchup cleanup, but that's
a technical adjustment that we
that thank you for bringing it
to our attention here. Okay, so
we won't see it on this sheet.
Okay? We have. Yeah, Go ahead.
Thank you. I I hate to keep
bringing it up or stop. Thank
you for flagging. It's
important.
Okay, Um
Let's go on, then to Page three.
Um, Page five, Page three or
four Gonna be lines 30 for
Through 40.
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman, And these
are all just, um reacting I T
projects.
Uh huh. And changing the
technical language they see
underlined. You've already
authorized the reauthorization.
These are just coming back,
making sure that statutory
references are correct. Great.
Thank you very much. Director
Sally. My correct. Are we on the
final page on the final page, Mr
Chairman?
This is the we put this language
in both the package that you
just adopted and we put it on
this one, too. This is
representative Brown suggested.
Language for the
Um
Community college and regional
university workforce item.
And then, um, Mr Chair if we
want to close out, um, line 42
to the Department of Finance
Administration, you'll see a
negative $50 million that's
reducing the General fund
appropriation to the government
Accountability and Improvement
Trust fund by $50 million and
I'm gonna skip a little bit
ahead. But just so we're kind of
keeping track if you move down
to line 45. You'll see that same
$50 million
As an increase to the Department
of Transportation for Major
infrastructure road projects,
including heavy maintenance.
That was a huge flag for members
yesterday. Um this is this is a
direct, um this is a direct
result of what we heard
yesterday when we heard House
Bill three. And, um from chair.
Hawkman, be hell.
So I think there's just two more
here.
So line 43 also to D F A adds
$7.5 million and this is another
alluded to this earlier. This is
another thing that came directly
out of yesterday's special,
supplemental and efficiency
hearings. There was concern
about appropriating funds to the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund,
versus um you know the the funds
there at M F A. And so this
Add some more money back into M
F a $7.5 million, bringing the
total transfer to that program
to $45 million.
Um, lastly. Yeah, that's a
technical, And so, um, this last
one is part of the
Workgroups work on the
healthcare authority. Rather
than sending this surplus money
That's in the
Tobacco Program fund its
budgeted for use in this year's
Medicaid budget.
And so we needed to take out
that transfer in the back of the
form.
Three.
Okay, let's go for questions
first. We're going to go to
represent Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thanks for the presentation has
been wonderful of all the
adjustments were made, and I
want everybody to hear to this.
I think one of the most
important ones was
Transportation Department.
To, uh, put the up that budget
because you know our roads our
lifeline to the Syrian Mexico
and this speech for our kids and
the economy. Thank you, Mr
Chairman for doing that. I
really appreciate it. And I'm
pretty sure everybody New Mexico
appreciated. Thank you.
Absolutely. Thank you very much
represented Garcia. And thanks
to you, and so many of the
committee members for their
advocacy
In that area.
Um
Any other any other questions
from committee members? I don't
I don't see any questions. We
don't have We
Okay? I don't. I don't see any
questions. So members think
that's gonna anything to add
director slowly before we sort
of wrap this up? No, sir. Mr.
Chairman, I'll wait for your,
um, call for a vote. Okay. Okay
members, So we went through a
lot there. As always. I deeply
deeply appreciate everybody's,
uh,
The discussion. What we bring to
this table members. I think
we've seen the ability that this
committee takes to adjust based
upon. Uh what folks share our
feedback we've implemented. A
number of things, including, um,
the public comment and other
things to, uh, to try to sort of
The end of the day. It takes a
little bit longer and probably
keeps us here longer, But I just
can't say how appreciative I am
truly for everybody's input
patients and what you bring to
the committee and we see all
throughout this, particularly in
ketchup cleanup. Really strong
recommendations work that the
committee has brought and I just
want to say thank you.
Uh, I see Represent. Garcia has
final comments before we go for
a vote. Um, thank you, Mr
Chairman. I want to committee
and all that. You know, the
Veterans department was kind of
punished for unaudited 2019 and
what I would like to do,
Charles. I don't know who could
do it. Mr. Chairman is how do we
take care of that problem
because it's going to be there
next year.
You know it hurt him this year
hurt him a lot this year
committees for several years
now advocating for hold on one
second to make sure that we can
continue back to law
enforcement. That's easier
They go out of states and it's
really been very regretful, and
people want to return the work.
There are many, many people that
can help us with the shortage
that we have. And so DPS. We
stand in strong support of this.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Maybe Mr
Secretary from the Department of
Public Safety
Okay, uh,
I So we've okay.
Um
Rob seven. Garcia, Please
continue. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Charles, You know, we
really need to look at this
problem has been lingering
around in 2019, and I don't know
why somebody hasn't taken care
of that problem date.
Because, like this year they
lost $881,000 off their budget
because of the bad audit, and we
really, really need to address
it.
I know it's too late this year.
But if we could work on it
somehow or somebody Mr Chair to
take care of that problem from
the turnaround Because we're
not. We're gonna have the same
conversation next year. Thank
you. Thank you very much,
Garcia, representative, Vice
chair, Dixon. Thank you, Mr
Chair, I realized
Ah, we're finishing up. My voice
changed. Um and the I just want
to flag for for staff for
technical corrections.
Um, line 17 and 18 for
geothermal projects. Uh, those,
uh, that funding perhaps needs
to go to M nerd.
As opposed to department of
Environment. So if we could
check that, um and have it on
technical
If that's the case, Thank you.
Thank you that that look ahead.
Let's go ahead. Uh, with that, I
want to ask for a motion to
adopt the House Appropriations
of Finance Committee catch up,
cleanup, recurring and non
recurring recommendations.
Still moved.
Okay. It's been moved by vice
Chair Dixon second by
representative sorry, Nana, Can
we miss Rodriguez? Can you
please call the roll?
Well, actually, uh, let me ask
this, uh
Set that aside. Is there anybody
in opposition to adopting the
house recurring and non
recurring ketchup cleanup, Kate
Please. Oh representative
pedigree in opposition.
Okay, now members that what we
were talking about with the, um
the we're gonna appoint a
technical advisory committee.
This is in director sleep. You
can explain more, but briefly.
This is a committee that's going
to work on any technical
changes.
That need to be made. These will
be minor technical changes, they
may change where something goes
or some of the structure around
that they will not change that
amount. Uh, in these will, um,
be flagged for us when we come
back to consider this budget on
Monday.
Okay with that. I'd like to
appoint representative ranking
member Armstrong.
Uh, Vice chair, Dixon.
Uh um.
Representative Han
And also serve as ex official
and also representative Brown,
please, Because we represent
Brown. We appreciate your
attention to the details.
Okay?
Uh, with that members, I think
Director sleep. Amanda. Is there
anything that you'd like to add?
No, thank you. Mr Chair is gonna
It's been a lot of work for this
last three weeks from you all
and I appreciate it. And I
appreciate all the grace that
you've given me and my first
year and I look forward to the
next two weeks with you. Thank
you.
Amanda. Thank you very much.
Director. Sell it to the LFC
staff to L. E. S. C, R d f a
colleagues. All who are here
members? Especially very big.
Thank you all.
