Representative Herrerra here
Representative Hochman Vigil
here.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Sarinana there.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Here.
By small.
Here.
Chair Lundstrom.
Quorum thank you thank you
I appreciate that I do
Wanted to ask Representative
small before we start taking up
our our bills if you might have
an announcement based on
activities from last evening.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair committee the last night's
Spirited and the and well
engaged committee
Pool regarding when the session
would be gaveled it's actually
madam chair and committee when
we did plus or minus closest to
the the starting time we have
Representative Allison
Representative Allison who came
out only two minutes away from
the final gavel so madam chair
committee there was a lot of
conversation.
Representative Allison all great
congratulations Representative
Allison thank you madam chair
it was a wild and crazy night.
And he was leading the pack.
Anyway well congratulations
Representative Allison and many
payday bars will be coming your
way.
I'm
already with that and jump into
the agenda our first bill is
house bill one thirty four
family friendly workplace and I
understand that that one is to
be tabled and I I'd go to
Representative lane for the
motion please.
I think you may be on mute.
No sorry we're we're not able to
hear you.
Madam chair yes R.
Representative Hernandez is in
the are you an additional
meeting right now that that's
his bill one.
Madam we can hear you now
I don't see in the in the bill
madam chair.
Yes I just wanted to come say
good morning and thank you for
being here sure for a few
seconds to hear my bill but
please Representative Lane.
Make your motion well I'll tell
you what since you're here I
didn't know that you're here why
don't we just let you say a few
words of that we're going to go
to Representative lane for the
motion to go ahead Sir.
okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee
H. B. one thirty four
appropriates three million
dollars from the general fund
for a.
to the workforce solutions
department to establish the
family friendly workplace
incentive program the purpose of
the program is to encourage
small business employers to
adopt and implement workplace
policies including those
concerning paid leave health
support work schedules and other
economic supports.
as the legislature continues to
find ways to support both small
businesses and employees it's B.
one thirty four proposes an
innovative approach to support
both instead of a one size fits
all mandate that will add
additional cost to small
businesses especially during a
time when many are struggling to
keep their doors open H. B. one
thirty four create a program to
provide financial incentives.
To adopt family friendly
policies in order to support
small businesses they want to
provide to their employees but
because of financial constraints
are unable to do so.
Madam chair in respect of the
committee's time and with the
budget already passed in the
house I asked that the committee
please table this bill.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative for the for the
overview and and I I appreciate
your understanding that because
it's not in the budget and it's
not in house bill in the junior
bill we're not going to be able
to to let this go so let's go
Representative lane thank you
madam chair so with that I would
move the house bill one thirty
four is the tables all right we
have a second.
Okay we have a second
Representative Ezzell is there
any opposition to that seeing
none your bill's been tabled
thank you Sir thank you madam
chair members of the committee
all right next to his house bill
one ninety one.
And that's the ombudsman bill I
see Representative Maestas go
ahead Sir thank you madam chair
on the members great to see
everybody.
This is a house bill one hundred
ninety one along with the.
Representative got Madam OD
Representative Chasey about a
ten to one vote in Judiciary up
and what this does madam chair
isn't seeking appropriation of
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars to create independent
ombudsperson Office of integrate
independent oversight of our
department of corrections are
department of corrections is
upwards of three hundred fifty
million dollars multiple sites
and is the most attached to
nobody's fault the most attached
agency to to the legislature to
appropriators others numerous
lawsuits involved in the O. C.
the culture remains the way it's
been for decades and we think
that without if we joined the
majority of states in this
country and have ombudsperson
office that can receive
complaints that can deal with
our problems and solve problems
that we can ultimately cost cut
millions of dollars in costs
without all of.
Pass it to a.
The prime sponsor in thank you
madam chair and for a brief
comment Representative go ahead.
Chair just thank you for your
consideration we believe this
independent oversight is part of
a path to a more responsibly
and managed budget and outcomes
for the corrections department
thank you madam chair.
Right is there anyone else.
Bill that's in the audience or
something that might be tied to
this bill.
Your muted.
Not that I'm aware madam chair
okay thank you so we don't have
anybody in the in the wings on
the house
wanted to let the committee know
that I've been doing a little
snooping around on what we think
is going to be in house bill two
coming from the other side
across so I think this is one of
the situations like we had with
one of the pre for two of the
previous bills that we've had
that they need the language kind
thank so we're gonna strip the
appropriation and move this out
I need somebody to make that
motion to amend this bill and
tell us how we're going to amend
it.
Thank you madam chair I would
move HSC amendment proposed
amendments to strike the
appropriation madam chair
committee on page one line
twelve we would strike making an
appropriation and madam chair
committee on page fifteen we
would strike section nine in its
entirety.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second.
A second madam chair okay we
have a motion and a second any
opposition to that motion.
Saying now I'm back on the bill
we have opposition
Representative Crowder you want
to ask a question.
Okay here I see your lips moving
in your hands move in but I
don't hear you.
Thank you madam chair now my
comment was on the bill thank
you I'm sorry okay all right
we're on the amendment we have a
motion and a second I don't see
anybody in opposition to that so
the bill's been amended.
Let's go back on the bill
Representative Crowder did you
have a question on the bill.
We have your your muted.
I don't do very well on Saturday
mornings baby
Madam chair I just noticed that
many of us to but.
We're with you this is a
recurring expenditure and and
I I don't know that I fully
understand that the need for an
ombudsman and in this process so
I just have a concern about it
thank you thank you very much
anybody else.
So we need a motion please
Representative small Madam chair
of the move do pass on house
bill one ninety one as amended
second.
As amended.
Okay we have a motion OK
Representative Herrerra is for
the second is there any
opposition to that.
Okay we have
Chatfield Representative Ezzell
Representative Crowder is there
any others Representative Brown
Representative Lane is there any
others that are in opposition to
this motion.
All right I think we've got all
of got all of us noted on this
vote so thank you very much
thank you Representative for the
bill you have a due process
amended.
Right bye bye thank you madam.
Thank thank you let's go next to
your house bill one twenty two
the representative Armstrong go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair and first
of all I would really like to
thank you and vice chair small
for working with me on this I
know we have an amendment as
this morning our house bill one
twenty two creates a fund that
allows us to making health
insurance more affordable for
individuals and and we hope
small businesses it
under the affordable Care Act
the federal government was have
a C. on insurance companies that
has stopped if they're not
collecting that fee this year so
this adds the equivalent to our
existing one percent surtax and
the the the amendment helps
clarify how the how the funds
will get distributed how that
that tax revenue we'll get our
distributed between this fund
and the general fund the tax
would start in twenty two that
program was started twenty three
calendar years and and then we
would with the amendment make it
clear that we would be providing
actuarial and OSI would be
providing actuarial analysis as
we go along and in future in
part LFC a program evaluation
and futures weekend then figure
out what's the right
distribution to maintain the
programs.
With that I stand for questions
okay I want to talk about the
amendment also so the public can
hear that if they want to
comment on on the amendment so
I'm going to have Representative
of small move the amendment for
discussion and he'll talk about
the amendment and then we're
going to go to the audience
Representative small thank you
very much madam chair madam
chair committee I would move and
House Appropriations of finance
committee amendment to HB one
twenty two madam chair committee
it's point two two zero four
seven five point four Madam.
This amendment does a couple of
things madam chair committee
first what it does is it ensures
that the affordability fund to
support New Mexicans getting
insurance on the health exchange
is able to have the necessary
funds to begin that with so
madam chair committee it begins
with this breaking down the
beginning with fifty two percent
of that of the proposed surtax
going to fifty five percent
madam chair committee that will
ensure that these funds
Twenty two to the affordability
fund giving them the opportunity
to help insure tens of thousands
of New Mexicans madam chair
committee at as I continue
through the amendment when we
get to July one twenty twenty
four the breakdown of the bill
the thirty percent will then go
to the affordability fund given
that will it will have built up.
Significant fund balance in
order to help cover tens of
thousands of New Mexicans madam
chair committee that thirty
percent which will then go to
the affordability fund I mean
seventy percent will go to the
general fund and that
insurers that there is
sufficient funding to cover
the premium the.
The Medicaid premium increases
as well as madam chair committee
retain flexibility at and for
the probation bodies in this.
In the legislature madam chair
committee briefly as I go
continue to go through it we
insert the office of the
superintendent of insurance as
chair Armstrong mentioned
very importantly the
superintendent of insurance will
work with the legislative
finance committee coming every
year to
This is the from the amendment
provide actuarial data from the
health care affordability fund
to the legislative finance
committee.
That on July one on or before
July one twenty twenty five the
legislative finance committee
will conduct a program
evaluation to measure the impact
of changes to the health
insurance premium surtax and I
will.
And the affordability fund so
there will be yearly reporting
on this madam chair and
committee program evaluation
and.
Soon.
Make sure and mute sorry
Madam chair committee
as chair Armstrong mentioned
another piece of this ammendment
we are in charge inserting the
words to reduce premiums for
small businesses and their
employees purchasing health care
coverage in the fully insured
small group market.
This is allowing the
affordability fund the
flexibility and giving it the
structure to support and work
closely with small businesses in
order to
Help cover small businesses and
their employees venture
committee I'm almost finished
the superintendent in
consultation with the secretary
of Human Services secretary of
taxes taxation revenue and the
chief executive officer of the
medical New Mexico health
insurance exchange again shall
work with the legislative
finance committee
to read full to develop and
report on performance measures
related to this fund.
Madam chair committee just to
summarize this based upon our
amendments this will have no
negative general fund impact
including beginning in FY twenty
two while it will madam chair
and committee help ensure
sufficient funds go to the
affordability fund to stand up
this important program helping
New Mexicans receive insurance
coverage and through its
additional supports to small
businesses and the effective
date beginning on January one
twenty twenty two this
ammendment again protects our
general fund supports the
affordability fund and includes
incredibly strong reporting an
actuarial work to ensure that
this program is measured
regularly repeatedly and can be
adjusted accordingly thank you
for indulging me Madam chair for
that additional time and I would
move that amendment for
consideration
we've we've gone through the
amendment everybody's heard it
so I'm going to allow for
audience comments briefly one
minute and I just wanted to
remind the committee on this
bill this is not an entitlement
I mean that was an incredibly
important piece for me to
understand this is not an
entitlement this program has to
stand on its own.
And every year when these
actuary actuarial reports come
back if it's not standing on its
own it will it will be funded as
we speak as we structured it for
the first few years so with that
being said I know that we
probably have a boatload of
people that want to say
something
why don't we start with those
folks that are in support of
this bill Mike I guess you'll be
the one that brings a man and
the and representative of small
will keep some time on it where
we don't want to have lots and
lots of discussion we want to
hear your point and so we're
gonna allow for about a minute
so go ahead my cruise first.
Okay madam chair will start with
the C. O. bond Kilbride please
go ahead.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes yes.
Thank you a good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is chiffon
Mexico pride and I on a small
family business in New Mexico
called salute recruiting
services I'm here to support the
bill because the implications
are not just for patients but
they are for health care
providers and small business
owners as a small business owner
we strongly support this bill I
need to be able to
Find good health care for my
employees and I need to be able
to afford it I spend my days
speaking with health care
professionals trying to convince
them to come to New Mexico and
they're not coming for the money
they're coming for the beauty
they're coming for the culture
they're mostly coming for the
meaningful work.
Meaningful work is taken with
health care providers sorry.
Fifteen seconds thank you
meaningful work is taken away
from health care providers when
we limit the access that their
patients have please support
this bill so that they come here
and they stay here and they
treat everyone equally thank
you.
Okay madam chair will next go to
Jeffery Bustamante just a
reminder to all the speakers we
are limiting COVID to around a
minute please thank you go ahead
Sir.
Mr Bustamante.
Good morning committee members
I'm Jeffery Bustamante CEO The
New Mexico health insurance
exchange the same stand in
support of this legislation for
many other reasons you're going
to hear to to today
fundamentally to address
affordability the expanding role
month without restating a lot of
what you're gonna hear anyway
I'd like to highlight a few
considerations first one New
Mexicans talk to us
affordability at the primary
barrier we run into the
prevention Roman second larger
enrollment in the exchange also
supports premium stability and
finally not only with this bill
help many uninsured get that
coverage but it also provides a
benefit to those already
enrolled in the exchange and the
greater affordability to current
enrollees would allow them to
opt into more comprehensive
coverage or use that money to
address other needs thank you
very much and have a great day.
Thank you Sir next we have US
secretary Schardin Clarke go
ahead Stephanie.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Stephanie
Schardin Clarke secretary of the
taxation and revenue committee I
stand in support of house bill
one twenty two and an addition
to the comments you'll hear from
others about health insurance I
simply want to confirm to the
committee that because the
premium surtax already exists in
tax and Representative tax
system taxed Representative will
simply be able to change the
rate in the distributions
meaning that we can implement
this bill on time and without
any additional resources it's a
very effective way to achieve
the desired outcome thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you madam secretary will
next go to Karen would lock
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what what with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we would just like
to echo the other speakers
particularly secretary Schardin
Clarke speaking about this this
will benefit New Mexicans and
that it will not cost a penny
out of their own taxes and we do
like the new provisions are
about including small business
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have courage
please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kurt
record on the director of
leaders advocacy administrative
New Mexico and live through us
administrative also speaks on
behalf New Mexico conference of
churches I'm here to us today to
state our support for H. B. one
twenty two and to the proposed
amendment we do believe that
health care is a fundamental
human right and that all New
Mexicans should have equitable
and affordable access to health
care services.
Affordability is the greatest
obstacle to people obtaining
health insurance and we believe
that H. B. one twenty two is a
good step towards addressing
that issue.
That being said we urge your
support for H. B. one twenty two
thank you.
Thank you we go noted Jean
Emmerich please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jean Eric
and the volunteer advocate with
a a RP New Mexico A. A. R. P.
New Mexico stands in support of
H. B. one twenty two thank you
for allowing me to speak.
Thank you we'll next go to Jesse
Barnes please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dr
Jessie Barnes I'm a family
medicine doctor work in the
community health center in
Albuquerque and long with
several dozen of my colleagues
in a group called primary care
advocates for healthy
communities we're here standing
in strong support of this bill
today all across our state every
single day our ability to care
for the patients and communities
in New Mexico is limited by a
crisis in affordability this
bill takes excellent measures to
address that crisis we strongly
urge you to support the bill and
to help us take care of New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you we'll next go to Phil
Hicks please go ahead.
Good morning everybody thank you
so much for letting me speak
today members still Hicks and
the intensive case manager the
City of Albuquerque investissent
clinic and I'm here to speak in
support of H. B. one twenty two
I have so many clients that are
working full time make barely
too much to qualify for Medicaid
and offered it for full coverage
by their employer and insurance
exchanges often are their only
option for example I have a
client that is required to get
substance use assessments for
its appropriations yes he's us
being asked to pay almost two
hundred dollars I have another
patient who works full time
can't afford the exchange is
having conversations about
paying his mortgage or is going
to see a specialist
the second situation that so
many of our community member
space too poor to pay for out of
pocket Services into much to
qualify for assistance I also
think it's important we're
talking about costs what is the
cost of not providing these
people insurance when they're
over utilizing the emergency
room it becoming incarcerated so
this is this contribute to the
system that perpetuate property
in poor health outcomes in our
community I really urge your
support thank you so much for
that and speak today.
Thank.
Thank you next will go to
Genevieve Romero please.
Hello Committee thank you my
name is Genevieve medow and I am
a fellow with Ford together
action this bill will increase
health care access for all New
Mexicans as has been stated and
too many people are currently
without health care coverage the
passing this bill will help
increase that coverage for over
two hundred and fourteen
thousand uninsured people in our
state as a young working college
student I've lost count of the
times where I can speak the
health care I needed because of
the fear of incurring medical
debt from not being able to
afford it I urge you to please
pass this legislation thank you.
Thank you next up Noreen Kelly
please.
Good morning committee members
madam chair thank you for
allowing me to speak on this
important bill.
Yes we we as new Mexicans are
happy and excited to have this
available to us finally it's
long been coming in and thank
you so much and please vote yes
on house bill one twenty two
thank you.
Thank you next we'll go to Bill
Jordan please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Bill Jordan
representing New Mexico voices
for children this pandemic has
exposed devastating racial
disparities exacerbated by deep
disparities in health care
coverage in the last few years
of the federal government
chipping away at the affordable
Care Act it is critically
important that New Mexico take
every action possible to
maximize health care coverage
for families by making it more
affordable this bill is clearly
one of the best most innovative
ways to do that in a really want
to thank the sponsors and the
superintendent of insurance the
Human Services Department and
secretary Schardin Clarke all
the lead advocates on this
effort for their good work to
keep New Mexico safe and healthy
thank you.
Thank you next will go to Diana
a team of two please.
When is yes.
So those
are members of the committee day
so again that the input on what
the other side was sent because
of that ET that the for what to
get that actually need one I'm
Planning will make you go yes
Dahlia keep but up will test
with the main thing is that they
achieve ACM being people's yet
it'll Medicine most major
medical we that'll this will
only by locals to get us for
food the ample even more when
the.
We do have a translator that has
all and we need to call her my.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Earlier she introduced herself
before we started the meeting.
Thank you doctor lord I believe
you're the translator is that
correct.
Right thank you so much doctor.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair
you're asking drive motor to
translate the previous public
comment I am she that's why
she's a in our in our group this
morning X..
Madam chair she is the muted but
all right let's go ahead Dr go
ahead.
Part of the issue for us is this
is this is.
The public is part of outside of
what's in our in our group here
that's why we would like for the
translation to happen.
Madam chair I believe did most
of the committee all the
committee under here the
translation.
Okay great thanks and nuts.
if I could not sure if everybody
could click on the global icon
on the bottom of the screen and
select I think it is English.
You should be able to receive
the translated Meredith if that
works the correct Mr vice chair.
It is madam chair committee we
have a thank you my thank you
Mike okay right okay.
And madam chair if I might just
for future reference if we have
additional Spanish speakers if
you press on that icon the globe
you'll hear simultaneous
translation.
Thank you all right.
Right okay if we could go to Mr
Nicholas court of a please Mr
Cordoba.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas Cordoba I'm an attorney
The New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty and we stand in strong
support of H. B. one twenty two
I really want to focus my
conversation today on the
amendments in it's absolutely
critical that this revenue not
simply go primarily to the
general fund in perpetuity even
if it's spent on Medicaid in
this cause to prevent this tax
from operating as regressive tax
on consumers the state needs to
ensure the money goes towards
reducing healthcare costs.
And we greatly appreciate the
sponsor and her role in ensuring
that this money goes towards
reducing healthcare costs and
health care initiatives all
together and we understand and
appreciate that the amendment
some cells are designed to
address this committee's
concerns regarding
accountability and advocacy
groups concerns regarding
stability for the health care
affordability initiatives thank
you we're to to pass.
Thank you if we could now go to
defecate Josh you please.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Dave D. Joshi I'm a physician
resident here in Albuquerque and
junior fellow of the American
college of obstetrics and
gynecology I'm speaking and
strong support of H. B. one
twenty two this bill is an
absolute necessity for my
patients not one day goes by
where I do not have to consider
access and affordability for my
patients for my twenty eight
year old Asian who was a new mom
who could not front one thousand
two hundred dollars for
medication to prevent dangerous
blood clots to my seventy year
seventy eight year old patient
just this week who could not
afford the antibiotic she needed
for over current dangerous
during infection you know we
train for years to be able to
hi provided the best evidence
based practices to our
communities and in the system
too often the barriers to care
are just too high decreasing
maternal mortality and reducing
disparities is at the core of
why do this work and passing H.
B. one twenty hello mate please
more and more equitable to
practice and thank you.
Thank you if we can next go to
the doctor secretary Davis
Gracie Human Services secretary
please answer.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee at this
is David Scrase secretary Human
Services and a practicing
physician I'd echo the comments
have been made by other
positions online today because
we know that health care costs
are much higher would be able to
lay care which they do when
they're uninsured of the data
shows this incontrovertible
eight I like to think
representative Armstrong and
members of the committee but a
lot of hard work into this
version of the bill as amended
and I appreciate that I I agree
that the pandemic has shown us
what can happen to low income
people.
When they are not insured and
this bill will help not only
prevent that in the future but
will help people to get the care
they need.
And lastly the Human Services
department is very happy to work
in consultation with the
superintendent I'm not a
valuation of the program and and
anything else we can do to bring
this help help help to make this
program successful thank you
very much madam chair members
the committee.
Thank you doctor secretary if we
could next go to or also some
more affordable.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Russ the guy the someone
I am a small business owner of
bluebird healing providing
mental health services for
homeless low income and
immigrant populations I would
like to just remind everyone
access to free or affordable
healthcare is a human right I
stand in support of this bill as
I recognize the ways in which.
It could greatly improve the
quality of life for not only
myself and my family my small
business Kollegal owners and
also many of my clients I think
that this bill would prevent
health care issues from becoming
fatal or dangerous and I stand
in support I urge you to vote
yes.
Thank you this somewhat if we
could go to our toll please and
if you could introduce yourself.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is the
superintendent insurance Russell
total I want to thank the
sponsor and this committee for.
Both your long standing records
of support for those in need of
health care in the state.
I want to assure the committee
that we are prepared to be good
stewards of this that we can
manage this program in a way
that minimizes administrative
and operational costs and do so
in a way that's completely
consistent with the intent of
the amendment I want to thank
both the committee and the chair
for including small businesses
in the provisions of the bill
because we hear more from small
business and their inability to
provide for their employees that
almost anyone else so we
encourage the passage of the
bill with the amendment happy to
answer any questions thank you.
Thank you Sir if we could now go
to Tony James please.
Hello chair.
Committee I'm twenty chance from
Gallup McKinley county with or
to get action I support it
should be one twenty two because
of Navajo and I have a C. I. B.
but my daughter is half white
she doesn't have a steady social
get cut option actions I. H. S.
is the mending proof of Indian
blood my husband works full time
at KFC and I'm a stay at home
mom we do not make enough to pay
for health insurance for all
three of us I believe every
human deserves the current and
accessible health care please
support H. B. one twenty two
thank you very much.
Thank you if we could now go to
Nicole Martin please.
The committee my name is
Muhammad.
I am incorrect then our.
Thank you for all the.
Programming for indigenous women
rising and.
You know.
People are saying income level.
Google to should struggle or
have to go to
what we can to help and there.
For some of those.
To support for oil.
Because the house is well that's
one of our core values as
indigenous people thank you.
If we could go to Valerie Wilson
please.
No not that one of the.
dollars thousand from Jenny
pueblo McKinley County and I'm
Apollo was forward together
action I would ask the committee
to support this bill because as
mentioned health care should be
not a not be an issue we
discriminated against it will
not cost our state money and I
support this bill because it's
time to give health care to
everybody thank you.
Thank you if we could go to
Temara from forward together
please.
Morning my name is Tamera
Carlson I'm with the forward
together action I thank you for
this time for leading that's
talk about this important bill
house bill one twenty two just
hearing all the people talking
about how we need to have health
care coverage and I just you
know the we look up to our
leaders and this bill is very
important and I hope that you
will have a compassion are to
pass this bill because everybody
needs health care coverage as
you can hear as you heard other
people are saying all they
needed coverage or medicine and
right now you know I have a
condition and I take medicine
for it but you know I'm grateful
for Medicaid that can cover it I
think of those my fellow New
Mexicans that don't have
coverage so why can't we be
giving state of New Mexico state
as a caring stay at us this bill
thank you for your time and god
bless you.
Thank you if we could go to and
should lead to a help please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
underweight teenage I'm a family
physician and the director of
because of the salute clinic in
Albuquerque where seventy plus
percent of our patients don't
have insurance and are
supporting us during the
pandemic by taking care of the
places where we work and live.
And are working very hard during
this time we see many people
getting sick and being afraid of
going to the emergency room or
getting the care that they need
this bill is really smart and
sophisticated it's a win win
feel like we can't miss out on
this opportunity New Mexico is a
leader in expanding Medicaid in
the first place and has been an
amazing leader during the
pandemic and I would love for
myself and our fellow health
care workers around the state
would really love for it New
Mexico to be a leader in moving
this bill forward to reduce
costs for those already insured
and help expand insurance and
coverage for those who don't
have it thank you so much.
Thank you next please Gaby
Hernandez please.
Okay good morning madam chair
and committee members my name is
Debbie and I'm this and I'm and
community organizer the cost of
the study was I'm here in
support of HB SB one twenty two
I'm a daca recipient like many
immigrant families my mother did
not have access to any type of
health care coverage and when we
had to see care it was up to us
to figure out how we would pay
for the thousands of dollars of
one ER visit this has happened
before and continues to happen
during this pandemic too many
too many people are without
coverage we must do this now and
the new revenue must go towards
increasing access to health care
for more people are without
coverage please pass HB one
twenty two thank you.
Thank you if we can go now to
Nicole Comeaux if if that's
correct please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Nicole
Comeaux I and the Medicaid
director
and we stand in support of house
bill twenty one twenty two we
greatly appreciate the
coordination and collaboration
with the sponsor and all the
other legislators who been
involved wanted to quickly
ensure the committee that the
bill allocate the revenue needed
to address the changes in the
MCS capitation rates that would
be needed to support the tax
finally we're grateful for this
work to ensure that all that
full affordable continue of
coverage is available for all
New Mexicans and look forward to
the work with the office of the
superintendent.
Thank you so much if we can go
now to forward together action
if you could and produce
yourself please.
Regions.
I'm not.
Thank you.
Thanks I should.
I go ET.
Just.
Thanks.
I shall
I do that you need.
Mr.
The needs.
Thank you very much for letting
me speak how the state is the
state please.
What
is on the way out.
SP one twenty two.
It is I stand behind the state
of thank you so much for letting
me talk.
Thank you we can go now to
Valerie Benson Bilson please
Valerie.
One thirty was given a chance to
speak lack it won't go up she's
still not enough thanks for
coming up and being and working
on a Saturday.
I support this bill.
Okay my god how many more do we
have and support we have three
more.
And after that we're going to
cut it off and move over to
those in opposition.
Eight thank you madam chair
Ramon are being a please Ramona
if you could go ahead.
And someone will be now so you
know it'll put us a little bit
out the needle make you going to
do that going forward with this
yes but.
Our land open up in the list for
you but I last year this season
being the those who showed us.
Thank you very much madam chair
I believe that's all the
speakers we've got two more that
are I'm sorry Mr Brett more this
will be our last speaker this is
Mike I want this for those in
support of the bill so we need
to hear all those and that we're
going to go those in opposition
so.
is that it for those that are in
support.
Yes ma'am sure we have one
individual who's spoken already
once but not well go on to the
next group go ahead.
Okay Mr read more so last person
to speak in support of the bill
go ahead Mr Moore.
Thank thank you madam chair
members of the committee
obviously I'm not speaking in
support of speaking in
opposition my name is Brent war
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we propose Senate Bill I
mean I'm sorry house bill one
twenty two because the bill does
not make health insurance more
affordable for those who are
currently purchasing health
insurance it actually does the
opposite it raises the taxes
that are paid by those who
purchase health insurance and so
you have a situation where those
are currently purchasing health
insurance it makes it more
difficult for them to purchase a
I would also note that this this
proposal raises the premium
taxes that are paid on health
insurance to a level that would
be well beyond what other states
are doing it would raise the
premium taxes to six point seven
five percent on health insurance
products the next closest would
be Hawaiian four point two
percent this is a a tax increase
on health insurance products
during the middle of a pandemic
and we just think it's the wrong
policy proposal we understand
the the motivations to try to
cover the uninsured but taxing
those who are currently
purchasing health insurance is
the wrong way to do that thank
you very much I apologize for
trying to to get my testimony in
at the end of the support thank
you so much.
Okay thank you very much let's
go to those in opposition.
Okay Mister Brian financial
please go ahead.
My name is Brian Madam madam
chairman I work for Albuquerque
publishing company I like Mr
Moore said this bill would raise
costs on companies that
currently provide health
insurance for their employees
are struggling to continue to do
so during an economic downturn
because premium taxes are passed
on through
the the calculation of your
individual premiums to the
employer it's not data like a
gross receipts tax that is
supposed to be a tax on the
seller what are allowed to be
passed on and and while the
purpose of this bill is it is a
good premise
it's it's causing employers that
currently provide insurance to
pay for the insurance for non
employers and if you take this
bill under consideration with
the other bills currently going
to the legislature such as paid
sick leave and minimum wage
increases if you add all that
together the cost on small
employers it could potentially
be crippling thank you very
much.
Okay thank you Sir just reminder
we have a one minute comment
period so Mister marker and go
ahead please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I represent United
healthcare if you take a look at
the bill and how this is the
fund is being paid for it's it's
for Medicaid plans the liability
for the increased surtax
is transferred to the federal
government that's how seventy
five percent of the funds being
funded the rest of the fund is
being funded on a tax on small
business private health
insurance that will do nothing
for their health care benefits
so it is normal and and and and
okay to go ahead and and support
twelve seventy five percent of
the money is coming from New
Mexico who it's going to help
them get on the health insurance
exchange what about the other
twenty five percent of the fund
it is being raised but that is
being that is coming from the
tax on small businesses it's not
doing anything for their health
coverage why do we need to do
that with this bill the other
parts of the whole but this one
part of it is unfair to small
business health insurance is
especially during the time of
the pandemic thank you madam
chair.
Thank you so if we can go now
tomorrow shows please go ahead
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla show it's
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
we appreciate the Sanchez
ongoing commitment to reducing
the rate of uninsured New
Mexicans we also understand the
rationale for reimposing the
repealed federal health
insurance tax on a state level
to again target the uninsured
population through Medicaid
enrollment and the health
insurance exchange our biggest
biggest concerns with the bill
which we have discussed with the
sponsor is it the federal health
insurance tax is reimpose with
this premium surtax sunset and
also that all monies from this
tax be used for increased
Medicaid enrollment and
increased enrollment through the
health insurance exchange and
not for planning and design of
the Health Security Act well we
have to review the amendments in
their entirety we do appreciate
the small business amendment and
hope that will help our fragile
commercial market.
Thank you next will go to Terry
Cole from the Albuquerque
chamber go ahead please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee we do not have
an opportunity to review the and
its effect on small businesses
and we will study what
legislation would raise our
state surtax on what insurance
plans to the highest in the
nation with the second highest
the long range only we are
concerned that the practical
result would be higher welfare
premiums for businesses
especially small businesses
across New Mexico when we have
our small business members we
have many of them Senator Costa
there with all due respect to
sponsor thank you very much one
opportunities here.
Thank you next we'll go to JD
Bullington go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the independent insurance agents
of New Mexico I first like to
say that the amendment that's
been adopted sounds like
something we have been
advocating for we welcome the
inclusion of superintendent
Russell told to provide
actuarial data however as has
been expressed this replaces a
repeal federal tax that could
come back and so we are
advocating still for a sunset on
this measure in case that
federal taxes reimposed if we
were to have face both of these
Sir taxes at the same time we
could potentially have an
increase in the uninsured in New
Mexico as health insurance
premiums would become more
unaffordable for those who are
currently paying them.
Thank you madam chair will now
go to our final commenter Jason
Espinoza.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and and while we will
certainly review the amendments
and their relation to the small
business assistance you know we
still do at this point stand in
opposition one of the reasons
why Congress repealed this tax
you know speaker Nancy Pelosi
said in a statement to Congress
that really protecting the
quality affordable healthcare
millions by permanently
repealing health care taxes and
so we are still a little bit
confused in terms of putting
this two hundred percent
increase surtax that will be
passed on to consumers
especially small businesses and
then providing them assistance
with a portion of that money I'm
still does cause concern
increased cost is but we will
certainly review the amendments
but currently stand in
opposition thank you.
All right well we think the
comments today we thank the
public for participating with us
today committee we have an
amendment that has been moved
for discussion and it was
seconded to I think was
Representative Trujillo this
seconded that let's go back on
the amendment and
What's the pleasure.
I move that we adopt House
Appropriations and financed
Committee amendment to house
bill one twenty two.
Second.
We have a motion and a second
for adoption of the amendment is
there any opposition to the
adoption of the amendment.
Okay saying number back on the
bill as amended and we have
members that have some questions
we're gonna start with
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Armstrong for
bringing this forward I
understand madam chair and
representative what you're
trying to do but as you know I
will be opposing this
legislation because
for that reason stated by the
opposition R. one secondly and
ultimately it's not the time
madam chair and representative
for to be putting this on the
backs of small business they are
in suffering right now thank you
madam chair.
Read that wasn't a question
thank you for the comment.
Let's go now to Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and just
just a little clarification or
help in understanding exactly
what the bill does.
I'm not real familiar with the
health insurance for state
employees.
And I wonder are the does the
state have to pay the surtax for
this increase on our state
employee health insurance can
someone help me understand that
please.
Representative Armstrong.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder no it doesn't touch a
self insured plans for the state
employees being a self insured
plan
that's controlled by federal law
Arissa and we did not include in
here the state employee planned
so it does not turn out at all.
Thank you so and I'm assuming
most local governments madam
chair and
Representative Armstrong most
local governments in counties
will not be affected by this is
that correct that's correct
madam chair and representative
that's correct okay so primarily
just private insurers and madam
chair my second question is
similar to that in that
Retired adults that have
supplemental insurance with
their Medicare will that
supplemental insurance be taxed
with this new surtax.
madam chair and representative
now.
It madam chair Joe let me have
help me understand why not it if
it's it's a private.
insurance to supplement Medicare
how how does it avoid this tax.
I'm madam chair and
Representative I may need to
call on superintendent till if
that's if that's alright the
very fine if madam chair if it's
okay with you sure
Representative are
superintendent.
It's.
In the attendee list it's are
till now.
Okay superintendent if you could
go ahead Sir.
this tax only applies to
fully insured drugs a licensed
by this office we do not license
Medicare products.
Okay so that the private
insurance that supplemental to
Medicare.
Does not have to pay this surtax
that's my understanding I will
double check that and get back
to work right now really only
applies to those that we
regulate and as you know
Medicare regulates those
policies.
Thank you Sir I I I understand
that.
But I also know that the
individuals have the freedom of
choice to purchase private
supplemental Mr and so I I am
very concerned about that those
are our senior adults that are
on that planet if they're gonna
get tax that I struggle that so
an answer for for you on that
right away.
Thank you madam chair.
All righty thank you let's go to
access to Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and chairwoman Armstrong for
this bill it is important it
matters we are in unusual
circumstances and I was
struggling with my sound at the
beginning so I apologize if I
missed some of the amendment
will change for small business
but several of those in
opposition said they had been
unable to
read the amendment see how it
affected so I guess my my real
question you can is
I would stand up to try to hold
small business harms the session
because it has been such an
extraordinarily rough year for
them my question is exactly how
does the amended bill affect our
small businesses thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair and
Representative Sweetser thank
you for the for the question as
originally designed we were
contemplating only helping
individuals purchase insurance
and and supporting them but
because the business community
has been speaking out and in
recognition of of that struggle
we wanted to add the US
authorities to support small
businesses in the authorizing
statute here we thank so we
began talking about and
superintendent told can can
maybe add to this conversation
talking about how we could
potentially support small
businesses and
primarily the idea that we have
is to develop a reinsurance
program that would help
stabilize and potentially reduce
their premiums if by picking up
the high cost claims that small
businesses might have so if
you're a small business you know
with of the you know ten
employees fifty employees and
you have a really high cost
claims in that it raises the
premium.
For the whole group so we're
trying our that's our that's our
order but which began thinking
about that during the session so
we're not fully researched on
the on the cost and
implementation of that but we
think that's doable.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Armstrong
not not fully researched on that
makes me somewhat uncomfortable
do you do you have a definition
of small businesses that would
be affected I'm in this
ammendment all right in this
amended bill now.
madam chair if I can go to
superintendent till.
Superintendent go ahead madam
chair I'm sorry I did not hear
the question the definition of
small businesses that it cannot
in the insurance because of a
hundred employs fifty or below
fifty.
All right thank you for that
madam chair and thank you for
this I I know this you've been
working on on how to assist for
as long as I've been serving in
the legislature and I greatly
appreciate your commitment I am
concerned about this bill and
I'm concerned about its impact
and so I'll continue to listen
to the discussion but thank you
very much madam chair thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of the
presenters of Representative
street you're gonna ask question
of the mass my concerns are.
The small businesses are going
to take the brunt of this tax is
that correct.
madam chair and of.
Representative
I don't I don't think that it's
on the small businesses that
take the brunt I I will say that
this was a federal see that it I
actually tried to run this
legislation last year and we
passed it out of the house and
has we
been able to and exit last year
there wouldn't have even been a
list and what in what premiums
for
that tax federal tax just stop
this year and it's it's just
reinstating it but it's spread
out over not just
small businesses but
individuals and small business
but by doing this also.
We can get more people insured
if it's more affordable more
people will get insured and then
you will have a larger risk pool
that actually helps to stabilize
premiums and potentially lower
them because you've got more
people
over which to spread the risk
and so it is and the carriers
have more premium business and
so it it it really is complex
but spreads out a lot more than
just landing on the at the feet
of small business.
Thank you madam chairman of
thanks for that answer but the
people that are we have
insurance.
People are trying to get
insurers are not going to be in
the surtax would have risen a
bit is that correct.
madam chair and representative
it's not the individuals are
paying the surtax it is
as the carriers and I and I know
then they spread that out over
there of other business but one
of the most of this actually it
will come seventy five percent
of the of this will come from
the Medicaid match because
Medicaid is also being assessed
and part of what's going to the
general fund pays the cost of
the increase in the Medicaid of
premiums a tribunal well to this
and then it pulls down match so
it is not all by any means
whatsoever all on the backs of
small business or even
individuals who currently are
insured the vast majority this
comes from Medicaid match.
Thank you madam chair just one
mortgage just Department of.
My concern is just the timing of
what we're trying to do here you
know the what we've been going
through for the last year not
just we everybody in the state
of New Mexico especially this
specially businesses that are
struggling and then it's hard to
build more tax on the
legislature online thank you
madam chair thank you and.
Chair chair just to note the
that tax doesn't started till on
calendar year twenty two.
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman and then
chairman I'd had a chance to
hear this bill presented once
before and I'm just just going
to ask a couple of quick
questions if I could madam
chairman earlier in our.
In this hearing I I heard of the
the financial dollars raised
from this tax and I didn't jot
them down in the amended bill
and could this sponsor or the
sponsor just the o's totals one
more time please.
you madam chair and
Mr vice chair may even have
those numbers directly at his
fingertips faster than them I do
I.
See the it was so.
I believe the vice chair will
have them Madam chair.
And madam chair.
Yes fiscal year twenty to it
brings in new revenue of seventy
seven point two million fiscal
two what year twenty three
hundred and fifty three point
three million dollars in fiscal
year twenty four hundred fifty
five point two million dollars
fiscal year twenty five hundred
fifty four that's new revenue.
that then will will be split
between a general fund and the
affordability fund.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and and it was set of
seventy seven in New Mexico the
ramp up of from seventy seven
million and madam chair to one
hundred fifty three I I'm
assuming some sort of half year
calculation madam chair and
representative exactly because
the tax starts on a calendar
year not a fiscal year thank you
it of the the.
Taxes raised in in a portion
goes to of a new fund and it's
not correct about the building a
new fund is that correct chair
and representative of yes it's a
new fund.
In the remainder going to the
general fund then my question is
does the money go into the chair
General Fund Carrie and
earmarking as to its ultimate.
Appropriation question.
madam chair and representative
no it doesn't contain an earmark
but it is sufficient to cover
the existing one percent surtax
that was already being collected
because we're just adding it on
to that surtax and it is
sufficient to cover the Medicaid
share of the premium increase
but it's not your more.
Thank you thank you madam chair
of sponsor I also heard a
suggestion that I thought was
was quite practical maybe even
the
comments from the public and it
had to do with the concept of a
sunset clause I'm sure madam
chairman the sponsor has given
that some thought however it
seems to be quite sensible that
of the bill might carry a sunset
clause stated simply said
something to the effect that if
the federal if the French
reimposed the tax for the same
purpose New Mexico's need would
up in my mind not no longer
exist
or not I suppose that that's
doubtful now that I think about
my question is to the sponsor
then chairman why did you not
consider some kind of sunset
provision in this tax increase
question.
Thank you madam chair and
representative actually we gave
it a lot of discussion and a lot
of fun and it's one at we don't
know that the federal government
will reinstitute any kind of
attacks if they do we don't know
how much that tax would be
whether it would be the same or
something different so that we
may be able to still do some
amount here.
But it's a complicated to sell
to.
To make sure that we get
the right allocations if there
is still some ability to do a
small tax for instance if the
federal government reinstituted
something that was just one
percent and not closer to three
percent
is so we did not put in the
sunset but
I just want to assure the the
committee madam chair and
representative that all of those
whether it's a federal tax or
here there's a a big lead time
because it has to be built into
our rates selling and so if the
government federal government
decides to do something will
have a year or more notice on
that of that that's going to
occur so that we have time to
come back in the justice and.
So that's that's why we didn't
put in the sun sunset because
it's not really clear
of that we would want to sunset
it all together we do want to be
able to come back and the
amendment says we will be doing
actuarial work and
and be able to in the in the
future years adjusted and we can
adjust that any time if the
federal government decides to re
tax but will have I think plenty
of lead time to be able to make
that adjustment.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and just a couple more questions
one is a the sponsor I heard you
refer to of the concept of a
small blip in terms of tax
increase on the state insurance
premiums and I I knew you meant
I didn't understand of the logic
of that comment if you could
elaborate on that please madam
chair Sanchez thank thank you
madam chair and representative
it what I meant was that all of
the carriers and premiums were
accommodating this up until this
year and this year it went away
and so then the next year it
would come back so it it is this
year is that blip if you will
but it was a previously and had
we passed this last year there
wouldn't have been a gap it
would have gone right I was just
stayed exactly the same.
Thank you thank you for that.
Liberation because it that I
hadn't framed it up that way and
I do understand your point of
last I think of it goes to the
general issue of.
I think we all share in the are
our interesting commitment to
seek improved health care for
all New Mexicans I see the
option the the counter point
being one of four bility.
I don't believe that health care
is right personally madam chair
I believe that that health care
is a need and it's an important
human need.
Right here with food and shelter
and
Therefore I I just I feel the
obligation to try to address
improved health care in New
Mexico but I do not necessarily
see that improvement through.
Right but that that's attention
I guess I just want to say that
I'm concerned about whether or
not the financing mechanism.
That we have selected up on this
very specific form of taxation
form of taxation that piles on
top of another tax increase we
have.
Misli past this year actually
increase last year actually
increased the year before that
that I'm very concerned when I
hear concepts like red jewel
commercial insurance market.
You forty seven point forty
seven down fifty point state
going with the highest insurance
premium taxed in the country
I'm I'm quite uncertain whether
or not this financing mechanism
is the best way to achieve the
share the result we all we all
seek so Representative wish you
good luck and one final quick
question where's the bill go
from here question.
Mr chair I mean Madam chair and
and Representative it goes to
the floor it was on the floor
and got pulled back up into
appropriations goes to the for
next.
Thank you sponsored madam chair
I appreciate the time in my
questions are done.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you so much madam chair
and that the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward and
I'm just I'm just trying to do
the numbers on here I am.
You know as an employer I used
to pay health insurance and I
can tell you that the hardest
hitting group was people between
fifty five and sixty five and
this was five years ago and
health insurance policy on that
family was that eighteen
thousand dollars a year so these
are critical issues for all of
us and we paid half of that that
that employee had to pay have to
and that was that was a cut out
of their you know of two week
paycheck of about three fifty so
it was huge it was huge I'm just
trying to figure out the numbers
here I know that we have forty
seven percent on Medicaid we
have about sixteen seventy
percent of our population are
seniors over sixty five so that
would make it about sixty three
percent and I looked at the
percentage of the employees
public employees in the state
twenty three percent I came up
with about eighty six percent of
our population that's probably
covered with health insurance
and that I I just want to know
if I'm right and then we have a
lot of employers to pay health
insurance so so what what is the
percentage that we're talking
about people who have no
insurance what percentage are we
talking about in our state
that's what I'm trying to figure
out thank you madam chair thank
you Sanchez madam chair and and
representative for your the back
of the napkin calculations
you're about right on so it's
we were down to about ten or
eleven percent I think uninsured
before before the pandemic and
that it has gone back up or more
more uninsured hopefully as
rubric re we recover it will get
better again but
This is to try and encourage
more people to purchase
insurance because they can
afford it to help people keep
insured and and not just keep
insured but access health care
so we have a lot of people on
who have purchased and paid
their premiums but they can't
afford to go get the care
because of the super high
deductible and so then they get
sicker and then that's costs
your
more in medical claims and
contributes to higher premiums
because you've got higher claims
because you're not accessing
care until you get really really
sick or you're doing it all
through the E. R. so this you
know I think this will help to
right size.
somewhat the are the cost of
health care
by getting more people insured
having it more affordable so
that they can access that the
care that they need in a more
appropriate time and it has a
way to spread the costs
primarily to Medicaid
and bring in that that US
federal match into the system
and it will also I think
improves
or help are at.
I indigent funds because if
you're if you're insured you're
not tapping into indigent funds
and
so it that's that's the intent
of this is to make
make it more affordable for
people to get insured and the
more people you have ensured the
more stable your premiums are.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you sponsor and I just want to
say this is this is really a
damper health insurance is
really a damper on on economic
development and prosperity I
know that my husband and I
wanted to start a business and
we realized we couldn't be had
to much of a risk index and
health insurance was so high
that you know one of us have to
have a job that paid health
insurance us so I think that
also limits our creativity in
business growth in this in this
state so I'm I'm very grateful
for you bringing this bill
forward and I intend to support
it thank you thank you madam
thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Armstrong for
bringing this bill
I was interested madam chair and
representative if you could talk
about up there two things that
I'm particularly interested in
hearing more about
I have tried to focus as a
representative on
increasing federal revenue into
our state and also making sure
that when we pass legislation or
examine their impacts that we're
using data to make our decisions
and so the first question.
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong is if you could talk
about of federal revenue and how
it would be impacted with this
legislation if if there are
federal funds that will be
coming into our state US.
As a result of this.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Dixon US seventy
five percent of the funds into
this is actually coming from the
federal source because it's the
match to Medicaid so by
imposing this tax across the
board to individuals small group
and Medicaid.
Medicaid yeah and it's building
the range Medicaid that and
Act draws down match on that
increase premium rate of
Medicaid and so the and because
we have so many people in New
Mexico more than forty percent
on Medicaid
most the bulk of the revenue
actually comes from federal
dollars.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so we what would
be the impact if we did not pass
this.
I'm federal revenue.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
well we wouldn't we would lose
that those funds coming coming
in but we would
not be able to
to help people get insured and.
and and state accessing health
care so then you've got
I think that drives up premiums
when you have people who are
sicker and not accessing care
when they when they could and it
is down a drain also on our
indigent fund for people who
stay uninsured.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of the other
issue I wanted to just get back
to was that of the data
collection and you know how we
monitor the impact of this
program if you could talk a
little bit more about that and I
don't know if it's the
superintendent needs to weigh in
but I would appreciate how will
monitor and assess the impact
thank you thank you and I'll and
I see the superintendent has his
handout but yes we'll have to
establish what the exact
criteria is and how much
assistance we're providing to
people all of that will have to
be actuarially sound and are
projected and we will be able to
report on the O. S. I'll be able
to report annually actuarial
analysis and projections on how
much of the fund is being used
and what it will cost in future
years and what and also tracking
and monitoring how how many
people are being served and I
don't know if the superintendent
if you have anything additional
to add to that.
Madam chair more proceed.
You may briefly.
Thank you when we do an actual
report we will look at all of
those things as we do now when
we review the submissions that
we get from the various
qualified health plans.
I don't want to noticed no to.
that looking at the tax rate in
total
is really kind of unfair in the
sense that we have among the
lowest.
Premiums in the country.
So that is applied that
surcharge is really applaud
against a very low rate
so I think that's important to
get the money into the other
question that you were getting
at Representative madam chair
and Representative Dixon.
The vast majority of people who
were helped on the exchange or
employees of small businesses
because small businesses.
Of all those in the state only
twenty some odd percent are for
health insurance coverage and as
I said in my earlier remarks.
The small business community
that contacts us is looking for
a way to make the insurance on
the exchange more affordable and
that's exactly what this that
this bill will do.
Thank you madam chair all righty
Representative Dixon.
Thank you I just want to
conclude by saying that I think
that this is smart policy.
And
thank you very much for bringing
this forward thank you madam
chair.
Right Representative day
Hochman.
Go ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you representative
Armstrong Representative Dixon
already
asked many more questions in
regards to the federal revenue
so I think at this point I'm
gonna focus now madam chair on
Effects these types the revenues
might have on the commercial
insurance market and how it
might actually support and
continued support and commercial
insurance in New Mexico so
Representative Armstrong if you
could answer that question that
be great.
Madam chair I'm I'm not exactly
can you restate your question.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Armstrong can you
can you tell me how the
commercial insurance market
would be supported by the
federal match programs and
Revenue that would come as the
result of your bill.
thank you madam chair and I may
have the superintendent way and
as as well as as necessary but
by making our insurance
more affordable.
More individuals will sign up
and elect to be insured which
means the commercial market has
more people that they are
ensuring and they are collecting
more premium and so it expands
their their coverage their bit
their business if you will by
covering more of people and at
the end in addition of the more
people you cover and assuming
that the people who have not
been covered are probably a
little healthier otherwise they
would of really
probably tried to manage to get
some coverage but
generally if you're not insured
your a little bit healthier it
will actually
Improve the risk pool and be
able to lower premiums by
spreading the risk even farther
so it it increases if you can
make it affordable it increases
the business to the commercial
market.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative so a lot of
people talk about why it's a bad
idea to do this right now the
COVID environment can you tell
me why it is actually a good
idea.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I think the the
COVID environment really
demonstrates how
difficult it is to not be
insured and the issues around
around that and when you lose
such a job and not be able to
get insured
So it's it just really brings
out the need for for health
coverage and to be able to
access health coverage and then
just are a reminder that this
won't be unfortunately it won't
be an immediate fix for anyone
this tax doesn't start until
calendar year twenty two that
has to be built into the rate so
there won't actually be
implemented until calendar year
twenty three so we have another
couple of years to
to recover there's also a I I
think being proposed federally
some assist similar type
assistance to of folks on the
exchange but only for this
current year and next year so
this would actually pick up
after that federal assistance
stops.
Thank you very much madam chair
that he concludes my questions.
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair reserve
fund I got a quick question so
the Democrats in Washington
repeal what did they repeal the
surtax.
madam chair and representative
of the surtax was was designed
to
Two X. our help the health
insurance exchange get started
and and kind of
launch if you will
the expansion under with the
health insurance exchange and at
this point health insurance
exchanges are well established
and so the surtax stopped where
it was actually I think I see at
the federal level as opposed to
a tax we made a tax year madam
chair and representative because
that's the easiest way to
administer it because we already
had a one percent premium
surtax and we could just added
on to that as a simple way to
administer it.
So the Democrats in Washington
rebuilding.
I'm madam chair and and
Representative I I actually
don't remember whether that was
built into the ACA from the
beginning as opposed to a repeal
so I I can't comment on that but
you it was well known years I
had that it was
Or ahead of it being
stopped that that was that that
was coming.
Thank you.
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chairman terms I
move to table house bill one
twenty two is amended.
Second.
I am not going to accept that
motion at this time because I
don't know if we've completed.
Questions.
I know that so non debate symbol
but I want to make sure that
people have a chance to ask
questions.
I don't want to use a tabling
motion to stymie debate so.
Let's go to the committee is
there anyone else that has also
questions Representative small.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair.
And Representative Armstrong
Madam chair representative.
I think we've gone through a lot
I would ask Miss again just for
clarity's sake seventy five
percent of this of the revenue
from this your proposal would
come from the federal government
is that accurate madam chair.
And representative
madam chair and representative
yes thank you madam chair
representative you would also
we the amendment inserts the
language to that focuses
specifically on reducing
premiums for small businesses
and their employees who would be
purchasing health care coverage
in this small group market.
Madam chair and representative
yes and if I can say is you know
an earlier comment or as I said
we hadn't fully researched yet
the fully research is just to
get the exact cost but we think
that we can develop a
reinsurance program for for
small businesses and the
superintendent I know has been
working on that
with the carriers already we
just don't have the exact cost
so that that's the that's the
piece that will have to research
but we think that's very doable
at a relatively low cost to be
able to help small businesses
with those out liar claims which
will stabilize or potentially
reduce their premiums.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and madam chair
representative we know that at
the end of calendar year twenty
two they'll be roughly at least
fifty thousand New Mexicans will
likely be forced to exit the
Medicaid rolls this is the
expansion during the pandemic
the maintenance of effort
requirement will
The maintenance of effort
requirement to keep those New
Mexicans on Medicaid that
concluded at the end of calendar
year twenty one is that correct.
madam chair and representative
I'm not the one to probably say
exactly when that will will and
because that's been I think
going quarter by quarter but it
will end at some point
relatively soon as the pandemic
is under control and yes all of
the individuals who have been on
Medicaid and not been able to be
dropped because a maintenance of
effort will fall off the
Medicaid rolls and and and will
need to get insured but they've
been
insured under the prime no
longer qualify qualify for
Medicaid so.
Being able to support and
affordability in exchange gives
some a soft place to land if you
will without as severe cliff
affect.
Understood thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so what
I gather from that is Madam
chair representative that we
will likely see
More we will likely see a number
of New Mexicans tens of
thousands of New Mexicans who
will need this coverage and they
could be needing this coverage
relatively soon Madam chair
representative
I wanted to see briefly.
Is if I could ask director till
a quick question madam chair.
Yes go ahead director of toll go
ahead thank you very much madam
chair and
Wrecker called can you walk me
through as sincere the
superintendent of insurance can
you walk me through what some of
the impacts
to the provider community would
be on this madam chair and
director and I'd like you to be
brief
Thank you madam chair Mister
vice chair of the impact would
be wholly positive
it wouldn't.
There were seen these for
uninsured folks at the highest
cost possible in the emergency
room this would allow them to
get preventive care and routine
care and I want to emphasize
that what this bill services the
most basic level is built on the
core principles of insurance in
other words the more people you
make covered.
There were more you spread your
risk the less the cost impact on
the rest of the.
of the pool and so if we're able
to at between thirty and fifty
thousand new people and give
them insurance it dramatically
reduces the uncompensated care
in the hospital community it
gives doctors a greater pool of
insured people to get the care
that they need and it actually
lowers.
The
premium costs because we've
expanded the pool so
dramatically all of that will
serve to keep premiums low and
help the small business
community I appreciate your
question.
Representative small.
Thank you thank you very much
director told thank you very
much madam chair
I know we had a substantive
conversation here madam chair
and director till the supports
to the provider community and
the ability to inject.
You know.
Almost I guess eighty plus
million new federal dollars to
support private health insurance
in New Mexico it's a
substantial
It is a very substantial
opportunity that will expand and
support the private the private
insurance market expand the
provider network in the madam
chair that director till and
representatives
as we lose the federal that the
increased supports for Medicaid
and as we see folks coming off
of Medicaid that opportunity
appears to be one that's very
important for the state.
Already thank you Representative
small I don't see anybody else's
hand up
So we're gonna go to the first
motion go ahead Representative
Brown.
thank you madam chair I was
just.
Renew my motion thank you this
was trying to check to see if we
had anybody else that wanted to
debate so that.
The technician is not able
so why don't we go ahead run
through that will take a roll
call on that and then we'll see
what happens I will go back to
the committee
everyone understand the motion
go ahead right state
representative about.
Sure I move to table house bill
one twenty two it's more.
second.
She.
Okay we have a motion.
A.
We have a motion a second for
tabling motion this call the
roll on this one.
Representative Allison.
So.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative Castellano.
yes.
Our
kids.
Yes.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
No.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
No.
Representative Herrerra.
Now.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
No to table.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara.
Note.
Representative Sarinana no to
table.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo.
to table.
Representative vice chair small.
Now.
You
madam chair.
No to table.
We have to go back to
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Anderson is no to
table no to table.
You have
Eight in the affirmative eleven
in the negative.
All right the tabling motion has
failed.
Ask them in the.
All right a we have a motion and
we have a second.
I can't.
Okay we have a motion and a
second take role.
Representative Allison.
What is it that they were voting
on them.
Okay Representative Allison we
had a motion and a second for it
to pass as amended.
So was.
Okay yes.
Representative Anderson.
Ask.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative Brown so.
Representative Castellano.
Bass.
Representative Chatfield.
No.
Representative Crowder.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
No.
Representative Garcia.
Yes with an explanation.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lane no.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Vice chair small.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes yes.
Representative Anderson yes.
What more yeah.
Question is no.
No.
Yes ma'am.
In.
It is all right what's the in
the affirmative.
And H. and then negative.
All right.
This bill has a do pass the lead
in the affirmative eight in the
negative and want to thank
everyone for your participation
and we do have of I think we do
have Representative Garcia that
wanted to make a comment.
Thank you madam chair in my
concerns on this bill is
I voted yes Beijing because I
want all New Mexicans to four
health insurance we're making
sure you're still with the law.
Tax.
All that are are repaid.
Just a concern and I do want
people altered in order to stand
out of this like I said
everybody deserves health
insurance but not everybody
deserves to pay off the backs of
other people thank you.
All right well thank you
representative Armstrong thank
you very much madam chair ready
and I do have a couple more
announcements for the committee.
We will not be meeting on
Monday.
Wanted to let the committee know
that our staff has been working
very very hard on the junior
bill.
As you know that that bill
started on the Senate side so
they have been doing all kinds
of of work in reviewing our
amendment that'll go on to that
Senate bill and there and
because we have collaboration
between house and Senate members
they've tried to make sure that
languages correct dollars are
correct everything that
you know that we've told them as
each one of the pharmacist has
come through.
I want to thank them and extend
our sincere thanks today because
that's been I have been left I'm
not sure that the new members of
the committee realize that we're
three staff down.
And so not only are they trying
to stay on top of legislation
coming to the committee but
they're also packaging House
Bill to and the supplemental the
junior bills so I I just think
that's important for everybody
to understand I know there's
been some grousing to leadership
about is not meeting.
But I don't care we have this
this piece of work that we have
to do so I'm not going to
highline Committee meeting
on this on our limited staff
thing is is that
We will my understanding is that
tomorrow the floor session
starts at two thirty.
Is to excuse me Monday everybody
shocked Monday
at two thirty where are floor
session starts and then we'll
take up our regular HSC work on
Tuesday so we've got another day
off.
Not only Sunday but will have a
day off from committee on Monday
so is there anything else bill
that we need to that we need to
bring up to the committee.
Sure no.
Done for the day all right I
think everybody again and have a
good weekend and we'll see
everybody on Tuesday thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
