Is an attached to her chair
small.
Here well it has to go with
anybody else did you have a
quorum check yep I'm on.
Excellent and and miss Rodriguez
we noted that Representative are
grail Armstrong is present also
correct.
Please note that Representative
Armstrong is presidency is here
okay yes I did help them
excellent thanks so much thanks
everybody we're going to begin
the subcommittee be with agency
code six four four that's the
division of vocational
rehabilitation and we're going
to ask our LFC analysts miss
ruby and SQL to begin walking us
through the different suits
and to help introduce the DFA
analyst and also representatives
from the division of vocational
rehabilitation so with that is
ask about please.
You Mr chairman and members of
the subcommittee nice to see you
all as the chair indicated the
agency code is six forty four
division of vocational
rehabilitation and will have
with us today my counterpart
with the department of finance
and administration miss madam
that stands for more and will
also have with us the director
of the division of vocational
rehabilitation agency Diane
morning brown and still has some
other folks in with the agency
that all allow the director to
introduce at the appropriate
time we started with your your
differentiate here that
hopefully everybody has received
their copy that.
The division of vocational
rehabilitation is composed of
four division so that that will
use all begin and start off with
the overall summary of the
differences and then I'll turn
it over to MaryBeth and then
we'll just kind of go back and
forth so that'll be our process
thank you so when you look at
this high level differentiate
you'll see two main differences
in the revenue column right here
though you'll see for the
general fund transferred that
the LFC recommendation is a
hundred and twenty six thousand
two hundred dollars hello the
executive.
And you will also note that in
overall for federal revenues
that the LFC recommendation is
seventy two thousand higher in
federal funds this is across the
whole agency role that together.
So and then just I'm kind of
just going down the sheet here
and then I'll talk about more
the differences but just to make
sure everyone following the
numbers then you go down right
here under the personal services
employee benefits category and
you'll note that there is a
difference of two hundred twenty
four thousand two hundred
dollars and that LFC is higher
by that amount two hundred
twenty four point two thousand
and then you go down the
contractual services thank you
see there's a difference of a
hundred and seventy two thousand
six hundred dollars LFC is lower
by that amount for contractual
services and then the last
expenditure item is the other
category and LFC is below by a
hundred and five thousand eight
hundred dollars.
So to summarize what those mean
those numbers in the revenue the
at LFC recommendation
Representative a two percent
reduction in general fund
support from the FY twenty one
operating budget.
The executive recommendation for
general fund is the lack with
the FY twenty one levels so
that's three see that like
different LFC is just slightly
below FY twenty one operating
budget what we call the op ed or
and and the executive is right
at the mid level for FY twenty
one general fund.
For federal funds LFC
recommended the requested level
with the agency requests for
federal funds the Port and that
actually represents basically
it's just barely below FY twenty
one operating levels.
Thank you recommendation is is
just a little higher a little
bit about that for FY twenty one
at the for federal funds above
FY twenty one now to go into
those more a little more time
more detail on this expenditure
categories
for personal services and
employee benefits for the LFC
recommendation overall for the
division of vocational
rehabilitation the it represents
what the agency requests for LFC
so that's where LFC that.
That's basically three point
four percent increase for
personal per person over FY
twenty one.
And if this at the decrease of
nine point two below FY twenty
one for contractual services and
these are what the agency
requests I just remind the
subcommittee the instructions
that agencies came in with for
FY twenty two budget initiatives
are with to come in and a minus
five percent below the operating
budget so basically that's where
you were seeing a request came
in and pretty much mostly across
the board the eight when we
found out we had more revenue
the executive he then a little
later than we did some of these
earlier budget the LFC right at
the operating budget.
So I'm to continue on with that
difference in the.
The other category the act the
executive recommended at two
point three percent increase
over those FY twenty one
operating levels your person and
want to percent decrease in
contractual services.
So that gives you an idea of the
balance in the way to where
we're coming in overall for DVR
and in addition the division of
vocational rehabilitation DVR
I'm quite a bit of a language
that we include in the general
appropriation act house bill two
so
there aren't really any major
differences between the LFC and
exec recommended in the
language.
Thanks dad for
the LFC does include a piece of
language in in the
recommendation.
Or did noting that five hundred
thousand the general fund
support be used to provide adult
vocational rehabilitation
services in the rehabilitation
services program so this was
language that was included last
year and the LFC is continuing
that norm and every recommending
that that language be included
in FY twenty two as well.
The only
and then on the second page of
your different states actually
just put out all the language
you're free to see that's all
that they are just if you had an
interest in potentially looking
at all the detail in the
language.
And then if you go to page three
of your differentiate.
Overall for the division of
vocational rehabilitation you
have some slight differences and
and the different programs in
our performance measures.
we did a consensus on that and
kind of more those so.
Last year packet if you guys
want to committee members want
to take a look at that that that
about that second to the last
page in your packet so there's
about.
Three two two.
Performance measures and the
second to the last package and
we have where there's
differences we have those circle
for the consensus so that gives
you a look overall at the at the
overlay Agency and with that
we'll move on to that first that
program and I'll turn it over to
miss more thank you Mr chairman.
Thanks.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee it's
nice to be here today over soon
I am going to just go over that
first piece code with you it's
E. five zero seven
administrative service that is
very simple you'll notice that
there were no differences at all
between the LFC in the executive
in this program and it is solely
funded with federal funds just
just so you're aware in this
program and as RubyAnn just
mentioned any differences that
we had in the performance
measures and the targets we have
come to a consensus so I'm I'm
going to turn it back over to
the end for the next program and
she will walk you through it.
So Mr chairman the next program
is rehabilitation services.
Five zero eight at the top of
your page.
We have just a different the
general fund of ninety two
thousand four hundred dollars so
the LFC is recommending five
point six four million in
general fund and the executive
recommending five point seven
three million in general fund so
so what does that mean
The LFC recommendation is that
It's just slightly below FY
twenty one operating levels and
the executive is flat as I
indicated before they came in
flat with that FY twenty one
level so that that's where we're
at.
I'm.
What equates to the LFC
basically came in at the request
at as I talked about overall so
the agency requests slightly
below in this case.
The division of occasional
rehabilitation they were one of
the few agencies that did not
come in with them minus five
percent request they actually
came in a little higher and why
is that it's because that the we
are asked to do a maintenance of
effort and and be able to draw
down all those federal funds and
in order to do that they have to
do that MOE maintenance of
effort so they didn't recommend
the minus five percent like at
other agencies and that's why
you see the LFC recommendation
supporting the requested level
of funding and of course the
executive came in a little
higher at the FY twenty one
operating level so that's
basically what you see in this
division and I think I'll leave
it at that that really explains
the difference over off.
Mr chair members the committee
again the next programming DVR
is P. five zero nine it's the
independent living services
program and as with the rest of
the agency there weren't too
many differences here regarding
revenue LFC recommended the
requested five percent reduction
in general fund support and the
executive recommends general
fund support flat with FY twenty
one so as RubyAnn just noted
this is another example where
the executive came in a little
bit higher because we kept them
up flat to the previous year
well LESC just and supported the
the slightly reduced amount that
was in their request and you can
see it's about thirty three
point eight thirty three
thousand eight hundred dollars.
Yes LFC recommends the requested
amount any other category which
was a little bit lower that's
where the differences any
executive recommends funding at
the FY twenty one.
And again I'm with the
performance measures we
reconciled and came to a
consensus RubyAnn I'll turn it
back to you the last program.
Mr chairman the last program
last division we have is
disability determination program
five eleven and there's no
differences there so this just
to tell you disability
determination what this is is.
It's weird when people at Plano
for social security disability
this is the division and they
have a lot of work east I'm
trying to get through all of
those disability determinations
that are so crucial to so many
people across the state so this
is funded a hundred percent
federal funds from the Social
Security Administration and
there were no differences in the
two recommendations and we will
turn it over to that executive
director miss Diane morning
Graham thank you.
Thank you analysts.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee
this has given out and then
smart thank you very much
representing our our program
I I do have the power point
presentation that I believe will
be shared.
I'm.
I mean I can share but I wasn't
sure if
The organizer was going to share
you.
Thank you director morning brown
are I think if you can share it.
That it.
Yes please okay thank you.
Thank.
I apologize
one of one of my staff could do
that oh wait wait one second.
No.
Okay there we go my apologies.
I'm of course you've already
heard about
The division of location
rehabilitation so I just want to
give just some basic highlights
about our our agency what's our
mission is to encourage and
assist the efforts of New
Mexicans with disabilities to
reach their goals we're working
and living in their communities.
We assisted between eight
thousand to ten thousand New
Mexicans with disabilities each
year.
Director
just in order to yes German this
is probably one of the CEO
and the director and the and
you.
Share my screen condition
Senator because we're going home
I'm sorry.
Sure I think what thank.
Okay Robert I I think I deleted
just one section there so.
It.
Director.
With the that this screen that
we're seeing yes and at that
it's it's circles FY twenty two
DVR budget request but it has
not gone into that presentation.
All if you want to either enter
into that or perhaps
exit your screen sharing okay in
your C. O. O. could but okay yes
ma'am I see okay not I will stop
sharing.
Cool and we'll go to.
Thank you director and then Mr
card on.
Yes.
That's great thank you both for
working through it and director
will go from here yes we have
our
of technical challenges
sometimes I understand.
Okay
right now I think we're ready to
continue on the second page.
Thank you.
Okay so I'm we assist
approximately
eight to ten in New Mexicans
with disabilities year.
And they represent one of the
largest portions of unemployment
in New Mexico as well about
seventy percent of New Mexicans
with disabilities that are
employees are also under rate
due to their disability next
slide.
Okay so historically DVR has
helped to thousand clients each
year to meet their living and
employment goals and the return
on investment for every dollar
spent on this program translates
to seven dollars returned to the
community so we do have a great
impact on our economic Committee
community as well
just a little history going back
to FY twenty one our.
Rehabilitation services unit
program sustain the six million
dollar reduction in FY twenty
one operating budget and during
the special session do we are
today four percent general fund
reduction to the B. R. program
which equated to two hundred and
sixty seven thousand dollars
that was used for match of our
federal funds.
So the impact of the four
percent general fund reduction
meant that DVR would not only
use one point seven you lose I'm
sorry at one point seven million
dollars in combined match and
federal funds will also lose
four point three million in
federal funds awarded by the
federal vocational
rehabilitation program.
Next slide please.
So.
Going on to FY twenty two the
effects of additional reductions
while they may ninety two
thousand four hundred may not
seem great that reduction in
general funds would then
translate to a reduction of four
hundred and thirty three
thousand eight hundred dollars
in the combined federal funds
and injectoral funds so in
addition there could be
potential penalties
that could be applied due to the
program not meeting the
maintenance of effort threshold
and I I believe this SQL talked
about that as well next slide
please thank you.
And our independent living
program in
the FY twenty two appropriation
request the division applied the
five percent general fund
reduction to the program which
equates to about thirty three
thousand eight hundred and
general funds to the independent
living program.
it's important to know that the
loss of funds to this programme
will result in the state's most
vulnerable populations receiving
less services that allows them
to remain independent and in
their homes the services are
provided directly to individuals
with disabilities so that they
can live independently.
Next slide please.
And this one I like to have Dr
Michael Bryan who is our
administrator for rehabilitation
services programs.
Just explain to you a little bit
about our order of selection
which plays a huge role in in
our budget and allocation of
those funds.
So.
Sorry your car then can you
there you go okay are are you
able to hear me now yes okay
thanks to it thanks Diane and
and I appreciate the opportunity
to be able to talk about order
selection that that actually has
been one of my primary
assignment since coming to the
agency of this this past June
DVRs been in order of selection
for over three years now and
what the order selection is is
when we are unable to serve
everyone either because of
financial imitations or because
we do not have enough staff then
we place people on a wait list
until we're able to serve them
currently we have there are
three groups of course selection
for Group One is what's
considered the most significant
disability and those are people
who have multiple disabilities
and multiple barriers to work
that group has remained
continuously open priority group
to in priority group three have
been closed very good two is
considered significant
disability
and they have multiple
disabilities but perhaps not as
many barriers to work and then
priority group three is
considered non significant
disability our agency as of
September of twenty nineteen had
more than fourteen hundred
people on the waiting list that
were pending services
that
during this past year of we have
taken about fourteen hundred
people off of the waiting list
however during that same time
we've continued to add people to
the waiting list when we
originally wrote this power
point the the number was
something over six hundred
people in that way it.
This as of this morning that
number's actually now
approaching seven hundred
people on the wait list
During the same time the
challenge and being able to
remove people from the wait list
is that as we've had a reduction
in funds it affects is a to
levels not just level in terms
of how much do we spend on
individual basis but it affects
us in terms of our ability to
full fill staff positions to be
able to serve these currently
our counselors who have been in
excess of a hundred and fifty
participants for counselor which
exceeds the national standard
recommended we have been
attempting to fill positions
this past fall and to increase
our clinical positions by
fifteen we actually have more of
about thirty eight openings in
the rehabilitation services unit
so we're simply not able to fill
all of those in the combination
between reduced funding to
affect cases that we're able to
serve people were able to serve
as well as reduce numbers of
staff to be able to serve those
individuals has caused us to
remain in in order of selection
as a result of that it also
means that we've gone from
serving about ten thousand
people a year to work we will
serve somewhere between eight
and nine thousand people a year
with the expectation that
further reductions will reduce
Rosal in the wait list growing
back up of over a thousand
this indicated we we have
instituted a number of policies
in the past fifteen months that
have helped us to reduce this by
continuously
moving resources and keeping
track of resources and opening
and closing the individuals
but we have not been able to
continuously open this the these
categories and of further
reductions we expect will result
in.
The the weightless growing back
up over two thousand and that
would be our current status in
order of selection.
Right thank you doctor Brian and
now I'd like to talk just a
little bit about
our other large federal program
is funded by the Social Security
Administration
and it's M. the disability
determination services or as we
call it the the S. it is one
hundred percent federally funded
and does not require a match
so I've asked the administrator
Charles Allen Hamlin to speak
for a few minutes today
while it appears that
this program will not be
impacted there is a little bit
of reduction in the person area
which would impact the bid on
our hiring Authority which is
given by the Social Security
Administration so Mr Hammond.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity Mr chair members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to present the
information related to the
disability determination
services or to speak to you
today regarding the efforts of
that New Mexico PBS in working
with our current agency DVR and
are funding agency the SSA.
give you a little bit of history
in fiscal year twenty we ended
up obtaining a total of thirty
five our hires from SSA we
started off the year with a
vacancy rate of over forty
percent and we ended the fiscal
year with the vacancy right
about seventeen percent through
the allocation of those hires
from as a savory we were able to
fill many vacancies that had
been vacant for multiple years
and those vacancies were making
it difficult for us to serve the
disability applicants of New
Mexico.
Because of our efforts to obtain
that hired me forty we were able
to again decrease our vacancy
rate and the all of our workload
targets for federal fiscal year
twenty during that time we have
also transition to a new case
processing system and we're one
of the leaders nationally and
rolling out this product to the
nation and we are providing
direct support to the SSA
regarding the performance of
this new platform.
Because of our efforts in fiscal
year twenty in fiscal year
twenty one the SSA allocated
fifty one hires to the New
Mexico DDS currently we have
created seventeen new FTEs we
have currently higher ten out of
that seventeen and the remaining
at pending vacancies at this
point are pending interviews at
this exact moment we are in the
process right now of hiring
those additional positions that
leaves us remaining thirty four
FTEs to be created by the end of
the federal fiscal year at the
end of September and with that
remaining FTE our plan is to
completely fill all vacancies
within the agency and to create
additional FTE ease so that our
agency can hire New Mexicans to
make disability determinations
for the citizens of New Mexico
this hiring allocation will
allow us to meet our federal
workload targets and we will be
able to provide the continued
customer service that Mexico EDS
is prided itself on the current
staffing plan will allow us the
opportunity to continue to grow
as an agency and to continue to
employ New Mexicans to make
things
determinations for the citizens
I appreciate the time and the
ability to present this
information so thank you.
Thank you Mr Hamlin and with
that Mr chair members of the
committee that concludes our
presentation and we would
certainly stand for question
ask.
Thank you so much director
morning brown Mr are the and
analysts I think there there may
be some some committee questions
but while we're waiting
to see up I see we we have our
first person and that is ranking
member Representative Crowder
Representative ranking member
out of state.
Thank you Mr chairman it is more
comfortable just Representative
Crowder.
I I appreciate your respect is
just more comfortable.
Chair just one very quick
question I noticed that.
Part of location rehabilitation
transferred five hundred
thousand dollars out of their.
PSEB yeah I was curious what the
purpose of the transfer was what
was the money utilized for.
That's my only question Mr
chairman.
Okay I'm if I could do for to my
CFO Mr Kirk done as.
Thank you.
Yes I you're on.
You Mr card on I think you're on
mute.
So okay so
I.
I usually agencies so a little
for the we need answers active
force to the Division of the
line and to
The staff and arguing so
Thank you the details of those
You're free right now and the
the US allies can do the
executive analyst is to.
Thank you okay if we can just
get the information I would just
be curious to know what that
money was used for when it was
transferred out of the SCG thank
you Mr.
Lou thank you Representative
Crowder and.
Analysts please follow up on
that in conjunction with the
with the agency I'm next I
believe do we have
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to the presenters and analysts
I just had.
Ranking member Crowder state
Representative Crowder asked the
question I was also interested
in but now that we have gotten
that out of the way I want to
ask a little bit about the
effects of the pandemic has had
on the independent living
program and whether or not you
anticipate that will have a
fiscal impact as you continue on
and then the formulation of your
budget for next year.
I would defer to Dr Brian.
So thank you
I I appreciate Dr to speak about
that we have we have seen an
effect
not only on independent living
but on vocational rehabilitation
services as well in terms of
both at and numbers of
applicants
willingness of employers to hire
people with disabilities and in
terms of the independent living
program specifically
we have extra we've seen the
overall programs experience more
difficulty in terms of being
able to access and to serve
their people more directly
they've had to work out a number
of remote solutions they haven't
been able to have as
defined as clear access to the
people that they wish to serve
and so it has created some
challenges in terms of how they
get to their customers and and
how they're able to directly
provide the services
so so we have seen some direct
impact in both areas
both in terms of employment and
in terms of independent living
and and available services.
One thing I would would also
comment on is that.
We we sort of expect this.
For lack of a better term Russia
fact that once things return
more than normal that pending
extended jurors that have been
waiting during the COVID will
sort of all at once become
Spence and needed while it
because people have been
hesitant to do things all of
those things that have been
agreed upon and pending will
sort of come in a rush so the so
that we we expected to see an
effect in both areas.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Mister current for that
explanation I just have one last
question it's clear the balance
sheet that you have a real focus
on the villains of these current
they get FTEs do you are you
experiencing any particular
issues that are making it more
difficult to fill these
positions and if so what are
those issues.
I'm I don't know that we have
any particular issues with
filling them we
have you know we have to provide
the services but we also need to
hire the staff to do that and it
did take some amount of time I I
think our applicant pools are
good
But of course we have to also
look at the requirements for we
are counselors and if doctor
Ryan would like to speak more
about that or even Mr Hamlin in
terms of the his hiring
authority that would be fine.
I don't know if if the Mr hamon
like to go first or.
Representative because they were
talking about the mandatory.
Yeah Mike I can go first I
appreciate that thank you Mr
secretary the net picky
interruption just a reminder
even on the zoom to always go
through the chair but please
take as deep thank you all and
sorry for.
Yes there representatives so for
the DDS the
issue related to hiring is more
of the classifications that we
currently are hiring apps and
the pay bands of those
classifications this is
something that are affected
passed in two thousand sixteen
when our agency positions were
reclassified to a lower position
what we find when we hire those
applicants is that we bring them
on board and we have success
bringing qualified candidates on
board because but because they
are a lower class vacation now
we tend to find that we train
qualified state employees in the
transition out of our agency to
another agency that can pay them
better because of the
classification issue so that is
something that we have been
looking at and I are actively
looking at trying to find a
solution to that if we could
increase that classification
again we are federally funded so
the issue isn't in terms of the
allocation of the money
and once we believe that we can
higher higher classification we
would then be able to retain our
staff at a greater rate is our
belief
I need okay thank you Mr chair
and I'm thank you Mr Hammond
that was precisely that that the
information I was looking for
thank you.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil
I'll just ask a couple of quick
follow up questions missing are
there any other committee
questions.
Okay.
So just a follow up
Director morning brown.
Mr Kirk in
German
There you all need to have a
higher more.
Of this specialized employees in
order to perform the services
that draw more federal funds
correct.
Yes Mr chair that is correct.
Okay thank you and so
understanding and and big things
to Representative Hochman Vigil
in the answer on the pay bands
for Mr Hamlin but it does seem
like
the higher
graduated from recommended
through the LFC in the personal
services employee benefits that
that will
Not address the classification
issue but it does address more
on the hiring issue is that fair
to say.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I believe that is fair
to say.
Okay.
Thank you all and and thanks
very much for going into detail
on an incredibly important
Entity as this the wait list
grows certainly it's an area of
caution for us all and perhaps
to be addressed in other areas
around in other areas but I
think we can take great comfort
we can take comfort in the fact
that the LFC recommendation
includes a higher amount in this
critical area to bring on
additional needed staff with
that I don't see any other.
Committee questions saying no
committee questions we will go
to Representative Hochman Vigil
and and a quick note actually
before we do that I apologize
first this is only a
recommendation no final action
is being taken today by the
subcommittee as such there was a
a question in the.
Chat there is not public comment
at this portion in the
subcommittee but again to be
very clear this is only a
recommendation and no final
action is being taken today.
With that we will go then to
Representative Hochman Vigil.
For a motion.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time I make a motion to
that we adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Okay there's a motion is there a
second.
Okay as so also Representative
Sweetser second by
Representative wheat Sir
motion is to recommended adopt
the LFC recommendation again no
it's not elected
today but a recommendation is
there any objection from
committee members to adopt the
LFC recommendation.
The school on seeing no
objection the LFC recommendation
is adopted today thank you all
very much for this in depth
discussion and director morning
brown and your staff thanks
especially during a an
incredibly difficult time and
thanks for being on today.
Thank you all okay next we're
going to go on to HSD code six
four five that's going to be the
governor's commission on
disability.
we're going to begin again with
miss RubyAnn asking about and
just like she did last time help
us by introducing at the
appropriate time the agency
staff miss ask about.
Thank you again Mr chairman and
members of the subcommittee the
HSD code again is six forty five
governor's commission on
disability and my counterpart at
DFA will be the same so to be
miss Densmore again and I will
have with us from the governor's
commission on disability there
executive director Miss Linda
foresight and I'm not sure
she'll have any other folks with
her not so begin and will do the
same thing start with an
overview of this agency.
It's made up of two programs the
first program is called like the
agency the governor's commission
on disability and then the
second program is that brain
injury Advisory Council so we'll
just let back and forth between
the stands more night so I'll
I'll start just by going over
that the difference is the high
level numbers here and then
talking about what those mean
so.
Revenue side the under the
sources on the first page.
The there is basically just a
different in general fund
revenue so this agency is funded
with the general fund and
portion of federal funds.
And the LESC recommendation is
sixty nine point seven thousand
below the executive
recommendation and here we have
basically that same issue that
we just discussed that the
executive recommendation across
the HSD is basically coming in
at the FY twenty one operating
level.
Thank and then the LFC at is
actually at the agencies
requested in this case the
agency did comply with those
department of finance and
administration guidelines to
come in at their request with
the five percent reduction in
general fund so you'll see that
the LFC did recommend the agency
request which represents a five
percent reduction in general
fund revenue overall.
So if we move down to the uses
piece here in the middle of the
sheet.
You'll see that after personal
services employee benefits
overall for the agency LFC is
forty six thousand eight hundred
hello the executive
recommendation.
And the the same down the line
for contractual services LFC
recommends a seven point seven
thousand dollar amount less than
the executive and for the other
category LFC recommends fifteen
point two thousand dollars hello
the executive recommendation so
that totals up to that sixty
nine thousand seven hundred
dollars that the difference
between the two recommendations.
So I'm.
Basically I'm.
We have a note here on and the
LFC recommending requested level
the we're all for it for all of
these categories.
And then we also have a note
that the executive recommends a
four point one percent reduction
from FY twenty one operating
levels for the personal services
employee benefits and the other
category so there is a slight
deviation there so the executive
is slightly below FY twenty one.
And.
We had some differences also in
the target for the.
Measures for this agency those
have been reconciled and their
noted on your second to the last
year.
Yes
thank you we have any question
about this you're used to seeing
the little circle differences
where we've come to a consensus
but this she had the little box
here with an asterisk.
Why that is if anyone has a
question about that.
This year you along with all the
technical glitches that we're
all managing
some of our performance measures
didn't didn't note in the LFC
recommendation we put a little
Asterix for House Bill to
measure for general
appropriation act measure that
would actually be included in
statute so those dropped off in
some cases so whenever you see
the little Asterix added there
that's what that denotes so
distinct issue were wondering
what the world that was doing
here so we know we're to Mary
Beth to go over the next program
thank you.
Thanks again RubyAnn and Mr
chair members of the committee I
am going to just take you
through on the first program for
governor's commission on
disability it is P. code P. six
nine eight.
I'm and this is the the majority
of their budget is in this
program as you'll see so if we
look at the revenue I'm again as
you can then just explain the
executive recommendation it
maintains the operating levels
FY twenty one for this program
while the LFC recommended the
requested five percent reduction
from the FY twenty one operating
budget for general fund support
so that's where the differences
mostly in this program I'm in
the base the LFC recommends the
requested levels of funding for
the personal services employee
benefits in other categories and
the executive recommends eight
four point one percent reduction
from FY twenty one operating
levels for the personal services
employee benefits and other
categories as you can see in the
contractual services that that's
higher
four in this both
recommendations.
And and that that's that's
pretty much it again the
performance measures we came to
consensus so I'll just turn it
back to me and for the last
program.
There.
Thank you more bad the last
program is that brain injury
Advisory Council and this is
funded a hundred percent what
general fund revenue and we have
a difference of nine point eight
thousand so the LFC is lower by
that nine point eight.
That basically is primarily
falling in contractual services
and other operating costs so
you'll see that LFC is lower by
seven point seven thousand in
contracts and lower in two point
by two point two thousand in the
other category.
So at the I'm executive in this
case it is at the FY twenty one
operating level for this program
for the brain injury Advisory
Council council so spot on with
FY twenty one and the LESC is
just that just add slightly
below that the request yes
request because they came in our
so that's basically it Mr
chairman for this this in with
that we can turn it over to the
agency's director Miss Lamport
that.
Thank you at less and director
foresight.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon
I think with the head nod to
thank you great to hear me which
is good
Thank you for having me here
today thank you get on the stand
more for providing that overview
of our finances I have with me
our CFO crystal energy dense she
had my back and everything and
so if I can answer a question
I'm sure she can
we have it covered.
I am going you are the power
point presentation I'm going to
share my screen hopefully
that'll work I was just going to
take you through a brief
overview of what our programs
are and what are some of our
constitution.
Okay everyone see that.
Okay.
all right so again my name is
twenty four by then acting
executive director of the
governor's commission on
disability I have had the honor
of being at the commission for
about six months
At so the governor's commission
on disability on the unique
thing about it is that it is
cross disability so we represent
people
of you know all different
abilities whether it to a
physical disability or hearing
loss.
Winder has a cognitive
disability we really want to
represent the full spectrum
ability to people and really
support and improving their
quality of life and so that it
can be at their ability to
engage and you know social
interactions on education
employment recreation the full
participation the benefits of
life right all individuals.
And to do that we have for that
program or disability awareness
and advocacy program our
physical accessibility program
which includes our whole
modifications our brain injury
Advisory Council and then also
our technology assistance
program.
Mr really another crucial review
of what our finances look like
that divided into different
programs and so you'll see our
awareness and advocacy and also
physical access programs and it
also where are kind of
management's and Administration
budget you know that for the
majority of our budget wise
our brain injury Advisory
Council at about a hundred
ninety five thousand dollars
going by the executive budget
hundred ninety five thousand
dollars and in general fund for
brain injury Advisory Council
and that again our.
Technology assistance program is
a hundred percent federally
funded and at the executive of
budget request five hundred
thirty nine.
Going into a disability
awareness advocacy program
thank you can see.
There's a whole range of things
that we provide one is at
advocacy at the individual level
for people who are experiencing
actors in the community and so
that can look like a lot of
different things one of the
examples from kind of the COVID
era we got a call from someone
who I
wanted to sit in a restaurant
the restaurant had you know kind
of change their thinking around
if they if they can accommodate
as many people as you to comment
restrictions and there wasn't
really a place for someone who's
in a wheelchair at two fifty to
wait and so
you know we'll talk to the
individual talk to the doctor
determines the kind of help you
need you
we also provide significant
amount of training and
education.
on
disability awareness and educate
most recently we did that for
the hospitality industry nothing
medical settings and then we
provide training on service
animals emergency preparedness a
range of things.
I
want to focus on thank go
through different programs is at
the accomplishments that we have
been able to achieve by
partnering with our state
disability agency I think when I
got here
I was really impressed with the
level of collaboration
coordination across our state
disability agencies as well as
you know the extension that we
work with in our ability to kind
of cool and leverage our
expertise and our effort.
And I think that within or
disability awareness and
advocacy work particularly
around COVID response in order
to give you a few examples right
now what we're hearing from
people with disabilities is that
they're very thankful that
they're able to get vaccinated
but they are encountering
barriers when they go to
different vaccine site so what
at you know we as a community
you know disability state
disability agency for include
commission for the blind
commission for the deaf and hard
of hearing you know GDP seen we
are
at we have taken a complaint
from the concerns and we're in
conversation with the O. H. and
with us about how do we
standardized portability affect
the site for for people with
disabilities
we've also at that a lot of
advocacy around communication
making sure that the messaging
that's going out about COVID is
acceptable to those recurring
disabilities thank you for
replying to and correct and hard
of hearing we recently got.
Intellectual and developmental
disabilities added to the severe
risk category for comment on
which had been missing even
though there is a higher
mortality rate for those with
the EDD
and another thing that we're
doing here with it New Mexico
bility emergency planning
Advisory Council is
Conducting focus groups with
people with different
disabilities find out how Covid
is impacting them in one of the
things that you know we're still
putting the report together but
one of things that we found.
Clearly distressing wise how are
deaf blind community is being
impacted due to isolation
we're seeing a higher reports
of.
Depression and
you know which side be cut due
to the isolation on a brought on
by COVID and or disability.
One more thing I wanted to point
out without return particularly
proud of is our partnership with
TV are workforce solutions do PC
and commission for the blind and
finishing all right
the governor's commission on
disability one of our key focus
areas should be employment
into returning much more
attention to that area we
launched the business engagement
summit for job developers this
month and it was really
incredible to see the
conversation from long you know
we I think we got two hundred
two hundred dollars judges over
to cross the state talking about
how to engaged.
Clearly around on improving
employment for people with
disabilities.
It's
not the program our physical
accessibility program in grant
program
we provide review plan to do
site visits on ADA compliant
around the state.
Probably one of the most
significant part of this program
is a residential accessibility
modification program so that is
providing home modifications for
people with disabilities to
allow them to stay in their
homes
instead of having to move out to
you know as a facility or
complicate care setting so that
providing grant after
modifications grab bars whatever
unitary to enable to say for
them to stay in the community.
this project has only grown so
in fiscal year nineteen I think
we did thirty five projects last
fiscal year eight sixty two
despite COVID we really want to
keep that same level attracted
to that we know that demanded
higher and one thing that I'll
mention is that usually any you
know increase or decrease in our
four hundred budget will
probably hit the ramp program
the most that will determine how
many projects we do I public
chair and
I development for the grant
program is one we are partnering
with our LG and construction I
see IT I'm training for builders
and for their plan reviewers as
well as working with the New
Mexico Association for Home and
hospice care workers I to
connect them to our grant
program so we're excited about
the negotiations.
or third project to bring
increased by three council we do
a lot of education research
studies around at brain injury
and you know this information
you know we we try to share with
governor's office Legislature
anyone who'll listen
because there we know that
there's not enough attention
attention on brain injury.
Our current initiatives a couple
of that at we are particularly
proud of is working with you and
and your network you're really
bring our brain injury education
to all parts of New Mexico
including rural areas community
putting on that information in
the hands of health care workers
and community as well as our
partnership with that domestic
violence shelters and medical
providers on you to help raise
awareness about brain injury
among people who have suffered
domestic violence and encourage
the the assessments at when they
receive medical care
at a brain injury connecting to
services.
And then last but not least with
our New Mexico technology
assistance programs and impact
again a federally funded program
to provide the technology to
help people connect to
educational opportunities
employment
or you know anything else that
they at the technology can help
and connect to and that is
through the bite the thirty day
to buy things you can try out a
device you don't have to
actually invest hundreds of
dollars thank you for you know
that work.
I devised in the station
training again and also
financial loaned to requires
technology.
I'm in our current initiatives
with an impact our and.
again I want to focus on
collaboration because we are
definitely stronger together so
we have strong relationships
with DVR and with certification
or something the technology
specially during COVID times
we're all doing things virtually
we have partnered with the
committee for the hearing
commission for the blind CYFD on
virtual accessibility underuse
virtual training although I
think there's been
differently can benefit you know
to being able to condition but
while they're also think
challengers in lot of those
entities virtual conference
platforms
Education Act as well as working
with and and and and and S. U.
and U. and M. to support farmers
to flexibility for acting
program.
Well you know we've had similar
comment challenges everyone else
alright you know how do we
provide important services the
flea how do we connect with that
our constituents and the people
that we're serving when we have
you know like events that are
canceled in the schools that are
close.
how we responded definitely to
adapt innovate collaborate with
our last program we've
definitely worked with our
clients
to if they don't want to send
their home trying to figure
creative solutions so that they
can get pictures and
measurements we can still move
forward with that project
the brain injury Advisory
Council working with the Iraqi
you live he on media outreach
for our protecting information
they should have to get I think
how much is.
for our have program I think
when things I'm at I'm always
amazed that is there a delay to
innovate and so you know they've
they've created these
contraptions you know it covers
all over the place so that they
can you know
demonstrated by the folks in
the.
Will can't come into our office.
and then with our disability
awareness and advocacy again
around COVID we and part of the
disability access and functional
needs coalition beginning of the
pandemic to really facilitate
communication problem solving
for people with disabilities
during comment on and that that
has been a really strong source
of expertise and how to get the
on through the pandemic.
And with that.
You can tell you can contact us
and happy to hear from you and
happy to take any questions we
have to.
Thank you very much director for
side
for the in depth presentation
and really the extraordinary
adaptations that you outlined
there serving some of the most
vulnerable New Mexico was
incredible I'm looking now to
committee members to see if
there any committee questions.
and I'm not.
Seeing any questions now
Will so yes that seeing seeing
no questions deeply appreciating
the work that you all do noting
the relatively small difference
although as folks know we look
to preserve General Fund space
through this recommend the
simplified.
forces is not a final action
but it's great that there's not
a lot of difference in that
there's especially very low
difference on the PS in the B.
areas in terms of bringing on
and supporting the needed folks
with that we would go to
Representative.
Hochman Vigil for
a motion and less there's any
Any questions from the
committee.
Seeing no questions we go
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr chair at this time
make a motion to adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you there is a motion to
adopt the LFC is there a second.
Second.
There's a second from
Representative Dixon
either opposition to that motion
from the committee.
Seeing no objection from
committee members
the as a recommendation the LFC.
Budget is adopted only for
recommendation of course no
final action in again miss
Forsythe.
Thank you for the in depth
presentation and the
extraordinary adaptations that
you and your team have led
especially to.
Thank you members of the
committee thank you very much
thank you.
Okay thank you committee members
we're going to go ahead now
continue to go through will go
to HSD code six four seven
that's going to be the
developmental disabilities
planning council and will ask
miss Kelly client.
To begin with the LFC analysis
or excuse me the LFC the
explanation of the different
suits and then go to the agency
down some more and we see that
we have this Alice the McCoy on
to step in after the analysts
conclude
Mr chairman this is David Abbey
if I could let miss Densmore go
first I'm contributing for miss
Clark to set another meeting and
and I can have some comments but
if she could help me by going
first thank you.
Good thank you very this does
more would you kick us off.
Yes of course Mr chair members
of the committee I'm happy to
help out
so I as as the chair Mister here
detention this is agency six
four seven the disability
developmental disabilities
planning council.
and I am just going to take you
through the narrative I think
it's going to provide a good
overview some of the differences
that.
We want to go into detail a
little bit about later I'm so
we're not even revenue so both
recommendations increase the
general fund revenue and this is
partly to replace depleted fund
balances for the agency I'll
just note very quickly here for
you
I do PC has historically relied
on a little bit of fun balance
in their operating budget in FY
twenty one they had just over
five hundred thousand dollars
and they have now pretty much
depleted it so I'm that put them
in a in a bit of a precarious
position heading into this
budget cycle so both
recommendations took that into
consideration and and looks to
replace some of that however the
executive recommendation is
about one point seven million
about the LFC so the executive
recommendation for this
additional general fund supports
the guardianship services and
there's two new programs that
I'm sure director a little clay
will want to discuss with you
but those are funded I'm in the
executive recommendation but I
will share that those were added
after the request was submitted
to they're not in the LFC side
so when you see those big
differences that that is a big
part of it and there is a
program on each of their P.
codes and they had a special
education ombudsman program that
they're looking to start and
then they have a guardianship
licensing program so again I'm
sure that director will fill you
in a little bit more as we go
along.
Into the base the executive
recommendation increased the
person hi five hundred and
twenty eight thousand this is to
provide six FTE working on new
initiatives so again as I just
mentioned there's two new
programs each of them
in order to to function full I
need a three FTP so that is
where the difference is
primarily again recommendation.
In contractual services the
majority of the difference is
for professional licensing of
guardians recommended by the
executive but again
the new services we're submitted
after the after the requests
were formally in and so that
again that's not in the LFC side
so you'll see that as a
difference
And then the other costs has
about seventy two thousand
dollars difference and again is
generally associated with those
new services I'm in the two new
programs that are reflected in
the executive recommendation I
and then lastly regarding the
performance measures yeah it
does analysts reconcile them we
came to consensus so there are
no differences I'm director Avid
would you like to discuss the
next program or would you like
just to have me go through it no
I'd like to make some general
comments first and I think it's
thank you for.
recognizing that a lot of the
increase for this agency did not
go through the budget process
that the committee has the LFC
recommendation for an increase
of about five percent I just
look real quickly invite one
where we list percentage changes
somewhere on page one eighty of
volume one in interestingly the
increase for this agency was the
third highest increase the LFC
recommendation which is course a
recognition of both need and of
budget constraints you know in
this environment you know with
uncertainty about oil and gas
and that sort of thing so the
the committee did prioritize
this area
You know the executive certainly
has the privilege and
responsibility to bring forward
initiatives that haven't gone
through but budget process but
it makes it harder for the
legislature to deal with those
because you know the reason I
your budget processes look at
contracts and personnel and
outcomes and all those things so
I think that that's my general
comment and then miss dance more
sure could help me a little bit
more she did on the detailed
programs if you'd go on or thank
you.
Of course.
You too hi Mr chair members of
the committee I will take you
through the next program if that
is all right
Thank you it's P. seventy seven.
And it's just called
developmental disabilities
planning council so in this
program.
The the main differences here
are reflected in that program
that the executive included
which is the special education
ombudsman program and you can
see that result in a difference
of about two hundred and eighty
three thousand dollars of course
the executive was hired to
include the initiative I'm and
then when you get into the
specific categories in the base
our the executive recommendation
in personal services is about
two hundred and seventeen
thousand higher and it's three
F. T. E. higher again that is
the anticipated need to carry
out the functions of this new
program the HSD is hoping to do
I'm again the funding FTE were
not requested to the LESC so
that is why they are not in
there or if we're not able to be
considered
In contractual services the
differences approximately sixty
six thousand and in the other
category
I'm sorry that's combined in
contractual services and other
and again those are those
Representative you know
additional contracts that the
agency anticipates needing as
well as you know miscellaneous
expenses to support new FTP
working on
the new program performance
measures are reconciled so
there's nothing to go over
there.
Then the other program.
Very very best they're just
coming
in for the DDP State Council the
differences entirely for a new
office so I would encourage the
members to to perhaps inquire
what outcomes happen
with the new office which is the
kind of thing that ordinarily
the committee would look at the.
Thank you direction.
Thank you very much you're if
you go to the next one I'm ready
thank you okay yes of course Mr
chair members of the committee
the second program for TV PCS
Pico seven thirty seven and this
is the office of guardianship
this is where you will see the
majority of the differences if
we get into it a little bit
there are a couple of reasons
white but I'll start by just
letting you know that the
executive recommendation here
was about one point four million
about the LFC and this is it's
really for two main areas the
first is that the executive put
in more to bring up the
contractual services to fund the
professional guardianships
but also is that additional
office that is in the executive
but did not go through the
request process again so not
considered by the LFC it's a
guardianship licensing program
so that's what you're gonna see
the main differences here and
just again and it is worth
noting I think I'm for the
committee that this is the
program that historically use
the fund balance you can see
that five hundred thousand four
hundred in FY twenty one
operating budget column on the
far left and then you can see
that it is not recommended all
by either I'm the LFC or the
executive because that the fund
balances is basically depleted
I'm so again very quickly just
going to the base for you in
person the difference is about
three hundred eleven thousand
and it's three F. T. E. more
that's on the executive side and
this is for the licensing
program for the professional
guardians are which is in the
executive recommendation but not
in the LFC I'm and then in
contractual services the the
difference is just over a
million
the executive as.
Higher and again some of these
costs our our our interest rate
with the new office I believe
it's about eight hundred a
little over eight hundred
thousand difference is the is
the difference that is intended
to provide the professional
guardianship contracts which is
the main
purpose of this program.
and then any other costs
category
But see I'm sorry and may have
mis read this one to do at two
hundred and thirty six thousand
is for the new licensing program
and the remaining for
guardianship Services so again
that's where you're going to see
this differences there more
significant here this is where
DD PC spends the majority of its
budget so it's it's a bit larger
than the other program but with
that I I have no more comments
but I will turn it back over to
director Abbey in case there's
anything you'd like to
contribute.
Your trip director Avid you're
on this rabbit you're on mute.
All right first I.
If you think an adult you Mr
chairman yester went to a
funeral Center white and I think
all of those who are involved
with this community appreciate
the good work he did for the
last few years trying to.
You know work on these issues.
I think I thank Mr Mortimer's
job laying out that that this is
kind of a mix about half money
recess and she will have the
exact figures to establish a new
office and the rest perhaps to
deal with a waiting list there's
a good discussion and buying to
about the waiting list and if I
could make a suggestion to the
committee
You know it wading into the
existing workload is generally a
priority of LFC so to the extent
there extra resources we I would
probably suggest looking at
trying to prioritize addressing
the waiting so.
Thank you Mr chairman for that
opportunity absolutely thank you
very much the strategy and and
and for the tribute to a former
senator white in the incredible
work including others on this in
this.
so committee meeting today
yourself and many others thank
you for honoring that
we we do want to also go next
now that we've can included the
analysts
we we want to go to
miss Alice the Michael eight
for a.
Her discussion and conversation
and we will we do also note that
one Alison of the there's
already a few member questions
so with that will
will head that agency the McCoy.
Please if you could give us your
thoughts in presentation.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you members of the
committee director Avid and the
stands more for your
presentations I know it's very
unusual to see this kind of
discrepancy between the
executive and the LFC
recommendations I will do my
best to run through that I do
want to give a very quick
orientation I'm very briefly
over the presentation and thank
just so you know a little bit of
our about our program if you
haven't already heard about us
so that D. P. C. the
developmental disabilities
planning council is a as part of
a network of developmental
disability councils across the
nation we are we are at we are
created by the federal DD Act
and we set on our on our under
council sits members from across
state agencies we have self
advocates New Mexicans living
with developmental disabilities
I'm we have their family members
and we have a broad variety of.
State department state agencies
if you include department health
Human Services Department I
children youth and families
department Public Education
Department I'm aging long term
services department and others
we also have other agencies that
deal in disability rights work
such as disability rights New
Mexico to sit on our council we
have so we have brought
representation on disability
issues we also have item in the
PC Center for self advocacy
leadership academy years.
This particular program provides
training and networking for self
advocates people living with DDT
and helps them become self
advocates in both provided other
kinds of policy and advocacy
situations and also of course to
get involved in our local
communities and take leadership
positions there we ran two
semesters of the leadership
academy a year we are currently
running our winter class I'm and
at and it always ones are hard
to see a lot of our academy
graduates take leadership
positions across the state.
That I of the four major
priorities that are councils
working on you have broken into
and committees to work on this
but I major priorities are
education employment health and
community based services and
legal civil rights I'm in
education we have developed and
with the.
Education department what we're
calling a special education
transformation team and these
include folks from across
special education to look at
special education issues and to
I'm really improve how we do
that in the state folks who are
in education especially folks
who know a lot about special
education work know that there
are many improvements that we
can should make I'm and that
it's a really difficult process
for students and families.
I'm an employment at I think
director for side spoke earlier
about some of the ways we
partnered implement and I'm an
additionally we have we're
developing an in house training
so that we can hire folks in to
our agency as a.
Part time employee and teach
them job skills and help them
look for other positions within
state agency I think as I'm the
state we need to take leadership
in hiring people living with
disabilities and the seat the
assets that we have and when we
do we'll do higher thanks
looking disabilities in
community health and community
based services we need done
covered related services
including and the distribution
I'm working through a vaccine
accessibility issues working on
critical standards of Kerr ads
look at director for site as
mentioned we partnered with all
the state agencies on on those
issues and because the state
agencies also said on our
council there is a lot of I'm
discussion within the council
I'm on how we can deal with
these issues and how it relates
to people living with PED and
other disabilities.
Finally we have because we are
federally mandated agency we do
have federal contracts and so we
manage as federal contracts and
some of that I'm organizations
that receive our contracts
include and the UNM center for
development and disability I'm
at parents reaching out affects
disability rights New Mexico and
many others I'm as such as best
buddies New Mexico.
Lots of organizations to do
their best to not only provide
services for people living with
disabilities fights I'm make
sure that they're part of the
community I'm the vast majority
of our budget as missed and
swarm mentioned is in our office
of guardianship and so I think I
spend the majority Jordy part
time today talking about what
our needs are in office
guardianship and what the office
guardianship is I'm is we
provide services to income
eligible New Mexicans that they
should reach a two hundred
percent poverty level but we do
make exceptions for folks were
close I'm for and what we do is
that we petition for
guardianship on their behalf and
we provide a professional
guardian if that is what the
courts and assigned to the
individual we also we will also
petition for guardianship for
family gardens as well so we do
both.
I am going to share my screen so
we can talk about the budget
recommendations differences
which I think it's but everyone
is most interested in today.
Somebody in my during the budget
summary one pager thank you very
much so this is our FY twenty
budget summary of try to distill
the issues as much as possible
for the members and I've also
emailed a copy to every member
and so if you have not received
it please let me know and I will
make sure you get it right away
and I've tried to broker right
down all the differences and why
they exist so I think the first
the first Mr major issue is as
Mrs for has mentioned we have
I'm nonrecurring funds that are
depleted and and those come from
two major sources so one is our
fund balance which will be
depleted by the end of this year
we anticipate a little bit of a
reversion at because of the way
the court proceedings work we
may not always spend every dime
but we get as close as possible
we've gotten very good in the
last year or two since I've been
here I'm to projects what are
expenses will be in legal
services so although we can't
quite pinpoint you know exactly
when the court is going to
schedule a hearing for example
I'm we do our best to to based
on data to answer in that.
And so we have so we will see
probably a tiny bit reversion
that'll go into the fund balance
but not very much and and and if
you look at our versions for
this last year you'll see that
again you know our versions are
very small I'm so five hundred
around five hundred thousand
dollars have been budgeted this
year and last fiscal year I'm
it'll be zero so that we have to
make up for that and then as
well we have last year we did
apply for emergency requests
from the state board of finance
I'm one of the priorities when I
entered when I started as
executive director of this
agency make sure that we work
through that wait list and last
year we did we got down to zero
at one point
and the the plan as we speak
we're speaking with executive
I'm the plan was to get a
supplemental request for at last
year and then come into this
year with a right sized budgets
I'm due to COVID and other
issues that didn't happen we did
have to ask for that emergency
grant just to get to the end of
the year with existing cases I'm
and so that that was around to
our I think the last year's
grant was around two hundred
twenty thousand dollars but what
we've determined wise for the FY
twenty two just replace
nonrecurring revenue sources we
would need I'm around six
hundred and eighty two thousand
dollars.
The second issue that we're
seeing are rapidly growing needs
for guardianship services even
though we got to zero last year
because of budget restraint
issues I did a whole all
assignment of cases except for
emergency priority basis I and
help those cases and and the
weightless began to grow again
I'm at this time the wait list
is
Over it's over a hundred people
and I believe I have updated
numbers that I just received.
I'm from my.
Staff.
We have two hundred and ten
applications on the wait list as
of today.
That's a lot for us you know we
were when I came into the agency
I we had I believe we had I'm
almost a hundred or four hundred
and we were able to work that
down but as you can see it's
growing and this is at this is
just over the past years I
started holding cases last
January in over the course of
the year we now have two hundred
and ten I want to let you know
that the emergency cases are
cases where life or death
decisions must be made on behalf
of the person and priority cases
are cases that are
That are referred to us from
certain organizations
child protective services and
adult protective services
And the veterans groups justice
name a few and also from for
example the Jackson lawsuit
members and other lawsuit
members.
And so I would like to emphasize
that you know we are we are in
the middle or hopefully it is of
a pandemic and we are seeing a
lot of complications coming from
that and I think the biggest
factor I'm that is growing our
guardianship services is the
fact that we have a rapidly
aging population here next not
only that but we are out there
doing a lot of outreach and and
education about who we are in
our services and folks as they
know the more they know about us
and the higher our application
rates rise and so we're
anticipating around a two
hundred thirty two thousand
dollar
increase to process cases on the
existing wait list in a very
careful and you know this
article way we're not trying to
work through the your site
everybody all at once we
understand that can overload the
courts we but we put project and
this is a very conservative
estimate this is how much it
would cost to to to start
reducing the wait list
meaningful I'm and this includes
our estimate up about two thirds
of the cases that we get
applications are for
professional guardians when we
assign a professional guardian
how we pay for those
guardianship cases indefinitely
until that guardianship is
terminated or transferred to
somebody who is on a roll and so
I'm so we are taking that into
consideration this year because
of budget restraints we have
asked for supplemental to get us
to the end of the year and we've
also
and also we're using our legal
services funding to have to make
sure that family guardians are
prioritized this year because we
don't have the funds to to sign
very many professional.
I want to emphasize and and
thank LESC for recognizing the
importance of this program and
for for recommending a two
hundred around a two hundred
fifty thousand dollar increase
and general fund monies from FY
twenty one to FY twenty two but
as you can see you know.
Two hundred fifty is about half
of our nonrecurring fund balance
that we usually have budgeted
and so even with the LC
recommendation higher in general
fund balance I'm sorry in
general fund we are still
looking at a budget that will
not be able to provide the
services that were already
legally obligated to provide at
this time.
When guardians are signed and
here in New Mexico or anywhere
by a court we are required to
continue providing those
services until
Montoya again the the
guardianship is terminated for
whatever reason some of the
initiatives that we are going to
be involved in this year will be
to help people assess where they
are in the guardianship and and
help folks graduate out of
guardianship that is appropriate
for them and to help them set up
I'm a support system so that
they can live more timeously and
have more control over their
lives I'm and in that way we
also free up state resources to
provide guardianship to people
who really do need that high
level of service.
I'm finally I'd like to go over
our programs and expenses and
the ones that are at that we're
asking for in in this budget I'm
the first one is the office of
the special education but.
I'm one of the biggest
priorities of this council is.
Revamping the special education
system we're working closely
with legislators with PED and
with and their past with that
teachers families students
really everybody as that are are
part of these education system
to see what we can do to make
special education what it should
be in the states I'm one of the
initiatives that we have come up
with is to create a special
education on president and they
will be in charge of making sure
that families across the state
of New Mexico understand what
resources and options are
available to their students.
I'm as they're trying to
navigate the system and they
will be there every step of the
way we will make sure that add
schools give families notice
every year I'm not schools give
and families who are already in
the special education system
notice
Every year again as part of
their individualized education
plan process I'm that that that
the information of the special
education on bad will be posted
and in a very prominent place in
every school and what the but
will do is work with families
and students they'll also be
able to access records with the
families of permission to work
through whatever issues that are
happening on the ground we will
start at the lowest level and
try to resolve all concerns and
families will finally have an
advocate they'll be entitled to
an advocate.
Who is on in the corner
explaining everything along the
way and and helping explain all
of their options as they worked
since that will also be working
very closely with PED and will
be required to and at.
To publish an annual report I'm
for the public to see our
activities and at one to
concerns that we've identified
through the through our work to
the on that work and to work
with PED and other stakeholders
and other decision makers to try
to fix the problems that were
identified to try to resolve the
issues on the system.
And so the special education on
that will do both individual
advocacy and system sixty we are
estimating this is also very
conservative because we are just
building the program this next
year we are requesting two
hundred ninety five thousand
dollars to hire three F. T. one
St special education but and to
staff to work with the on but
this will be a statewide program
and it is the goal of this
office too I'm recruits and
In train and certify ombudsman
across the state of New Mexico
so that every school district
will have an ombudsman at the
when we get to and every school
district will have an ombudsman
that they can go to to
To help them with the process
and then each on each ombudsman
in that district will have
access to that the state
investment here at the PC to
make sure they're getting any
kind of assistance technical
assistance and in connection
with you know whatever resources
that they need to get things
done we're again we're going to
going to be working very closely
with the public education
department and we will bring to
bear all of the authority that
the PED has I'm with schools and
school districts to make sure
that we get it done on that
local level because that's where
everything gets sent for
education.
I'm so the next major program
that we are.
Presenting this year is the
Asgardian ship or licensure of
professional guardians and
conservators
many of you are are have had
experience in the adult
guardianship world and you've
seen and many of you even if we
have an experience you've seen
in the news I'm issues with
professional guardians I'm date
I I work very closely with many
professional guardians in the
state of New Mexico many of them
are the majority of them are are
contractors and and and do
excellent work but it we need to
make sure that every single
professional guardian who is
collecting money to provide
these resources are meeting the
highest standards of
practice and ethical standards
of practice and so under this
licensure requirement I'm.
To be a professional guardian or
conservator in the state of New
Mexico you need to receive a
license from the Office
guardianship before you can be
appointed as as a guardian or
conservator in the state I'm do
this this will give the state's
direct oversight of guardians a
one of the biggest problems that
we see in professional
guardianship is that
the courts you know they have
continuing jurisdiction over
each case but a professional
guarding for example may have
eighty case and so if.
You know if a person brings the
case to a court and goes through
at the hearing and all of the
other very burdensome court
proceedings to address an issue
with regarding you have to
address it in one case and who
will do it for the other seventy
nine and so with this at with
this office of licensure we can
make sure that there is a
comprehensive and direct way for
us to work with guardians and
make sure they are complying
with the standards you're
obligating to comply with.
I'm the estimated cost for this
program is two hundred eighty
five thousand again for three
FTE and other other costs and
part of this part of this effort
is to make sure that we
understand what's happening with
partnership across the state of
New Mexico and how people are
being cert I'm part of this bill
that we're going to bring that
is going to create this
licensure I'm will also
strengthen the off the
guardianships requirements in in
making sure that contract to
complete our contractors for our
our.
Special guardians were
contracting with us guardianship
are meeting those requirements
to use their be requirements for
I'm not only contract compliance
budgets and meeting I'm
standards and
and.
Forming comprehensive service
reviews of every single
contractor annually and also
visiting protected persons and
making sure that and the
protected persons are receiving
this care that they should the
quality care should be.
That's also part of the bill
Representative I'm and one way
to make sure that we don't lose
historical data and that we are
I'm making evidence based policy
decisions is part of our new
program request that we're
asking is a hundred seventy six
thousand dollars for a data
provider data provider
management system this is
incredibly important what I've
noticed in the last two years
are your to your half that I've
worked at this agency and at
that I worked at Coffs
guardianship is that there is no
way for us to analyze or pool
historical data this is
incredibly.
Problematic we have people the
community asking us about
certain guardians about you know
folks who might may have been
our guardians before that but
that we stopped contracting with
for whatever reason sometimes
because they don't meet our
standards and
there is no way for us to really
pull that information except
case by case and in a very
At.
Antiquated data system and so
what this will be able to do for
us is what will be able to track
historical data study trends and
make sure that we're able to
provide information that we need
I'm when when people want to now
and and it's important because
with guardianship it is
essential that we move very
quickly and and and and it's
also essential that we make
changes guardianship is and ever
changing
Area of law and so in order to
make sure that we're.
Make we're protecting people's
rights and that we are providing
least restrictive options and
that we're supporting people the
way that we should I'm the state
a metric system scripture.
And so that is
hopefully at a very
distilled version of what you
need to know for for our request
in with that I stand for
questions thank you.
Thanks thank you so much
director local eight for going
through that detailed
presentation we do have
questions will jump right into
it goes straight to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for your presentation
is required hi I noticed in our
volume to this required the.
LFC recommendation even though
it's lower than the governor's
recommendation is actually five
hundred eleven point seven
thousand dollars higher than
your original agency request.
I was surprised when I saw that.
anyone a couple that with the
fact that I'm looking at your
answers out of the SCG.
In the past year was two hundred
and eighty thousand twenty three
point eight percent of your PSEB
was transferred out of that Fund
somewhere else I don't know
we're and I would like to ask a
question.
And you said you had a small
river.
Was a hundred hundred forty six
thousand six hundred eighty one
dollars which is over ten
percent total.
In FY nineteen your that is
reverted a hundred ninety
thousand dollars in tracks fifty
five thousand out of PSEB so
there's a track record.
Is C. B. and reverting over ten
percent your budget can you help
me understand those numbers
please yes absolutely
Representative Crowder thank you
and that Mr chair thank you for
the question so also noted that
the canning I believe your first
question was about
well I show server their version
is that was easy I'm so the
reversion amounts at is
incorrect there was a major
discrepancy in the auditor's
reports and I believe that and
this agency and our CFO signed
off on the auditors reversion
number and that is incorrect we
have now received I'm updated
reversion numbers and I believe
it's about a hundred and ten for
the whole HSD split about fifty
fifty between the PC and our and
Asgardian ship and as far as why
there is about fifty thousand in
each program in DPC because of a
lot of the programs that we do
our our training self advocates
a lot of face to face meetings
traveling across the state of
New Mexico to make sure that
we're providing these programs
for folks I'm and then also I'm
giving and also contracting out
with our contractors to do
similar kinds of programs and
with COVID and with the pandemic
we were not able to spend down
all of those monies I'm for
those programs in part in other
part is that we actually did
receive more federal funding and
to say general fund money and to
save state funding I'm in the
team on the PC side we chose to
spend federal funds instead of
general fund money this is non
revert at this is that this is
not money that goes into funded
us just revert back to the
general fund so we were doing
our best to be fiscally
responsible in this last year
knowing that it was a very
difficult budget year for.
As far as offs guardianship and
that fifty percent I am so in
our you know we have.
Over five million dollars in our
budget for off the guardianship
and fifty around fifty thousand
dollars of that
we believe this is not too bad
of a reversion and the reason
why we have fund balance is
because of the way our program
works when we assign a case I'm
in need to go through the whole
court process before we can pay
out the case so we have to do
and sort of a very fine line
from budget your budget you're
trying to projects when those
monies are going to be spent and
I think I'm you're nearing it
down to about fifty thousand I'm
I'm pretty happy with because
that means next year date yet we
won't actually have we may have
a fund out of maybe fifty
thousand I'm not really sure
hopefully zero and but but what
we did get from last year will
be spending that down definitely
this year I'm we'll be doing a
bar for that I'm and so that
that does speak to the reversion
and at Representative Crowder
and I apologize and and what
we're that that there was a
couple I wasn't really sure what
you meant by the transfer.
Insurance for.
are going to be eighty thousand
dollars is transferred out of
your personal services.
Allocation in I don't know where
that is useful I would be
curious eight years.
So we.
Twenty four percent of your
operating budget.
For the was transferred for
other purposes.
The person in two hundred
category of distance work is
that right okay I'm so because
we were running quite short and
contracts and guarding contracts
providing those direct services
to people I'm when we captives
vacancies open what we tried to
do was I use our vacancy savings
to pay for direct services
situates and that's that's why
we work I'm transferring from
two hundred to three hundred to
contracts for address it
appreciate responses it does
trouble me that that this agency
has a history of that nineteen.
PSEB here's in a different
person's last first your
reporting monies back in that
in some there's an indicator
that.
You're you're not spending the
money we think we're.
In your regarding money.
That I don't know how you're
doing that so and then the other
one that.
C. request.
Yes.
You too.
See actually recommend.
The house over the are you
requested.
Thank you representative that Mr
chair and so as far as the
history I understand a very
problematic history in this
agency I think historically just
to get I'm and many members who
are who may be new to this
budget
historically
this agency was reverting large
amounts and because of that the
fund balance kept growing so
when Oscar District reverts it
actually goes into the fund
balance and at one point
Before I was here you know far
before I was here I think that
the fund balances up to three
million dollars and so for for
members who have seen this
agency historically it is
usually problematic and I
recognize that when it came in
I'm one of the things that we do
prioritize of agency when I
arrived was working through that
weight we did do that and in
fact at one point because LFC I
think because of the legislature
was not happy with how hi the
fund balance was and how high
that the wait list was the
actually restricted fund balance
spending to reducing the
waitlist explicitly and so we
did spend all that down I'm and
again when there is a reversion
into our fund balance.
That's where we're spending it
and so seeing now that we've now
consistently Spence our fund
balance down
I think that shows our track
record our recent track record
of spending every single cent
that is being assigned our
agency so while we may not
always be able to spend it again
in that budget year we we have
your market for those services
and there those services are
being provided and that money is
being spent that's why you're
seeing a zero balance I'm being
recommended for FY.
This is your question represent
only and one last thing I'm we
were directed by the executive
to turn in a five percent I'm
decrease in general fund from FY
twenty one I I did submit a memo
to the executive which I
forwarded to LFC
you telling the reasons why I'm
that five percent would not work
for our program but we were
directed to do that and because
I did not have for example DVR
has a federal mandate that says
they you know they must have.
continuation of services act as
at the current level we didn't
have that kind of authority to
make that call and so we have
followed the executives
direction and submitted our our
request with a memo which we did
send LFC explaining why that
request was insufficient and and
do telling the exact amounts
that I also have provided to you
in that one pager amounts that
are necessary to actually run
the program and sustain and
maintain our services that were
already legally obligated to
provide I think at I again thank
the LESC for recognizing that
there this is an issue and for
for recommending an amount
that's higher and I also think
the executive for are
recognizing that we do need the
full amount and when the
executive made a decision on the
overall budget decision that
there that agencies that the
budget wasn't going to look as
bad as I thought it was good
and that agencies should should
do our deep dive on what they
needed and that was when the
executive recommendation came in
at the amounts that you see and
I hope that I'm I hope that
answers the question and thank
you if it doesn't dress to
questions and I appreciate I I
would make one final comment Mr
chairman of it's okay
I I have the the blessing of
setting on the legislative
finance committee if we go
through all summer long budget
process it is very frustrating
to come to this meeting at this
time and have a much larger
request than what we've ever
anticipated.
We saw in the try to deal with
it in a very brief time that
that is very difficult to.
But I just want to express the
frustration that comes out of
that kind of action that takes
place in thank you I appreciate
it thanks for your presentation.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we're going to go to
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and a director limit quite good
to see you again thank you for
and in depth presentation and
and I think that you are.
Addressing.
Important needs in our state and
and doing it in a creative way
but I'm just going to also echo
Representative Crowder stress
duration and not working through
the budget process that helps us
make good decisions so I guess
my question is with with two new
new arms to new offices the
special education ombudsman
office and the new licensing
program not submitted the LFC
within the budget criteria what
what exactly happened there.
Thank you for your question
Representative Sweetser Mr chair
I'm so it's.
A couple things I'm.
A big part a big chunk of the
amounts that we're requesting
now.
I'm again you know we were
directed by the executive and we
had to
Go through the executive process
on what we were allowed to
request and we were directed and
you got a memo Census you you
have to come in at five percent
under we had our meetings with
the executive of what as well
I'm detail on all the things
that I details you today and
that has so I did put that in
writing a memo also put that in
writing to the I'll see what I
submitted our official request
that was five percent under I'm
and at and have had multiple
conversations with I'm your L.
C. analyst about I'm about our
needs and so I think I'm.
I have Representative M. at all
points the budget process what I
believe to be and what's
necessary to run the surround my
programs and and I presented
that to today
I did put it in writing in my
request as well as part of that
introduction I did put it in a
memo but I follow the direction
of executives I was required to
do apologize that that is.
Frustrating part of the process
for both for both of us were
all.
Thank you Representative a well
and and Mr chair director Lou
McQuay I get it I do understand
your given parameters and then
suddenly at some point in their
the parameters change but that
these are big changes are really
important
Clients in our state and I mean
I I honestly I'm working on some
legislation for special
education I love this special
education ombudsman office idea
I just love that I can get the
it's logical and it makes sense
to have had somebody you know as
a central point that will work
the entire state and helping
with some of these issues and
and I don't know that I've ever
really thought about
professional guardians but a
licensing program and we are not
these are not
you know hi and this guy kind of
ideas that really solid and
thoughtful I'm just frustrated
with the differences in the
budget fan and so when we get to
that point I think we'll have to
to try to work in and and and
reformulated but I I do think
that that is important that all
the agencies understand that we
really depend on this budget
process and because we have no
staff because we are you know
coming up here depending on
budgets that are presented to us
we look at the LFC budget is
kind of our staff and so so
anyway I I like what you're
doing and I I wish that we
weren't at this point today
right before we're trying to get
a budget done in the next twenty
three days or whatever it is but
but I thank you for thinking
outside the box for the is
really important members of our
state so I guess with that with
that Mr chair and pass on
questions and and appreciate
that you you also are as and the
as I understanding of our
frustration as we are so thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
we'll go to Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation and
director limit quite you know
I'm one of your biggest fans
you've always done so much for
when you were in the other
department
I I just want to echo what
Representative Sweetser is
saying that these two items are
not pie in the sky and
I would actually like to see
those implemented one of my
questions is Mr chair is why
would the special education on
bugs then be under this
department and not under like
PED.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair Representative Armstrong
that's a great question and so
one of the one of the biggest
issues that we hear from
families and from from students
and.
M. I just want to give some
background to that you know
through our special education
transformation team work we have
we're doing a series of focus
groups and it's become very
apparent to us that our families
are very frustrated with this
process and it is complicated
we're expecting families to
learn complicated areas of law
to be able to read you know
fifty page packets and out and
and and know how to navigate
through that the whole system
and know where to find in that
fifty pages there one yeah one
page answer this is really
difficult and what we've heard
is that they need somebody in
their corner they need an
advocate that's just for them
I'm and what PED is a sort of a
neutral party the PED is
they run the mediation is no
they they they provide
facilitate our facilitators for
IEPs are an individualized
education plan meetings I'm here
that there are third party there
than usual party and they have
to be and they have a very
important role there to do that
you know they have to navigate
both families students and
schools and school districts and
make sure that schools are
getting the resources that they
need to and I'm EDD PC is
federally mandated to do
advocacy work on behalf of
people with disabilities and so
it made sense to us as we were
all brainstorming and we did
have a conversation should be in
PED should be here where should
be one of the reasons why it
landed and the deep sees not
only because we're vanity to do
this and we have the
the perspective of you know in
advocates but we also have honor
council a broad variety of Santa
Fe County state departments and
listed some of them for you
PED's one of them I'm HSD Human
Services Department department
how
and CYFD all of these
departments are big parts of
solving problems for students
and for kids and so we thought
that it would make sense to put
it somewhere where all these
departments come together and
have you have Representative and
where we we can have access the
department.
Still maintains that that
separation from departments so
that we're really more of an
advocate were very unusual state
agency and that we are supposed
to be at that's our job we're
not supposed to be a
bureaucratic administrative
funding and so that's the
primary reason why it's here.
That answers your question
Representative at yes thank you
so much thank you Mr chair and
thank you for that answer I just
thought it was a strange place
because not all special
education has to do with
disability so I that's why I was
curious on on that but I I do I
I really like both of those
programs a lot of echo
Representative Sweetser said
Concern for the way that it was
done but also concerned that
we're going to be missing it so
I'm hoping that we can take a
closer look at this and that
will be up to madam chair
economic and and
a co chair of small so I will
leave that up to them to do that
but I'm hoping that we can take
a second look so thank you Mr
chairman and.
Alex this quite thank you thank
you thank you very much
representative Armstrong
For really in depth questions
thank you to director loom clay
I don't see.
Any other questions on the
committee.
Noting really the excellent
Committee questions director
local a your explanation across
our wide area including the fact
that the depletion of the fund
balance represents is
representing.
Eighty it seemingly a stronger
fiscal approach to carry out
your mission and and noting the
in the performance measurements
right now you were four times
if over two hundred pending
cases that's four times the
agreed upon performance measure
between LFC and and DFA which
clearly is something the need to
be addressed so we're gonna go
to Representative Sweetser for a
motion inclusive of of the work
that perhaps we still need to do
in this area.
Thank you for that chairman and
with that I would move that we
accept the LFC recommendation
with instruction to the analyst
to work on this agency and come
back with something it might be
a little closer thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser is there
a second for that motion.
I see a hand right from
Representative Armstrong so
there's a motion to accept the
LFC recommendation with
instruction for staff to work on
both explanation perhaps
bridging some of the difference
in key areas while understanding
the very tight budget
constraints we're currently
under are is there any
opposition to that motion.
Okay.
Seeing no opposition thank you
tremendously to the advocates
director Louis McCoy your.
Really excellent effort in this
area and look forward to
following up and big thanks to
committee members for excellent
questions and really drilling
into what needs to be done.
All rights will continue on next
we're going to go to HSD code
six six eight that's the natural
resources trustee
we're gonna start with miss
Caitlyn mon to give us the LFC.
Narrative on the different see
it and she can help with
our natural resources trustee.
okay miss one if you would take
away please thank you and good
afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Caitlin
one LFC analyst I joining us
today to help present the
recommendations for the office
of the natural resources trustee
which is agency code six six
eight we have DFA analyst Andrew
Miner and natural resources
trustee and Maggie Hart Stebbins
I'm going to present the very
brief difference sheet and then
see if and has any more comments
before we turn it over to the
agency.
So the LFC recommendation for
the natural resources trustee at
reduced general fund revenue by
five percent and offset that
reduction with to twenty two
point three thousand dollars and
fund balance the executive
recommendation kept general fund
revenue flat with FY twenty one
to reduce the use of the natural
resources trustee fund for
operations both recommendations
increased fund balance
approximately two point eight
million dollars to make use of
funds resulting from case
settlements and you'll see that
in the all revenue sources the
LFC and executive recommendation
are equal.
In the base budget both
recommendations made minor
increases to the person on the
other costs budgets and
increased funding for natural
resource damage assessment and
remediation project by two point
eight million dollars.
And LFC and yet they staff did
come to a consensus on
performance measure targets and
you would you like to add
anything.
A yes just briefly thank you
okay Lang good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee as Kaelin described in
as you can see the
recommendations for the naturist
forces trust your very similar
they're the same at all
expenditure categories the only
difference there is that in the
General executive direction to
maintain general fund flat with
FY twenty one the twenty two
thousand dollars there was
instead of an expenditure
increase it was swapped out with
the natural trust the fund
revenue there is a statutory
provision that allows the
trustee to use that fund for
operations but the executive
chose to reduce that by twenty
two thousand just to preserve
that fund for it's a into an
original intentional purpose of
and natural resources
assessments and restoration so
that concludes my remarks and so
all I leave it to the trustee.
Thank you Mr reminder at.
Trustee hard Stephens great to
see you and please take it away.
Thank you at chair small members
of the subcommittee my name is
Maggie Hart Stebbins I was
appointed by governor Lujan
conversation about a year ago to
service New Mexico's natural
resources Tracy and I am really
pleased to be here at be here
with you today to talk about our
budget and just go over briefly
what we do and what we
accomplished in the twelve
months since I spoke to pass and
if it's a campaign and share my
screen I've got
about ten slides.
But I'd like to
share with you all go through
these quickly.
This.
And you'll notice at the end of
the presentation there is a
little more detail that I'm
happy to answer questions about
that as well so I'm New Mexico
office the natural resources
trustee we are a small agency
there are
For employees
we are administratively attached
to the New Mexico environment
department and we received very
excellent legal support from
Mister bill rampant who is I'm
an assistant Attorney General at
in a deep authorises office I'm.
We share responsibility with the
Environment Department for
responding when there is a
release of oil or some kind of
hazardous wastes into the
environment we work with B.
Environment Department very
closely but we are an
independent agency and
our response rules are different
I won't go into detail but it's
there slide and I want to just
make it clear we do not have a
regular we are really
responsive.
I'm.
So here are just a couple
highlights of our work since the
last legislative session
We have several two cases
bringing one point one five
million into the state of New
Mexico in FY twenty one one of
their settlements was the gold
king mine Kinross gold Madam and
the other was the front oil
We settled with from oil for
their release of oil and diesel
into the surround revert back in
two thousand six
at this point I really want to
give credit where credit is due
because the cold gold king mine
sentiments was really led by the
excellent work of Attorney
General Hector Harris again our
assistant AG don't grant them
and the legal staff at the
environment department's
We were part of that settlement
and I just wanna make it clear
we could not have accomplished
that without
without the AG's office in the
Environment Department
In
FY twenty one we initiated
seventy restoration projects
that total five point nine
million dollars we have resumed
that damage assessment on for
significant contamination sites
around the state I'm.
Why does that matter because
these settlements bring dollars
into our communities they go
back to the communities that
were injured by these releases
and
they can be used to well and
they do create and restore
opportunities for tourism
recreation and agriculture among
other things so owner T. since
its creation has proper almost
thirty two million dollars back
to the state of New Mexico
through the settlements.
We have many partners we work
with tribes and pueblos other
state agencies federal agencies
what will governments nonprofits
and NGOs we work with other
states and private landowners
they are all our partners in
this work and as you can see
from the bottom I'm.
Section our projects are located
all around the state.
And here's a map that shows
where our current damage
assessment projects are and when
I talk about damage assessment
that is our prescribed process
for gathering the data and
preparing cases against
parties responsible for
contaminations so you can see
the located brown state.
And this map shows locations of
the settlements since two
thousand so there's that figure
was thirty two million dollars
and you can see where those
sites are located.
Throughout our state.
I'm.
Into in twenty twenty we
initiated several new
restoration project so this
these projects use dollars that
have been awarded in natural
resource damage settlements or.
They have resulted from
settlements with responsible
parties
as you can see quest that
Grant County Albuquerque's south
valley and
Scanned over six million dollars
I'm.
So on this side there just two
things I'd like to highlight
this has to do with our budget
On this I think you can see S.
drive minor and despondent
pointed out.
The general fund does not cover
our operational expenses so all
of our expenses combined are
operational expenses total five
hundred and thirteen thousand
dollars and so
you know our request
is below that
And the practice has been that
those dollars
whatever the deficit is
We take out of the damage
assessment funds I'm you also
see that you know we do have a
very significant work increase
in our request for dollars from
the trustee Fund and that
request is to implement projects
actually funded restoration
projects around the state and
right around the state in the
communities that have been
injured by
by pollution and to increase our
work on damage assessments.
So this lied really gets it what
Miss one and Dr money we're
talking about so
Our budget our operating
expenses are five hundred are
five hundred seventeen thousand
dollars so the difference
between the executive
recommendation and LESC really
comes down to what is the
subsidy that comes out of the
assessment
the the assessment fund is
really fundamental to the work
that we do it on our T. it
allows us to pursue new cases
and in general owner to needs to
pay the expenses of those
process meant up front and the
dollars should and those
expenses and recovered
When the cases are settled there
go to education I'm.
It.
Can be expensive you know for a
significant case
seven hundred fifty thousand is
not an unreasonable estimate and
so we do anticipate that we will
need the dollars that are
currently in the assessment
funds and you know this
practices using assessment on
for operating expenses did we
need to that fund it to the
damages but being insolvent in
twenty twenty and all the damage
assessment work that was funded
out of that trust out of the
funds came to a halt so.
We do think it's important to
keep that assessment fund on
top.
So I'm.
Let's see again this is just a
brief explanation about the
request for other state funds.
And then I just want this is
here because I want.
You to appreciate how important
was that the
That house bill two last year
included special appropriation
for own R. T. you know it
It.
After the special session that
appropriations two million
dollars and it has allowed us to
do some really important work
again the settlements you know
the gold mine in the front oil
cases very important but it has
also allowed us to continue work
or we start work I'm at some in
some of these other locations
that again are really important
get these cases settle so the
communities that have been
injured by these contaminations
can be a whole.
I'm you know our agency
challenges as we gear up the
settlement as we
you know reach
Reach you settlements with
responsible parties it does
bring us a lot of new work so
Ian dollars that we we will
receive through the gold king
mine Madam you know we will
implement restoration projects
in the four corners area and
Right now
We have I'm responded to that
challenge by making internal
adjustments with the staff we
have but
You know I think in the future
we will becoming back to root
for with the request for
additional staff so.
That's my presentation and I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you thank you so much.
trust the hard Stephens.
Really it is to say just in one
year's time significant
successes and and pretty
substantial progress we do have
questions first we're gonna go
to Representative Sweetser and
and Representative Dixon
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you test the as well as
remembering when you popped on
my screen of you appear before
us a year ago on your second or
third day or something am I
remembering that correctly.
That's right I was pretty new.
Well Mr chair and and hard
seventy didn't excellent job
then it and then even better job
now and I just have one question
you sort of glossed over the
people that he that the boss the
issue and and you may not even
know what we're really facing
there but it has real concern
and and I kind of wondered if
you could give us a little bit
about date on them.
Of course so people has been on
our radar and as long as I've
been in this job
certainly contamination sit it
public man and cannon are well
known we do anticipate that we
will bring in natural resource
damage claim
when we have the information
that we need there is there are
still issues about P. fost being
identified as a contaminant of
concern
and then there's just work that
needs to be done to identify to
quantify the extent of the
contamination and so we will
again work closely with our
partners and other state
agencies to
two percent of that natural
resource damage claim when we
have the information that we
need.
Mr chair and the hard seven I
think that's a great answer
because I think we we disarm
fairly.
At in the service of what that's
actually done in the meeting
for all of us and and then I
would be remiss if if I didn't
thank you and and that
the agency on the work that you
did in Grant County which has
been very helpful and and all
across the state but that is my
my areas so thank you and I do
I'm not looking forward to what
happens with the fact that I
think and I know it it's on
everybody's radar and in a big
way thank you for that thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you so much Representative
Sweetser next going to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam trustee for your
presentation I do apologize
because they had to step out
briefly and so I I'm sure that
you already answered this but if
you could tell me what is the
balance in the assessment fund
right now that would be great
thank you so much.
I'm Mr chairman Representative
Dixon
thank you for that question
I believe that the balance so we
have expended about a hundred
eighty two thousand dollars from
that
From that damage assessment
funds I should probably I'm.
Clarify that we have our our
budget analyst I'm on staff but
I believe we also have about a
million dollars of that
Encumbered.
Okay thank you very much at any
given Mr chairman
representatives and I'm happy to
get back to what that specific
number within twenty four hours.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Dixon I
before we go to a motion.
I don't see any other committee
questions however I I I have a
couple of quick questions trusts
the
It's C. trust you seems like we
can look forward to a fairly
substantial amount of
restoration work into these
diverse New Mexico communities
kinda you know from from the top
The New Mexico to the bottom and
all parts in the in the number
of ports in between.
Do you have a sense of kind of
where this the restoration work
that you noted in your
presentation where that stands
in terms of what the historical
restoration work from the office
is been essentially is this
going to be a big year an
average year or.
Or or perhaps below average.
I'm well thank you Mr chairman
for that question.
It has been my intention in this
job to accelerate the
expenditures of those dollars
when you know I I joined L. and
R. T. you know I did notice that
there was a significant fund
balance and it is important to
me that those dollars be out
working for the communities that
need this restoration that have
been injured and
In.
And deserve to be made all it's
also important because these
dollars create jobs in these
small communities
And so
it may seem like a big increase
that we are requesting from that
fund balance but that's the
reason why I think it's
important for those dollars to
be utilized in the way that they
were intent
I'd be happy to get you you know
the numbers of how much of the
Madam has actually been
Expended on restoration and it
but I would say it's close to
ninety percent.
Excellent thank you and and I
agree wholeheartedly that the
the entry to the community's
needs to be remediated as you
really eloquently described plus
we know that there are
substantial benefits
economically and otherwise from
putting those dollars to use and
so I think full commendation to.
Moving that work aggressively
the last question I would have
yeah I see there's a very small
difference on the general fund
although slightly less from the
LFC this time
and made whole through the fund
balance you're point to and I
and I know we just heard it with
Representative Sweetser the
potential for for substantial
growth perhaps in the mission
that you oversee and maybe it's
not a question I think it's been
addressed
the budget process that was just
described in the previous
hearing.
If there's a successful track
record of of winning damages and
then aggressively applying those
damages to help communities
looking forward to seeing that
maybe in the upcoming budget
process as we as we look for
what's next in the special with
the foss describe areas very
close to the district and people
that I represent.
In Dona ana county in other so
we leave it at that okay thank
you very much trustee thank you
very much to committee members
we would now go to
Representative Hochman Vigil for
a motion.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
this time I move the LFC budget
recommendation it opted.
Cares a motion for the LFC is
there a second.
Been seconded by Representative
Dixon and Representative brown
Is there any opposition to
adopting the LESC recommendation
for this year.
Course is only recommendation
at I don't see any objection.
So without objection.
Thank you trust the hard
Stephens looking forward to the
work on the ground into seeing
your plans for continuing to do
this important work.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members.
All right Committee were now
move to the final agency for
today that's going to be agency
code six three two which is a
workers compensation
administration missed the catchy
will begin
and
and we'll go from there miss the
catchy please.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee.
I'm glad to be your last one
today.
So the workers compensation
administration is found on page
six thirty two volume two.
I'm and I am joining me today is
Simon Miller from the department
of finance.
And also from the workers
compensation administration we
haven't missed Loretta Lopez who
is the executive director
Michelle green is the W. and we
have anyone they Martinez who is
the financial person the fire
their CFO.
I hope I got that right if I not
use correct me ladies.
I'm so I'll just give an
overview and then they can can
present alternative were Simon
and then to the Loretta.
I'm.
There's no differences in
between the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation we both took the
agency's request that is
approximately four point four
percent below the FY twenty one
operating budget.
the workers compensation
administration is funded through
it's it's on funds so there is
no general fund in the
recommendation.
the there's two there's two
programs there's the workers
compensation administration
program and there is the
Unemployed uninsured employers
fund.
I'm.
At the end of twenty twenty
there was four point three
million dollars in the workers
compensation administration fund
and six million dollars and that
I'm the uninsured employers fund
at the agency was projecting
about eleven million dollars in
revenue for FY twenty one.
The overall budget for the
agency for both programs is
eleven point nine million and
both the I believe the executive
and the LESC agreed that the
funding with the funding was
sufficient the projected
revenues and money that is
currently in the funds was
sufficient to cover the agencies
expenses.
For our they agencies FY twenty
two budget of eleven million
point nine three.
The other thing I should note
that is unique about the this
budget is there is on there has
been for several years in the
past now a transfer from the
workers compensation
administration to the workforce
solutions department and the
recommendations for FY twenty to
continue this transfer at a
million dollars.
So with that I'll turn it over
to Simon if you have anything to
add.
Yeah thanks Carla good afternoon
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Simon
Miller and I'm an analyst with
DFA thank you for having me
today
Carla pretty much covered
everything there like she said
both recommendations are the
same and are about four percent
last in the current fiscal year
majority of that reduction is in
the person category two hundred
category both recommendations
increase the unfunded vacancy
rate from about six percent to
roughly ten percent so that's
that makes up the majority of
that that decrease so with that
I will turn it over to director
Lopez thank you.
Excellent thank you Mr Miller
and and we we we have misli
Martinez executive director
deputy director and Michelle
green who is the CFO and that
Whichever you would like to get
this off please wait I'm sorry
Sir
Mr chairman and members the
committee I think we've had a
little snafu with our invites
I'm gonna Lopez I'm the workers
compensation act shell green is
our chief finance officer and
she appears twice because I came
in on her invite to this meeting
with regards to this is also
president yes we Martinez is our
deputy director and she has been
with our agency for absolutely
twenty four years in various
capacities within that agency
Michelle green who is our CFO is
been there probably about one
month longer than hi I was
appointed to this position by
the governor in October of
twenty nineteen so I have a
relatively new tenure in the
agency but it has been very busy
very busy time and my
presentations the anticipating
that our recommendations are
similar or the same I didn't
prepare a whole a different
power point but rather just kind
of the highlight was that I'd
like to be able to go over and I
needed brief because I wasn't
sure exactly how much time we
would have at the end of the day
and I thought you would
appreciate at the end of a very
long day something so thanks so
that being said
as far as our agency is
concerned we've really tried to
participate
as many changes as we could this
year and there were a lot of
changes so we really sought to
modernize our agency and in
doing so we have a computer
consultation done in twenty
nineteen.
that consultation recognize our
need for a new computer system
for new modernization of the
system that we have
that C. two appropriation is
part of the recommendation that
is made by the executive an LLC
for two million dollars that C.
two it took a lot of energy from
our agency because we just find
it and presented it and prepared
ourselves we did not have a
project manager come in and do
that for us this is the funding
that we would appreciate
the most in the sense that we
want to be able to bring our
agency to match the trends that
are going on in other parts of
the country regarding workers
compensation
as far as of the funding that is
anticipate that funding is
anticipated to come from our
surplus from the WCA
And as we have worked the
numbers currently we believe
that this is something that we
can do if we and work in concert
and if we are conscientious
about our expenditures part of
the consultation that we had a
computer consultation that we
have there was a review and
needs cited for some I. T.
governance within our agency we
in fact are doing that regularly
now on a regular basis we are
looking at what our expenditures
are going to be and we are
planning very conscientiously
what we are going to need we
needed quite a bit to get our
people out and working remotely
it took more than a couple of
adjustments.
With regards to the sea to
modernization program I'm gonna
go ahead and share my screen I'm
not sure if there's gonna be a
glitch with this since I'm not.
That there we go.
This particular.
Right in the nineteen is not a
power point I apologize
especially following that
beautiful our hope that we saw
last but it's really meant to go
over the different things that
we see with our modernization
what will be able to accomplish
and and and really how our
agency can grow and change if we
have the support for instance up
this particular modernization
I'm.
We need to have a significant
need for a case management
system system as it currently
stands apart he's management
system that we have in our
agency doesn't allow us to
communicate between bureaus and
it really doesn't allow us to be
as organized serve pro se
litigants as well as we could
the improvement and the
improvement to this data
collection is also going to help
us.
Develop the schedule it would
help us create a drug formulary.
We don't have the volume of
cases that the other states do
but we need the same tools and
we need those same tools to
provide relevant information to
our stakeholders and provide
attractive statistics to those
prospective businesses
contemplating a move to our
state and modernizing our
computer system is really allow
us to do that within the last
within the last year we saw a
slight drop in in our case load
approximately one hundred basis
less in the upcoming year we
anticipate that we're going to
see again an increase in those
cases and due to comment we may
even see more cases coming our
way we've maintained our
performance measures during this
time period working remotely the
judges have done their cases
mediators have done their cases
be is zero but I do have to say
that a new computer system that
would help us with the control
of our our actual
assignment notices would make
remarkable just difference in in
making us more organized and
getting done what we need to do
the COVID impact on our workers
This is as been
really
Not as I think is as difficult
as it could have been when we
first I.
It started to work remotely we
didn't have the necessary band
with to run VPN we now have he
can within our agency that we
don't have licenses throughout
the agency and we're working
with an app to have our other
people.
Have access to their files from
their offices which may not seem
like it is difficult to do but
it's a very difficult service to
work with and a lot of people
have had issues with their
equipment and
we've we've had to do a lot
based on the fact that we have
this older system I'm.
At the end of December twenty
twenty there were sixteen
hundred ninety five first
reports of injuries that were
filed for work related COVID
cases and of those claims or
approximately seven deaths I'm
the occupation that is we picked
up with our data it's most
seriously affected are those
workers that provided health
care and social assistance as of
this date we haven't had a lot
of complaints filed regarding
claim issues on the issues
regarding coverage have yet to
present themselves to our judges
so what we've seen just a
smattering of cases come through
the mediation here we haven't
seen asked school
cases persist and continue
regarding coverage to our
administrative judges.
Medical cannabis as been part of
our agency on since twenty
sixteen we're one of the few
states that provide for
reimbursement to claimants for
medical cannabis costs the data
collected from our stakeholders
is provided voluntarily so it is
incomplete as it currently
stands the average amount that's
being reimbursed in the number
of claimants has increased every
year since inception of the
program in twenty sixteen our
computer modernization program
is going to allow us to capture
more specific information
regarding the usage of marijuana
and other prescribed substances
such as opioids and things are
we are unable to do this
workplace injuries related to
substance abuse will also be
capture with our proposed
modernization program we're
really hopeful that next year
will be able to bring you some
news of our progress
I think that the agency has
needed an overview for some time
and some of the vacancy savings
that we've enjoyed we've been
able to accomplish easily
because some of the jobs within
the agency have not had that
overview and in case let's
haven't been assessed I think
when we are in a different place
and were able to capture
different data we will also be
able to get a better grasp since
the penalties we collect so this
modernization program if it is
really something that's long
overdue on the system that we
have with constructed by an nap
developer who worked for the
agency and is now since retired
we've gone through a lot of
Machen nations to really keep
things working we're kind of
putting a bandaid on things and
need this additional up to it so
with regard to the budget I
think that is what I would
underscore and ask for with
particularity I stand ready for
questions.
I'm sorry I can't hear you.
I apologize director Lopez
course the last one I left it on
mute there so I apologize thank
you very much for your excellent
presentation going through the
highlights as you know during
incredibly difficult year first
we're gonna go to Representative
Crowder for committee questions.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Ostentation rector.
I record you know of any workers
compensation bills that are
being proposed or contemplated
this session.
No Sir I didn't I'm sorry
Representative Crowder Mr
chairman no Sir I do not know of
any at this time that are being
proposed I've heard a smattering
of rumors but I have not
actually seen anything come
across my desk and I have not
received any first with regard
to this bill of any new
legislation.
Mr chairman and members that's
good news so I I appreciate you
coming on that
Mr chairman my second question
is for one of the analysts it
has to do with the transfer of a
million dollars.
From the CA over to.
Workforce solutions.
I understand that some of the
other financing uses category.
It's my understanding that that
money is actually.
Directed to the labor relations
division labor relations board
is that there is.
I can answer some and if you
want to do so Mr chair and
representative Crowder
money that way that that
workforce solutions department a
lot of the money for FY twenty
two is for the unemployment
division and for the employment
services division and they are
leaving the labor relations
division largely funded through
general fund.
Okay so that that's a change
from years past and the million
dollar transfer historically has
gone to workforce solutions in
into the labor relations
division so I don't know who I
guess we get workforce solutions
before answer that but the
historically that's where the
money is gone but I think I hear
you say that's different this
year.
I'm yes Sir Representative
Crowder and a chair small I'm
yes it is it is a different
distribution but it's really not
it does impact necessarily the
total amount general fund and
that he's going to workforce
solutions department and it's
just a different mission so
where there might be more
general fund going into
employment services are the
unemployment division and say
it's the transfer and the
general fund is going into the
labor relations so I'm as one of
the analysts like to put it it's
kind of like to do co but it
doesn't change the overall
funding of the overall general
funding that's going to the
Department it's just being
distributed differently among
the programs do you want you
want to add anything Simon.
No Carly you cover it thanks so.
Okay.
Thank you for your answers that
to me that is a changes it's
something different that we have
done in in history passed I
actually went back at our volume
to to look at it could not
find this year last year it was
directed directly into labor
relations this year I didn't
find that's why I was curious if
they're going to change so I
appreciate your answers
responses thank you madam
director thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative next
we'll go to Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair
director green I just have one
question for you on your
presentation you stated that you
had a specific number I can't
remember what it was of work of
COVID related workers
compensation claims can you tell
me how one how your agency is
determining if a claim is COVID
related at work.
Thank you for that question
Representative Representative
the hill Mr chairman.
Right now are at canonic
Division collects those reports
and the reports are collected
from the first report of injury
that we received we are Economic
department so
that particular reporting system
there may be some discrepancy
with with that but that is the
information that we are are
cleaning for more economics
division.
First report of injury.
Thank you Mr chair director
green so if if the report is
coming over from your economic
division that it is determined
to be comment related you're
simply just allowing them access
to the workers compensation or
is there any further
investigation from there.
Well
Representative Vigil Mr
chairman.
That are coming in that that's
the data that's collected but as
far as the basis the complaints
that are actually filed there
has only been a smattering of
complaints that have been filed
with our D. aren't mistreated
a dispute resolution Division we
are cases are resolved by
mediation and if not there
proceed to trial the number of
complaints that we received in
our case load is made up when I
use that those terms a little
different than regular
litigation claims are to to us
those those kinds of
things that one would make to
your insurance provider.
Things is a what we count as our
case load a complaint is when an
image an injured worker files.
Plaint against his in the the
company that's providing the
workers compensation insurance
that is the difference so when I
say that there are claims those
are first report of injury
claims that are being taken care
of by these insurance companies
for these people the complaints
that are coming in are
distinguishable because the
people that are having problems
right now getting their workers
compensation insurance coverage
are much less and as of today
the majority of those cases
which are less are less than a
dozen have been handled through
our mediation division and been
resolved so our judges have not
yet seen those kinds of class
those kinds of complaints coming
to them where there has been
coverage from the insurance
companies.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
then director Lopez I apologize
on my eyes you are identified as
miss green and I am a slave to
technology in this strange
atmosphere in which we find
ourselves so my apologies thank
you for the answers.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil are
there any other Committee
questions.
I don't see any other creating
many questions will go to
Representative Sweetser for a
motion.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
very much for the presentation
at this time I move the LFC.
There is a motion for the LFC is
there a second.
Thank you okay there's a motion
for to adopt the LFC
recommendation by Representative
Sweetser a second by
Representative Dixon is there
any
objection.
Any objection to that motion.
Yes Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman it just
I I just kind of look the board
I'm gonna vote against both
recommendations.
For years I paid into this fund
and I was told that it went in
there for employers that didn't
have insurance to cover their
employees that's why the fund
was created I think it's.
Fundamentally inappropriate they
were transferring money out of
that fund for the employer pays
two dollars employee pays two
dollars every quarter former cop
you were transferring it's
somewhere else so I I'm just I'm
opposed to the transfer and and
I wanted to share that with the
body and so I'm gonna vote no on
both recommendations.
Under state thank you very much
Representative Crowder will note
the objection or or the the.
Vote against both
recommendations by
Representative Crowder.
Okay he Representative brown do
you want to it may be.
I think let's go ahead and go to
mistreated as hopefully.
She's on.
Just to make sure yeah miss
Rodriguez.
Would you mind.
taking a quick roll just on this
last one please.
Okay I was having a hard time
with sorry you know you're not
get money you do myself okay
it just be clear the motion made
by Representative Sweetser
seconded by my Representative
David is to adopt the LFC
recommendation we should also
note that it's the same
As the DFA recommendation so the
that solution and then if you
could call the roll please
surgery is all right
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brown.
No.
I'm sorry I didn't hear your
vote.
No no.
Representative Crowder.
The.
Representative Dixon.
I'm sorry.
I didn't hear your vote.
You.
Yeah.
Yes okay.
Sorry that's okay
Representative sister.
Yes.
The vice chair hop then we can.
Yes.
Share small.
Yes.
Yes.
I yes to knows.
yeah.
Okay I.
Thank you very much Mister Drake
as for noting that vote will
also note of course that this is
only a recommendation
and
Have some extra yep we thank you
very much committee members
thank you for the great
questions explanations thank you
to director Lopez and her team
as well as to our analysts.
That thank you for the
opportunity to present to you
all absolutely thank you for.
Okay
With that.
I think that concludes our work
for today thank you so much
committee members thank you to
analysts from LESC from DFA and
to all who joined as well as a
number of the attendees also
observed today's proceedings we
deeply appreciate folks feels
like we're all getting a little
bit better even though of course
I was the one on mute for this
last presentation so sorry I
under money that a deep thanks
all the committee members will
be back at it tomorrow and hope
everybody has a good evening I.
The meeting that's chair better
last year good meeting thank
thank you Mr chair.
