Chair.
Just hand out.
Bill I can't hear you.
Yeah.
Madam chair.
Charles is that correct yes
madam chair that's correct.
We can hear you now I can hear
you okay so you want to just
make a few comments about this
David.
met madam chair you're gonna
hear subcommittee reports for.
Some of the subcommittees
recommended some adjustments and
most of those will come are in
the in action on Saturday and
catch up clean up if if the
appropriate we can flag that and
then you'll hear a public you'll
hear the full reports so
committee reports from higher at
a public schools and the special
appropriations and then finally
B. A. R. recommendations madam
chair okay let's go back to the
updated general fund revenue
estimates do you have any
comments on that I know that the
handout that go madam chair the
revenue estimate R. Smith for
for for weeks and the.
We saw on the previous estimate
in December this is customary
are there some strength in
revenues both gross receipts and
especially oil but on the other
hand from December to the
present oil and gas have been on
a roller coaster ride we
certainly stronger on production
what we've seen oil prices go
from.
The sixty high sixties down and
then up as much as eighty we've
also seen natural correct yes
drop off a couple Bucks so given
all the uncertainty the the
conclusion of the revenue
estimators that was reported in
a memorandum through which
secretary Schardin Clarke
secretary Romero and me was not
to make a change or otherwise
all right very good.
Very good all right our next
item is the house transportation
and public works committee
report the one of welcome chair
and helical Rubio so
do we want to have the analyst
speak first and then we'll tear
turn it over to the chair so
Connor or so what else would you
like to start that will have the
chair discuss their report.
Madam chair I think the
suggestions with the chair start
and then the staff to follow up
as needed okay all right go
ahead chair.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon I would like to
present house bill three as
amended for your consideration
for FY twenty three operating
budget for the New Mexico
department of transportation a
lynching laying off for men our
committee analyst is here with
me as well as an expert in case
you have specific technical
questions but is but also there
are other folks from the from
the
Tell a technical committee for
here as well of this morning
health transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee passed this
legislation as amended with all
those present voting in the
affirmative of the technical
staff working group which
consists of members from the New
Mexico department of
transportation the legislative
finance committee and the
department of finance and
administration including Lynch
and have been working diligently
this week to come up with the
consensus on house bill three
which is what I will be
presenting to you this afternoon
overall there is a revenue
increase of seventeen point four
one six million dollars and a
fund balance increase of thirty
two point five million which
results in a total increase of
sixty six point seven eight
three million because of the
sixty six point seven eight
three million increase the
working group felt strongly that
much of this additional funding
should be applied to the
maintenance of highways thirty
two point five million of the
new revenues were aligned to
highway maintenance and the
remainder of the thirty four
point two eight three million of
new revenue was budgeted for
various uses as requested by the
department the department does
have four program areas the
first one is the project design
and construction program which
consists of state and federal
funds that will support a very
robust highway construction
program that is estimated to be
at four hundred and eighty six
million for the upcoming year
The appropriation recommendation
for this program includes an
increase of four point five
percent over the LFC
recommendation that is three
hundred and sixty five person at
twenty eight point eight million
in salaries and benefits four
hundred and eighty point two
million in contractual services
and two hundred and sixty three
point two million in other costs
for a total recommended
appropriation for this program
seven hundred and seventy two
point two million dollars.
The second program is the
highway operations program which
represents one thousand eight
hundred and forty hard working
women and men who keep the
roadway safe for the traveling
public by maintaining pavement
clearing snow replacing guard
rails traffic signs as well as
the unfortunate and never ending
task of cleaning trash and
litter off of our state highways
The appropriation recommendation
for this program includes an
eleven point two percent
increase over the LFC
recommendation one thousand
eight hundred and forty person
at one hundred and twenty two
point five million dollars in
salaries and benefits seventy
eight point zero million in
contractual services and one
hundred and eight point two
million and other costs for a
total recommended appropriation
for this program up three
hundred and eight point seven
million.
The third program is the
business support program which
includes the office of the
secretary human resources
finance and information
technology and other various
services I will like to
congratulate the department for
last year state audit which it
was a testament to the great
work that they did in accounting
for over a billion dollars a tax
payer resources the business
support program consists of two
hundred and fifty three person
and is recommending a three
point seven percent increase
over the requested amounts for
twenty eight point three million
dollars in salaries seven point
one million in contractual
services and thirteen point one
million and other costs for a
total recommendation of forty
eight point five million and
finally the mortal program which
is which includes transit and
rail aviation traffic safety
programs and the point of entry
program an eight million
transfer from the weight
distance permit identification
fund was recommended for the
improvement of the ports of
entry the model program
recommendation is a one point
four percent increase over the
HSD request the recommendation
includes a hundred twenty one
point twenty one person ninety
nine point seven million in
salaries thirty three point nine
million in contractual services
thirty two point one million in
other costs for total
appropriation recommendation of
seventy five point six million.
Therefore the total agency
recommendation for the New
Mexico department of
transportation's FY twenty three
twenty three operating budget
consists of two thousand five
hundred and seventy nine person
a hundred and eighty nine point
four million dollars in salaries
five hundred and ninety nine
point one million in contractual
services four hundred and
sixteen point six million
dollars and other costs for
total appropriation
recommendation of one point two
billion dollars which is a total
increase of five point nine
percent over the LFC
recommendation this
recommendation is the house
transportation public works and
capital improvement committee's
recommendation for the
transportation appropriation act
of twenty twenty three I want to
just think again the technical
group for all of their work and
their diligence to coming to
this consensus I want to thank
you all for your time and
consideration and we will now
stand for questions.
All right Representative Ezzell.
Thank you very much thank you
for your presentation of.
Representative Rubio your
highway operations program the
second paragraph whenever it's
calling for a hundred and eight
point eight million in other
costs can you tell me what the
other costs are.
Thank you madam chair
Representative you sell all
handed over to Lynch and and I
know that other analysts from
LFC NDOT are here to help with
that if up to address that thank
you.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
and thank you for madam chair
I I may have to do for it this
question to of C. forty and M.
and L. O. T. staff.
Thank you madam chair this chart
Jorgensen with LFC what you're
generally seeing it affects
other category
That's a lot of you have a lot
of maintenance fuel supplies in
there for the highway operations
program.
To be a little more specific on
that Connor sure
What we need to maintain your
roads and conduct whatever
operations so thanks sultan
Centers for winter operations
Things of that nature.
Okay so madam chair and
representative Rubio and Connor
I'm assuming because of the
price of oil right now the way
it is there's also adding the
increase in the cost of asphalt
my aunt understanding that right
madam chair and Representative
Rubio.
Because I know that might not
will come after the winter
months and if that's the case
that.
My question answered thank you
very much thank you
Representative.
Representative Hochman Vigil and
Representative Lara.
Thank you very much madam chair
I just had a quick question to
Rubio on the department
transportation aviation Division
budget
was that a flat budget this year
were there any specific
increases for the office of
aviation.
Thank you representative of.
Connor I don't know if you have
an answer to that related to the
aviation piece.
Yes ma'am I believe there was a
slight increase in aviation when
we added on the balance of by I
know we have Mallory Mallory
months not just who is the HSD
over a DOT on the call as well.
Mallory would you like to speak
specific with ideation.
And madam chair we did have a
slight increase about a hundred
and ninety one thousand dollars
of the aviation fund the see
increases are does receive the
revenue due to taxes such as
aviation jet fuel tax G. R. T.
so what we did present our
budget back in September of
twenty twenty one there was a
hundred and ninety one thousand
dollar increase in the
production this coming January.
Thank you madam chair I missed
on the nested the increased
bye bye I'm not going to beat
around the bush but the director
of aviation reached out to me
and stated that he had some
specific budgetary increase
asked that he hopes will be
increased included in DOT's
budget that he did not see so
I'm trying to decipher F. that
those increases are just based
on G. R. T. and bill taxes or if
there were any other general
fund increases that would then
trickle down to aviation
specifically related to this
this is just I feel tax related
increased we did not see an
increase yeah as of yet from the
general fund I believe there is
an appropriation about five
million dollars and house bill
two but that I have not
confirmed that.
What would that two million
dollars appropriation hospital
to before it's actually I
believe five million dollars and
it's going to the grant program
that we receive that yes No last
fiscal year funds to help
support improvements throughout
the fifty our parts New Mexico
the rural areas.
Yes thank you very much madam
chair.
Right Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Rubio I have
a we need to do a couple of
questions and comments on the
project design and construction
program it says that there are
not in it states are therefore
bus highway construction program
hi we construction do we know
how many projects are equal to.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lara I'll defer
to Mallory Mallory I don't know
if if you have those specifics
for Connor.
Water.
I'm sorry madam chair I was
having a discussion on the on
the last.
Question can you repeat the.
The question madam chair
Representative Rubio madam chair
my question was are you on the
project design and construction
and it states here that there's
a robust highway construction
program and I'm just wandering
off the top of your head if you
know how many programs this this
funding is going to be
supporting around the state.
I'm proud of all feel free to
jump in there helpful secretary.
Secretary Santa.
The increase frame gosh darn it.
Madam chair I if I might yeah.
Sure.
Members of the committee
reviewed the executive director
I we appropriations we have
about two hundred active
construction projects currently
ongoing and we could introduce
as many as two or three each
month for the leading so we have
several projects out there
currently and proposed in the
hopper.
Thank you Mr president thank you
are presented madam chair
another question that I have
goes into the business support
program and you mentioned that
there was to audit findings so
what what were the audit
findings that were discovered.
Thank you Representative Mallory
you can.
So the two findings fiscal year
was one related to not reporting
we were not reporting federal
numbers and the federal system
and was not as so much is that
we were not
thank you correctly we are just
not putting in putting the
numbers and and that system and
then the second finding was fuel
related the department does hold
fuel cards and whenever the
patrols go out on snow removal
in the also happens to run out
of fuel than they go to the
normal gas stations such as and
also the well when they do that
they have to turn in the
receipts and in the finding that
we did not have to receipts to
show for the artist of fuel.
But thank thank you for that
thank you representative madam
chair so it does I hope these
these findings have been crowd
corrected because especially the
one having to do with the
federal funds how do you do lose
the opportunity to all to get
more federal funds or be
eligible for federal funds are
for not submitting our our
reports on time Madam chair
representative the third of.
Comment that I have is the model
program the million transfer
from the weight distance permit
ID Fund of was recommended for
improvements in the port of
entry I really like that as as
we know in something that is so
we have a port of entry and we
are in desperate need of
upgrades and modernization at
that at that port of entry so I
think that's a I I like that
suggestion and I and I as and I
supported on this on the surface
now and I think that would be a
good idea to do.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair that's all I
have.
Right Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and I
answered my own question I was
trying to figure out what why we
were sixteen point eight six
seven million short on the front
page but I realized it was
federal funds so if anyone else
and can add the math like I
could add that that's the
difference and you see it in the
bottom block on that on the
third page so thank you madam
chair.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair be quick
to either Representative Rubio
for the D. O. T. of secretary or
personnel.
It seems that there's a great
deal of funding coming from the
federal government down to the
states on
roads bridges export
infrastructure will call it I
see a lot of that he added to
the department of transportation
do you feel that this year's
signing up D. O. T. is
sufficient to meet what I
believe may be future expansion
activity projects except for
that's not open ended questions
short answer please.
Thank you madam chair
representative I mean I think
there's there's definitely room
for more all all let the
department transportation speak
to that Mallory Rick I don't
know if you want to speak I
don't know of Secretary is is
still unavailable.
Currently connect info I believe
he's on now.
Okay.
Yeah I'm sorry I've been having
connection issues all day and
it's telling me I had a on
secure zoom link so I'm trying
on my phone and hopefully this
works I apologize.
What secretary would you like me
to restate the question yes
please thank you here.
Thank you Mr secretary I'm
looking for short answer my age
my question is is this budget so
Ishant for department of
transportation in preparation
for what I believe will be three
to five years of.
Very large spending for projects
coming at you of your comment on
will you be prepared if in fact
a year and two from now we're
dealing with a much larger
infrastructure spending under
way and coming question.
I think the short answer is yes
I think that within our budget
there's flexibility for me to
staff up or I need to it's one
of the the highest budgets we've
had at any point in my career
over the last twenty three years
it doesn't mean that a tsunami
every need but it's well at this
point.
Thank you Mr secretary I wish
you the best and madam chair
that's my question thank you.
Register Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
I have a question for perhaps an
analyst or maybe the secretary
would even know
twenty five percent of the
country is karst formation and
so when we have road projects
is especially true for a certain
parts of the state often times
are we encounter karst
formations that have to be
assessed and then sometimes
design work has to be around the
more needs to be some kind of
remediation my question is if
the if someone knows how much
was spent on contractual
services to deal with Kirsty
issues in the last fiscal year
and then the question will
follow what do we anticipate
spending in FY twenty three on
that.
Thank you Representative
secretary do you do you have any
insight on that.
Madam chair and representative I
do not have an exact number but
it's certainly something that I
can have staff work on and
hopefully get to by the end of
this hearing or by the end of
the day today.
Madam chair and Mr secretary I I
would appreciate that
information there's something
coming up in our budget
discussions this afternoon that
that will factor into the answer
to that question and so hold
children to do a follow up thank
you madam chair.
All righty thank you let's go
representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
One thing that I would.
LFC recommendation.
Representative we're having
trouble hearing you.
Problem again yesterday and
Can you hear me now.
Okay with a four point nine
percent increase over the LFC
recommendation and I'm hearing
the federal money is available
after with some of the rural
projects be brought forward so
that we can get them done
sooner.
Madam chair representative can
you repeat the last part of the
question are you asking if the
federal funds would allow for
rural projects to be completed
sooner than they are right now.
All the.
So thank you.
Four five Representative
we're not we're hearing bits and
pieces.
can you turn can you turn it up
a little I can't I can't
understand it thank you.
All.
Thank you.
Come into my office.
Excuse me representative of
Trujillo let me apologize to the
committee on this this is been
an ongoing issue where we can't.
We just can't seem to get the
technology right but I'd look
looks like we're going to have
this switch there are with the
Representative Trujillo and
we'll have Representative
Allison come on in go ahead.
Stride again representative
Allison.
You're on mute.
Thank you madam chair.
I noticed the of five point nine
increase over LFC
recommendations and some extra
money from the feds does that
mean that the projects in the
rural area especially my rural
area and.
Representative Rubio knows
about.
what I've been voicing my
concerns over during her meeting
is that gonna bring very extra
money is it going to bring that
projects any sooner.
Instead of waiting three four
five years can we get some of
them started this summer.
What we also cabinet secretary
to answer that since that's a
scheduling issue please go ahead
thank can you answer that yes
thank you madam chair
representative Allison yeah I
think with the it with the
addition of federal funds
certainly we'd be able to
accelerate the projects that are
ready and also in the state I
did want to mention
representative I'm not sure if
you're aware but we were awarded
a few weeks ago twenty five
million to.
discretionary grants for the
Shiprock to the Arizona state
line projects I know that's one
of your highest priorities and
we're happy to say that we are
the only state to get back from
out of twenty five million and
so that certainly is and help
get that project done sooner so
if it's in the state but we get
more federal money and it's
ready we can accelerate those
both in the rural and urban
areas.
Thank you for that madam chair
and secretary the last time we
talked when we got twenty five
million in the federal grant of
the start date was still twenty
twenty three now that you've got
the five point nine extra for
the LFC is that gonna bring it
up any closer.
Representative Madam chair
representative Allison I'd have
to look at you know it we were
all if we have the money we're
ready to start but I think if
it's not designed the waiting on
right away or environmental
clearances those are usually the
things that hold it up
regardless of how much money we
have so I can check for you to
see exactly where that project
in design but it looks like we
have enough money to get started
as soon as it is ready to go.
Thank you for that the secretary
thank you madam chair.
All right you want to thank
Representative Trujillo for
lending her computer okay is
there any any other questions we
have of share Rubio.
Or the staff on this report
madam chair can ask two quick
questions Representative small
thank you very much madam chair
very briefly madam chair and
chair Rubio drug secretary St of
all first quick question.
We know that
multi modal and and reducing
emissions with transportation
especially in a very rural state
I wanted to ask if you.
How you are working on that in a
very concise way and then my
second question madam chair just
us with the same time will be
for Mr Jorgensen and that
question is the detail the
differences including the
slightly higher fund balance
usage from the house
transportation in the
department's approach.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative small yes we with
the the new bill act that was
just passed at the federal level
there was a significant amount
of new transit money and I know
our transit and rail Division
director is working on expanding
services at the local level so
that is one of our goals are
also looking at better ways to
utilize.
Our park and ride services as
well as the rail runner to get
more usage from those two
services on the fund balance
issue we did bring in more fund
balance this year than usual and
I think that has a lot to do
with number one we had to bring
in an additional twelve point
three million more than usual to
just meet the the federal match
with the new bill money so that
raised it up a little bit and so
the other reason is we we really
did do conservative estimates
because of the pandemic and so
we were really kind of making
sure that we were low in our
projections and so because we
were so much higher than our
projections that just created
more fund balance for us to
bring in as well so I think
because of those two issues that
you're seeing that fund balance
a little higher than usual.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary is is there anything
that that Mr Jorgensen wanted to
offer.
Okay Madam chair representative
small so.
Every year when we put the DOT
budget together it's been the
standard practice to start from
the LFC recommendation of the
LFC recommendation as the
secretary pointed out is based
on a revenue estimate that comes
out in July.
so couple things happened this
year one is you know the request
of DOT did not include a whole
lot of federal funds.
Because the infrastructure act
had not passed so after the
infrastructure act passed.
the LFC recommendation added a
bunch of federal money into it
but then it turns out not a.
So that was one difference the
second is that
those revenues are updated in
January so after the LFC budget
recommendations but together we
receive updated
State road fund balances are an
updated projections and that
creates both recurring and
nonrecurring funding but needs
to get considered for the
upcoming year budget and that's
what the tech group was added.
Representative small did you
have any more questions no madam
chair thank you very much thank
you already do we have any other
questions from the committee the
other comments from the staff.
All righty we've heard and we
should have the report everyone
should have a copy of all this
might turn to Representative
small for the motion thank you
madam chair I would move that we
adopt the committee report the
house transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee report for house bill
three as amended.
In the second okay we have a
second Representative Anderson
is there any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing none we've adopted the
report would like to thank the
transportation chair and all the
staff for being with us today.
Thank you all.
Okay we're gonna move on
we now have sub committee a
report we need the chair to
present that the subcommittee H.
shared estimate to present that
report.
Sure Representative Allison and
we sent somebody up to his
office to see if we can figure
out what's wrong with the sound
but he may have to go into
Representative to his office to
do that.
Okay Representative Allison
thank you yes I put in my ear
plugs how do you hear me now I
hear you fine now if we could
keep it that way I think we'll
get through the report so once
you go ahead Sir okay thank you
madam chair.
thanks committee.
Hey Matt on January the eleventh
and as we're going through the
report.
I'm gonna switch off and on with
the by.
vice chair devry seventy on a so
I'll do the first reading and
then Debbie will do that but
just let what.
Okay.
The first one we had was the
business unit for sixty state
fair commission the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
and consensus performance
measures.
And targets.
Morning director presented the
state there's budget request
sent spoke about how the
pandemic affected the budget in
FY twenty two and the need for
supplemental and deficiency
funding Representative Anderson
ask about vacancies and what the
money for the African American
performing arts center would go
towards.
Debbie.
We're waiting.
Yes sorry yes that start six oh
three American African African
American affairs subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
and consensus performance
measures and targets any would
go director presented the
office's budget request
Representative Garcia asked
about the office's audit and LFC
analysis gave a summary of the
audit's findings were
Representative Sarinana asked
about the data systems.
For.
Was business unit six oh five
the Martin Luther king junior
commission the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
and consensus performance
measures and targets measured
weights director presented the
commission's flat budget request
there were no questions.
We're ninety cumbersome toll
tech as a committee Dr LESC
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
LFC staff noted in addition to
the section for operating quest
the LFC section ten framework
includes three million for the
Congress and Toltec scenic
railroad inner presence got
gifts presented the budget
request along with the update on
railroad activities
Representative Herrera lane in
Crowder all noted how beautiful
the train ride is encouraged
members to visit.
For that I the space sports
authority the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
consensus performance measures
targets director of business
operations Wheeler mobile Acker
present the budget request an
update members on the flight
activity tenants and upcoming
events for the sports.
Spaceport authority
Representative Chatfield just
how long the state would supply.
Los excess played two revenue
and Mr blacker more.
That revenue we're hard to
project but the spaceport is
working to become our self
stating.
Rep Christine Trujillo
complimented agency leadership
on a per on improve management
of business already
Representative thirty out just
for follow up information on
help teachers and schools could
participate on spaceport school
help reach.
Thank you Mr chairman six oh
four commission for the deaf and
deaf and hard of hearing.
This committee adopted the LFC
recommendation consensus
performance measures and targets
they didn't go executive
director discussed the declining
revenue in the
telecommunications relay service
fund affected by the changing
telecommunications industry to
increase the revenue and change
maybe required in
telecommunications relay service
fund service the representative
of a to a flat rate
Representative Anderson asked
about the doubling up of the
other revenue in other financing
uses in the executive
recommendation and stress the
importance of not duplicating
budget amounts.
Six of six the commission for
the blind subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendation consensus
performance measures and targets
correct craft executive director
discussed agencies funding dates
and services.
Six forty four division of
vocational rehabilitation
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
Casey Stokes donor marrow
executive director introduce
yourself Representative Lara at
Lara asked about the expansion
of project search and director
stone Romero indicate the
program expanded to Alamogordo
and make spans the pueblo wacky.
Garcia thank agency in Cappy can
go Representative representative
from the governor's office
Representative Trujillo asked
about the TV art what the DVR
does and was told in an act an
employment agency for
individuals with disabilities
Representative Trujillo asked
about the agency managing.
Its budget separately but being
administrative straight we
attach to the public education
department and part of the PED
annual audit and just DVR to
collaborate with PED on career
technical education
Representative Anderson
indicated that there may be
opportunities to consolidate
overlapping functions between
DVR.
Governor's commission on
disability and the developmental
disabilities council.
Six forty five the governor's
commission on disability.
The adopted the LFC
recommendation consensus
performance measures and
targets.
This is.
Budget director presented
information on the commission's
adaptive technology program and
residents accessibility
modification program and
stressed agency is focused on
services for people with
physical disabilities
Representative Anderson stressed
agency serving people with
disabilities should collaborate
more closely and look for
opportunities to consolidate
functions.
Six forty seven the government
of the disabilities council
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation consensus
performance measures and targets
director Alice Lucroy updated
the committee on the
commission's priorities
including a rate study for
guardianship the director noted
the executive recommendation for
rates with over two hundred
fifty thousand above the LFC if
I'm fifty fifty percent of the
rates steady.
The business unit six six two
the minors hospital of New
Mexico the subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendation consensus
performance measures and
targets.
beams to the executive officer
presented information on the
hospital's program and
accomplishments including being
selected in the top five of
critical care excess rural
hospitals Representative
Chatfield welcome CEO birds and
chief financial officer money to
be done and complimented them on
the hospital Representative
Anderson ask about the hospital
miners Trust Fund revenue and
fund balances and director Abbey
indicated there was about twelve
million dollars in fund balance
Representative Allison Anderson
also ask about the executives
recommended other financing uses
and the seven point four million
transfer and was told it was an
accounting adjustment in the
system.
Chairman Allison asked hospitals
serve more than just minors and
was told they see all patients
Representative Trujillo ask
about the increased cost of
travelling nurses and was told
both recommendations cover these
costs is and a twelve million
dollar fund balance of the my
distrust from was revenue to
support hospital operations.
And that will include.
Our subcommittee report madam
chair.
All right I wanted to ask the
committee members anyone on that
subcommittee did you have
anything else to to add.
Okay is there any questions from
the non subcommittee members
esco Representative Trujillo
going on.
Representative Trujillo.
Okay you're muted.
You want committee C..
We're asking question if there's
any questions from any of the
committee members on
subcommittee As report my
apologies I didn't realize my
hand was up no I don't have.
No problem is there anybody that
has any questions if not I'm
gonna go to Representative small
for the motion.
Madam chair I would move that we
adopt the subcommittee a report.
So committee report.
Okay we have a second in the
chair okay we have a motion and
a second is there any opposition
to that motion saying that we've
adopted subcommittee a report
all right let's go to sub
committee be if we could have
the chair talk about this report
please absolutely thank you
madam chair I'm gonna go through
the first six agencies and then
Representative Hochman I share
about Hochman Vigil will detail
the remaining six madam chair
Committee we we started with the
board of examiners for the
architects agency code four zero
four we adopted the LFC
recommendation along with the
consensus performance
measurements and targets this
exceeded the executive
recommendation by a slight
amount for other costs that was
a result of a technical error
and as an additional note this
is a board that receives no
general fund revenue.
Moving on madam chair and
committee to HSD coke for four
six the board of medical
examiners we adopted the LFC
recommendation again along with
the consensus performance
measures and targets director
executive director Sandra Frank
updated us on the medical board
including on
the transfer of us the path to
the Medical Board something
that's.
Additionally important madam
chair committee as we're working
to expand health care services
in New Mexico going on madam
chair committee to HSD code four
six five this is the gaming
control board there was a very
robust hearing on the gaming
control board where our
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendations and Wiley I am
sharing a committee right now
can I call you back.
Looking and chair in the there
we go sorry I apologize
continuing on
madam chair and committee with
the gaming control board
they had hired on a number of
folks late in the fiscal year
in so we work to find a.
After the reconciliation between
the LESC and the executive
recommendation.
That with the LFC providing
seven hundred forty two point
six thousand less than the
executive recommendation we we
work through those challenges
also talked a lot madam chair
committee about a COVID in the
challenges it presents including
with travel and onsite
inspections that are the
responsibility of the gaming
control board Representative
Ezzell specifically asked about
measures being taken to ensure
security
which is important to all of us
and representative from the
gaming what control board
explained that they were working
to really monitor any reported
payment calculation are errors
but that they did want to report
active monitoring
and to ensure compliance which
goes to their desire to travel
more moving forward madam chair
committee to HSD code four six
nine the racing commission
racing forward as it may be we
adopted the executive
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
that was fifty five point two
thousand dollars less than
the LFC recommendation in
general fund revenue however the
committee really did focus on
revisiting the commission's
contractual services needs this
Rivera from the department of
finance administration also
noted the support for increased
contractual services
recommendation
which was made after the
executive and develop the
recommendations so that reflects
the LFC yeah in response to
committee member Dixon agency
it's then the LFC analysts noted
that there is a C. O. C. special
recommendation for five hundred
thousand dollars to help the
agency for Phil New Porsche
racing integrity and safety act
requirements that was a federal
measure that had passed I
believe.
Moving to the last agency that
all last to the board of
veterinary medicine madam chair
committee was seeing a change in
its executive director we wish
them well adopted the LC
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
are the LFC recommendation was
slightly higher than the
executive however the board does
not receive any general fund
revenue finally madam chair and
committee for HSD code seven six
five our subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendation and again
the consensus performance
measures and and targets miss
Tamera mark Intel director the
juvenile justice facilities
presented a flat budget request.
Representative Ezzell asked
about drop out rates and how to
track them through the job
juvenile justice system and the
again Representative Dixon a
drastic core concern us how we
could.
Consider either rolling them
potentially role on the board
into the children youth and
families department to ball
state funding and to maximize
efficiencies most importantly to
maximize services for youth in
that system.
That concludes what I'm gonna
present over now to
Representative Hochman Vigil
vice chair Hochman Vigil all
right.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you chair and vice chair
smaller our subcommittee I'm
gonna go on to HSD code of four
twenty which is the regulation
licensing departments the
subcommittee drive the LFC
recommendation consensus
performance measures and targets
with a recommendation for an ad
hoc committee on this agency.
Moving on to HSD code four or
nine the board of nursing this
committee adopted the executive
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
executive director social
updated the committee on the
board of nursing.
HSD code four six four board of
professional engineers land
surveyors subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendation and
consensus performance measures
and targets noting no difference
between LC and Executive
recommendations recommendation
Representative eight point three
percent increase compared to
fiscal year twenty to the board
does not receive any general
fund revenues.
Moving on madam chair to HSD
code six six eight Office of the
natural resources trustee
the subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation which is a
hundred and ninety five thousand
one hundred and ninety five
thousand seven hundred dollars
higher in general fund revenue
new agencies fiscal year twenty
two operating budget thank
consensus performance measures
and targets were not there as
well HSD code five await The New
Mexico livestock boards that you
drive the LFC recommendation
which is two point five million
dollars higher in general fund
revenue agencies fiscal year
twenty two operating budget we
also drive consensus performance
measures and targets LSE's
recommendation included a nine
hundred and sixty four thousand
nine hundred dollar increase for
nine FTE and implementation
process agencies need inspection
program.
Lastly madam chair members of
the committee agency code seven
sixty which is the parole board
the Senate committee adopted the
executive recommendation just
thirty six thousand seven
hundred dollars or six point
five percent higher than the
agencies fiscal year twenty two
operating budget and ten point
two thousand dollars lower than
the LFC recommendation
subcommittee also drive
consensus prospectors and
targets for that agency as well
and that concludes our step in
the report mentions.
Already thank you very much I
wanted to ask if there's anybody
else most of the committee I
wanted to make a comment.
Okay let's go to the rest of the
committee is there any questions
of this chair and vice chair for
subcommittee B. report.
I have one question madam chair
go ahead with regards to the
licensing and and rate
regulation licensing division
did that it was the ad hoc
committee formed what happened
with that destruction.
Go ahead Representative small
thank you very much madam chair
Representative Lujan vice chair
behind Vigil we did there is a
recommendation coming forward
and catch a clean up to address
some of the concerns that you
and other committee members
raised thank you very much chair
thank you madam chair vice chair
small.
Okay let's go to the committee
we need a motion.
Okay.
Question the statement
Representative Ezzell go ahead.
No ma'am okay okay already let
some Representative small for
the motion thank you madam chair
I move adoption of subcommittee
B. report.
The second from Hochman Vigil is
any opposition to that motion
motion
is that an opposition
representative resell.
Okay well we it is in opposition
the.
Of the committee report on four
six nine.
Okay already so we have what's
notes that we have one in
opposition on the verbal of
subcommittee B. with that it it
has been approved so let's go
ahead and move into subcommittee
State.
Thank you madam chair I had the.
The Dixon was my co chair and so
what I'll do is I'll present the
first six and show present the
last I and the first one was a
code five one six the department
of.
This is the committee adopted
the LFC recommendation which is
almost identical to the
executive recommendation and it
requests LFC staff and youth
conservation corps director to
develop a PO.
Post Betul appropriations do use
the agency's fund balance I was
the director Abbey noted out the
analysis identified seven point
five million in the fund balance
and the agency is only spending
about half of the annual to me
than it receives why C. C.
director star would state that
the agency was working with
other agencies such as the
energy minerals and natural
resources department to develop
arrangements to use the fund
balance for projects the
subcommittee adopted consensus
performance measures and
targets.
Agency I code five twenty two
youth conservation corps the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation adopted consensus
performance measures and targets
seven one the DFA W. secretary
Cindy Martinez in LFC director
David Abbey presented the
executive or legislative
recommendations the DFA of the
department of game and fish does
not receive general the general
fund money the legislative
recommendation is up ten percent
compared to FY twenty two it is
one point two million higher
than the executive
recommendation the GGF director
Michael loan.
The schools are a nine million
dollars special appropriation
request for a species
conservation program that will
leverage federal funds the
legislative recommendation
includes five point five million
for this purpose the five
million dollar appropriation
from the given protection fund
in the capital outlay framework
and five hundred thousand from
the general fund and special
appropriations.
Code six oh nine the Indian
Affairs Department the sub the
subcommittee adopt the LFC
recommendation recommendation
and consensus performance
measures and targets Lynn trio
secretary presented the
department's budget the
subcommittee we recommended
adding back funding for suicide
prevention so we'll wait to see
what happens with that
discussion code six thirty to
workers compensation that
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
Representative Chatfield astro
we transfer a million.
Dollars for the work for work
for workers compensation
administration to the workforce
solutions department LFC step
the staff and the transfer
reduces the impact to the
general fund by one million
dollars and then my last one
seven eighty crime victims
reparation commission the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation with the
understanding that the full
committee would revisit the
total amount of the
recommendation and recommended
language chair Trujillo
requested agency work the staff
work with the LFC staff to
document invalidate an expected
reduction in federal revenue for
victims services members
expressed the desire to add
funding to the legislative
recommendation for victim
services possibly through
increasing well.
Created from the early childhood
education and care fund which
would be contingent on
legislation.
Expanding the allowable uses of
that fund the legislative
recommendation is of four
hundred and eighty eight
point five thousand or two
percent higher than the agencies
FY twenty two operating budget
three million dollars lower than
the executive recommendation the
subcommittee adopted consensus
performance measures performance
measures and targets and then
I'm going to do for the rest of
it to my wonderful co chair
Meredith Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and to a
chair of the subcommittee
Agence you six nine commission
of public records the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
representing a nearly flat
budget from fiscal year twenty
to the recommendation included a
three percent increase in
general fund revenues for a
total general fund
recommendation of two point five
million in response to
Representative Dixon Dr Rick
Hendrix noted the commission's
lack of ability to increase
revenues but Jessica hits then
LFC analyst noted at the current
rate charged for agencies to
publish N. M. The New Mexico
register three dollars per
column inch which hasn't been
increased since twenty
seventeen.
HSD three fifty four New
Mexico's sentencing commission
the subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation which is two
hundred thousand dollars or
sixteen point one percent higher
than the agencies fiscal year
twenty two operating budget and
six hundred twenty two thousand
lower than the executive
recommendation LFC staff
confirmed language extending the
appropriation for the commission
to we rate the criminal code
through fiscal year twenty three
is included in the legislative
recommendation for special
appropriations subcommittee
adopted consensus performance
measures and targets.
HSD three sixty one department
of information technology.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets.
One point four million dollars
below the executive
recommendation in response to
Representative Anderson Matt
Smith broadband advisor explains
the need for investing in a
variety of technologies to meet
New Mexico's needs and noted
states are currently awaiting
further guidance regarding uses
of federal broadband funding.
In response to Representative
serin Jana Representative Brown
acting secretary Sam vandam
noted how the LFC is
recommendations re purposing of
FTE might hurt its ability to
fund activities that are not
right supported such as
cybersecurity and the project
management office the committee
expressed a desire to
potentially adjust general fund
revenues for FTE in the
compliance and project
management program and
increasing okay general fund
amounts for the office of
broadband access and expansion.
Agency for ninety one office of
military base planning the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets economic development
department chief financial
officer they're relevant Alina
presented for the agency
Representative Syriana noted
military bases are a key part of
the New Mexico economy and asked
when the agency would expect to
hire a new director.
Is Melina stated the HSD hopes
to fill the position within the
year.
Members also noted the
importance of hiring a part time
administrative position the HSD
which the LFC recommendation
supported.
HSD seven of our military
affairs department.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation with contingency
language regarding the
availability of federal funds
for the department's proposed
job college academy in requests
staff provide recommended
language staff provided the
following recommendations.
What the general fund
appropriations to the department
of military affairs include five
hundred thousand dollars
contingent on certification by
the department of finance
administration that federal
matching funds of at least one
million five hundred thousand
dollars have been secured and
crap the legislative
recommendation for general fund
revenue six hundred thousand or
eight point six percent higher
than the agency's FY twenty two
operating budget and two hundred
forty five point two thousand
lower than the executive
recommendation the subcommittee
adopted consensus performance
measures and targets.
The last agency is of seven
ninety five homeland security
and emergency management.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation amended the
recommended language for the
state fire marshal's office
program to read quote the other
state funds.
Appropriations to the state fire
marshal's.
Office program of the homeland
security and emergency
management department include
four million nine hundred
seventy one thousand three
hundred dollars from the fire
protection fund for
administration and operation of
the state's fire marshal's
office any unexpended balances
in the state fire marshal's
office program of the homeland
security and emergency
management department at the end
of fiscal year twenty twenty
three shall revert back to the
fire protection fund.
Both the legislative and
executive recommendations for
general fund revenue were flat
with the agency's FY twenty two
operating budget the
subcommittee adopted consensus
performance measures and targets
thank you madam chair.
You madam chair we that
concludes our presentation.
Okay we have a question
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair of on item
seven eighty well item seven
eighty about halfway through the
committee report of crime
victims reparation commission
madam chairman we had a
discussion in that sub committee
about
considering the twenty two
percent cut that we had had in
the
sexual so
Crisis under way in New Mexico
and the intervention but federal
funds nonetheless should be
reduced twenty two percent I
think we were hoping for a
little additional information on
the impact of that cut without
perhaps LFC and the FAA but
Madam chair of I was hoping we
might.
Consider in addition through the
early childhood education and
care fund should be of bill
passed that opens up of some of
that funding available I think
the statistic was sixty percent
of the sexual so in New Mexico
is unfortunately on you
young young New Mexicans are so
that's my point nine leave it
hanging out there all of the
possible addition trainer
thousand for that purpose.
If I could this is to ensure
statewide coverage of because
all right now the the map would
indicate in terms of service
coverage from a geographical
sense it is around
fifteen to twenty percent Max.
Okay I do have a comment on
that.
Madam chair yes.
R. David let's go to David first
okay by Senator comments first
of all I believe that our catch
up clean up some adjustments to
the initial action are
forthcoming thank thank you I
know that the junior has
significant amounts for this
purpose inspection of Senate
that I've seen already and third
my staff agency right been spent
a great amount of time working
with the department to try to
validate the the concern about
federal funds and and I at this
time I don't believe that we're
able to validate that we're not
saying it's wrong but I don't
think it's supported at this
time.
Madam chair director Avid so
comments were.
Very
our new news for me and so I
think I will hold any my idea in
abeyance until perhaps a little
later and we get additional
information thank you.
All right is going to
Representative Trujillo your
hand is up to join make a
comment yes I wanted to concur
with the Representative Anderson
there was quite a bit of
discussion about this and and
that based on what David is
saying with is it catch up
cleanup we'll go ahead and
address some of the concerns
that we had and hopefully by
that time you'll have
information regarding the
federal funds because there is a
very strong concern madam chair
that the they will be under
funded if we don't addresses.
And that's our report madam
chair.
All righty do we have any
questions on this report.
Representative Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair three
sixty one for the department of
information technology just a
little concerned FTEs or
Cybersecurity are we've I think
I schools have been hit with APS
being the biggest one lately and
that's just a lot of kids out
when we we have problems with
cyber I just wanna make sure
recovered on that in that area
thank you.
Where do we have any other
questions for the Representative
Trujillo.
OK Representative Trujillo for
the motion.
Yes madam chair I I would do
pass on this recommendation this
committee report we have a
motion for adoption on this
committee report second by
Representative Anderson is there
any opposition to that.
Seeing none the committee report
has been adopted.
Right let's go to the committee
do.
Thank you madam chair
as you know our vice chair of
Susan had Cadena is no longer on
this committee so I'd ask
Representative Castellano to
help me with that report.
subcommittee do first a
considered agency three seventy
nine public employee labor
relations board.
We adapt to the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets because the
recommendations of the LFC and
exec were largely similar
director Griego declined to
comment on the budget but
requesting consideration for
special appropriation request to
increase the salary is salary
once he retires so he has a plan
retirement in FY twenty three.
HSD co three seventy eight state
personnel board we adopted the
LFC recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets director srna noted
the agency only has funding to
fill thirty seven positions and
after recent hiring efforts
offers have been extended to
several candidates and the
agency anticipates being fully
staffed in the coming weeks
director certain noted the state
currently has a twenty three
percent vacancy rate and that
half of all open state jobs were
filled by current state
employees making it difficult to
reduce the vacancy rate director
srna noted the importance of
marketing and attracting other
individuals to state government
in response to Representative
Crowder director service stated
that CPOs reversions of five
hundred eighty five thousand
nine hundred dollars in FY
twenty one.
And six hundred fifty four
thousand three hundred dollars
in FY twenty resulted from high
turnover leading to vacancy
savings agency Mexico three
forty administrative hearings
office we adopted the executive
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets which was at one
point six thousand below the LFC
recommendation in general fund
revenues Brian David Denson jeep
hearing officer noted the
agency's keep budget priorities
and noted that both
recommendations supported
funding to fill an executive
assistant position that was
created but unfunded in previous
fiscal years agency noted
reversions related to funding
intended for hearings for the
Human Services department which
did not occur last fiscal year.
HSD code for ten the ethics
commission subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets which is eighty
three thousand nine hundred
dollars hello the executive
recommendation executive
director Jeremy Ferris noted
that both recommendations allow
the agency to fill two
additional requests F. T. and
noted plans to reclassify an
existing special projects
coordinator position to become
an attorney position which the
LFC recommendation supports in
response to a question regarding
reversions Mr fares noted the
agencies for persons and the
contractual services category
we're due to reversions of set
aside funding for hearing
contracts that was not needed
due to delays in scheduled
hearings and set aside funding
in case of the need for external
legation contracts that also was
not needed.
HSD code for seventeen the
border Authority sub Committee
adopted the executive
recommendation which included
ten thousand dollars less
general fund revenue then the
LFC director Michael greater
provided an update on border
activities to members and noted
the border is now open again for
non commercial travel and the
point I have been very busy.
In our tribal ceremonial office
agency code five thirty eight
the sub committee adopted the
LFC recommendations including
consensus performance targets
for the inter tribal ceremonial
office tourism secretary Gen
Schreier W. secretary Antoinette
Miss Vigil along with executive
director Melissa Sanchez
presented an update on the last
ceremonial event and plans for
the upcoming one hundredth
anniversary of it president of
the Gallup inter tribal
ceremonial Indian association
Kyle Tom actually travel to
Santa Fe and provided remarks he
stated that for the first time
in years the nonprofit which ran
the been in past years and the
state agency had reached an
agreement on responsibilities
for the events and had open
lines of communication.
Madam chairwoman you stated you
want to follow up information
from the agency about the
divided responsibilities and
finally HSD Mexico three forty
three the retiree health care of
forty we adopted the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets Neil hi for acting
executive director provided
background on the retiree health
care thirty program including
the number of members covered
and the types of coverage
offered Mister Cooper noted they
had a total liability of four
point five billion and assets of
just over one billion resulting
in a funded ratio of twenty five
percent which was up from the
sixteen point five percent in
two thousand twenty Mr Burciaga
quest to the committee consider
funding for the special
appropriation requests made by
the.
And now Representative
Castellano.
Thank you sure Sweetser madam
chair agency called the forty
two Public School Insurance
Authority subcommittee adopted
LFC recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets there is no general
fund in PSA I and our operation
are funded through premium
revenue from participating
entities and individuals acting
director Patrick Santa provided
the subcommittee within are you
of yes I ate appropriations is
stated that the agency is
requesting an eleven point three
percent increase in expenditures
authority for FY twenty three Mr
some of also stated that the
rates are set in the spring what
the agency is anticipating an
increase of nine point four
percent for health insurance
rates and four point five seven
percent for risk insurance
increases.
Like to a question
Representative Crowder Mr
Senegal stated that that he
would provide a list of all
alright spent and teach in the
program Representative Allison
asked why education employees in
rural areas are paid
significantly more than
Albuquerque public schools
employees for health insurance
Mr son of this funded at the PS
I a whole is more rural.
Is moral and faces higher costs
that those covered under APS
Representative and I asked if
there was any way to combine
insurance plans to provide
coverage to both urban and rural
employees and thereby reduce
costs Mr Senator stated that the
integration budget advisory
committee provides a measure of
centralized purchasing already
Representative as well as to
that the differences in
contribution rates between yes I
ate and other state health
insurance plans we're LFC
analyst Connor Dorgan's provided
an explanation of the different
statutory contribution rates and
the different total premiums
paid by public employees covered
under the state's three
insurance purchasing entities.
HSD go three fifty two
educational retirement board the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets executive director
David except the presented the
agency's budget request.
Which did not include any
general fund and directed the
majority of the additional
funding to the contractual
service category to pay for
investment management fees Mr
Fletcher noted investment
returns for the past year were
over twenty percent and returns
exceeded actual assumptions for
the fund for all time periods
measured Representative Lane
noted the relatively low
investment fees New Mexico
commended agency on producing
large returns with low asset
management fees Mr chair that
the in response to a question
from Representative Sweetser
stated the failing bank in
stated the filling vacant
positions will be among his top
priorities as executive
director.
HSD code three six six public
employees retirement association
the subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation including
consensus performance measures
and targets executive director
great Trujillo described the PRH
program including the number of
active and retired members and
stated the pension reform
legislation as it had improved
the funding of pension plans
acting CIO crystal of a law
stated that P. ari and shooting
twenty four percent investment
return in FY twenty one a record
for P. R. eighty is what a lot
of knowledge the P. R. E.
funds and performed in the
bottom half of all public funds
in all of the time periods
measured but pointed out that a
risk adjustment basically P. R.
A. is currently in the top
twenty percent of funds.
Three three seven state
investment council subcommittee
adopted LFC recommendation
including consensus performance
measures and targets both LFC
LFC LFC and executive
recommendation fully funded
agencies request which increases
the FY twenty three budget by
fifteen point four percent the
increase totals eight point six
million from FY two budget state
investment officer Steve Mosey
presented agency needs including
an additional hundred and eighty
seven point four thousand over
the request for recruitment
retention and vacant positions
as the S. icy indicated needs
arose after the submission of
the budget request additional
money included in the LFC
recommendation there's no
general fund revenue in S. I see
and the revenue increase comes
from the relevant permanent
funds any unspent funds would
revert to the relevant prevent
Perman Fund permanent fund the
budget increases driven by
increased management fees of
eight point six million which
are all function of asset values
over the last fiscal year S. icy
managed assets group about
twenty four percent or five
point eight billion to six
thirty point one billion this
funding would help S. icy feel
twenty five on the twenty six
authorized FTEs madam chair that
concludes our.
Some committee report.
Okay is there anybody else on
the subcommittee that might want
to make a comment.
Okay let's go to questions is
there any questions on this
subcommittee report any of the
items that are listed.
I don't see any hands raised are
going up Representative Lara I'm
sorry I didn't see your hand
there thank you madam chair kind
of blends in there thank you
madam chair that yellow light.
madam chair
Representative I have a question
on HSD code for seventeen the
border Authority I just
wondering why the subcommittee
decided.
To to reduce that the by ten
thousand dollars as well so
they'll see recommendations.
Thank you for the question madam
chair representative Lara it as
just typically we take a lower
and it was so close we took the
lower okay thank thank you for
that is I I know that some we we
need to stop funding down and so
that that is on the board I was
just wondering I.
If you know what what the call
was on that thank you I
understand thank you thank you
madam chair.
All right do we have anybody
else that has a question if not
we'll go to Representative
Sweetser for motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move we adopt the subcommittee
do reports.
A second that motion second
Representative Castellano is
there any objection to that.
I don't see any so it has been
approved to spend adopted.
So next we have the special
supplemental deficiency
workgroup and bar.
Now let me ask you something
that David and bill would be
quicker if we get those other
three first instead of yes and
the okay so let's go to the
computer systems workgroup
report next.
Who was sharing that.
Also insured that subcommittee
chair OK Representative Allison.
Are you one who was the vice
chair.
Madam chair that would be me
Representative X. what we have
Representative Dixon fire up
then on this the computer system
working group report madam chair
I am not sure that I know where
that is.
Madam chair yes yes with the
computers group we had.
The report excuse me does
everybody have a copy they're
shaking their heads no so can we
share screen else.
Staff can we share the screen on
this not everybody has a copy of
the computer report.
Madam chair then make a
suggestion if we could go to
public schools and higher at and
I think we can find the I. T.
report pretty quick and ensure
okay all right let's go to
public schools working group
of Representative Sweetser.
Yes madam chair thank you for
that the public school work
group met January twenty second
two analyzed agency code nine
nine three public school
supporting related
appropriations the workgroup
review the HFC or House
Appropriations and finance
committee staff scenario for
public schools which mostly
adopted LFC recommended funding
levels but included several
changes to align probation with
the executive recommendation.
The appropriation scenario
adopted the executive anymore
teacher and principal salary
levels of fifty thousand sixty
thousand and seventy thousand
four levels one two and three
licensees respectively other
changes included a decrease in
extended learning time size
adjustments and targeted
compensation adoption of the
executive recommendation for
instructional materials and use
of the public education reform
Fund to supplant general fund
appropriations for the extended
learning time size adjustments.
The Appropriations Committee
scenario also adopted the
executive public education
reform Fund recommendations for
community schools and career
technical education as well as
five twenty licensee page
Hispanic Education Act
implementation school
transparency and cybersecurity
and then as well as increased
funding for teacher evaluations
and teacher residencies and with
that I would stand or we would
stand for questions.
Okay does anybody else on that
subcommittee want to make a
comment.
Go ahead Representative Lara and
then we'll go Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and there are a within a with
your permission and was
Representative Sweetser
commission I would just like to
ask or awesome clarifying
questions what's happening is
I'm going to yeah I've been
getting up a quite a few of the
calls and and questions
regarding some so some aspects
of the extended learning time
program and I would love to us
some some some clarifying
questions if I may sure and we
also have sunny they can help
answer those questions so go
ahead yes ma'am thank you thank
you madam chair my first
question is so the the extended
learning time program it is
pretty much going to be mandated
does that also mean that the
teachers are going to be
mandated to work the extra days.
The US and chair representative.
The extent learning time program
requires the addition of extra
instructional days which only
teachers of record can't find so
yes they'd be required to
provide this instructor dates.
Thank you Sonny thank you madam
chair so if the school district
already has couldn't hear that
because there is talk in the
back.
Not every.
You know if someone needs to
meet their computer office.
Your movie.
Okay.
If Sonny repeat twenty set is
going to.
I just need to have everybody
meet their computers well the
people are responding so go
ahead honey.
Yes madam chair so in response
to your question Representative
Lara B. as teachers would be
required to provide additional
instructional time.
For the extended learning.
Thank thank you senator thank
you madam chair.
Is so if the school district
that already has or is already
implementing these programs to
five plus extended learning then
they can easily just build it
into what they have separate
correct.
Madam chair representative if
the school is already providing
extended learning there would be
no additional requirements on
that screen.
Thank you sunny thank you madam
chair I I'll so how hopeless
bowl is you it is this your
this for our requirement can you
can schools utilize days or
hours or combination of both to
meet the requirements.
Madam chair representative if a
school is doing extended
learning for the very first time
they could find half of the
additional days in the form of
ours and then they can find five
of the ten days an important
updates if they are a high
performing school they can find
all the time in the form of ours
if they are a school that has
less than two hundred students
thank you find all the time and
all of ours.
Thank you so you madam chair and
that leads me to my to my next
question so what if we have a
school district that has mixed
schools some are high performing
and so we're not how how would
that work out.
Madam chair representative that
would be part of the
determination that the secretary
would have to make sure the
language as provided so PD
secretary would have to.
Make a judgment call.
Thank you senator madam chair
one more question please so what
can the school districts decide
or target specific schools
within the school districts for
the six extended learning time
program or does it have to be
district wide.
Madam chair representative so
the concept is that all schools
will be participating in
extended learning in high
performing schools will have the
maximum flexibility to provide
that in the form of ours.
Thank thank you for signing I I
appreciate that and I would just
like to make a comment that I
that I really would like to for
the the PED and the and the
secretary to be very clear on
those guidelines but the school
districts when it comes to all
the implementation of this thank
you madam chair thank you sent.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you very much I you know I
I voiced my concern yesterday
with the LTP and I continue to
by it today.
Because there are so many people
calling in very concerned about
this requirement and and for me
you know not having it better
there than House education are
Senate education.
Makes me very concerned again
about the policies that I'll see
is making for legislators to
implement I really have a strong
objection to it and I would like
for us to we thank all of the
LTP bring it back next year
maybe and have the committees
that it because right now from
what I understand and sunny
correct me if I'm wrong.
LFC created this policy not
education am I correct.
Madam chair representative the
December in time program was the
joint.
A program that was created by
LFC and LESC back and and the
twenty twenty session.
You madam chair not ELT Peter
was
it was K. five plus and K. three
plus but was never yell TPE so I
have a real strong concern about
that and I would like this to
rethink it thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair.
To clarify for the committee
your extended learning time
program was part of house bill
five.
And it provides additional
instructional time for all
schools and provide most of the
money is actually for after
school enrichment services.
Your requirements for teachers
to get a minimum of eighty hours
of professional development and
what the recommendation thank
you have before you does is ask
the kind of flexibility measures
that the school districts have
been asking for all summer
and provides that in to fit into
the statutory framework as
budget directions madam chair.
Madam chair with all due respect
that was not vetted in
committee.
I was in house bill five though
wasn't Charles isn't that what
you're saying is that a few
years ago we carried house bill
five that was sponsored by
Representative Stapleton and
myself.
That we had all of that that the
stuff in there is that correct
I'm trying to remember what was
in that bill yes that created
the program madam chair along
with K. five plus that
Representative Trujillo talked
about had the at risk increases
in the other reforms to the
formula.
Wanted to well look up the FIR
for that bill.
and the fiscal year that we did
it and send it to Representative
Trujillo.
Yes okay Representative three
are you still have before.
Madam chair thank you so much I
would like to see that but I
really have strong concerns
about it as do many districts
and staff.
Representative Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair up I I'm
going because of Representative
Trujillo is concerned I didn't
know I had to go back to Mr
Salie's about high schools doing
it because I didn't know high
schools were doing it to I never
heard of that but I have concern
that if it's mandatory or if
it's mandatory
I know the teachers I work with
we are with kids an hour and
forty minutes every day it's a
long time and by the time this
school year was over I'm.
Adding a few more days I don't
know the teachers will come back
specially high school because we
tend to be a little bit more
Not is.
Cooperatives of the teachers.
Just to say the right thank you
madam chair I would just I just
don't remember being that either
L. the estate but thank you
madam chair.
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you very much I do have
problems with is it really going
to affect our smaller school
districts negatively.
They're up against the wall
anyway and just trying to you
know make budget constraints
that they have you are gonna
have a hard time getting just to
come back I agree with
everything that Representative
Lara said in there and Jana and
Heo it is a problem for me and I
have heard lots of teachers data
my district and outside of my
district not my district full of
I I have objections to this as
well thank you.
Madam chair to clarify for the
committee districts under two
hundred students.
Would just need to make the
school day about fifteen minutes
longer and then they get the
extra money for enrichment and
after school programming
and the districts can also
convert a teacher in service
days to instructional days after
choosing so that the teachers
contract may not be extended.
Just wanted to put that into for
the committee to make sure you
understand and there are micro
districts that are doing the
program thank Arthur was one of
the state needs another one of
them back in balance stand K.
five plus district wide so some
of the districts have moved in
this direction already.
All righty let's go to
Representative Anderson.
Madam chairman Madam chairman of
my question was answered in part
by Charles is
additional information relative
just two hundred and hello being
a issue flexibility to the our
small the the the under two
hundred discord districts but I
to share with concerns expresses
afternoon thank you.
Okay let's go to Representative
Crowder.
Thank.
Two very quick questions of in
the aircraft we have on our
cover sheet it says other
changes included a decrease in
extended learning time what did
it go from and down to how much
was the decrease.
Okay senator Charles.
Madam chair representative if
you look on the second page of
your hand out there should be a
high level with highlights on
the changes in the area.
You look at line thirteen of
that second page you'll see that
the extended learning time size
factors were decreased from
twenty six down to seven
million.
About thirteen million of that
is being supported with the
public education reform Fund so
the.
Decreases six million dollars.
Madam chair I understand there's
a decrease in the funding with
this Senator says there's a
decrease in extended learning
time.
So so Madam chair
representative.
That is a budget provision that
would provide additional money
for medium to small districts
that added the ten days as they
would bring in extra money into
their communities particularly
for the enrichment and after
school programming if they
didn't want to do the full ten
days then there are those other
provisions
that would allow them to still
get the basic extended learning
money so it's kind of an
incentive
along with another twenty one
million dollars appropriation
that's basically a thousand
dollars per classroom for
planning grants in transition
grants to help teachers support
the curriculum changes that the
court is telling the state we
need to do.
Thank you madam chair Charles
final question is.
Secretary PED the other day said
that this is gone now from being
voluntary to mandatory we had a
lot of schools that didn't
accept this did the doctor in
place in their schools he stated
clearly that this year it is
mandatory how did it go from
voluntary to mandatory you made
that decision.
That's the recommendation Madam
chair representative Crowder.
Thank you recommendation as an
LESC or is it for PED years
consensus group.
As a regional and LFC
recommendation the subcommittee
adjusted the language to make
the program universally
available so the expectation as
everybody does it in some form
that's outlined with the kind of
flexibility provisions that the
districts have been asking for a
letter from okay right now I'm
sure I am to getting a lot of
calls on this so.
It's going to be difficult thank
you.
Let's go to Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair I I think
I need just a bit of
clarification because I heard Mr
Slee reference HB five of twenty
twenty that that obviously
produce my time in the
legislature and so my question
madam chair is.
Is it is Mr Slee suggesting that
in H. B. fired from twenty
twenty that extended learning
time programs are mandatory or
just that that the concept of
the extended learning time
programs were created in H. P.
five in two thousand twenty.
Programs were created they were
not mandatory in each of the
five.
And so madam chair that
essentially I think.
If I'm understanding what's
happening is.
The swap then occurred within
the language that will be in
house bill two is that right.
Yes that would be in house bill
two for the next fiscal year
only.
Okay so I think what I'm
understanding the rub them from
some of the educators on the
committee is these are typically
substantive type policies that
that would go through a
substantive committee and not
necessarily in the language of
house bill two if if I'm
understanding the pushback
Rackley
you know as I look at some of
the other language you know
madam chair
One eleven for example it goes
beyond.
Extended learning time it gets
in the K. five plus and
the sensitive I understand
language correctly would would
implement that into all schools
by two thousand twenty five.
so I I agree with my colleagues
I do have some concerns about
the the language that that's
present here and I hope that we
can revisit that thank you.
Okay let's go to Representative
Jack Chatfield.
Thank you
madam chair I was here during
House Bill five and I do
remember the difference the
difference was that it was not
mandatory.
I got a lot of input then.
And I'm getting a lot of input
now in one hundred percent of
that input is negative I have
not received not one email not
one call in favor of this
program it seems to me like it's
a top down program.
It is directed to our local
schools without any input.
Thank you madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair with
regard to this particular debate
I wanted to say that I was not
here in two thousand.
Twenty of for the debate on
bell I
but I find it.
Somewhat frustrating that we
have this discussion last year
I'm in appropriations over the
same sort of issue and we've had
a year.
Where we know our children.
Are having a more difficult time
learning.
And we have research that shows
that this is a proven.
Way to improve student success.
So I just wanted to voice my
frustration that we have not
been able to solve this
particular disagreement and I
really hope that we can get a
solution in the near future
thank you so much.
All right I am going to see if
there's anybody else here that
has any questions madam chair I
hope we have Representative
small excuse me no thank you so
much madam chair madam chair Mr
Slee Mister Liu I do have a few
questions madam chair Mister so
the Mr Liu we've provided enough
funding in last year's budget to
fully cover extended learning
and begin to fully fund not only
and and one time but in
recurring budgets K. five plus
is that accurate.
Chair representative that is
correct.
Okay you madam chair up madam
chair Mister Lewis we provided
that funding date we the the
programs are not mandatory is
that correct.
Yes that's correct okay madam
chair Mister lose so
We now this will be this would
be here to that we provided full
funding but if if if the
guidance is not there to help
schools implement with
flexibility but also with
certainty madam chair Mister
Lilly would seem to me that we
might as well expect to have
unspent monies upwards of a
hundred million dollars like we
have in recent years what is
that fair to expect madam chair
Mister Liu.
And chair representative yes
that's correct okay thanks madam
chair thanks Mr those so I'm
trying to get it straight in my
head.
When if we go a a completely
voluntary route.
With sufficient recurring
funding year after year does
that mean Madam chair Mister Liu
that that funding is unavailable
for other priorities across the
state.
Madam chair representative.
Yes that that money would be
dedicated specifically for these
programs okay thanks man thank
you madam chair thank you Mr
though and
So the put a point on that I
would share the frustration I
will go beyond the frustration
to just have to start to
consider madam chair Mr Lewin
Committee members that if there
isn't progress and we've heard
secretary signed house state
publicly multiple times in
public settings including an LFC
meetings that it's important to
provide more flexibility and
more teacher preparation time
many many more services for
educators but that at the same
time extended learning in K.
five plus are essential in as
committee members of noted we're
coming off of the worst year for
learning loss ever due to no
fault of anybody it was a global
pandemic.
So if we're madam chair Mr Liu
committee members.
It.
How do we justify not spending a
hundred you know saying we're
putting a hundred million
dollars here that's not going to
be spent.
When it's not going to be
utilized it's not going to help
the single kid it's not going to
help educators is not going to
go to the purpose we intend and
our state needs if we don't take
this step forward on on some of
the guidance I just madam chair
Mister Liu and I'll have another
quick question I struggle.
Without some of the progress
that we're seeing in the
language here that does allow
for flexibility I I truly
struggled to see why this money
should and potentially be
considered for reserves or other
purposes because we this would
now be three maybe four years
running where money is going to
be put in a budget with the X.
in the most likely outcome is
that will not get spent there
okay madam chair just briefly
one more time then.
The LFC recommendation is to go
with the full licensure
increases is that roughly ten
thousand dollars per year is
that correct Mr loop madam
chair.
Madam chair yes the increase
would be about ten thousand for
each tier in the current
scenario okay thank you madam
chair thank you Mr Liu
And when we add in the the seven
percent that's sorely needed are
we looking at Mr Liu at four
teachers is it over twenty five
percent pay increases that would
be contemplated.
All in when we look between the
FY twenty two in FY twenty
three.
Madam chair representative at
the seven percent is applied
first in this scenario okay and
so teacher would get seven
percent and then it raises a new
minimum at that seven percent
cover that remaining amount.
Got it okay I see so so okay all
right madam chairman through the
thank you
I would be hopeful that we are
able to move forward as a
committee with this moderated
language I I certainly
acknowledge and hear the
concerns but madam chair if
we're unable to move forward
with moderated in consensus
language then it seems like we
should.
Seriously consider moving money
from the budget because it is
unlikely to be use their based
upon the last several years
thank you madam chair thank you
committee all righty I want to
ask one quick question for Colin
Representative Armstrong just so
I'm clear.
That is the source of the
education reform is that not
correct with the money that
didn't get spent the first year
that we put it in for this
purpose.
When into this reform Fund is
that correct.
Yes that's correct okay so
Representative small is correct
on that so let's go to
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair one of the
questions I had was on the cyber
security and data systems
is this
Is this for the Stuyvesant carry
in the side the schools and what
was their original request.
And I'm chair representative
this one point five million
dollar request was from the
executive recommendation and it
was for PED to provide technical
assistance to school districts
on cyber security.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you sunny and so this is
for technical assistance only
and it's not for implementing
cybersecurity.
Madam chair representative to my
knowledge there is some
professional development
training and assistance and some
upgrades there part of that
request but I would have to go
back and look at more detail and
if you need.
I'm more clarity on specificity
on how that should be spent I
also like to turn notice and if
she has anything else to like
that Madam chair of the program
okay Cindy you have a bank yes
madam chair members of the
committee if it does include
some support for cyber security
I don't know exactly what the
full amount would be but it is
professional development it is
our technical assistance and
some cyber security I can get a
break out for you if that would
be helpful thank you madam chair
and thank you Cindy I was just
curious I'm hearing I think it
was in the PED project where
there was a lot some so the this
is in conjunction with that for
the technical support so thank
you madam chair and and thank
you so much and just I too have
got to say that you know madam
chair I.
Stood up in committee several
times and bait to not have this
Extended learning time made
mandatory so
Just need you to hear that thank
you madam chair.
Okay I wanted to ask the staff.
What is that dollar amount that
has been put into this budget.
For that mandatory pace.
What is that amount.
Because I'm not willing to keep
that in there if we're not gonna
do this.
so what is the amount.
And share in total the bases one
hundred sixty million dollars.
Okay.
So sixty million dollars has
been put into this budget.
I did that it's mandatory.
It sounded like the committee
doesn't want to do that we're
going to we're gonna talk about
that but if they don't do it
we're not keeping it in the
budget either we'll have to look
at some other
other uses I'm not sure what
that is yet obviously but let
let's talk a little bit about
that
what is that number based on
sunny.
Is that school by school it's
not participating now or or what
is that based on Madam chair in
the funding formula.
Every student generates point
one one units of if they're in
an extended learning time
program okay just announced
would get every single student
that program so all three
hundred thirty one thousand
students three hundred twenty
thousand students and there's
funding and hundred sixty
million to provide all students
this program if they do not then
that amount reversed the public
education reform okay so let me
ask you a question that what
about those schools and they're
already doing this that we're
mandated to do it but they've
already got it in their budget
regardless if we give them
another dime.
That we're how are they paying
for that.
Madam chair about forty six
percent of all students across
the state are in an extended
learning time programs about
half of them they are generating
it straight from the SCG formula
so about that appropriation.
So then they're they're able to
afford that that is what it
sounds like to me because it's
coming out of their own formula
funds.
So I'm okay and madam chair just
to add one thing the hundred and
sixty million that Mr leader
talked about about ninety six
million are are a little more
than fifty percent is intended
for after school enrichment
program so if you're a district
it's like animus for example
that doesn't want to do the
program they could to still do
the program and had fifteen
minutes to their instructional
day not change their school
calendar and they were gonna
slug of extra money for after
school enrichment program.
I see okay let's go to setting.
All hi yes madam chair members
of the committee I have I did
get some information from the
public education department in
relation to the cyber security
question for Representative
Armstrong and they are currently
providing kind of a whole slew
of security support for for
schools and then for the twenty
three money so I can send this
list to everyone so you have all
the details but they will find
incident response services so to
all schools when there's an
attack enhanced remediation
guidance to Europe to assist
them proactive cybersecurity
consulting so there's a lot of
it is going to be to assist with
cybersecurity that one point
five million that was in the
executive branch.
Okay all right so.
As far as I'm concerned they're
covered on that so let's let's
talk about this mandatory
language.
I would have thought that all
those who have been brought up
in the subcommittee and also it
has the concerns of the
subcommittee would have been
bringing this up more than just
one person.
So let's.
Talk about I just want to see
kind of a push poll here on who
is against the mandatory
language if you would just raise
your hand but the thank you
okay.
Yes you could put your hand up
the zoom and.
Madam chair Mrs Sanderson I'm
and I'm a no.
And I can't get my picture up.
Thank you don't want the
mandatory language or you do I
do not want to land mandatory
language okay.
And it looks like.
The fund my.
I know you're coming from Jack I
do feel like we obviously did
not discuss this as being
mandatory when we were in our
subcommittee groups and I
apologize for that I'm not sure
I understood that as well I
think that we we made a misstep
in in communicating that so I
apologize it's chair but I feel
I also didn't understand that
thank you madam chair okay so
how much for what we and then
that.
So what would be amended to non
mandatory or what was the
original language on that yeah
madam chair there was a change
in the subcommittee from
Where it required PED to not
appropriate or not approve a
budget for a school district is
pretty strong.
The language before you and the
subcommittee report is for
fiscal year twenty three.
The PED shall ensure the
operating budget of all school
districts and charter schools
includes an extended learning
time program pursuant to
section.
This section of law for all
students through twelve a
kindergarten through twelfth
grade before we had more of a
negative connotation and it like
required every low performing
schools to apply and and get the
money in this just says it's
universal and PED should try to
ensure that.
Chair.
Okay so my feeling about this is
is that
We should do.
Yes we should not even have that
in there that mandatory language
in there when I'm out that word
and another works and that it
should be
you know I I would say that it
needs to be up to those
individual school districts that
have to be those are already be
doing it obviously have enough
money to cover it because I've
been doing it right.
Correct.
Thank you he didn't do that
we're going to do some
adjustments on this on the money
part two guys so I want you to
know that now.
We don't get it both ways.
So it's going to be let's let's
make a motion on that
Representative Sweetser so we
don't have to have mandatory
language on that report.
So thank you madam chair I I
would move that we adopt the
committee report with the
exception of removing the
mandatory language for extended
learning time then they'll be a
budget adjustment and with along
with the budget adjustment.
Representative small that was it
thank you madam chair a budget
reduction.
Okay.
All righty is there any
opposition to that adoption of
that report in that manner is
there anything else madam chair
I just have a question for
clarification.
Go ahead.
Madam chair so
that doesn't mean that those
schools who choose not to do
this well not I don't want them
to be penalized because they
chose not to do it and I'm
concerned that if we raised
incorrectly PED well I'm assume
that they did not become part of
the E. R. T. P. program then
that there are other funds will
be cut.
That's not what it means.
So is there any other questions.
All right do we have any
opposition to this motion.
We don't have any opposition so
the report has been adopted and
I'm advocating Representative
Sweetser Representative small to
work with the staff on the
funding adjustment and bring me
in on that too okay let's move
on.
The next report understand that
computer report is inside of the
supplemental documents so we're
gonna go on to hire it right now
so go ahead Representative small
thank you very much madam chair
madam chair committee with the
higher education subcommittee
we had an excellent hearing.
The emphasis that the LFC
through the summer process
placed on additional school
wraparound services as we all
recall was adopted we modified
that madam chair in committee in
our subcommittee meeting based
on madam chair cut subcommittee
Eight so we in order to be
budget neutral.
We remove some money all those
still left over three million
dollars in the student support
services that were really
emphasized over the summer as a
key thing for us to move forward
with higher education and we re
district.
But the at those
dollars in those glancing madam
chair and subcommittee members
just to go through a briefly
another two hundred thousand
dollars to project echo
that's on top of
the significant increase that
they received in the base budget
another one hundred thousand
dollars to the San Juan center
for of excellence for renewable
and for energy another three
hundred point four thousand
dollars for the New Mexico
department of agriculture and as
was specified this is a
generalized item so that
provides them budgetary
flexibility.
We also matter.
Committee began to make up in
the per student gap that exists
for institutions
for for several of our
comprehensive institutions
including eastern New Mexico
university the university and
western New Mexico university.
And dedicating one point two
million dollars to eastern to
begin to make up the gap that
exists between them and other
institutions in the state and a
hundred thousand dollars to
western New Mexico university
there is an additional four
hundred thousand dollars madam
chair committee members for
athletics in the eastern Mexico
university and
the to the two hundred fifty
thousand dollars stays in the
teacher education consortium so
building the teacher pipeline to
recruit more educators that is
going
instead of just the one
institution to hire a to
distribute and to look at in a
more statewide perspective okay
so that's center for excellence
for teachers right madam chair
yes.
Okay Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair.
Thank you very much
Representative
the vice chair small thank you
for explaining because one of
the concerns that I have been
hearing about what's the twenty
percent less funding per student
the N. M. U. R. at the end M.
you this is all the other New
Mexico universities this bring
about twenty percent that they
were concerned about.
Madam chair representative is
out I don't believe that this
covers the entire gap
That that existed at I know miss
Fisher is is here this be this
does take madam chair
Representative Ezzell this takes
a sizable chunk out of that gap.
And also madam chair if I might
I forgot to mention three
additional changes is that okay
to Adam and now are I can Adam
at the going ahead thank you
madam chair I apologize
there was another two hundred
thousand dollars that was added
to the adult basic education
program with AGD sixty nine
point six thousand dollars to
adult list literacy and then
another two hundred thousand
dollars to the health
professional loan repayment
program.
Okay Representative Ezzell he
still wore.
Okay.
Wondered if
you're small tell me why twenty
percent gap was why it was into
it and prior to
I need an explanation on that so
I can tell people that have been
contacting me.
Madam chair representative is
out
I can't speak to all of the
history it seems like madam
chair representative Ezzell this
is one of the things that will
continue taking up in our higher
education subcommittee to make
sure the funding formula is
right but it seems like Madam
chair Representative Ezzell that
at a point previous perhaps
previous to all of our service
there was an additional base
amount that was not afforded to
eastern and western eastern New
Mexico university in western New
Mexico university and so that
gap has existed were fixed we're
beginning to fix that madam
chair representative and we're
also noting that use that the
Senate can continue to do some
of that work if they so choose.
Let me say something about this
is that it wasn't until recently
that we really focused in on a
higher and formula.
Because of discrepancies like
this so the LFC in this last
year has set up a subcommittee
specifically to focus on on
higher at and just because of
exactly this kind of stuff I
mean each share would come
forward and you to big
discrepancies between certain
schools are you see some of the
big schools doing and runs
around everybody else and and
not following the process.
So we have seen funding formulas
come out of the last couple of
administrations that work only
if we put new money into it and
all we ended up doing was
holding them harmless anyway.
So this is our first attempt is
starting to get closer but it is
not at the twenty percent yeah.
Okay and that's my concern madam
chair and vice chair small but
whenever you said that you
vetted one point two million to
ENMU and eight hundred thousand
to western.
Whenever you add in that one
point two million only the
percentage that that we have
closed supposedly closed the gap
on the screen.
Can somebody come I read
who is our analyst here I'm
sorry.
And this is Kayla.
So I I ran some numbers about
funding state funding per FTE
full time student quit line to
these institutions and eastern
right now is about at eight
thousand three hundred about
westerns about it ten thousand
three hundred and highlands is
really high at twelve thousand
eight hundred and it's not
necessarily because we've always
appropriated per student higher
to them but there's just been a
huge amount of fluctuation
enrollment since we started you
know a funding formula the most
recent one back fiscal year
level for that I think in around
in the year two thousand so as a
moment's gone down it's really
distorted
at some institutions like
current it's really distorted
there funding crafty and so
that's part of the reason why
we're seeing such big
discrepancies I have to run the
numbers to see how much per FTE
it's going to bring you up.
It's not a huge amount but it's
not it's not going to be a huge
amount but it's better I think
nothing and and as madam chair
sent to something I know that
LFC is dedicated to trying to
address not just within the
conference universities but
across the board.
You know just for like a
comparison you know highlands of
thirteen thousand markets you
know higher per student than
either state or even right now
so just keep it simple.
How long do we are in the right.
Okay that's helpful.
Well it's helpful but is not
helping the university madam
chair and vice chair small and
the one point two million that
that is still keeping a long
ways from that also brought
there but this needs to be
correct for both ENMU and
western New Mexico thank you
madam chair.
All right let's go to
Representative Brown.
Madam chair she stepped out.
Okay the representative
Sarinana.
Thank you madam chair I'm I have
a question on the teacher
pipeline can you tell me
So you NM is getting less than
thanks our schools or is what
money they using for the teacher
probably just that specific
category number seven.
At least UNM.
Madam chair representative
Sarinana this is just an
additional extra categorical
funding recommendation that's
part of the LFC budget course
the educator prep program is
funded by the regular operating
instruction in general money
that's always been there for
them this is just traditional
new piece of money.
Thank you.
Representative Brown back.
Okay yes she's right here all
right let's go.
Thank you madam chair I was
taking a call from secretary
Santa.
Madam chair I'm concerned about
something on the higher ed
institutional it's a high level
worksheet it's on page will
serve a number.
Is some under New Mexico tech so
it's a couple pages on.
One four one one PM today we
were given the the worksheets.
And
One two hundred are.
We're looking right now.
So there's a.
I.
It's it's it's one two hundred
cave and karst research and it's
one of the reserves of public
service project items.
it showed of funding in past
years was three hundred thirty
six thousand dollars and then
the HFC scenario again we're
looking at like two hundred went
up to four hundred four hundred
eighty eight thousand.
I was very pleased to see that
because I know that this agency
I and this public service
project has suffered for funding
over the last several years.
Pre recession they were funded
at the level of five hundred and
sixty seven thousand dollars.
So they've been kind of cap for
out and when I saw that that
better number I thought that was
I move towards fitness.
madam chair and an hour later I
was handed another.
higher it detail and it was
revised it it was marked to two
fifteen PM today.
And when I looked at that
spreadsheet I realize that line
two hundred the funding for cave
and karst research went back
down to three thirty six.
And so I was quite alarmed when
I saw that I do know that the
request was made by the New
Mexico tech in the research
institute for the higher funding
again they were hoping to get
back to where they were before
the recession but at least they
got up to forty eight so
apparently
there were some numbers that
were scrambled on the on the
worksheet I look above one two
hundred points one ninety eight
one ninety nine and some of
those numbers change to.
And then there was the in the
spreadsheet from one to one PM
today there is a massive error
in that the homeland security
center which is going to a one.
It was getting four point four
million which this I think was
an air based on the previous
funding which was quite a bit
less so it appears to me that
something in the computer system
was on the Fritz.
And I just I just want to go on
record as stating that I'm sure
that
This public service project
cable cars really does need
additional funding they have
they serve a very important
purpose in that it's a national
research institute is
headquartered in Carlsbad it
receives funding to the New
Mexico tech it's under that
umbrella also from the federal
government and from the
municipality in which it it
exists so it's of international
reputation and they have been
waiting to do some things
because because they haven't had
the funding yet and I just wish
that
this error had actually been in
their favor and getting up to
four eighty eight yes I just
want to mention I'm I'm really
not happy about where we are
with the suggested funding at
this point and I would like to
see it increased.
The question on that
is that first draft you have
that first document you have you
got a one o'clock today does
that say draft on it.
Madam chair if you if you don't
mind yeah go ahead go ahead this
is this is an air of money sorry
I the first graph that gives
everybody at that one oh one had
a printing error whether you'll
see everything the line off so
so Representative Brown that
four hundred eighty eight member
is really for the homeland
security center below everything
should just be awful light so
you should really referred to
that second draft you're right
the Kevin Kerr start PS PS how
may I apologize for the
confusion so please you got to
in front of you look at the one
at time and date stamps that two
o'clock hour thanks for.
Madam so the the one of the from
one to one PM did not state
draft but yet we we now know
kind of what happened there
so I just I'm.
Really hoping that the amounts
for keeping her school go up I
wonder if there's something we
can do with this is this at this
point in time so thank you madam
chair already thank you very
much do we have any other
questions.
Iran Representative Trujillo.
Madam chair I put I.
Question on the chat but for
some reason I can't find any
information on what we did with
the help professional loan
repayment that line item and how
much we are funding at for.
Okay Micaela.
Representative Trujillo so the
professional loan repayment
program is part of the ETT
budget is P. five of six so it's
kind of at the bottom of your
detail and high level there.
Workgroup recommended having two
hundred thousand to the LFC
recommendations so that would
bring the program up to one
point six four eight million
dollars.
I was hoping that we could add
at least another five hundred
thousand to that there are a lot
of requests for that additional
funding madam chair so check can
I clarify also the LFC wreck was
up two hundred so here's another
two hundred on top of that so
it's a four hundred thousand
increased from the bench.
I just don't find it anywhere so
thank you for letting me know.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair
Could someone point out to me
miko I think this issue where
the where project echo is and
what their total funding is.
Sure so Madam chair
representative Dixon if you are
looking at the detail I handed
out project echo is on line
seventy.
And I can tell you they're
they're regional for their base
funding from clear twenty two is
about two point five million the
LFC here originally recommended
that up to about four million in
the workgroup added another two
hundred thousand of that so
there around four million.
Okay okay I just wanted to flag
that because I'm you know I know
they just launched the long
COVID program what you know some
of the work that they're doing
and how helpful it is so
you know if we find that there
is additional funding somewhere
I'd just like to flag that so
thank you very much.
And I just like to remind the
committee though that there's
another chamber there's another
bite at the apple across the
hall when it comes to all of
these ask so I just want to make
sure everybody knows that also
okay is there any other
questions for the higher ed
group.
All right let's go to
Representative small for the
motion.
Madam chair I would move
adoption of our higher as the
committee report.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay we have a second is there
any opposition.
Saying that it has been adopted
thank you very you're in a
opposition Representative Brown
okay we have one noted in
opposition.
Is there any is there let's see
let's move now to our
supplementals.
peace are we ready for that.
Madam chair yes I can go ahead
and begin okay.
Right.
Madam chair members of the
committee Amanda Dick Peddie
fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee
for section five and six and
special supplemental
appropriations there is for
section five B. H. A. F. C.
scenario is our total for
general fund about two hundred
twenty point four million
dollars that is about fifty
million dollars higher than we
do introduced LFC scenario that
was approved by members in the
fall.
For section thanks
that the agency's Nereo is it
twenty four million dollars
there is less than the LFC
introduced scenario.
So we can difference between
section five and six is about
thirty four million dollars
agency is about thirty four
million dollars higher than what
you stop for LFC in the fall.
Madam chair I know that you have
a very busy agenda today I
didn't know if you wanted to
have me share my screen and go
through what's changed or just
you very high level big
appropriations.
Know whether to go ahead and
share this screen.
Okay but what I don't want to do
is go through every word in
language everybody the staff
they should have already read it
you know what's in there okay
okay that.
Thank you yes the columns to the
far right that's where you see
what changed.
Through this pretty quickly.
And madam chair if I could just
ask us AGFC zoom master to allow
me to share my screen making it
started.
Go ahead Amanda you should be
able to share screen up it is.
All right.
Okay can everyone see my screen
okay.
Okay.
All right so for the first he
again as Charles mentioned the
key you're gonna want to look at
here is this very very far right
quarter this shows what has
changed between the LFC and HFC
on your first he there's only we
want to real changes
the appropriation to the
administrative office of the
courts item number four was
reduced by two hundred fifty
thousand that item was addressed
during the special session and
in another non recurring package
so that item was removed from
this section because it's
addressed somewhere else.
Another item that changed item
number eighteen for the
administrative office of the
courts this is six hundred and
forty eight thousand dollars for
offsite of jury trials this is
that the unified budgets top
priority for nonrecurring
funding and it would help kind
of clear the backlog of cases.
item number two you see lots of
course nothing's changed so I'll
go ahead and move on page number
two nothing changed.
Number three we have a couple
big changes here.
We'll start with item number
fifty four for the Attorney
General this is litigation for
the Rio Grande compact so this
is a water funding the total
amount you see it didn't change
the total appropriation is still
four million dollars but the
recommendation change to
included two million from the
general fund and two million
from the consumer settlement
fund because the office just got
a very big a settlement so that
recommendation uses some of that
settlement for this purposes
eight million in general fund.
Item number fifty six.
This is also to the Attorney
General for gold king mine is
originally was not recommended
in the LFC recommendation but
again that consumer settlement
fund you Madam came in and so
there is now about four point
two million recommended from
other state funds for that
purpose.
Moving on to page for you see a
couple more for the Attorney
General again from the consumer
settlement fund.
Consumer settlement fund
And that you may help it stand
local district attorneys that
with our sexual violence cases
and for tobacco litigation.
Get over some of these little
ones and I'm happy to help
answer any questions members
have what will go down to item
number sixty nine to the
department of finance and
administration and this was not
originally requested up.
Or wrecked commended by the LFC
this is that consolidation of
hunger initiatives that the
executive put into their one
time request recognizing that
this is a big initiative from
the executive the HFC scenario
now includes three million for
hunger.
I know changes going on.
Thanks again I'll skip over some
of these little ones.
We do have a really big change
on item number ninety this is a
twenty five million from the
general fund to the Economic
Development Department this is
for traditional media projects
the original LFC recommendation
hi to address to we to funding
in a separate part of the bill
in section ten of the executive
had concerns about the
availability for those funds for
traditionally SO the HFC
recommendation includes twenty
five million there.
Two other big ones but I know
we're addressed in committee
meetings for HA exceed our items
number ninety six and ninety
seven these are both to the
office of the superintendent of
insurance this was a week
requested by the executive
the executive recommendation
included in the operating budget
the HSC proposes to fund it here
as a supplemental this is non
general fund revenue it's from
the health care affordability
fund and it would lower premium
prices for small businesses and
for individuals so that twenty
eight million and fifty million
there.
I'll just hit this big one item
number one of seven to the
energy minerals and natural
resources department this is for
watershed management project
this was not originally included
this isn't again non general
fund revenue seven million
dollars up from the land
protection revolving fund.
On page eight I will just
highlight item number one
thirteen to the state engineer
this is Dale for water
litigation Agency scenario
includes an additional two
million dollars general fund to
the state engineer for that
important water litigation
moving that appropriation from
four million LFC to six million.
what will just item number one
twenty one
This is to the Human Services
Department for up a federal snap
over payments claim estimates
for the settlement moved up so
this went up by about two point
eight million dollars in general
fund revenue.
There's not any real significant
changes there so I will well I
will highlight number one thirty
three because I know this was a
priority for the legislature
this is to the office of the
natural resources trustee this
is for the.
Revolving fund yes.
This was originally not
recommended LFC and now with the
AGFC axillary Bill includes five
hundred thousand dollars in
other state funds to address
that issue.
Well.
There is one big item item
number one fifty one this is for
community school and family
engagement initiatives that this
is a one million dollar other
state funds increased up from
seven million to eight million.
To page twelve I'll just try to
highlight the general fund
because I know that that those
are the really important ones.
Item number one sixty eight to
the higher education department
this is for the higher education
endowment fund
With some language share it you
know requiring a match is was
not originally included in the
LFC recommendation and now in
HSC there is five million
dollars included from the
general fund.
Third.
The end of our section five so
I'll just highlight quickly item
number one seventy three
this is for of matching funds
for research universities of
for.
Research advances in knowledge
this is twenty million dollars
in other state funds from the
technology enhancement fund.
So that's big changes
at their item number one seventy
eight and section five increased
about seven million dollars
that's the transfer for the IT
section so you'll see IT in
another place so I won't go into
detail and what's in that seven
million dollars.
Well quickly run through section
six there's only a few big
changes in this section so page
fourteen we see no changes.
If you see a couple reductions
so we'll look at item number two
oh nine for the Human Services
Department you saved about
fifteen million in general fund
revenue here compared to the LFC
recommendation and a hundred and
sixty one point nine million in
other states findings that to
double mental was no longer
needed the executive agrees to
that because of some enhanced
Medicaid revenues coming and.
Another big reduction here you
see item number two nineteen for
GST there is a ten million
dollar general fund reduction
there since the LFC
recommendation and that's now
being used from other state
funds.
Madam chair page sixteen you see
that is the end of sections five
and six
the change from LFC HSC scenario
seems really big but as you can
tell it's really just in those
few places I'm happy to help
answer any questions.
A pull back up here
All right so this is a
sub committee that I chaired and
I don't really have anything to
add here so is there any
questions that anyone might
have.
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair I move
adoption of the specials and
supplementals of committee
report.
Second it madam chair.
Any opposition.
Saying that it's been approved
okay next.
Madam chair I think we're ready
to go to I. T. and if we start
with the narrative.
Mr speaker hits from will
present that yeah we can we
share screen on that please is
that possible.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I would you prefer if
I shared the screen on the
bullets or on the sheet that
Amanda just went through is just
because the bullets because
that's the same in phone it's
clear to follow.
Perfect already I'll go ahead
and share screen just a could
conspirator's from it please
sure thank madam chair so the
subcommittee met.
Saturday and adopted the LFC.
What heard some concerns about
pride whether projects were
fully funded and staff came up
with the scenario to
Address some of those concerns
and I think we're with so much
going on we are a little remiss
not to work with Representative
alors Allison others to go over
all those numbers in advance so
I think we can find them right
places of the amounts you may
want to keep thinking about so
with that background you've got
a staff recommendation here
improving the LFC recommendation
addressing concerns but not yet
fully vetted by the subcommittee
so that's where the states right
now but I think it's worth at
least one of while the state has
a full a full committee at this
point I mean we don't we don't
have time we've got a role on
this and again what I'm gonna
say is is that there's another
chamber they can add to this we
don't have to carry the whole
load over here at HFC so go
ahead Jessica.
Chair members of the committee
let me just make sure that this
is full screen for you also you
can see that are you able to see
my screen.
Okay great so.
For the LFC recommendation the
difference between the LFC
recommendation at introduced and
the HSD staff scenario is is as
a difference of just under seven
million dollars the key
differences are highlighted here
these are the only items that
changed and so instead of taking
you through the the big messy
spreadsheet will just go over
them here I'm as you can see
there was three point two
million dollars added to the
Department of Health this is to
fully fund the request for the
like tronic health records
project so that will get them to
initiation and through
implementation of that project
we also added one million
dollars to the higher education
department for the shared
services enterprise resource
planning and student information
systems project a big mouthful
but that is the project that is
in coordination with the
collaborative for higher
education yes if you all recall
and then we also added a million
dollars to the Department of
Health to fully fund the request
for the client data management
system project there was
conversations of this project
relates to the DD waiver and so
there were conversations about
that in the subcommittee so this
million dollars would get them
to fully fund the request for
that project there is an
additional nine hundred ninety
thousand to the department of
public safety for their criminal
justice information services
cybersecurity project on this
would also fully funds that
request and then the last item
is just seven hundred fifty
thousand that was put in for the
office of the state engineer for
the water rights adjudication
system modernization project
this seven hundred fifty
thousand would cover an
additional year of software and
project management services for
that project and would also give
them about fifty I'm sorry five
hundred thousand dollars toward
the I. T. services for the
following year so those are our
money highlights and changes and
I can go into questions would
you like me to structure mystery
madam chair.
Yes I can see everybody if you
could take those take it down
thank you very much.
To listen to a little bit of
that hearing and it seems like.
Your high level is what people
were talking about but let's go
to questions to start with
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you madam chair I had more
of a COVID than a question I'm
just I sat on the computer
systems IT subcommittee I heard
all that testimony and I am so
happy and relieved to see those
additional monies go towards the
medical records project in
patient information systems that
work for the DD waiver thank you
for hearing our concerns I
really appreciated I know lots
of people throughout the state
of New Mexico due to thank you.
Representative Crowder.
objected to just say get out but
I really appreciate the effort
LFC put into this they would
look at everything we asked them
to look at I appreciate the
process and opportunity to do
that and I thank you both thank
you madam chair thank you David.
Okay representative Garcia thank
you madam chair just Jan and I
may be off of based was there
any money of appropriated for
the department of health the
dispensing machine the door open
for.
For medical
Of medicine dispensing machines.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I don't believe that that
was in information technology
request I believe David Abbey my
have a comment on where that
might be include Mr chair madam
chair and representative Garcia
when you see our own catch a
plane of on Saturday on a health
department you'll see a
suggestion from staff to address
that need to in a range of about
one point two million which was
the executive request thank you
David Abbey thank you madam
chair mobile was off base a
little bit there thank you.
Already okay are you satisfied
Representative Allison as the
chair.
Thank you madam chair yes I was
I had a great team and at the
last minute I have to accord  my
partner Crowder as a vice chair
and he did great.
Thank you want you wanna you
know make a motion here.
Go ahead partner.
You're more it.
Got about that madam chair I
move it do passed for the
special supplemental I second
okay so we have a motion for
adoption of the computer I. T.
subcommittee report any
opposition to that saying that
it's been adopted okay levels
April and.
The last one is the B. A. R.
report and I think Miss since
then and Mr solely together are
going to cover that one.
Okay that's the fun and fun and
games report so let's go ahead.
So madam chair these are
this is a forty four agencies to
adjust their budgets throughout
the year and there's two types
of the A. R. authority one is
for the current fiscal year that
we're in FY twenty two.
And the second the other one is
to address the budgets for FY
twenty three so some of the
criteria we used to look at
these include.
does the agency have sufficient
funding in order to
provide these budget adjustments
and what happens sometimes is
agencies are collecting revenue
and if they are collecting
revenue in excess of what their
budget is taken budget an
increase up to five percent
depending on the revenue source
and.
Some of the things we look for
is it is it a budget adjustment
for a specific item and amounts
is tend to be look more
favorably upon
we don't usually recommend
program transfer authority where
you're moving money between the
big programs that you're
appropriating to your
appropriating to departments for
specific purposes sometimes we
will recommend that if the
department is short in the
middle of the fiscal year to
help resolve overall budget
issues and then for next year's
R. thirty we tend to not
recommend a lot of the story
because you just spent a lot of
time building the budget and why
would we and do it before we
even start to fiscal year so
with that madam chair we'd be
happy to answer any questions.
And madam chair if I may I just
wanted to know to let you all
know how to kind of re interpret
this spreadsheet just briefly
you'll see the column with the a
request that is the language
that was requested by the agency
you've got the LFC additional
recommendation with comments
associated with that of the
executive differences column I
just wanted to know for the
committee that in places where
you see that that's blank that
just means that the executive
was kicked in consensus with LFC
however it's it's kind of easy
to tell because the executive
just recommended every bar
adjustment authority that was
requested for both FY twenty two
and FY twenty three so that
exact differences column is kind
of where you'll see where there
is a difference between LFC and
exec and then the language in
the yellow box is what is being
recommended as the staff
scenario for HSC.
Okay let's go to the committee
is there any questions on this
I've been looking at this this
afternoon we're raising it again
but is there any questions
anybody house on this.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I'm sure
you mentioned a little earlier
part of this is for the twenty
two budget part of it's for the
twenty three budget how do we
discern which is which within
this chart madam chair.
Madam chair if I may.
I apologize for not not as well
so the first three pages are
your FY twenty two of forty you
can see that noted on the title
and then on when you get to page
four of the package that's going
to start your FY twenty three a
budget adjustment authority
requests again starting on page
four for the rest of the sheets
so that's kind of how we spoke
about.
Thank you madam chairman
difficulty with the this year
but thank you very much.
Okay do we have anybody else
with any questions on the chart.
Water reading I know that.
Okay I don't see any hands come
about so Representative so small
promotion thank you madam chair
I would move that we approve the
additional budget adjustment
authority requests as presented.
Okay I need a second place.
Second Representative and your
sense all right is there any
opposition to that.
Or it saying that it has been
approved so is this bill or we
get anything else.
Where we're going for right now.
Okay we're done for right now
appreciate that and now it's
time to get all the stuff
organized and want to thank
everyone so I think our next
meeting is not till Saturday
that correct bill.
Okay thanks everybody and we'll
see all Saturday by.
Thank you madam chair I would.
