As I want to note a bill that's
going to be rolled that's the HB
twenty one in consultation with
the sponsor this bill is not
being table is being will we'll
reschedule this.
Now members to a brief couple of
those H. B. one forty.
In H. B. eighty two as amended
in consultation with the Sanchez
we're going to table those at
this time
and I'll ask Representative
Dixon for a motion for that
please.
Mr speaker
sorry.
Chair.
I move that we table the
following bills one forty.
When we eighty two and eighty
two.
Right the second for the most
great move by Representative
Dixon second by Representative
Baca is there any opposition to
that okay.
Yeah well and thank you vice
chair Dixon work members we're
going to go back I apologize we
do have a member who is
participating remotely
Sandra we're gonna so this is on
a motion to table house bill one
forty.
And house bill eighty two.
this is this will be a roll call
vote on those motions to table.
Whatever.
Representative Allison.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative I have just.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative capital yes.
Looking.
Representative Aaron.
Yes.
Representative yeah.
How DO yes.
Representative.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative leading us yes.
Right here Dixon yes.
Shares maaf yes we have twelve.
Great thank you very much
members thank you and thanks for
that because I surjective okay
now and again noting were we we
will not be hearing today house
bill eighty two there may be
some other bills or resort to do
that as well but that's sort of
our action to begin with
with that members now we're
going to go to our first bill
for today this is house bill one
eighteen it's great to see the
leader lane here and deeply
appreciate his work on House
Appropriations and I was at the
same place.
We're used to come when you're
on this committee representative
Mr chair members of the
committee
I I do miss being on this
committee I prefer to be on the
other side of the bench one and
there's a possibly my table my
building table because of the
settlements but could be back
here in and the in this company
so thank you.
Excellent great Representative
we now I know you have house
bill one eighteen we're excited
to hear that and we also will it
if you could sort of go through
you have an amendment as well
yes Mr chairman I made to
explain the memory to to the the
if you could briefly touch on
the builder for them letter and
then if you could explain them
and thank you Mr so Mister what
house bill one eighteen does it
creates office of
entrepreneurship within the
Economic Development Department
as the committee as well where
there's money in the budget for
this so this is a discussion
that that was taking place
during the interim several times
during LFC the topic came up
about the need to promote
business growth in New Mexico
and start ups in particular and
so that's what the part of the
angle is here with this office
of entrepreneurship to be a one
stop shop essentially where the
new businesses here to five
years old to come to central
office at the state level and
get help in terms of navigating
the different permits different
licenses going from one office
to the other and it also is sort
of a central repository for the
the regional
economic hubs that exists to
help them to have a central
place as well and then the the
last point that I would mention
the committee Mr chair that I
think is helpful as there's a
provision in the bill that that
asks essentially for report
about legislation that we passed
that is the either beneficial or
harmful to business I think
that's good for us to get our
arms around in terms of what
we're doing as a state so with
that Mr chair at for any
questions thank you very much
Representative now let's go
ahead can we have a motion for
the amendment and if you could
explain the amendment after.
Thank you Representative I think
we're gonna ask real quick
Thank you.
What the the briefly a motion
for the amendment.
Okay there's a motion for the
okay and Representative Lee can
you just again touch on the
amendment after Mr so what the
member doesn't strike section
two for the bill and which is
the appropriation piece and as I
mentioned in my presentation on
the underlying bill thirty
within the framework for H. B.
twos there's no need for this
appropriation language excellent
thank you very much okay is
there any I we have a motion and
a second for the amendment is
there any opposition to adopt in
the amendment saying that your
amendment is adopted okay
members is there any brief
public comment I think members
have been briefed we know by her
Dixon is your co sponsor
I don't see any I don't see any
public comment we'll go to.
We have.
Right okay we're gonna go to
first Russell Wyrick from the
SPDC for one minute go ahead and
start whenever you're ready.
Yes my name is Russell Wyrick on
the executive state director for
the New Mexico small business
development center network as
you know our program if the
eighteen centers across the
state that assist small
businesses with starting and
growing their businesses in the
state
The impact of this bill we have
clients that we deal with on a
regular basis who run into
barriers when they go to
register their business or get
the licensing or things
appropriate that we're assisting
them and then they run into some
your credit challenges
at the at those levels and then
trying to navigate those the
it's our belief that this bill
would support small businesses
by having someone that could
work with those various
departments in the state help
them understand how they can
streamline their processes and
the things they do to make the
state more business friendly
thank you great thank you very
much Mr Wyrick okay I don't see
I don't see any other public
comment
let's go to Representative
Trujillo for the motion.
Hi very happy move this amended
bill okay.
Thank you bye Representative
Chatfield is there any
opposition to that two house
bill one nineteen as amended.
Seeing on.
There we go thank you Mr
chairman I did forget to
introduce my expert witness
Chief Justice
bacon so my apologies.
Thank you and vice chair reminds
me we see Christmas before our
eyes read Shelley and greens and
that was by their Dicks and note
that might
it well done okay we're now
going to go to house bill one
sixty seven.
Two of Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr chair of we're
very.
House Appropriations finance
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty seven I believe
it contained some changes that
were requests in the last
committee.
Let's get to this members.
Thank thank you very much
Representative I'm not sure that
I have a house appropriations
and finance committee
substitute.
I I would so so I I unfortunate
Representative what we have
before us is as I believe house
bill one sixty seven out as you
and your co sponsor introduced
at.
And we.
Give me a moment I will pull
over.
And I think what what what we
may have to do Representative
because we do have to be back on
the floor at four thirty
What we can DO.
Is
Maybe ask you to work with our
staff.
And
yes go ahead I don't know we do
not have the the the substitute
here.
Mr chair and.
Committee the changes up the
other committee requested I
think we're fairly minor but
Certainly didn't change the
amount of money requests so
however you want to to handle it
if we need to
We thought that their draft got
to the committee and apparently
it has not Representative I
think especially since we're
pressed for time for today and
ask you to let's work with the
staff to get the substitute this
and we'll work through also sort
of some of the budgetary issues
okay and we will know the that
house bill one sixty seven
course we're we're meeting every
day members so we'll be looking
for to bring it back up so.
Thank you okay and I apologize.
Okay right now.
So okay.
yeah go ahead if you can hold on
the second Representative
construct over table if we could
bring it off the table with this
of the necessary.
Okay I I thank you and and
Representative I understand also
that there's been junior money
that is been dedicated to this
office which is very helpful
which I think but I think we
need to make sure that as a
committee we have that all ahead
of us we'll do that as quickly
as we can and again I apologize.
R. S. sorry.
Kate members so that of what
house bill one sixty seven two
of the bills will be brought
back up before the committee.
Now we're gonna go to house bill
I don't see the sponsor for
house bill one ninety seven.
I'd just and perfect timing.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair chairman guy goes
it's great to see you thank you
for being here with us today
this is can you briefly go
through house bill one ninety
seven for us please thank you Mr
chairman committee nice to see
you all
house bill one ninety seven
Is to allow the director of the
the to the Department
I'm sorry I'm on the wrong page
excuse.
I ran in various.
Thank you for we were moving a
little more quickly thank you so
much for making the available
right away thank you.
Right page since sorry about
that Mr chair
house bill one eighty seven
would double the number of days
that the game and fish director
with approval from the state
game and fish commission may
designated designated as free
fishing days from two non
consecutive Saturdays to two non
consecutive two day weekends
during free fishing days
residents and non residents can
exercise and sample privileges
as those with a fishing license
and with that Mr chair of stand
for questions great thank you
very much of Madam so the thank
you for the explanation we see
here on our fiscal import and
impact report it is
indeterminate and middle if
minimally negative also I think
it notes that this comes from
the game protection fund so
there's no there's no impact to
the state's general fund are
there any questions.
Okay seeing no questions
Representative Chatfield for the
motion Mr thank you for that
second okay to move by
Representative Chatfield
seconded by ranking member
Armstrong for do passed is there
any opposition to that motion
seeing none.
We've just we're on our way to
doubling the free fishing day
reversion days for everybody so.
Thank you very much.
We've got some snow in the
mountains and they will have
some water.
Kate.
All right thank you so now we're
going to go to this is house
bill forty two
will ask Representative Ortez to
come up chairwoman Ortez it's
great to see you
What will ask is again a brief
sort of explanation for the
legislation
please feel free to introduce
your expert.
We're working through the
committee members sort of
ensuring that we can have the
conversations we need to have
your of knowing that our our
largest focuses around the
budget and that one of the core
questions we ask the question is
whether or if there is a general
fund impact if that general fund
is been built and H. B. two but
with that chairman or to is
great to see you please go ahead
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee a longtime
listener first time visitor to
this committee I'm happy to be
here here is my experts because
good marker we're also
presenting this bill with a
representative of chair Liz
Thomson I don't know if she's in
here she's welcome to come up
what H. P. forty two does it
creates the public health and
climate resiliency program at
the department of health so that
communities across the state can
build capacity expertise they
can whether at the.
Challenging weather events that
we've had over the the last
couple of years and it also
establishes a public health and
climate resiliency Fund to to
get money out to to those
communities this is in response
to the fires to our snow squalls
that we had in inTaos in extreme
weather events all all around
the state.
Would you like to add something
quickly churches very quickly
are I will add that you know
this is our opportunity for the
state to plan in advance before
next extreme weather events
happen we know there are certain
of a public health threat as as
is alcoholism and and and the
presence you know it infectious
diseases there there are extreme
weather events happening they've
already happened I don't think
that's a question anymore some
may argue over whether they're
man made or not but the point is
that they threaten our health
the harm our health this is a
measure to try to allow local
communities to start planning in
advance great thank you very
much thank you to our church has
thank you very much Mr good
marker what what we're gonna do
now I think sort of sticking
with our approach we're gonna
ask for three speakers in
support and then if there are
speakers in opposition if you
wouldn't mind
lining up I don't believe.
we're we're looking
Yeah go ahead and and let's do
for an for if there's for an
opposition that's fine.
Thank you to our staff for
making sure and getting the
microphone squared away for us.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee David Hotmail I'm a
registered lobbyist for the City
of Albuquerque in the City of
Albuquerque stance in strong
support of this bill as a very
needed preparation model for
sadly potential future Bauska
fires that may affect our
community place our citizens at
risk this will help us stab was
resources and infrastructure so
that we can address
unfortunately that potential
reality thank you very much
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we also
stand in support of this bill
and believe that there are a lot
of measures that are very
important in improving our
communication with our
communities and organizations in
those communities to address
some potential health problems
as we move forward thank you
thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Doris person I'm the
executive director for New
Mexico counties we stand in
strong support of this bill when
we have situations like
wildfires or even prescribed
burns we do have citizens that
need additional ventilation
units things like that on the
ground we see this as being a
very proactive measure very
grateful to have an opportunity
to work with the Sanchez on this
funding thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
the risk at the with the Sierra
Club you're gonna chapter
representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
of like to emphasize the fiscal
prudence of this bill building
the infrastructure within the
within the department of health
will help particularly small
rural and underserved
communities apply for state and
federal funds to improve their
preparation for and response to
natural disasters in addition to
leveraging funds this will say
public spending on emergency and
post disaster responses as well
this bill is a small but
significant step in helping New
Mexicans mitigate the
devastating impacts of climate
change to preserve their
physical mental health along
with their homes and livelihoods
yes you will vote yes thank you
thank you very much okay I see
are there I don't see any hands
online and support.
Are there any I would like to
speak in opposition for house
bill forty two.
okay.
Sorry I I think let's go back
okay I don't see any opposition
in the room we're gonna go back
to support online I believe we
have
we're going to go we have two
speakers practices one we have
is that for how to meal.
Is that for for one minute when
you're ready please.
Thank you good afternoon
chairman members of the
committee my name is tougher how
do you and I'm here
Representative yeah because he's
United for climate crisis action
yeah because a useless campaign
without remember.
The New Mexico we strongly
support H. B. forty two because
we know that the current crisis.
Communities representative of
all colors what is here but we
saw the flames Crisis we also
need to recognize that some
impacts our universal from
corner to corner of our state
New Mexicans are already feeling
the consequences of oil and gas
extraction and the warming
climate for House.
Lawmakers inaction today will
relieve the opening next to the
generations to come we will be
experiencing longer deeper water
shortages wildfires
desertification flooding all of
these have public health impacts
and we know that the staff
capacities because of the
climate change not only better
literacy but also our mental
health this these displaced when
crisis hit and the grief and
loss fills our lives are.
We appreciate it when readers
our government agencies.
Fifteen Mexico.
many.
Fourteen.
We're going to go to our last.
Hazel James.
Okay I don't.
Hello years.
We got to.
Yes okay for one this thank you.
Hi I need for the here's to
propose
I'm sorry to close we are on
forty two thousand four I'm here
to support.
Well it was resiliency bill and
supported AG wanted to thank you
right thank you.
One.
This is very thank you thank you
very much.
We do not have.
General fund for this purpose
of.
Is there there are a.
And some other proposals that I
think.
In that go to the committee for
any.
Instabilities that are.
But they're also in a sense an
ex.
The reality your.
I guess this would just be a
sort.
An extraordinary responsibility.
Plan for.
The the very.
And sort of assistance and I
know chairwoman or.
Homeland security and emergency
then.
Liaison that.
Funds funding as well as.
So and thank.
To the end from.
We looking at hopefully we can
add the.
In this area.
The Legislative Health and.
Help us to.
I think the the clear and.
Representative Lujan is there
any up.
Seeing on the.
One forty in converse.
We are going to house bill one
forty.
Talk about your bill.
Madam there and then go.
House bill one forty seven.
Act was passed in two thousand
and three.
Regarding the Indian Education
with.
Fortunately it has.
Act has since grown.
To it twenty million dollar.
This point time what this
amendment seeks to.
Districts again.
On tribal grants and those.
If lucky they receive them in
the third.
It quickly and and.
One off grant applications.
School districts we have with.
Also discussed in the
legislative and.
It also received endorsement as
well.
You Mr Picos.
Summary we'll go to.
And I think we took.
And we always appreciate folks
being here.
It is great for the resources.
Hundred percent what's necessary
to move.
State funding to be made of.
Communities and allows them.
As well as indigenous language
present.
Tribes to to care those are.
Needed necessary by support.
Very much.
Members of the committee my.
On page that we need to protect.
This bill thank you thank.
I'm and I would we.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon.
Chairman for the all public
council governor.
Two problems here in the state.
Whenever we.
More in whenever you're ready
for one.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee one is all the more in
by Representative I was advocacy
for the.
Sen.
I think you should try to join
the LFC and others a supporting
also one forty seven.
In the thanks all those who
currently this is twenty million
for the Indian Education Act
however as a former cabinet
secretary Indian Affairs I know
the longstanding practice of on
artisanal reversal rats that.
Scent with limited period as an
effective the state and for the
costs this
Legislative Education Act
service.
Disable educational systems are
ages students the average adult
effective and coordinated.
This is a sign indicating in
education access to the internet
with the purposes of the act
which is a sponsor as we
to what this bill will create
much needed capacity to.
Education departments and as a
whole to collaborate effectively
serving as it is thank you to do
that thank you thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee added in rural New
Mexico which is for children we
support the cell and a
representative Lente affirming
it lowered interest of time into
whatever position on today we
support this old all the reasons
you already are today and we ask
the committee to join is
regarded as well thank you great
thank you.
You need to be made for.
Service but I.
Down if you're not in support we
will go.
Melissa.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Alicia Vikander area
administrative The New Mexico
Center on property and I am
hoping for the us weekly and as
Martinez lawsuit.
Not poverty some of these
supports this meeting
Representative like people are
hello this is working reading of
these pieces of legislation that
really improve on the education.
So it is a different hello I
don't repeat all of the.
Just to say that everyone in
full support of the solar energy
to pass thank you thank you very
much risk on the idea.
Senator Nickles
Thousand.
Okay
the public library.
We are very grateful and
appreciative of the funds we
haven't received because of that
I just want to as what everybody
else is that.
I wanted to do was actionable
urged receive funds.
In the long this bill and I
support it because of that.
Access to the body we.
You want to scramble to try and
accept these terms we want to
continue to provide quality
after school program the worst.
Police and
Able to plan better and also to
build capacity right now we're
just to.
And.
But we have worse acting.
Thank you for this opportunity
to extend my support one
additional thank you that thank
you very much thank you Mr.
Yes good afternoon my name is
one of our Martinez and I'm a
professor in the department of
labor's studies and the director
of the institute for education.
Out of those entities we are
able to support us one forty
seven and we also thank all of
you on good afternoon thank you
to consider that the sale as
well as I'd like to thank
Representative Lente.
For more on for your support all
the work that we're doing across
the state of New Mexico thank
you.
We're going to go to the team
that.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee aims at
all and education Act also the
low we are able to support each
one twenty seven which of the
funding strategy for this I can
attest to the difficulty that I
have experience with these
requests but I.
Many but it's you have all the
funding we have received over
the past couple years has not
been reoccurring and has very
goals we are of course able for
the additional funding because
the city specific products what
what is it about capacity which
is what we really need on the
requests that additional stress
on our department and our staff.
Meeting for twelve ninety
strategy and more returning
funds to come to their location
departments.
The motivator also wanted a
seven thank you for your time.
Opposition in in per.
I'm it it clear.
The children that would benefit
from.
Funding formula and the now.
fix the funding formula.
Okay.
Hi.
And this is just you and I we
have an office and a little
anyway
I eighty.
A request for the.
Asian also on the Senate
resolution passes that
the distribution is unfair to.
And that was units and with over
two hundred thousand out of the
students and go to finally get a
look at is really unfair citing
that formula is
and this and that it needs to be
done so that it's more for each
student you will.
There are costs four thank you.
Thank thank you.
Like to add before we go for
coming.
The question thank absolutely.
Okay so we're gonna go for.
Garcia.
Chairman.
Distribution.
Devided.
Long.
Twenty sep.
Well I can understand that that.
Each student.
In in the same form.
Using this.
Capacity within each tribal
community.
that that.
You know of my.
For.
Give me a hard.
Of.
Twenty seven dollars.
Representative Brown and and
Representative.
Any of this money shown.
And what.
Mr.
Would it take.
That would be collaborative in.
Support programs within the.
Years ago the.
Assessment and then.
The continuation of that.
Services.
Mr chair.
Ninety percent.
Try.
Mr Chairman.
Questioning why does.
That that's a fair concern.
Of the existence of the ended.
Appropriation and allocation.
Departments as has been.
That unless you invest and
build.
If they can difference.
At the tribal level to build.
Fair across the board.
Nation wants to use.
Adding.
As it is with the job growth.
One point five million.
The two tribes.
It says for.
Mr chair.
Percent.
On.
It says here that.
Representative what other.
So you have tried.
Charter schools as one.
For and then you have.
Tribally online.
Answers and things.
Use that for me.
Communities to.
And likely in another jurors.
Community based.
Them with students service.
The programs for those purposes.
We're investing to build.
It's really to to then have.
Infrastructure with.
City with this investment.
There's a place where there.
Services currently do.
For that Mr chair.
Has not attended.
Mr Chairman representative.
With multiple bills that all.
Children who otherwise.
Because very few schools.
From their community.
Community somewhere else.
After.
Meeting with Mr Pecos.
An excellent.
Mexicans.
My final question.
Can happen if we do not.
Thing is that we remain status
quo.
Any mechanisms whether it's in
the.
The recent.
Close.
Members of.
Thank you very much.
On this piece of legislation
thanks to my colleagues and
most.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
I gotta tell you candidly I was.
For the lack of.
Silence any of those.
I apologize thank you
For folks who are in here with.
To pass.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and then.
To fund the
Assistance act.
Friendships but it.
We.
We have in our budget that is
standing right now just under.
Act funding.
I see no one point nine.
Jim Baker to my right who's.
We have Katrina.
Representative go ahead.
Marcus Martinez who's the
deputy.
Kate miss Baker it's great to.
let's.
Thank you
Receive funding of approx.
Although the funding across.
Creations remained Uproxx.
Immense demand.
Is more than twenty percent.
Again.
Health care sector a major.
our state is desperately.
We are going to need to and.
Reduction act we're we're going
to.
We need to be ready to train it
now.
Puts our programs and.
Mr chairman of the committee.
Just be able to make.
On.
Others that the the.
It was online sure there is
constructivists air and and
committee its control.
But.
And.
Hi.
Because this body maybe.
See if any of that money has
been used.
But it's over so K. what.
With that will out.
If you might just sort of line.
And in strong support of this
may.
Session we also see the faith.
In extracted the state.
Endorsed this is going to.
Locally thank you so much thank
you very.
Mechanical contractors sheet
metal con.
As we look at sort of the
pipeline.
We're going to get that interest
there but that we.
Well in addition to the prepaid.
Along with the international
brotherhood of electrical.
Throughout New Mexico in even
include.
Wrinkle site down units New
Mexico.
The corner of rural New Mexico
and I know that.
Now let's go on.
Mr hang.
My name is yes.
It over training is there after
years of investment managers in
any community for the little.
You
in the early signing for many
years
it is eight in a row I was
one hundred years ago
digital apprentices with the
last several years we've grown
to three hundred forty act now
every one of those working you
know we we have our organization
and other all trees.
All right reserved.
You know I just I just we
ordered a coffee which is really
wrong and.
You know the teachers programs
is that right.
To about universal we.
But you know overturn removal
order this.
Is from years we really do have
a lot of work to do that.
X.
you know that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Thank you a lot of renewable I
need to be sick Levin.
I know the associated with a
little bit of an audit and this.
The thing is
benefited.
The working force.
Mexico in a production gonna
provide opportunities for men
and women to.
Bill EDD's.
And invest in themselves and in
our communities as well.
Incentive will support.
This thank.
anybody in opposition.
Online.
Please.
Thank.
It.
Very specific to.
Dollar amounts you know as far
as.
How did you arrive at that
amount.
Share and and committee all to.
I was the CFO of a.
I took the hours that were paid
out of this year and instead.
To establish the funding.
And then I increased.
To allow for growth in in for.
Amount of members or or people.
Is this how do we know.
so between of you to.
She's the director of the state
apprentice power.
And then that programs list.
Total funding is divided by.
The number that talk about a
printer.
tell me.
It comes from where.
And so they and.
act for decades.
Actually participate in.
Thank you.
This Representative thank you
Representative.
They raised their hands we have.
Yeah.
Members of the committee this is
what the department of workforce
solutions I just like to provide
some clarification as to how the
funding is distributed so
actually a yearly application
process which any program that
is administered for eight years
I for the funding.
So with that application process
ones here
and it is also going to have to
any industry weather's
Association and the register
program it does not need to
introduce currently we have
fifty registered apprenticeship
programs in the state and
approximately twenty two hundred
apprentices so the whole formula
that we go through in which we
determined that our houses we
have the basic finding out in
the dust on the number of flaws
and each program applies for we
N. also look at the related
destruction of the number of
flights to determine that the
hourly reimbursement rate for
just hours so yes it is two
dollars and forty seven cents
per year but it is all based on
the number of programs or this
is losses in a request and they
cannot requests for preferences
a prominent slot what a have
registered at the time of
application the quarterly basis
thanks Amanda claim to us noting
the apartment just hours that a.
Okay.
that works.
And a program that was specific.
The importance of that program.
we've been to women.
Where we are funding for.
Correctional facilities.
that when it comes to skilled.
Program so they have great value
in that.
They were headed by women.
Families and women who have to.
Cheers but these partnership
programs are able to.
Which I do an hour which is
a great ways to stay.
One more question if I would be.
Sixty one dollars an hour.
Money and apprenticeship
program.
I remember correctly I.
Women in the trades to try to
make sure.
We're going to go to
representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
So.
Stay in good health.
Thank you very.
So I want to ask a.
Technical issues in the.
That language is what makes.
It just has to do with the
apprenticeship.
Any apprenticeship programs that
are read.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative.
Funding request is.
So there are many different
partnership.
So generously reminded that that
the probation.
Grams and other appreciate
probe.
Act which is which is manages.
Representative.
Quest
has it is base.
We are going to do a little
less.
Zacks have apprenticeship
program.
This funding is.
Based on last year's numbers.
This fund which is about two
minutes.
Mr chair and representative.
What's going to happen to that
building.
Program and it's.
Only based on last.
Representative Montoya.
Representative.
To the answer of course.
So Mr chair
Carpentry plumbing.
Companies.
Don't.
Colleges junior colleges and.
Costa I.
Nineteen years.
Mr chair right I just.
I believe in the trades.
You can get that through
certificate.
And I'm just afraid the cost.
That I understand this programs
is.
Thank you Mr chair percent.
State that are.
For.
You would mind reading thank you
Representative Brown.
Miss Vigil.
From applying.
There's not we actually have
four colleges that would be
eligible for colleges we
presently community colleges and
colleges that do have registered
apprenticeship program.
After you register program.
Eligible to apply for the money.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Every and and miss the.
Sure Mr chair members of the
committee
we we had this yearly as it
comes at our application it
comes out we want our major
programs so that they via email
so that they are aware of that
the funding is available we have
an actual leading where we go
through the formal application
process we also have an approval
process information training
advisory committee this is on
your side of the funding and
they also go through.
Approval process in
programs for the funding.
Other questions from members.
How to the first question to
great.
Yes okay that sounds good Mr
Martinez.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee we we
need to help build the last year
five million dollars for the
initiative and I know you know
hours for adult case management
and important at Oakland are.
Yeah and and and and and so what
we did in working on it over the
it is a program to create more
awareness I could integrate and
manage programs with the five
million dollars at that we're
looking at it we were working
with the Eiffel around the state
that he programs and and and and
putting that out there is.
Madam chair members of the
committee as as far as
obligated we've got the full
million obligating very little
has been banned for the full
amount is public.
Mr Martinez.
Trying to support that we're
talking about to.
A portion of the money they.
Madam chair members of the
committee we we have allocated
we waited a little dollars
elsewhere we do not consolidated
and here but with AT and I'll
use get
That prepares the proper term.
K. and and.
The LFC sort of the under.
Has been spent slash.
We show in our system that that.
so I I.
Eight speaker I think that.
Ation.
So it's it is.
For the intended purpose.
Fact we need.
Through the Senate finance
committee.
I think we probably they can
you.
We do that if that's okay we
want.
If that's alright and I've.
and then.
Is only a one point three.
And and and I understand the
time and attention you've given
and I really appreciate it but I
would like to make it.
Thank you very.
Your time and attention I I.
Very much appreciated.
Its workforce solutions state
clearly.
City or not all in one.
Work but.
Testified today.
Ready appropriated is perhaps
the.
Available for this important
for.
Thank you members for going
through.
One thirty nine.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I appreciate your likability
with me today I am going to
politician is not our friends
that's why we're looking at Lee
not with you in person.
Eighty nine eliminates state
mandated posted education fees
assessed in traffic and criminal
cases.
H..
US Leland ATC's which are
imposed as administrative costs
to quarter to or appropriations
and government programs.
It is a legislation not use in
any way and provide are leveled
at those was facing most.
check this as a punishment and
fines are not considered here I
was still because I understand
it courts are.
An asset should be funded
government
The representative not healing
backs New Mexicans actually and
New Mexicans so often in the
capacity to actually meet in.
I also know that there has been
as we some inconsistent and
limited revenue this is really
important purpose of New
Mexicans out of the cities and
SS we have built in a delayed
implementation page one thirty
nine so related and
implementation of July first
twenty twenty four to make sure
that it will on the judiciary
side under those programs that
have revenue from the CD's
they'll have more than a year to
make sure they have room to the
committee for
that purpose demonstrated to you
on importantly that there
fighting for you in the thirty
days uh suggested by their
budget and hopefully be funded
appropriately so that the
so many seeds has a key delayed
implementation and yes it does
have a significant fiscal impact
that's why we're you look
forward to the conversation and
and for me it is about making
sure that we use general revenue
dollars whatever it really proud
to be here with you just as a
today as well who let Legisla-
and the case and has really come
in as we move forward this
effort lastly Mr chair before it
has to be passed our.
It was of course to only today
raise their hands in support of
this bill.
James insanity public on it so
there are people in support we
ask you to return out if there's
just as well
alone thank you for supporting
today we have been dark blue
jeans New Mexico senator Tom
hardy aces in New Mexico NMC
Americans are very.
Please enter law offices of the
public defender so that was.
To the defense's initial
comments in New Mexico you go to
committee.
Very.
Additional comments on your.
Stratis costs to fund.
As it follows.
Programs out of the general
fund.
Impose but and she's down by.
Just a pass through entity we.
The funding.
We shouldn't be given the
discretion to do.
It puts them in the position of
funding.
People are I. T..
In terms of the costs here.
Funding has precipitous.
If the funding coming to the
dish.
The person to get them to come
come.
Nearly that much.
Well over a hundred dollars a
day.
For any questions because I know
I've I've.
It really should be the
taxpayers as a whole.
Sure here and support today.
We're going to go for.
Mr chairman.
The checker has provided.
This goes into so first we have
to.
Here to engage in.
One of the questions I have is.
Or any the fees paid directly.
To the crimes repor reparation.
Our prior hearing I don't think
anybody's.
Stand in support of this bill.
Victims of domestic by.
These victims of violent crime.
Each of us will be expected to.
Anticipate that each of these
entities.
Mr chairman I do.
Representative Brown please.
The first one is.
Mr.
For.
So.
Verification I've.
Mr chair Mr chair
representative around a blue.
Yes this is
not provide any
elimination of these.
Profil walk.
Future that's one.
It some ways it.
Other committee questions of.
I'm looking through the.
On page two.
Three hundred on.
There it's a long term.
Be present be aware of or.
Public comment portion I.
Closing comments first us thank.
Mr chair and thank you to our.
We believe this is a bill that
is.
And we would ask for your
support.
Mr chair I just wanted.
As You incredible survivors
others including those as a
public comment for the related
to the fund
for many this is just the what
this bill is about New Mexicans
survive on these essential
programs including the resources
that they are through GST and as
of this program.
Additionally that is not because
it's not available at this point
the related to the fund is
bringing in about three hundred
thousand dollars of revenue I
don't want to be with you all
that I presented to disabilities
HCAC and other places I have the
least impact on you all as you
Appropriations Committee as soon
as the utility says it in the
house what are budget isn't
isn't the state government says
any.
so it is well whether the
remaining three fund or the
sexual assault program services
that was revenue if this bill
becomes law we continue to have
access to set up to investigate
and others we are excited to
help make these compelling
arguments and indications are
that the committee losing
funding and it was with the
passage of this bill certainly
comes Act accurate and and
appropriate funding levels they
always find ever received so
absolutely internet services and
I look forward to advocating to
see them that budgeted
appropriately in the next fiscal
year thank you for your
consideration thank you
committee thank you very much
for.
Yes.
Yes.
By a unanimous vote to.
Kate members I I know.
Four thirty I think we're.
Here in.
