Senate right.
All orders version made by the
secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver hi two hundred
and thirty days will call.
That.
Here.
He doesn't.
His excuse to return to the top
here.
Four eight
thank you for the roll call of
the having excuse members were
not secretary of state we have
sufficient number of members
attended to certify
The next order of business
is the approval of the agenda
move approval okay I sentence
which is separate from the
public order.
Is not really all those in favor
when you walk in real life okay
and that through the whole of
the decision is going to be I
know right.
Yeah I remember for on the job
that is approval of the of the
minutes of the June twenty
second twenty twenty one you are
motion to approve moving for
about all right get any
compensation issues not
Representative says prior to the
for the I just no ma'am then
let's call for a vote
all those who approve of the
minutes for two for twenty.
I right unanimously carries we
are now on that order of
business which is the
certification of twenty twenty
one local election results and
I'm gonna ask the secretary to
walk us through that thank you
madam chair as you go in at
early this month we connected
the twenty twenty one regular
local election across the state
this year it held eighty at a
unique set of challenges and
opportunities this was the
second time we have regular
local elections statewide at the
total registered voters eligible
to participate in the selection
or one million two hundred fifty
five thousand four hundred sixty
five total registered voters are
excuse me total turnout was two
hundred forty five thousand four
hundred fifteen for a total of
nineteen point five five percent
turnout statewide.
and I'm going to skip over a few
these points
Again another pandemic
collections which was
successfully conducted our
office works closely with the
county clerk's to ensure that we
all had the information and
tools required to successfully
administering the election and
let me go over our campus report
and madam chair which is in your
finder so when you skip to
overview you will find the total
turned out for the regular local
election in terms of a county
wide for now as well as a
reporter at the turn out for our
state that home program which is
our confidential address program
we had a hundred and sixty two
participants were mailed a
ballot and thirty two returned
their ballots would be fine you
will see the election results by
race statewide so for each
Alexion the total number of
votes cast in those races
and the break out by the county
groups so early voting absentee
voting election anybody and we
do have following that the
report from our independent
auditors to come in and make
sure all of our math is correct
the independent auditors had no
findings the sounds that we have
conducted at the county and
state level the election
correctly and counted the
results correctly which is
excellent
and then you'll see the total
number at at birth if each
thirty three of the thirty three
counties that certification
campus results for those
counties and I'm happy to answer
any questions on that campus.
You madam secretary I don't have
any questions here is your
without questions we're going to
go to the possible and we can
six on the job is that correct
some of so madam chair if we
could just have a motion to and
I will go ahead and move that we
certify the twenty twenty one
regular local election results
all right so we'll stick with
the exact words I say which is
to sign the certificate of
election I second that motion
all those in favor say aye aye I
should carries less survive
that.
So wonderful thank you so much.
Okay next on the agenda is as a
result of the certification of
our campus we do have a number
of automatic recounts that have
been triggered and I'll just go
ahead and list them for the
record because state law
requires automatic recounts
within a certain margin of
victory we will have to order
automatic recounts for the
following races as tax school
board member district five
Bluefield school board member
district five city Anthony
municipal judge city of Belem
municipal judge Clayton school
board member position I does the
school board member position for
House councilor at large
positions wanted to House
counselor large position three
point for counselor large
Moriarty Edgewood capital
improvements tax question and
the ability to fort Sumner
councillor at large and I will
mention madam chair we had three
tight races among those that are
going to automatically
madam secretary state remind
page three you have the costs
they are actually all kicked
them to in any of the Heller
election director.
For.
Hi.
Are at large.
Sorry
councillor at large in the
village of house councilor at
large in position one into and
position three and then we have
a recount in the contest for
positions for further details
Independent School District.
The joys of small small actions
in New Mexico.
and so madam chair with that and
was there any other questions I
move that we at order this
automatic recounts
Madam secretary of state I have
no further questions more than
once we call specifically so
thank you very much directors
report hi that second your
motion to order the automatic
recounts all those in favor of
the education that would say I I
I motion carries very possible
automatic recounts identified in
item number six on the agenda of
the child's age who Hey Chris.
So.
next madam chair and we are just
about at the end of our agenda
today we do need to reconvene in
order to certify those automatic
recount results and based on the
work between your office and
mine we have identified December
sixth at twelve PM in order to
reconvene to make those
certifications right so Federal
Election then to schedule the
next meeting on December sixth I
don't know if we need a motion
madam chair that might be just
informational all right if we
were to meet requiring a motion
I believe it would carry so
wanted
yes we in the same position yes
madam chair Hey thank you very
much yeah the next item on the
agenda is to ensure the state
canvassing.
Commission to do that so moved
and madam chair before you leave
I'll just have you sign this
order of automatic recount do
that so I will provide.
Second team.
All those in favor of the
journeys they are.
Right.
Carries.
We can't afford.
Thank you madam chair
had given the sample is if
you're talking.
This is the way for the first
time we're doing automatic
recount ballot question.
Election so.
And I.
It was headed by some.
this weekend.
