The the procedures that we use
here and need to share very
similar to those that we use in
rules we have about twenty we
have.
I think here they do it for ten
minutes for your presentation
ten minutes for any of
coordinated support if you would
like.
Hi and I have a list here of
your folks who have signed up so
with that please feel free to go
ahead and get started on Senate
bill three oh one.
this on or do I use the other
one I I think the other the
other one is been working better
and was working better and rules
I think.
And it is on yes it is okay
great.
Wonderful.
thank you madam chair thank you
for scheduling SB three oh one
today with me today I have my co
sponsor Representative McQueen.
And then I have our subject
matter experts at Jessica
Johnson here to my right and
director Belinda garland to my
left she is the director of the
New Mexico livestock board.
Madam chair and committee
members just be three oh one
addresses what we consider is an
urgent matter regarding free
roaming horses
I have such a situation and
proceed to us which is in
district nine and it's my
understanding.
There are also similar concerns
in the area of Rio de also and
other parts of the state.
so what SB three OO one does it
helps to insure.
That there are free roaming
horse safety welfare and human
safety
There were a chair and committee
members it's my understanding
and just a few days ago yet
another horse was hit by a
vehicle on highway one sixty
five this bill has gone through
quite a few drafts and that's
because we've had quite a few
discussions in twenty twenty two
and to that end Senator Pat
Woods was part of these
discussions so I really want to
credit him for helping us
develop the bill that you see
today.
We also held discussions with
the livestock board county
commissioner Brock who is with
us today BLM cattle and wool
growers The New Mexico and
crying rescue association New
Mexico counties and quite a few
procedures residents.
Now
My subject matter expert Mr
Johnson is going to discuss what
gaps in their correct
irregularities are in the bill
but in general what what we are
striking.
Are those things that are
obstacles for us to give the
welfare and care to horses and
And ensuring that they are safe
said and have adequate
veterinary care.
I also want to say before I hand
the Mike over to Representative
McQueen that he and I are so to
to dedicated for this success of
this bill that we have both put
in junior money to the total of
a hundred seventy five thousand
dollars to ensure the livestock
board has the resources to get
the first year of this program
off the ground and so with that
chair and committee members I
would like to have the Mike over
to Representative McQueen.
Thank you senator.
Thank you center and and thank
you members of the committee so
hello House Bill three oh one
addresses a really complicated
issue of free roaming our
management and it doesn't
it's not a thorough solution
it's a step in the right
direction it's what I consider
service safety safety valve for
air pressure valve that we have
we have more horses than the
range can support there are you
know human our interactions
which are detrimental to both
this allows a mechanism for some
horses to be adopted for some
horses to be ridden relocated
for some horses to be put on
reserves it's there are far more
horses than there are there's
space for that to happen so the
idea that this would result in
extirpation of the our heard I
think is miss guided it this is
just allowing us to to place
some of the horses and I think
that that's going to be a good
thing so I'm pleased to be here
thank you very much.
Madam chair can I now introduce
miss Jessica Johnson for opening
remarks.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm Jessica
Johnson chief government affairs
officer for animal protection
New Mexico and animal protection
voters as the Sanchez alluded to
this is not a comprehensive
solution which we have been
working on over many years but
it's become apparent that it
will take many more years to
build consensus and resources to
implement a comprehensive plan
and so this is something that is
going to help at least address
some of the dire issues just in
certain areas there are plenty
of free roaming horses in New
Mexico that live without
incident but there are locations
like in Sandoval county where
there are conflicts with people
and with natural resources and
threats to the horses
themselves.
So the approach of Senate bill
three oh one is to really work
within the existing framework we
have an existing state while our
laws seventy seven eighteen I
and so this bill keeps the same
outcomes for wild horse
management we've also renamed to
the the animals as free roaming
horses just to ensure clarity
differentiating them from the
federal wild horses
so the outcomes allowed our
management through fertility
control and if relocation is
necessary due to the carrying
capacity of the land of being
there's too many horses.
And then those horses can go to
a sanctuaries preserves they can
be go to our rescues for
adoption or they can be humanely
euthanized in the case of severe
health conditions we know that
there are a small number of
people that are claiming that
this bill is going to re
classify a wild horses as
livestock or that it's going to
allow mass euthanasia wipe out
of the forces that's simply not
true and it's not borne out by
the actual language of the bill
important changes that are made
that are proposed in this bill
are to remove some
as as senator McCain a refer to
them irregularities that have
prevented humane management of
the horses one being that it
removes a requirement to DNA
test each and every our to
determine some of the on a
specified level of Spanish
colonial our blood
and it also removes the
University of New Mexico museum
of southwestern biology Division
of mammals as the entity
responsible for managing wild
horses we have confirmed and and
have a letter that I believe is
shared with committee members
that they believe it was a
mistake that they were written
into the law in the first place
and would like to be removed
so it does it does keep the New
Mexico livestock board as the
general overseeing statewide
authority for this issue which
is existing law
it because the statute is in the
livestock code and that also has
been affirmed by the New Mexico
court of appeals but we do
believe that with the passage of
this bill it will allow for
better protections and humane
management of these horses thank
you.
Care and.
Signals I guess have a doctor.
That two minutes left okay and
behavioral health care
proponents of signed okay great
so we have two minutes left for
both expert and testimony for
for for your expert and them all
will move to great so I would
like to give it to director
garland now.
Thank you senator thank you on
chairman members of the
committee high and Belinda
garland on the executive
director for the livestock board
we believe that the livestock
board overseas they on chapter
seventy seven we are charged
with enforcing that chapter of
the New Mexico state statutes of
this falls within our purview we
also license of our rescues
within the state so we think
this licensing of the hort free
our for free roaming our expert
would fall within that purview
as well we do support this bill
we don't I agree with
Representative McQueen this is
not a fix all but we think this
is a very important step in the
right direction has these horses
I I mean a lot of people would
like to believe that these
horses are running through green
grass in their fat and happy
every day but that's not reality
reality is especially in policy
is these horses are without
proper forage and care thank
you.
Thank you very much and then so
we have fund up six minutes
set the first one and and I
asked the each of you keep your
comments to about a minute and a
half the first is joy for New
Mexico County one.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is a bill
that's we've been dealing with
our issues for about the last
ten years and evidently one of
the legislators all comments
that can help us fix it the
problem has been is that
counties are set up for
specifically companion animals
so we recognize there's a need
that we traditionally had to
come out and oppose this we work
very closely with the advocates
for this bill this year to
address concerns that we had
initially we are extremely
grateful that this provides the
mechanism for the authority to
make the decisions that need to
be made about the herds and
whether or not the range of
sustainable and with that we are
one hundred percent support and
we have really strong feelings
from our two counties that
struggle with this issue that
this would be a great benefit
thank you.
Where we also have Catherine
Christian out of New Mexico
counties signed up but I I
assume that Troy.
Covered.
Probably wishes to issue here.
Because they have okay
Katherine Brewster they're
commissioner sorry.
Brought.
Thank you thank you thank you
chairman and committee members
we appreciate your time this is
a very important issue to our
community and I I want to also
thank Senator McKenna and
Representative McQueen for their
efforts on this because it has
been a many year long Prague
process of trying to get
something in front of the
legislature that would actually
move us forward this is what I
see is a way forward as again it
is not an end all be all but we
do have significant issues in
our community around forces that
are being killed as well as the
potential risks to our community
members but I don't see this as
a plus C. does only issue I see
this as I county wide and a
statewide issue that we need to
start looking at how to better
treat these animals for the
future and make sure that our
community members are safe thank
you.
Commissioner
Peggy Roberts.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Katie
Roberts I live in a small ranch
implicit as of my horses I
emailed the committee regarding
the problems of the feral horses
in the residence and procedures
are experiencing and I will not
repeat that email we personally
have twelve to twenty three free
roaming horses on our property
at all times our property
outside of our fencing has been
destroyed and there are no
longer grant is for the horse to
eat or water in the creek to
drink we don't want the horses
to go to slaughter we don't want
them to be hit by vehicles we
don't want them to start today
however we do not want them on
our property or on the roadways
and there's nothing we can do
about it under the current
statute we cannot legally
relocate them to a more suitable
places the free roaming horses
are not wild animals they are
domestic animals that need to be
cared for I ask you to please
vote for this bill thank you.
Thank you on assume we have
Amanda the core of substance.
is not on okay my mic Mike this
is not.
Is not on either of the yes he's
he's here the head start.
So madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mike
please.
From please see this New Mexico
I am for this bill I've been
fighting for a bill of this type
for years and years it's time
the legislature do something
these are state horses it's a
state responsibility I want to
give you some facts that I've
gathered from N. M. D. O. T.
department of transportation and
Santa Fe County a hundred
seventy five horses in proceed
is alone right now you twenty
two different bands more than
thirty dead horses on the roads
in a look in the last eleven
years twenty one of those on
state highway one sixty five to
in the last thirty days hundreds
of thousands of dollars in
insurance claims for totaled
vehicles and human injuries and
injuries sustained the sheriff's
office.
Has determined in all of those
accidents only one time was
speeding or alcohol involved all
other times no speeding no
alcohol involved one third of
all collisions between mile
markers I am mile marker ten.
On highway one sixty five our
our related collisions these are
not accidents we already know
that they're going to continue
to happen to our population is
growing seven to eight percent
per year even with the
contraceptive PZ P. down from
nearly twenty five percent but
the plus seat is heard the still
growing by twelve to fifteen
horses per year.
Thank you thank you Mr needs we
have one person signed up in
opposition Christine on to.
We have one person signed up in
opposition Christine.
Hello.
After staying ahead of me if you
can hear us you'll have that
free minutes.
Please log meeting we're going
to go ahead and proceed but
proceed we will note that you
are in opposition with that
we'll go to questions from the
committee.
Representative.
Madam chair thank you for
reading this bill.
Just a couple of questions
right.
first one is question I think
really.
The.
What is eight.
There.
What are you what are
you.
Madam chair Center I believe.
Like a mule is a cross between a
horse and donkey in that Henny
is across where the mother is
the donkey so they're less
frequent so it's a it's a it's a
hybrid animal but they're less
frequent annual because it's
difficult for a donkey to carry
the offspring of a horse.
That's if if I'm remembering
cracked that's why this.
Based on the on the.
Mexico.
Los.
The.
Met madam chair Center new rules
are sterile they're they're
across into they don't reproduce
so to give you all you need
usually have a horse and donkey
to get the Henny you reverse
that the parentage of
of sire and whatever the female
thermos.
Mr is what you get when a in the
process of the with.
you don't get anything because
ten these are sterile like heels
on their own system.
Okay.
Your maps so as I as I look
through.
This position versus just
disposition of provisions of the
law.
The the first question I have is
page thirteen.
Winds fifteen sixteen
administering this neckline and
the neckline.
Does not claim within five days
after last publication of them
all.
Have the.
At age thirteen thank you so
much.
The
bill that I'm looking at and is
it eight.
Senate bill three oh one Madam
You might be on to seventy one
and so three oh one.
This fantastic those beautifully
written.
For those on the committee.
We have a motion Purdue pass
it's go ahead and do a roll call
of will fall off of the number
Representative.
Our other Representative.
Yeah so I I.
Given the given the preference
of a problem for staff I.
You're still.
I'm I'm curious about the
references to verses.
It is our desire to.
Two four.
Madam chair and senator Ivey
Soto so yeah that the free
roaming we've been using that
for this bills language because
as well as given by the
testimony by miss Roberts
the horses for instance that in
her area they are not wild and
the last time I was there they
came right up to me because they
thought I had food and so we
felt it's wrong to consider
classify them as wild.
and so hands the free roaming
and if my subject matter expert
who's been studying this for
many years has anything to add
I'd like to give her the Mike.
And madam chair and Senator Ivey
Soto perhaps I'll just add that
we're just talking about free
roaming horses because there are
no known wild free roaming
donkeys mules or Haiti's in New
Mexico.
And the term inclined would
encompass all of them.
So the madam chair and members
of the other for state owned
and.
Madam chair senator I'm not sure
what they do with their free
time.
I do.
Up that I guess the just the one
concern that I would I would
raise.
Is that that's this is in in
this bill that state it is a
your amending chapter.
Seven seven article two.
And and then the next bill and
you're also amending chapter
seven seven article two and what
are the definitions you end up
only with the definition of
acquired.
Which is which is the stuff.
Our Porterfield on Community.
There is no definition then of.
Our for for for for free.
running our.
Madam chair and senator Ivey
Soto yes that you know that the
challenges that the both bills
being heard tonight do amended
the same statute although they
are on different topics Senate
bill two seventy one will be
exclusively about domestic
horses donkeys mules and Henny's
My understanding is that in the
events that both bills might
pass in this session that there
are experts on the enrolling in
engrossing side that will ensure
that all of the changes meshed
together well.
And then and madam chair.
expert that's.
I was just that is what we do is
is we do our best to try to
match them but it's also good to
make sure that they they.
You care about them and involve
both of the to try to Mexico
both as much as possible
in advance is very helpful to
the steps of the.
Because otherwise they will end
up dropping the the erectile
Department.
It will not.
So
right right but I do see that
you do have in.
This bill is.
A definition or something.
So.
I think that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
and.
Remember some of the bills
passed and just really happy
that they we have a starting
place very clear this is no.
Solution but so good job by
coming up with this but I do
have a question with the
implementation of this so
there's some concern in the FIR
about what how who is going to
do this is there proper funding
under what agency will this
person be so my understanding is
it's probably the livestock
board it is that you know is it
just one person one of FTE that
that handles this a new position
in and the livestock bordered
like how do you how's this going
to work implementation wise and
real granular level.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator o'neill I guess so I
think by the time to address the
the the the funding side by the
time the FIR was issued and the
junior bill exercise came
through I think they missed each
other
so Senator Representative
McQueen and I are both
contributing a hundred seventy
five thousand dollars total to
get the first year to get the
first year done for this and
director garlands livestock
board they are going to be
identifying the our expert or
experts and I would like to
offer heard gives of a some more
background to answer your
question.
Thank you center madam chair
Senator o'neill
So as just a preliminary thought
on how this is going to work we
have not asked for an FTP in
order to fulfill the job
requirements of this what we've
been told is that we will do a
study we are not arrange
Management Agency however we do
work closely with an NDA and
university in Los crucis so what
we this money will be utilized
to work with some range
management specialist out of the
university to set up some
guidelines on how this person
should actually function and
what qualifications they should
carry and then we will oversee
the licensure of it where these
people can contract with us and
for example Sandoval County in
order to.
I I think give some guidance on
some possible relocations
population control and just
May humane management of these
horses that that's our
preliminary thoughts on this is
the Senate your question thank
you and in in here with the
livestock board
Madam chair Senator now yes I'm
the executive director of
livestock thank you now that's
great and QTS to both of you for
using House Bill junior which is
awesome.
You know towards this this very
important issue thanks.
Have.
Senator are.
Yes Representative.
Yes
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Fifty seven yes you have to do
thank you thank you thank you
madam chair thank you committee
members.
And that we will continue with
us on a bill to seventy one.
For for the next.
Thank you to me.
Yeah.
But I believe one is on her way
there she gets here we'll we'll
get.
All.
And the.
Will again.
The US.
Madam chair members of the
committee of Senate bill one of
six has actually been heard in
past years and it passed the
Senate for unanimously it went
through house committees and did
not get heard on the house floor
if specifically asked that
pharmacists and physicians
assistants be included in the
definition of health care
practitioners for the purposes
of the non compete clause and I
do have an amendment madam chair
that the committee has to also
add the psychologist after we
got through the first committee
the psychologist came forward
and asked to be included so with
me today.
I have two expert witnesses we
can make this as short or as
long as you want.
It could be very short since it
went through here in the past I
have with me deal Tinker and
also for the the pharmacists and
Lisa long for the physician's
assistants and I don't know who
is here for the psychologists
but you do have a one line ma'am
efforts to add the psychologist.
if you like your experts to
speak what we believe to be ace
first.
You don't have to do anything
else.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members my name is
Lisa long I'm a physician
assistant in New Mexico I'm
speaking on behalf of myself as
well as the New Mexico and
