We have a.
Please rise for today's
application by minority leader
Representative Lane.
Let's bring
what we're grateful to come be
with come before this morning
over grateful that we live in a
country where we have the
opportunity to meet openly floor
to to a crowd to you for was a
man helps lower than we do pre
for.
With them learn I know we need
that above almost anything else
as we step in these roles floor
as we debate as we move built
Ford as we.
Take votes will represent our
hearts and minds would be
focused on what's best for the
people of New Mexico and not
else's political office holders
and our own interests and is
bright for the state thank you
again for the gift of life that
we all woke up this morning have
opportunity to come in and serve
you so we love it's increasing
repression and.
To leave earlier so but for the
pledge of allegiance.
Thank you Mr chair I pledge
allegiance flag of the United
States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one
nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
Representative Michael with the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
Label.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe Los
Alamos anybody.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business in addition is so
ordered.
Gentleman from San Juan
resembling thank you Mr speaker
as I'm sure the bodies where
there's been some comment
positives going around.
around the building and so
Mister speaker I would like to
request unanimous consent to
suspend parts of the house rules
seven dash one in nine dash five
dash four through the end of the
first session of fifty six the
legislature to allow members who
have tested positive for COVID
nineteen to participate remotely
and be considered present both
committee meetings and four
sessions and tell their
isolation period is completed
so no objection it is so
ordered.
Members thank you literally in
this is an example of bipartisan
bipartisanship at work I would
commend the work of the major
office and the minority office
in coming together to address
the surge in COVID cases that we
are experiencing in this
building.
members who test positive for
COVID nineteen will be allowed
provided the suspension of
coverage expansion of these
rules to participate virtually
in floor and committee
proceedings.
It is encouraged that members
who test positive for COVID
nineteen contact the respective
leadership offices who will then
make arrangements with our
office and the clerk's office to
ensure that they receive the
links necessary to participate
in the proceedings.
In terms of the floor the way
will handle floor will to be the
way we've handled in the last
session which would be a voice
vote
for members who are going to be
participating through Zillow.
Come again I want to commend.
Both the majority and minority
leadership offices for coming
together so quickly and helping
address the search and COVID
cases.
With that.
Are there any sports.
The gentleman from Santa isn't
the Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
of my family's journey today and
wondered if you could welcome
them in the gallery.
Certainly gentleman I.
His rise to be recognize we have
Caroline some of Cole's wife as
well as his children Jack and
Kate welcome to the house.
Thank you for sharing your data
with us we appreciate you thank
you Mr speaker deleted from
thousands of artists Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial to be removed
from the speakers table be made
the next order of business in
objection it is so ordered Mr
speaker would be getting to that
point the record reflect that
all actions server placing House
memorial two on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution legislative explain
the memorial thank you Mr
speaker House memorial to is a
memorial honoring the her ROIC
response of NMSU's college of
agricultural consumer and
environmental sciences staff.
And the cooperative extension
services staff during the
hermit's peak cap canyon fire.
Mr speaker I'd like to have the
title of the memorial read
before I introduce the staff
click to read.
House memorial two introduced by
Representative Sari√±ana Senator
Woods Senator Sedillo Lopez
Representative Castellano and
Representative Ortez a memorial
honoring the response of New
Mexico state university's
college of agricultural consumer
and environmental sciences staff
during the hermits decaf canyon
fire House memorial to introduce
the representative Sarinana
senators would and FHA deal
Lopez and Representative
Castellano and or tests.
Thank you so much thank you Mr
speaker my guests are on the
rostrum and I'd love for you to
stand when I say your name we
have from the NMAA you Act
experiment station Leslie Edgar.
Thank you.
My friend and neighbor and
Bernie.
The person's.
Thank you Tammy.
Donna Adler.
Warren.
Thank you.
From cooperative extension
services John Boren.
Lee and not is.
Tom dean.
Louis Lopez I hope I have that
right.
Monica Gonzalez Wilder.
And our animacy region chairman
the vast Sallee.
I just want to take a moment
here.
Lots of folks who are on the
rostrum right now stands a
couple of staffers from the
tiles land trust we're together
one crazy afternoon to rescue.
Seventy thousand baby trees
that's operation or bit
operation rescue Babytree.
This is an these if this is
enough these are enough trees to
reforest three and fifty acres
which is.
Not enough to
To manage or what the did the
devastating loss but it's a
start and it's because of
programs like this that we can
do what we need to do to bring
our forests back to life and
that that was a wild and crazy
day getting all those trees from
what I County over to Santa Fe
it took a ton of work and a lot
of energy and commitment and I I
just I cannot thank you enough.
But I think you now so you did
that thank you thank you Mr
speaker thank you is there
debate on house memorial two.
The gentleman from Colfax K.
Harding quay some again in
university Chattfield.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I truly appreciate the work
commitments the folks from you
it NMS you for their hard work
to during the fire and for the
time to come they are working
extensively I happen to know at
this time to try to find plant
materials to revenge take the
areas that were affected by the
fire when we went up and turned
that fire it was a quite a thing
to see is some of the places
where they used to be a home was
nothing left but just a little
little spot of aluminum that had
been melted down the trees were
for byrd  and and many of them
falling over some of the souls
back to minerals mineral soil so
the the work to come is is
enormous and we appreciate these
folks not only for what they did
during the fire but for the
plans that they're making to
restore these areas in the
future thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen children
from Torrance and San Miguel
Representative Castellano thank
you Mr speaker I also want to
thank them for all their hard
work being there as well.
The fires when we went with the
Representative Chatfield places
great you guys did well to take
care of the products that you
have in there too for the
restoration and I just want to
thank you guys and commend you
for all your hard work I think
the work is an outcome and of
your guidance for me just while
they're in full support thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen is there for
the right of house memorial two.
The gentleman from doing in our
percent of small thank you Mr
speaker I rise briefly to echo
the comments of my colleagues in
the gentle lady from house Mr
speaker from New Mexico's ashes
truly hello he wrote work we we
see it now and we see Mr speaker
the work that the extension
service and other partners are
doing will really help not only
our state but lead the way for
the entire southwest so to just
echo the comments Mr speaker
thank you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I now move that house
memorial two do now pass and I
now ask unanimous consent of the
house of the record show that
the rules and called on all
members present present voted in
the affirmative this is a motion
to show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
that is so ordered we are on
final passage of house memorial
two.
The vote is now open.
What is opposed by a vote of
seventy five Zenigata of house
memorial to has duly passed this
house.
The gentle lady from canton
center support of an answer
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise on a
personal point to put privilege
please see your point gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker.
What's happening in rural New
Mexico Mr speaker.
Just wanted it was I found it
quite fitting Mr speaker that we
just happen to have this great
memorial for this a grand
opportunity that we have in New
Mexico but as I'm sitting at my
desk Mr speaker I get a phone
call from a constituent who says
their insurance has raised five
times what it normally is
further business Mr speaker I I
asked.
Why and so I called a couple of
insurance companies there is
something now called the brush
fire score Mr speaker.
And so people in rural New
Mexico right now are getting hit
with a brush fire scoring.
That is going to raise their
insurance costs for their
businesses through the roof so
this is a public service
announcement Mr speaker for
businesses be aware and
homeowners thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady the
gentleman from.
I have to come up with the same
time we'll go go to the left
here Colfax regarding quase and
getting you to the track field
thank you Mr speaker once again
about our watersheds I think is
a.
Vitally important that we
recognize the poor health our
watersheds are in and that we
continue to restore them that we
continue to stand them the those
of us in the business sometimes
referred to we while and
wildland urban interface and
that's where the house is made
to trees and we need to work on
those areas specifically and
especially to theand some of the
brush and the trees and we need
to appropriate funding well this
bodies together to do that thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman the gentleman from
Sandoval Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate this opportunity it's
a special day in the house you
will see in front of you
the incredible set of use that
to
I think we're all super proud of
and it's been to have been a
scale Mr Mr Mr again it's a the
expanding program is amazing and
what it really does things aside
from teaching use fund skills
like you know how to build a
fire and how to survive in the
outdoors but a really teaches
them about community about being
good citizens of our nation our
communities in our homes and
what you see in front of you
what is generally house or those
who have earned the rank of
Eagle Scout which is the top
rated eagles the topic in the
scouting program only about two
percent of scouts and updating
the eagle.
Why this is meaningful is behind
every one of these handles are
hundreds of hours of community
service.
Serving in the in the community
in their churches in their homes
and and these folks have learned
how to write to their
congressmen how to be involved
in their community and improve
the committee for good.
Senator Lisa gentleman what I'd
like to do is I'll just mention
their surnames quickly if you
would stand and remain standing
in your name is red and then
we'll Santa Claus for the very
end of the list a statement
through the wall congratulate
these folks to if you just stand
on your name is read we have
William Bircher.
John king.
Russian balustrade special needs
the federal parks seven where
Mason NAS login the manager this
Alexandra Kirk.
Andrew horn.
Nicolas Cage heroes castle
Braunau.
Brownhill eight in the console.
Total Sara Rutherford Joseph
Rutherford Samuel Todd Abigail
ogle Mr McCord issue percent of
the cargo ship Thomas will let.
Madeline Walker and twenty ones
Wirth canceling owns worse Colin
Wilson Mason Madison Tyler was
going to just some parents and
Stephen Harper now ladies and
gentleman ought to say today it
is a truly rare to find a young
man or young woman who is
trustworthy loyal friendly.
Courteous and reverent.
Who does their duty to god and
their country.
And I know please join the house
that as these use in race these
ideals of scouting in their
lives.
The blessing to all those around
us contribute positively to
society and make a difference
for good in our community I look
at these young people.
And it fills me with hope for
our future so on behalf of the
great state of New Mexico and
New Mexico's representatives we
all congratulate you on this
monumental achievement please
join me in welcoming honoring
the scouts.
Deleted a believe we also have
other family members up in the
gallery please remain sitting to
be honored thank you for your
work and your service with these
young people.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola McKinley supporters and
one of them is here
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial fifty three be
removed from the speakers table
and made the next order of
business to no objection it is
so ordered.
The director of the collections
are for placing House memorial
fifty three on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the memorial Mr speaker
this memorial is very very
important because we have over a
hundred forty thousand veterans
in the state of New Mexico.
I am very nice to to record
Vietnam veteran and a vision
gentleman if it wasn't for
veterans we would not be having
the committee today you know
because freedom is not free you
know a lot of New Mexicans died.
In the in the in combat you know
through all large World War one
to the Vietnam War wars are
going on today in you know this
is very very important not only
to me is very important to the
state of New Mexico the we honor
veterans and remember of and
Richard again done etcetera time
and again Mr speaker of memory
and a veteran of putting a flag
on his gravestone member of it
and saying hi to you how you
doing thanks for your service
good to see you have a good day
info from Mr speaker Mr Spiegel
that I would like to introduce a
couple of guests that I have.
First of all I wanna know
special order someone rural
introduce retired army colonel
thirty one years chief of staff
of the Army National Guard awful
bronze star recipient director
of New Mexico department of
finance currently he is New
Mexico secretary of Veterans
Affairs Mr Donegan done and he
is from the city of pickled New
Mexico Mr katana.
Mr speaker I have a retired
United States Marine Corps
gunnery sergeant.
Twenty one years nineteen years
Mr of Garcia has been.
The director of United States
Marine Corps ROTC instructor in
requests the one two national
champions for real one and two
thousand five one and two
thousand sixteen
and then today Mr Garcia is the
city would requests counselor
who may approach in to introduce
a awful pickles New Mexico
gunnery sergeant George Garcia.
Mr speaker point one final gives
them is Vince Lopez retired army
major.
he worked for the department of
Veterans Affairs Committee.
Assistance sergeant at arms just
appointed to those selective
service director of the state of
New Mexico Mr bins Lopez.
Mr speaker the critical readers
are difficult.
Certainly gentleman the clear to
read.
Morrill fifty three introduced
by representatives Harry Garcia
Sanchez of Cologne Sari√±ana and
Alan Martinez immoral declaring
February twentieth two thousand
twenty three military and
veterans day and the house of
representatives.
We're as a nation was founded on
the belief that all Americans
live in a free society and are
guaranteed the inalienable
rights of life liberty and the
pursuit of happiness.
And whereas these freedoms
everyone enjoys the do not come
without a price and they have
been fought for and defended by
the nation's military service
members who have sacrificed to
preserve and protect those
freedoms and the country from
all enemies foreign and domestic
and whereas there exists in New
Mexico a long and proud history
of military service by its
residents dating back to the
indigenous peoples who are
willing to fight for and defend
their land from European
settlers and whereas New
Mexicans turned back the
confederacy at the battle of
Glorieta pass in northern New
Mexico in eighteen sixty two and
we're as New Mexicans were an
integral part of teddy
Roosevelt's famed Roughriders to
help drive off Spain from Cuba
and lead to victory in the
Spanish American war and whereas
in World War one fourteen
thousand one hundred New
Mexicans served forty nine
thousand five hundred New
Mexicans served in World War two
twenty five thousand New
Mexicans served in the Korean
conflict fifty seven thousand
New Mexicans served in Viet nam
conflict and more than fifty
thousand New Mexicans have
served since the goal for and
whereas with for military
installations twelve thousand
seven hundred active duty
personnel four thousand National
Guard and reserve members as
well as one hundred forty one
thousand veterans living in the
state Montoya influence remains
a strong part of the fabric of
New Mexico today.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to New
Mexico's military personnel and
veterans by declaring February
twentieth two thousand twenty
three military and veterans day
in the house of representatives
and be it further resolved that
New Mexico's current and former
military service members be
honored and thanked for their
service and sacrifice for the
country and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to the
secretary designate Veterans
Services house memorial fifty
three introduced by
Representative Harry Garcia
Sanchez L. cone Sari√±ana and and
Martinez.
Mr speaker I would like to yield
to the my friend invited me to
the army corpsman Representative
I going there is debate in the
memorial the gentleman from
Cibola McKinley Representative
Alcon thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from the.
My my neighbor on both sides.
He's my neighbor in the grants
area and he's my neighbor right
here too
was thank god it's a great day
to be a veteran in the state of
New Mexico.
And you know I just the.
I just want to say a few words I
mean the other night that was
the the president given the
state of the union address.
And when this president the
legend of that are and.
Both sides of the table and
everybody that was in that
building stood up and.
We collapsed in the street and
hollered.
They're all happy and.
And they were really pleased
with our veterans.
What's a Super Bowl.
We speaker and gentleman from
Cibola and again when they
mention the veterans.
Get everybody in that stadium
stood up.
And cheered for the veterans.
Mr speaker.
That is veterans.
Struggle just to get basic needs
for our disabilities and
everything else that we need to
have to fight the VA system.
What happens in the federal
level.
It took almost eight years to
get the back at the past the
stated that the house at the
federal level.
Almost eight years to take care
of our veterans that came from
Iraq and those areas that were.
Totally disabled.
Mr speaker.
When you come to the state of
New Mexico.
I presented Domingo or a couple
of bills.
On the house floor Honda has
and they're sent to a committee.
A couple of bills that would.
Give a veterans assistance with
their property taxes.
Is what happens to those bills.
Mr speaker the table.
Mr speaker.
We stand near how we honor our
veterans the gentleman from
Santa Fe this could cost me
forty dollars a year bill.
The lan.
Let's figure out how do we honor
our veterans.
I think we want to make that we
can we will table bills that
will help our veterans here in
the state of New Mexico this is
not the first time that this
bills got tabled this is the
second time times in a row.
So much talk about honoring our
veterans.
I mean that's honor and with
more than just words thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
from single is there for the
debate on the memorial the lady
from Bernalillo Representative
but I go.
Thank you Mr speaker
you know as counselor I a was
interested in expanding sort of
the awareness of of of our
veterans in Albuquerque and I am
honored to be here at the
statewide level because I think
it's really important that we do
honor our veterans in every
possible way that we can we go
to other states across the
country Colorado Tennessee and
and they're and they're veterans
are like first and foremost we
know it's a military city
Albuquerque and New Mexico is a
military city in the military
state and I just want to remind
everyone of that fact I was
honored to to know that my
father served in World War two
and the three hundred combat
army engineers and I I found
that out because I was missing
him one day and I thought I'll
take a look and see what comes
up if I can go my father's name
well it led me to a website Mr
speaker and I came later to find
that my father in six of his
brothers when or in the military
all at the same time and they
have a remembrance in age of
fire
but I just want to thank our
veterans for everything that
they've done for us in New
Mexico and across the country.
Thank you Julie there's further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative than a
cruise and we are on third
reading so please asked to yield
and please yield to the other
person thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Israeli of elected members of
Mayo county.
Mr speaker I also feel that it
is important that we not only.
Find platitudes to our veterans
and we honor them and and and
all of that is good and
necessary but at the same time I
have to agree with
Representative on that one bills
come before this body for
consideration even if they are
to be on the for the timing of
the the funding threshold that
they get due consideration Mr
speaker as an example there will
be a bill to help fund.
Veterans that can no longer
drive themselves to appointments
that are disabled and I hope
that this body gives that bill
that is also sponsored by
Representative Garcia due
consideration and not just
hollow platitudes thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentleman from sun the violence
Representative.
The listening.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
good gentleman from grants
yield.
I will rule I will yield the
generals and well County.
Mr speaker I rise today in
support of this memorial.
And it's more than a memorial
it's the time to recognize the
contributions of the struggles
that veterans face every day.
I really want to thank the
gentleman who introduced this
bill because he is a constant
fighter for veterans.
Issues veterans benefits
veterans recognition.
And authority truly appreciate
the work that he has done.
For twenty five years I had the
privilege.
Of working for veterans in the
state it was the best career
again ever dream of.
And I was able to work along
side
Representative Garcia.
The fine gentleman.
To make sure that our veterans
were taken care of.
And I appreciate that you
recognize the new cabinet
secretary.
But I want to remind this body.
We can only honor veterans on
veterans day Memorial Day.
For veterans day at the
legislature.
Every time that you enjoy your
freedom or a benefit of being an
American.
It's because of a veteran
somebody stood in the gap for
you when I.
And we need to remember that on
a daily basis so Mister speaker.
Kind gentleman thank you for
allowing me to sign on this
memorial with you.
Let's honor veterans on a daily
basis thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Diana
Representative Lara thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Is very Joan done Ana County
thank you John
Thank you for bringing this
memorial this is very important
to me because my father's a
Vietnam veteran.
And I credit him for me being
here today besides the fact that
I'm his son.
His leadership and what he
taught me and the values that he
instilled in me as as as a young
man are reflected in how I treat
people today and how I work with
my colleagues I also would like
to say Mr speaker Dahlman that
as the oldest of three brothers
by at work.
On a weekly basis of my father
where where he's for yes to deal
with issues with the VA for yes
to do with other physicians
regarding health and his
disabilities and so I wholly
understand.
From a first person point of
view the struggles that are
veterans go through to get these
type of budget and I want to
thank you gentlemen that Mr
speaker for bring this memorial
Ford this really means a lot to
me I appreciate you I appreciate
your service and our veterans
here and thank you for doing
this thank you Mr speaker thank
you don't.
There's a request for members
remove their coats that's okay
that's fine next on the list I
have a Representative the
delayed from earlier percent of
about the vehicle.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman please sealed all of.
They will yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you and thank you very
much as always Representative
and all of your Sanchez for for
this memorial.
What can I say Mr speaker and
gentleman Representative
Martinez Alan of thing is
brought up.
Some really significant points
that I wanted though speak to.
Why there significant is because
I totally one hundred percent
agree.
That we must be honoring our
military and veterans every day.
Not just on the designated days
that we have.
Every time you see someone in
uniform period.
You thank them for their
service.
More so I would say those that
are defending the front lines
for a country as many of you
have heard over and over again.
It gives me good great sense of
pride that every time I mention
his name I am.
I have to remember that I am the
daughter.
Of the three war combat veteran.
He was in World War two eighty
second airborne Normandy drop.
He was.
Career more prisoner of war.
And he served two tours in
Vietnam.
As a special forces green beret.
He received the Purple Heart
twice.
And he has a number of other
metals.
And that is my father.
Fairly bit through he'll avoid
by from Los crucis doing on the
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman he
joined the army back in the
nineteen thirties in order to
help bring his family out of
poverty.
He lied about his age as many.
Young men did at that time so
that they could join.
To do two things one defend the
honor of their country and their
flag.
And of course to help their
families survive the aftermath
of the Great Depression.
So Mr speaker and gentleman as
the previous speakers of said I
would not be.
Why am if it were not for
families heal right but.
He's been honored in Washington
on any walls by the
congressional delegations in
Congress.
Thank god he appears on all
three wall walls of the veterans
memorial.
In Los crucis and I understand
in other memorials around the
state is a true hero he was my
hero he was a warrior.
The old warriors that you don't.
That we're losing today those
that are in their nineties in
the hundreds so Mister speaker
and gentleman it means a great
deal to me.
Being the daughter he only had
three daughters.
But he had.
Two grandsons and now he's in
heaven from heaven he has for.
Great grandsons.
All of whom honor him on a daily
basis in our prayers.
And in our economic trends as a
family when we speak so in the
name of all of those.
In military active duty and
veterans and those that have
given their lives.
To protect and honor this
constitution of the United
States in here in New Mexico.
Thank you so much Mr speaker and
gentleman and all the sponsors
we honor them today and every
day in our lives thank you so
much.
There's a divisional and
promoted Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker for the
general let the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley is
the core of San Juan and
Valencia please yield is that we
would find gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise
today just to also echo some of
the other comments that we heard
this morning about how great our
veterans are and folks that
every single family has veterans
that we are so blessed to have
in our families Mr speaker
gentleman I know my grandfather
he retired from the army he he
served in Korea and I have
uncles who also served in
Vietnam have cousins as well who
who are currently serving or
have been retired from our
nation's army Air Force and many
other branches so we are all
blessed and honored to represent
them and to honor them today Mr
speaker gentle and gentleman hi
Representative Otero County and
our county is the third largest
concentration of veterans in the
state so we are so blessed by
our veterans in the
contributions that they make Mr
speaker and we are also very
blessed to have a home an
airforce base right right
outside of the fifty first
district so I also want to echo
those folks and just commend
them for their great sacrifice
service and they're honorable
legacy that they give to our
state thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen thank you
gentlemen there's further debate
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative that C. R..
Process is the most speaker will
be in a.
I'm from.
A grant this.
The from the counties.
Thank you Mr Beasley's they will
process the order for the what
the Chicanos referred to as
grants and thank god that is.
Thank you Mr rose
this last week you know it it
just hasn't been veterans.
That have been HELOC.
especially the Vietnam era vets
system of speaker gentleman from
our.
In Russia it's been the
The winds.
Of the veterans
like to share with somebody an
example.
In the early
Nineteen eighties
We established Agent Orange out
program that of a similar
community center they're not the
school and the south valley.
And
it was a basically a in Agent
Orange outreach program.
to get the veterans of the
amendment.
To sign on to a class action
lawsuit against Dow chemical.
For the the ability to bring
consequences that our veterans
came down with during the
following bombing in Vietnam.
Using the chemical Agent Orange.
Speaker general fund Cibola.
It wasn't the weapons.
That showed up at our center.
To sign on
to become of of formal complaint
and in that lawsuit it was the
veterans wives that showed up.
And
Mr speaker
reason for that is the most
because was that some of these
Vietnam vets.
That
Can down with the engine on
poisoning
We're suffering from PTSD and
still kind of a.
Detach from integrating into
society.
And
But that was a good example is
the most because the general
principle of how.
The wives of veterans have
stepped up to address the needs
of their spouses in this
particular case is Agent Orange
outreach program.
Yes my speaker that program
right in bedrooms.
Fund House all the way down to
support.
And
It had a very.
Positive impact on.
On those veterans being able to.
To make a claim to that Agent
Orange lawsuits against Dow
chemical as though speaker.
Speaker
Representative Alcon holds a lot
of truth.
in regards to how this chamber.
This of this chamber about the
legislature.
Has addressed some of the.
The concerns of our return
population.
And I give the example of some
of the speaker of a.
This legislation that I bought
for nineteen ninety eight.
It was a.
The property tax exemption from
the percent service related
disabled vets.
Mr speaker that it took five
years for us to pass that
legislation.
And that's seconded testifying
were.
veterans like flower Giada's
from my please go to my
community.
Labour's you.
When we came back to.
Application the sooner okay.
Resources director
Brought in for an interview
Senator didn't have a job for
them.
And as he was walking out I
looked around and inside is a.
It's application goes straight
into the trash can estimates
speaker.
And flagged gentleman that came
up to testify.
On behalf of the.
Representative percent disabled
vets because it was one of those
guys is the most because.
I love going naked metal
detector at an airport.
Estimates speaker Jim from
Cibola in that metal detector
would go off.
Because he had that much metal
in his body.
From an explosion of a Japanese
girl made a grenade that landed
on is that is the most because
We had other veterans provided
us this must be Belgium from
seeing the light that came to
these hearings.
Senator running is.
And so on why shop for polls
yeah maybe six bullet holes in
his arm and basically didn't
have any movement in this are.
But it looked like.
In need.
Is this the most because this is
the caliber so much because of a
single a of some these threats.
That came.
Testified on behalf of that
legislation.
And
especially at the more lies the
same speaker that the the tax
and Representative committee.
This piece of legislation for.
Five straight years but then
they would see the legislation
that would bring the tax credit.
tax benefits.
Oil and gas operations that
would easily pass.
The
committee.
And generated the veterans and
came down and.
for the fourth year they were.
We're kind of in a rebellious
mode.
And the final bill got tabled
again and never resurrected the.
They were all local in their
protest of that committee.
That legislation forward.
Speaker
I was fortunate to have a
father the I don't know what to
on the front lines in Germany
and France.
And it was because of him back
into the session with that is
the on.
To to do some reform for our
vets and that was my first
project.
Hundred percent service related
disabled property tax exemption.
And
You know as the most people
don't from some of them are past
the age forty eight years old.
I was eighteen years old just
three months after graduating
from high school.
But I saw one aspect of my
father that none of my other
seven civilians on.
Not even my mother.
And that was when I would come
home from a party in New.
Thank kind of drunk in my but as
the most because a during my
teen teenage years.
you know my when I was little I.
Opened in the kitchen.
in me coming in at two three
fund morning from flooding on
Monday and
And many of many occasions the
most because of unstable a.
Come in.
In order to my doctor and see my
dad calling on the floor.
He was basically.
Those battles.
It was actually experiencing
that right then and there.
And I just glancing my dad kind
of go through that and I'd wake
him up and
Take him back to his bed
estimates speaker.
And that's the with me forever.
You know what I kind of
something happened because of
that experience which was
running for legislation to this
body.
Based on the need to know that
our veterans
Bring for that is overwhelming
Mississippi for them to kind of
a
the.
Do to their lives.
And that's what we do when we
bring forth legislation is that.
It is it brings dignity to the
lives of our veterans.
And and and then at
it also kind of compliments.
Thank congratulates.
The effort and the pain and the
sorrow that they went through
especially in those who are.
Point areas of our country is
the most eager to thank you
again estimates because of.
This initiative for.
And I only.
Support the step of initiatives
in the future as well.
There's a big delay from
McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Cibola county yield.
the gentle lady from McKinley
County thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen I rise in
support of house memorial fifty
three hi Representative Mr
speaker and body the the most
patriotic small town in America
that's Gallup we've been
designated that several times.
I also represent
Families that out to our
descendants of Navajo code
talkers there's a number of
those folks that live in my
district and of course the
Gallup was the community where
they were inducted into the hall
the marines.
I also come from a long family
history of military folks my
father was in the army my
brother was a marine Mr speaker
gentleman from Cibola.
That is a long time legislative
finance committee chair I set up
a committee working group to go
and visit the veterans home in
tears State because we had
understood that there were some
very poor conditions in in that
home we sent some members of the
LESC committee down there
several times to evaluate what
the conditions were and where we
were successful in getting sixty
million dollars general fund
money in that and then to be
matched with federal dollars to
get that facility upgraded so
those people that live there
year round have a better live of
life in a better living facility
Mr speaker.
But certainly I'm proud to stand
here in support house memorial
fifty three what I like about
this discussion Representative
from Cibola the talks about
being an American first and
that's what we are it's not
about politics is not about
whether or not you're Ed.D or
you're in our it's about being
an American first and I
appreciate that and does it have
that at the heart level
understand exactly what I'm
talking about with that being
said Mr speaker and gentleman I
hope everybody votes for this
you certainly have my support
thank you.
The lady there is further debate
the gentleman from Katrin grant
any the local representative for
Gallegos I thank you Mr speaker
will the kind gentleman from
Cibola please yield you so we
will do a fine gentleman thank
you Mr speaker thank you for
bringing this side I'd I think a
lot has been said I you know as
provision be born in a family
where my grandfather was a is a
possible heartened we'll work to
my father served in Vietnam
three tours was there for the
tet offensive of many of my
uncles and and including my
mother in law was an MP in the
army.
And my my daughter who's serving
actively and and Japan as we
speak so being in the in the
mortuary Business decide this
it's been an honor to serve all
those
men and women who serve our
country.
To we have we have one of the
national cemeteries there's
Silvercity and so I've been
blessed to be able to work with
those families and serve those
families but you know I'm so
glad that
My colleague mentioned that
we're American first that was
really she she took place under
Mr speaker I propose a beautiful
thing to say and and we're
pretty I really appreciate and
thank you for this chamber and
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for bringing this
legislation.
The gentleman there's further
debate the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from all those
counties in district sixty nine
year old.
You'll to find lady from
What.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise in
support of this memorial
As many by many of my family
members have served in many of
those wars and.
In different capacities of
service
I get a little
For you know motion over
thinking about our veterans and
all that they have done for us
in and giving the the ultimate
sacrifice and putting everything
on the line for all of us so
that we could be here I just
want to note that there are
about two thousand US service
members that reenter into
civilian life every year and
they're learning to re orient
themselves into
into a different world for more
than what they have lived and
experienced in about five point
two million I have experience
behavior health issues.
And more than half of those
veterans.
Do not seek help.
The suffer in silence.
And I wanted to take note of
that and what what it is and
what our responsibility is here
and making sure that.
We identify that as much as
possible as possible that
behavioral health and identify
be behavioral health as an
essential.
Health conditions.
For all of us and we have this
role to make sure that our
service members or veterans and
their families are prepared for
their next steps as are entering
into and reorienting themselves
into civilian life and I just
want to
to say that I'm proud to to be
on the the house appropriations
and finance committee were we a
found money and and our budgets
for the behavioral health of our
veterans in our state and I want
to stand in full support of this
Memorial and say thank you to
all of our veterans for all that
they have done for us thank you
Mr speaker.
There's a gentleman from San
Juan Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Well my hero from the grant
sales.
I will choose to my friend from
San Juan County.
Thank you gentlemen thank you Mr
speaker I to.
Rise in support of this
memorial.
Members are also veterans my
older brothers three of them and
then my my son my son in law.
Some of the major branches of
the US armed forces.
My son and my son in law are the
youngest and biggest just
recently got discharged and.
There are a lot of veterans in
my district that are often
asking for assistance and I
believe that these assistance
that they're asking for is right
for them because they earned it
we are not asking for handouts
they are asking for a simple
assistance that's right for me
to them.
I am proud to say that.
In our inventions made of
American culture.
Our native Americans have the
highest percentage of a specific
group to volunteer for the armed
forces.
I used to have one of the four
remaining at home code talkers
until we lost them this past
summer.
And now we have only three of
Navajo code talkers.
One of the celebrated his one
hundred and sixth birthday
Mexico.
Of the three.
The youngest one is ninety eight
years old.
And the.
I stand in support of the
recognition that we are giving
our veterans because it is
something that is right for
them.
And as my colleagues have said.
Every day session backroom state
because of liability as a
freedom day so I am very happy
that my colleague from Cibola
County brought up this remote
memorial I thank you of
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr chair thank you Mr speaker
thank you there's further debate
the gentleman from but as a
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker or my
friend and gentleman from civil
Plainfield we'll do gentleman
from the lexicon.
Thank you Mister speaker
delivering this forward I to
come from a military family
grandfathers and fathers served
in Germany France the Pacific
and a bit now.
So.
The the folks in the the
military will definitely the
judge the greatest generation
their sacrifice and what they
did for our country for the
world you know I question if we
would actually have the stomach
to do that now so I rise in
support of those.
To those who served in Vietnam.
Like my father.
Back they were actually
mistreated.
Come back to parades income back
to this because waiting from.
They came back in silence.
Thank you guys for all that you
do.
A special want to recognize
veterans is actually of the
women who have served I know
some of my colleagues in the
chamber have Sir but also my
grandmother was a World War two
veteran at the age of sixteen
she became a nurse in the army
does care for the troops from
overseas so I want to thank the
women I want to thank all that
answers served.
Also want to thank the families
because I think there's a
greater sacrifice.
Because why speak to they said
they would do it again.
Source for the families and they
leave behind for the families
who worry about their loved one
indefinite for the families who
receive that fly the flag.
One is to remind us that that is
what made a country great.
It is to our military through
the sacrifice of others that we
stand here today.
And I pledge that we all need to
support our veterans.
Can kind gentleman thank you Mr
speaker digital with there's
further debate your lady from
McKinley is on one
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker yes my kind neighbor
from all those counties yield
you so you'll be gentlelady.
Thank you Mr speaker
representative in order to stay
ahead has said that he can have
is a logo on the sole Bob by
state the needs and.
Ladies and gentlemen that the
language that you just heard is
the language that our honorable
Navajo code talkers used to
baffle the enemy warships.
So I want to thank you for
thanking our veterans from every
military branch especially our
Navajo code talkers I come from
a long line of veterans.
who served in the US army mostly
in the marines and the Air Force
and today I am a proud auntie
who continues to support our
veterans our children those
who've served those who returned
safely.
And those have gone to the happy
hunting grounds I thank you for
this memorial Mr speaker the
delay there's further debate the
gentleman from Colfax what it
was and we get a dollars
Representative Sanchez thank you
Mr speaker of the gentleman you.
Is that we will do the gentleman
my best friend.
Mr speaker they just wanna thank
the gentleman for bringing this
forward and I just want to thank
all the veterans here and the
those that are here some of the
real brief thank you thank you
Mr speaker thank you seen over
the medium and close Mr speaker
I did want to mention one thing
I want to recognize
Representative Sari√±ana she's a
for veteran and I don't see you
on the chamber Sen Jeanne one of
Michael Sanchez and I just
wanted to reach out to you thank
you for
Mr speaker in my family but that
when the U. S. navy World War
two
road and air force Vietnam.
Former and army Vietnam two
daughters one of there for
someone in the army and I was in
Vietnam at the age of eighteen
you know this memorials for
important to me because in all
there's no your testimony from
all these people find
representatives here in our
veterans are being left out in
the more help from the state of
New Mexico I'm from the federal
government but in the state
level we need to really step up
and and do things that are right
for you know some of the things
that have gone on are not good
for veterans but we will keep on
trying and as far as long as I'm
a representative Mr speaker will
try my best to help all of it
earns with that being said Mr
better New Mexico Mr chairman Mr
speaker home sorry
I now move the whole world fifty
three do now pass I now ask
unanimous consent of the house
the directors shoulder the rule
I been called and all members
presented present voted in the
affirmative thank you Mr speaker
today the motion show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered
final passage of house memorial
fifty three the vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed level of
seventy in the affirmative the
negative house memorial fifty
three has duly passed this
house.
If folks before we leave
announcements there are some
guess I don't see in here yet
but I'm gonna read out their
names for the record against
Representative is else from
Travis county it is director
Tina sees medals counselor more
money been read.
Medical registered nurse Vicky
standard in many others and
staff members of the New Mexico
you challenge academy
and if we see you walking you
later we'll do this again so
that we can rank recognize rural
person but just in case I wanna
make sure we put that on the
record these are sixty plus
students from all across the
state and they're here today
visiting our legislature welcome
to the house.
Can this believe you've got a
couple of shuttles with you
today.
Thank you Mr speaker I do I'd
like to introduce a two of my
twelve soon to be fourteen grand
children Gavin and ruby.
And I have more.
I brought their mother down when
she was just a little bit older
than this and and Mr speaker
there in the Kelly today rise to
be recognized please thank you
for joining us.
The lady from Santa Fe
Representative Penske.
Mr speaker I'd like to introduce
my shadows for today I have two
wonderful shadows they're both
in fifth grade it would Ghormley
elementary where my son is also
a student so first I have Eliana
Jackson she is ten years old she
loves math this is her second
time visiting us and she wants
to be an astronaut and a lawyer
so we'll have to introduce her
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo who who practices
space law her parents are a list
of all does and counselor
Michael Garcia if you please
help me welcome Eliana.
And I also have violet so Lee
who is also a Levin she has
visited the legislature often
and she wants to be a law
enforcement officer her favorite
topics in school or reading and
writing and her parents are
Charles to lead of our own LFC
and Jennifer silly Mr speaker
and members it's also violence
birthdays so how we wish her
Happy Birthday thank you for
spending part of your birthday
with us violet and please help
me welcome her to the house the
lady from Santa Fe to seeing.
Have the burners date to you.
Here by the.
Really wasn't was on one percent
of New thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon good afternoon members
reminder that this Thursday the
twenty third is our deadline for
capital outlay to be turned into
the at the LCS also on your desk
you'll find a large spreadsheet
the in my hand writing uses
three million dollars plus and
so what this spreadsheet is is
it's the governor's list of all
of the requests she has received
to date we would without any
commitment so much is going to
fund but this is our list to
date and so in years past I know
the practice has been we we fill
our seats and then we find out
the day after maybe there after
some time that the governor's
funded X. amount of dollars for
project you gave a lot of money
to and then you find out well I
don't know how my money really
affected good change in
utilizing money effectively to
the projects and so this year
we're we're going to try
something different and in
regards to trying to bring
transparency and collaboration
into the process and so in
working with the governor's
office the share this list with
us and so if you want to
participate you don't you can if
you don't want to do you don't
have to but at this point time
if you look at the sheet that
has New Mexico legislature up on
top capital outlay governor
collaboration request form you
will notice that.
it's it's it's basically a
listing of if in fact you have a
project in your district and
maybe you and a couple other
members want to try to effect
change that is greater than
three million dollars that you
don't have the capacity to do so
you can get together put that
project number the web number
appropriation request the title
and what you may be willing to
fund and the attempt will be
then to have the governor see
how she may affect
adding additional dollars to
that large request and so this
is really an attempt by by the
governor and the legislature the
Senate is doing the same exact
thing on their side to try to
bring some clarity and to be
able to begin to plan these
things out better so that we can
more efficiently and prudently
use these dollars to affect
better change greater change
within our communities and so of
look at the date please note
that today at five PM is the
deadline to receive these
requests back to our office room
three sixteen if you want to
have bring a hard copy that's
fine if you want to scan and
email them to our assistance
that's fine as well again in the
attempt is that to compile these
reconcile them all and so the.
Governor staff made the the
mention that on Wednesday by
noon they would be able to
provide us a list that the
governor has
approved that lists her projects
as well as the dollar amount she
will be funding for this capital
outlay season and so.
It's a work in progress it's not
perfect but I think it's it's
it's a valuable attempt to try
to bring some clarity and again
some focus on to try to make
sure that we can stretch these
dollars as as much as we can so
any questions I'm here any
questions feel free to just call
me or the card actually on there
so thank you Mr speaker thank
you members additional in the
deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker we go to that order
business third reading of
legislation junction is ordered
is from Senate of resentment
thing is ready and item number
ten.
He is out of the chamber.
Given the low.
One Mississippi two Mississippi.
Surprised to.
Some of the highly imaginative
number ten.
Mr speaker thank you can you get
me to that point Representative
election a server placing House
Bill one sixteen on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker I stand before you in
the body presenting house bill
one sixteen.
This is an act that gives the
adjutant general the authority
to hire staff on a full time or
seasonal basis to serve an act
in an active duty capacity
before an emergency is declared.
The end goal is a full time
state active duty force which
will which is prepared for
emergencies throughout the state
that is continually assessing
and mitigating potential hazards
in collaboration with other
state entities.
Today I have with me Major
General Miguel are you a lot of
the New Mexico National Guard.
A Regina Ciccone deputy director
state programs department of
military affairs as my experts
and with that Mr speaker I stand
for questions the gentleman
there is availability for
earlier presented Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker one item
from Santa yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman is this
your first bill.
Mr speaker good lady from
Bernalillo this is my first.
Bill the representative not my
first bill on the floor.
Mr speaker and gentleman and he
served as an expert witness in
the past.
Mr speaker good lady I have
served as an expert witness on
several bills Mr speaker and
gentleman and this is the area
of expertise on page two served
as the expert witness Mr speaker
following lady this is my
passion well thank you so much
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Frankly I wish I could give you
a bit of a hard time it is going
to be hard to do so because this
is not one is going to do divide
the house for three hours so
this is because gentleman thanks
for your work here and I hope
this passes.
Thank you Mr speaker see if it
general close.
Mr speaker I move that the house
bill number one one six do now
pass we are on final passage of
house bill one sixteen.
The vote is now open.
A little more right on the board
would be great please.
Close.
Right before we close both the
clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes.
What is a close one of sixty
five in the affirmative the
negative house bill one one six
has duly passed this house.
Mr speaker and body thank you
very much.
Regulations gentleman.
Is a gentleman from similar and
looking the.
Right and item number one.
Thank you Mr speaker will give
it to that point that the record
reflect that elections are
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one of five has been taken.
No Representative those are the
two debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker I have the amendment
on this bill gentleman it will
be passed so right now.
Can you give me the two to four
number on the bottom.
I have expectativa and following
through on that's what I have
gentlemen let's give it a minute
so that it gets passed out to
the members and that a gets up
on line.
In the meantime can you please
introduce your experts.
Thank you Mr speaker
My experts the little that it
goes and he is
he is with the railroads is full
time job is that.
Okay he's.
Is more
of a locomotive engineers okay
of also a little hearings and he
is basically the expert witness
as far as a legal fight of this
legislation is concerned the
gentleman and are there chairs
behind you there for your for
your expert okay you all should
take a seat please thank you.
The man is getting passed out.
It is online at this point we'll
just give it another minute or
so to get it on the floor.
Gentleman can you please move
the amendment.
I move the the amendment number
one to.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill and I.
The gentleman.
To explain.
The amendment thank you Mr
speaker and members of the house
only basically did is we took
out the penalties in this
legislation after a lot of
research on models getting a PhD
and railroads
We found out that the secretary
of transportation
allows only the.
The fiery two point civil
penalties so honestly we don't
want to be stepping on the
secretary the transfer day since
those.
Right is there debate on the
amendment.
Your objection to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none.
Generated by the amendment thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen with the gentleman
from Cibola yield.
The speaker I yield to the
gentle lady I'm sorry Mr figures
want to clarify this is
amendment two two four nine five
one dot one.
Yes thank you Mr speaker is in
part I guess I'm alive Mr
speaker gentlemen I'd one quick
question I was looking at the
second point on here link page
thirteen line for.
it just looks different I didn't
see the language on there on
that page I apologize want to
make sure.
On page thirteen line for diss
geography one long bill Miller
and bill thank you Mr speaker
gentleman appreciate your time I
wanted to.
Or on house bill one zero I was
just having enough trouble as it
is.
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley County yield the lady
from those on the other.
Thank you Mr speaker and Mr
Representative one of the
questions that I do have is
whether or not this has Mr cost
which is the middle Rio Grande
council of governments they have
a transportation board
that deals with
locomotives and our rail runner
and our automobiles.
Cetera I just wondered if anyone
has contacted them gentlelady
we're we're still on the
amendment I believe you're on
the bill if I can come back to
you after the amendment thank
you Mr speaker is are for the
debate on the amendment.
Is our opposition to about the
amendment.
I see none.
Given the amended bill.
We're back on the back of the
gentleman to fully explain the
bill with the amendment in the
will go to debate on the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker a.
This basically is an act
relating to road safety and what
we're asking is that it requires
at least two persons for the
operation of the.
A little globally that is used
in the movie the freight let's
think of that I will stand for
questions there is a bait the
gentleman from Travis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker real and
gentleman from McKinley County
yield.
Chavis thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker one issue that the we
raising Committee was.
With the advent of technology
and it seems like not just on
the highways but may be
applicables to rail as well is
the event of a Torrez driven
vehicles and I was wondering if
any thought of the given to the
issue of no
actual people being on board of
the locomotive them for it to be
Driven if you will through some
Mechanism at a central location
somewhere in the United States.
Okay Mister speaker I hope I can
understand this question what
you're asking as with all the
new stuff that's coming out in
this world
Eventually you're hoping that
there will be nobody on the
train.
Mr speaker it's not my hope it's
with the advent of technology it
seems that there are a lot of
technology companies that are.
Moving toward.
The.
Thomas.
Creative in vehicles with no one
on board whether be trucks cars
and I would assume the same
technology would apply to trains
and I was wondering if any of if
any thought have been given to
the possibility that.
That technology may catch up
with the railroads and would be
utilized in that contest in
which case of this will this.
Bill would be adverse to that
would not.
Mr leader gentleman over that
would have been we would have
legislation just like we have on
the economist said mice that
would allow us to be happened to
happen and no I'm not.
The other two million for the
village of Milan following the.
Two three miles of railroad cars
it would scare me that it would
have a if that dream would be
and the in the world is that my
nose right to pick up this is
land and moderate to pick up as
all that stuff to where to put
the cruise control on it and so
does that and speeds up and it
keeps you in the line but I have
to be behind the hotel for that
truck to be globally.
So would you compare something
like that.
To a trade.
That sense the long that's going
through our area I think we need
to have some separate
legislation in the future to
allow that to happen.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
disagree but it seems to me that
billions of dollars are being
invested by some very large
companies today to remove
drivers from your ranger pick up
from cars from semi trucks and
I'm just asking the question
with that same technology not
also find its way into
applications on railroads.
Mr speaker and gentleman
the in order to answer that
question all I can say is that
probably would but in today's
world we need to be careful what
we're we're we're going right
now.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
today's world there's two
members are to people on the
train is or not.
Mr speaker and gentleman
hopefully yes.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman
not hopefully yes I think it's
required isn't Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman so why
is this law necessary if that is
the current state of affairs
today.
Gentleman from Chavis up.
The two member crew is not
mandatory.
And right now just think what
you're speaking about they're
talking about changing that
because of everything that's
coming up in the world.
And Mr speaker and gentleman the
the fact of the matter is
there's two members required
under collective bargaining
agreements and at the current
time those agreements are being
subject to negotiations and it
just seems odd that this piece
of legislation is coming up in
the Middle those negotiations
and and so Mister speaker and
gentleman.
If that is the case it seems to
me that the the.
Unions yeah look it out after
the safety of their members
would want to maintain that the
issue.
Within their own province of
power.
And we want to negotiate what is
best for their union membership
but this is statutorily going to
require that which takes it out
of their hands as well as the
roads and so I'm a bit the
baffled by by the legislation
other than maybe it's being
utilized for other purposes so
Mr speaker and gentleman for
that reason I rise to to
Not support the this type of
legislation that gets us and the
things that I think we should
not be getting into thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Cibola county
yield
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan Mr speaker German principal
would you kindly explain to the
body of the the.
The reason for the need for this
bill.
Do you the one minute.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan right now the roads on
to go to a one person because
the positive train control
Boston drink until of course
cannot replace all duties of the
conductor.
Mr speaker John from Cibola
it sounds like what you're
describing is some kind of a
safety rationale.
Speaker gentleman I could
explain it better.
Mr speaker gentle from C. what
can you explain the body what
what is the safety concern.
The gentleman are you thinking
of you remember and committee
the biggest concern there was is
that there has the one person
alone on the trading has to
seven times have to control all
kinds of different things at the
same time and there is no way
that they can handle everything
that's there if in case of an
emergency even in case more than
anything else that one person
has to use the bathroom.
you know what's going to happen
and.
Mr speaker Jennifer Cibola and
so the the concern is if you
have a trained in New Mexico
that is a one person creating
that person as a medical
emergency or something goes goes
off the rails terrible pun
intended and it causes some kind
of a reaction you need more than
one person on on board is that
correct this gentleman again if
I could have said it better.
Mr speaker gentleman from Cibola
it seems then that as a body we
should be concerned about all
trains in New Mexico including
passenger trains with the same
concerns that fair.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker general principle or
would you consider a an
amendment friendly if we amended
this to include all trains in
New Mexico including passenger
trains.
The gentleman I my understanding
is that we would consider is a
different set of rules for
different trains and it would be
hard to get to that area.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola but if if the concern is
for the safety of the public to
make sure that we have two
persons on each train it seems
like we could actually
streamline a lot of confusion
and just pass a single law that
applies to all trains in New
Mexico whether they're free or
whether their passenger and make
sure that we have a two man crew
on all those trains.
The gentleman I have been told
that the the passenger trains
have up to five to members on
board.
Mr speaker gentle from C. well
then it seems like it would
follow that would be okay to
mandate in a lot of that lease
up to correct.
Hey I have five right now why
would we want to bring it down
to two Mr speaker and gentleman
from Cibola it's a good question
if they're already doing that
right now why would we codified
into law as I recalled.
Are we currently having a two
person crew on freight trains
right now.
Mr speaker again like I
explained earlier but we have
the two member crews however it
is not mandatory.
Mr speaker gentleman from see
what when you say it's not
mandatory you mean it's not
codified in statute.
That is correct Mr speaker
gentle from C. more than it
would follow I think that it's
not codified in statute for
passenger trains either correct.
Right.
Mr speaker German principle that
it seems like to me as a body of
for going to tackle this issue
we need to get our arms around
the safety piece of that's the
underlying rationale and so it
seems that as a body we should
consider amending this bill to
include all trains whether
freight or passenger.
I think the best way to do this
is together and put together
another bill that'll figure that
part Mr speaker German well I
I'm afraid that the time for
dropping new bills is has passed
on fortune otherwise maybe we
can consider co sponsored such a
bill but we do have up to the
minute here on the floor and so
again if the if the desire is to
make sure that all trains are
operated safely in the case of
an Representative medical
emergency or anything else it
seems like a very good codified
for all trains in New Mexico is
that correct.
The speaker then within the.
Conflict of federal law.
Mr speaker and gentleman from C.
will can you explain that
rationale.
Mr leader gentleman what happens
is okay.
Other passenger train this is
the rules are hold the budget
different than five months what
we do on for eight you gotta
remember also that tone were
hauling freight we also a all
hazardous materials.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
single I I understand that but
if of train goes off the the
tracks whether it's one car
passenger trainer a thousand car
freight train it's still going
to cause disruption and and
possible harm to citizens and so
I think that's what we should be
focusing on.
Mr speaker gentle from C. what
can you share with the body how
many accidents have there been
in New Mexico involving freight
trains were there was only a one
person creating that because
that accident.
This is the man zero because at
this time we don't have one
person crews.
Mr speaker gentleman from.
Cibola so at this point we've
never had an accident in our
state's history.
We're currently running to.
Crew on every train in New
Mexico.
We just didn't amendment to
strip out the civil penalties.
So there's no teeth in the bill
anymore so Mister speaker
gentleman from C. one kind of
scratch my head and wonder what
what's the purpose of the bill
really what are we trying to get
out here by passing this
legislation the gentleman up
there is peace in the bill
because the department of
transportation the secretary of
transportation
allows for civil penalties to be
assist against the real roads so
we additional needed and in our
village is already taking care
of on the federal level.
Mr speaker gentleman from Cibola
so.
I think.
What I have a concern within a
bill like this.
Is what we're already doing the
very thing that we're saying we
need to put in statute.
What we're not saying though is
that there is an ongoing dispute
between the train themselves and
the underlying labor you.
And the labor union says it's
unsafe to go below to.
The train say no it is safe to
go below to.
And they're asking us to decide
which of those is correct.
Mr speaker gentle from Cibola
typically would look at well
what what's happened in the
past.
But in this case we don't have
an example of where Nexans been
caused by less than two.
And that leads me to think well.
Why should we jump in the middle
of this it's already happening
there's only two man crew.
Why did we do codified in
statute I think Mister speaker
it's a bad policy to jump into
contract negotiations and
codified in law.
And I understand that parties
one of flex whether it's you or
or the train owner want to flex
their political might.
but Mr speaker and gentleman
that's what I see is truly
happening here because if not
they would be in there be an
appetite to amend this to make
sure that all Transamerica
including passengers which by
the way.
You're hauling human beings.
Which to me seems a little more
important than than hauling
cattle or whatever else these
freight trains hauling and we're
saying no we're not going to
call to find a statute that you
have to have
to pass and to creating only
for.
This particular set a train
which happens to have you
membership on the floor right
now and I think that's pretty
telling as well so Mister
speaker gentleman from Cibola I
don't think this is really about
safety I think this about
contract negotiations and I
think it's bad policy for us to
dive into that from the
legislative perspective thank
you Mr speaker for the debate on
affirmative Representative
black.
Thank you Mr speaker with kind
gentleman yield please the
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from a.
Otero Tenaglia thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so I'm and your bill
I'm reading it here and it says
class one and class two
railroads could you please tell
me Mr speaker how many class one
railroads we have in the state.
Gentleman from what that'll we
have to.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman how many class to Rio
roads do we have in the state Mr
speaker.
At this time and gentleman from
a total zero.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate that answer so I'm
just looking at the news and
recent derailments and trains
can you tell me how many of
these recent derailments across
the nation have been due to.
Creating and not a Quitman
failure Mr speaker.
the speaker a gentleman
we really can say that the crew
members have failed to do their
job all of these accidents that
have happened I because this is
the failure of equipment.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and that's exactly the
answer that I was expecting
because I think that this bill
has a lot to do with creating
but not necessarily the
equipment to Mr speaker so I
will keep on going here and I
see that.
This bill requires two crew
members per locomotive can you
define what crewmember is Mister
speaker.
It's on the line from with that
it is in the bill.
To to to to and we did amendment
on that in order to make sure it
was in there but I can't find it
it is one twenty one.
One engineer one of.
One and.
Or one conductor.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John so there could be
technically to engineers or two
conductors is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman Mr speaker
and gentleman electric.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so isn't already
current policy to have to
members on the locomotive Mr
speaker and gentleman.
This gentleman like I said
earlier.
We have to members but it is not
mandatory.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so I guess my question
then would be what is the
impetus for this bill if this is
already current law is it due to
federal rulemaking that could
make it a little less strict is
that the reason Mr speaker.
Figure gentleman.
The.
It's not mandatory it is not
federal law.
So therefore this will allow us
to make sure that when that
three hundred car straight is go
with the New Mexico the we have
few people aboard that trade.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so do you have any
statistics or data showing in
other countries where we don't
have this kind of requirement
already where one member has
created a catastrophe Mr speaker
gentleman.
I'm as a German or you have that
problem for the one crew member
alone on the train just had a
heart attack or something like
that or gotten sick in that
situation in that situation
eventually after many miles is
that the trading Census the
problem there was a problem and
it will slow down but.
It takes a lot of miles before
the trade decides that there is
a problem there.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so.
Isn't it true that all freight
trains in the state of New
Mexico are on positive train
control meaning that the
engineer or I guess the
crewmember must respond to a
computer screen prompt or the
computer screen will stop the
train Mr speaker.
Speaker from the Linda Abbas of
there is no.
positive train control thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
can you please repeat the
beginning that the answer
please.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
with that from the lintel and
Bosso there is no B. C. D..
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman do you.
Do you know why there's not Mr
speaker sentiment.
Speaker June from a dental
because the infrastructure has
not been set up for a.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman how many crashes or
significant events have
happened.
Due to the lack of such a
element in that train ride from
the lan to a Paso Mr speaker
gentleman.
just three or four about.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
German you you do not know the
answer.
The gentleman the answer was
about three or four.
Thank you Mr speaker or madam
speaker I apologize madam
speaker the gentleman okay so is
that true that the railroads if
they wanted to change this
policy they can do that via
collective bargaining through
the union with arbitration Mr
speaker Tallman.
Madam speaker John.
This
Madam speaker also they always
gentleman from with that
As the proponents of the
railroad gave it to us best when
they testified in our committee
and Judiciary the negotiating
this for forty years.
And they haven't done anything.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
thank you madam speaker
gentlemen I apologize I keep on
missing that one out of the
madam speaker gentleman's so I'm
reading the history here with
the with the trains with the
federal railroad administration
and it looks like since the
sixties they had about five
folks on the locomotive and then
from the nineties going down to
to so would be correct to say
it's been about thirty years
instead of forty Mr speaker
madam speaker gentleman's.
I think gentleman all I'm
telling you is what I heard the
proponent of the real roads say
in Judiciary.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman all right you know I
appreciate the answers today at
there is a lot more questions
for me that answers that I
appreciate it madam speaker
gentleman thank you.
There is the debate the
gentleman from patron grant and
Hidalgo Representative us us.
Thank you madam speaker with the
kind gentleman.
You.
The.
Madam speaker a gentleman from
Silvercity.
Are you do you think you'll need
Mr speaker madam speaker the so
I I just wanted to make sure I
understood this right my
understanding is that you have a
there's a standing you contract
that mandates to people on a
train that is currently active.
This gentleman just like we
expect that in committee that is
not correct.
Mr speaker move or Jana me to he
will Mr speaker and gentleman
okay that's.
The information I'm getting Mr
speaker gentleman is that there
there you have a standing
contract since the nineties and
that currently have two people
on that train Mr speaker
gentlemen I I don't want to
repeat all the things that were
already said because it's a lot
of what we were going to talk
about for I was gonna ask about
but I think it's dangerous for
us to get in the middle of a
union negotiations between
anyone and and the you I believe
that's Mr speaker and gentleman
that's the the privilege that
the union has been negotiating
those type contracts I think it
would this would be setting a
bad precedence for many other
you contract negotiations would
you agree with that Mr speaker.
The speaker of course.
Well I knew you're gonna see
that Mr speaker.
But anyway Mr speaker I I know
that there's a standing contract
and that's really why can't
support this I know that this is
been going on for forty years
there's there's at least been to
people on the train this entire
time they can not remove those
two people even though it's not
of federal law but
they currently do have to people
and they can't remove it it's
still on active contract Montoya
is renegotiated between the two
of the two parties thank you Mr
speaker.
There's.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Cibola in
McKinley yield Mister speaker I
yield to by the name of the lady
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Representative Mr
speaker
I'm not going to repeat what I
had to say about the collective
bargaining I do have concerns
regarding that
but I do also want to mention
that in Albuquerque there is the
council of governments and there
is a transportation board which
I sat on as vice president and I
do know that we didn't give of
funding to our trains including
our rail runner and if this does
pass I would urge
the gentleman from Cibola
McKinley Representative L. con
and the individuals with him to
meet with that board because
it's very important that if if
this passes then
those FTEs that you're looking
to would probably be funded
through some of that funding
thank you Mr speaker and and I
also repeat some of the concerns
that were brought up regarding a
collective bargaining thank you.
There is for debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil but
if.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
does the gentleman from Steve
Cibola County you'll.
The lady from the on the screen.
Thank you Mr speaker I am I am
one of the a talking to from the
skies so I imagine that might be
kind of weird but I just have
one question for you is there a
as an action currently happening
the federal federal railroad
administration as dealing with
this exact topic.
The lady from the money all
right now it's a study.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
and gentleman from from Cibola
county and what is that what is
that study of exactly.
The basically the the living
room but on the other to the.
Do we need to keep the people of
the trade.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman
from stable
Was there another Committee
another another.
Summary from the federal
railroad administration that was
was drawn concerning two man
crew staffing and if so what was
that what what was that.
About and why was it withdrawn.
The.
The living room of the of the
speaker look basically is a with
be the FRA administrator chains
the study went away.
Okay Mister speaker and
gentleman from single accounting
but what part of the withdrawal
because but V. FRA came to an
affirmative decision that no
regulation on to increase
staffing is necessary for safe
railroad operations at this
time.
The the lady money to the
witnesses are saying you're
correct.
Okay that's all the questions I
have Mister speaker thank you a
gentleman from Cibola there's a
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Gentleman from simple in
McKinley hill please
the I yield to the gentleman
that someone over there.
No interest subject.
Of the automation of our
transportation systems
consideration we're
experimenting with driverless
trucks and drones to deliver
packages remotely with the
location on intervention so the
question is what both of finance
individuals current members.
Required to be physically
located.
Trump.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
We manage our political system
we manage systems remotely
possible that one of these
individuals serving of the
central control facilities look
at television screen would be
able to adequately monitor other
gentle actually only tried.
Mr speaker I don't think that
could happen we could have three
member crew and then have a
third member on the screen but
the we need the two member crew
on the train.
Mr speaker and gentleman we seem
to be moving away from that
direction if you will we will
defy.
For true individuals on
wondering because automation is
getting to be more robust so
every day.
It would seem to me.
The conductor or engineers
sitting in a central control
facility monitoring that tried
to play with the kids that much
slept in his own bed
were and was going to work the
following morning might actually
be.
Productive employees.
That was actually out on the
rails.
Don't seem to be reasonable.
The moment I am having trouble
following well I I I can see the
reason that you're giving me
right now if.
Okay
I'll move on what about.
Hello to any of these trends
transit Mexico.
To our state.
All of the.
Requirement for the number of
personnel changes Alps of New
Mexico and interstate trying how
would that.
Handled if you will.
And transaction to New Mexico.
The the
Colorado and Arizona already
have these loss that we don't
have to that we do he we haven't
had any problem making sure that
there's two people on a trade in
that are leaving from New Mexico
into Arizona Florida Colorado.
Mr speaker as.
Issues continue.
The two person crew is not
correct I.
Other states can foresee
potential for.
There's no problems when the
train comes into the state from
the state that doesn't have a
term career day.
Mr speaker I don't see that
problem because the they'll have
somebody on that trade before it
enters New Mexico.
Circumstance our schools will
have to agree to disagree I'm
interested in opposition to
this.
Because I believe it is in
serving state government should
issues between.
The ownership of this.
Trying to appropriations and our
labor force.
In the interest of safety.
Both of the phones.
In terms of your room have
interest in maintaining a high
level of safety.
Consequences of research thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you one of those
individuals current about go
with a little bit Roosevelt
and son we get it Representative
Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from what
and or a one of those counties.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
on the make you faint they'll be
looking for you under the chair
here in a minute.
I'm going to support your bill
and I want to make some comments
as to why.
In Clovis.
We're we're a hub and and the
train stopped there and and a
lot of the people.
My constituents work for the
railroad.
In Clovis.
Mr speaker and gentleman we have
made great sacrifices to the
railroad.
We have lost crossings.
For grain elevator that decided
they were going to ship in corn
on the rail to support our ag
community there.
And then losing that crossing Mr
speaker and gentleman.
There are people that live on
the south side of the railroad
tracks.
That if need an ambulance or.
A fire truck.
The emergency service people
have to go miles around that
because we lost that crossing.
We fought hard not to lose that
crossing but it didn't happen.
So we're forced to make those
sacrifices for the railroad.
Nobody in this debate has talked
about the well being of that one
person in that.
On that train manning that
train.
How.
Do the people look at this
point.
If that person was to get sick
or get hurt in some fashion and
and and Matt Mr speaker and
gentleman I've never been on a
train.
So I don't really know the ins
and outs and everything but if
you have one person out there in
the middle of the pastor between
von in fort Sumner.
And they're stopped there for
hours whether it be a blizzard.
Whether it's a a rail car that
needs to be detached and and put
on the siding because it can
proceed forward anymore.
I believe we ought to be looking
at the well being of the people
that are manning the training.
And why.
Mr speaker and gentleman why
can't the.
Railroad.
Sacrificing created job for our
communities.
And keep safety in that train
safety in mind for that person
in the train if he needs some
help.
If we take it.
The other places and other
businesses Mr speaker gentleman.
McDonnell's can go in and put
all robots.
Walmart isn't manning.
Check out.
Check out anymore.
So.
I believe.
In the humanity part of it in
creating jobs.
And the sacrifices that we make
for the railroad why can't the
railroad support a few jobs in
our communities for the
sacrifices that we make.
And Mr speaker and gentleman.
How do you look.
The well being of the one person
in the train.
Not just the safety of the train
but the well being of that one
person.
Being out in the middle of
nowhere and something happens to
them is the computer going to
help them.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Gentleman I think
A lobbyist for the railroad said
it best.
We don't need this bill if we
take out the safety factor out
of the.
And that's exactly what we're
looking at the safety of the
people that are bad news that
trade.
And Mr speaker and gentleman I
look forward to support this
bill.
You won't find me in your corner
a lot of times I know that this
and this one is different this
is this is the well being of the
people on the train so the train
can be safe.
For other people in crossings
and everything else.
And this is about jobs.
And make sure that.
The the not only we work at
creating jobs but the people
that we make sacrifices for can
also create jobs for people in
our communities thank you Mr
speaker thank you John this for
the data from Bernalillo
Representative then a close.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
at the event of an ideal.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
coming fast upon us so we're
gonna have to make some critical
decisions around A. I.
artificial intelligence we talk
a lot about we don't really need
people in this and we don't
really need people in that role
in fact right now there is a are
can write papers for college
students that can write poems
and employees in an amazing
amount of things eventually we
will really need people for much
we may not even need us here
we're going to have to come to
that determination at some point
in the future.
We need human beings to have
employment.
Mr things otherwise we will be
determining that we all as a
species are obsolete.
Mr speaker I will support this
bill.
And I will support efforts in
the future that keeps keep human
beings working thank you Mr
speaker there's a gentleman from
Chavis and you know that
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
now I really want to the
gentleman that's a way over
there for me to have this on
both sides.
Thank you gentlemen
a little bit about.
Our.
Is this requirement for the for
the people on the train.
Want to be on the field I mean
what is are they both going to
be it and the locomotive where
are these people and how will it
make it safer.
Because they're both on the
locomotive.
So.
Mr speaker just exactly.
How will this make the operation
of the train safer other than
having a redundant person on the
unlikely the engine had a heart
attack or something like that
what what does it really did.
This figure the most figures of
the rooms have is thank
complicated a day that is going
to be doing one thing the
conductor is going to be doing
another thing so this people who
need to be doing two different
things at the same time it's not
just one person that connected
to the ring strike to do the
conductor's job with the
conductor stated during the
engineer's job I decided
difficult to do.
I Mr speaker and gentleman I was
thinking about my friend's
comment about crossings and I
was wondering.
And I I I I understand exactly
what he's saying but I'm I was
trying to figure out how this
would.
That that would make the trains
go over.
Ross sings.
Quicker with is there some
regulation that says they can't
block crossings I mean is there
something how does that work.
This is the answer is
complicated there is a mixed
into the crossing conductor has
to get out of the trade then
assess the situation and help
out in whatever way they can.
Mr speaker I I
I have no problem supporting a
bill that will actually make an
operation.
A more safe.
Would reduce.
Infants as my friend.
Mentioned or.
If we had a history of issues I
would be I'd be all about it but
I mean even the day
We have.
One Representative that's voting
remotely.
And provoking counts just as
much as everybody else I mean
there are technologies now.
At allow.
All of this to occur.
I have a question for you and I
hope I'm not outline Mr speaker
but is one of your witnesses.
The attorney for the bargaining
unit that is currently
negotiating this.
This gentleman I have new
attorneys with the.
I'm sorry I didn't understand
you respect Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavis I have no
attorney said in here with me.
Well when your well armed in our
chief of.
The closest thing that Mr
speaker that was for you to
stick cases of button down on
is is there.
By one of the people bargaining
Act part of the bargaining unit
that is being affected currently
by this.
The gentleman neither one of the
more.
Well.
That's the only part of this
mission Baker and gentleman that
that is troubling to me is it
gives every indication.
That there is an and and we're
being used as pawns in a
negotiation that the.
May be a good attorney would
have to have us to get it done.
Mr speaker I would I would it's
troubling.
because I see from the industry
that I came from.
The application of.
Technology has grown immensely.
And.
In the in the in the
transportation network that I
come from.
We use geosynchronous satellites
we had cameras we had Intel that
was you know plus or minus two
or three seconds we had what we
called.
Parity bits that ran in the
communication link to you know
I'm OK you're OK so that it made
sure that the operator of the
facility was.
Was
The knowledge you and was
participating in the decision
making it can be done and quite
frankly.
Mr speaker and gentleman
sometimes the application of
this technology.
Has more.
Safety and that then that of a
person who is involved in the
incident and under the stress of
making those decisions so I I
would
I would I would tell you that I
don't think personally from
reading a listing that this is a
much about safety as it is
bargaining and that troubles me
so Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate the the time thank
you share this with the
dimensional infer Lincoln an
update Representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yield.
Thank you gentleman in rubber a
Mr speaker.
So I've met both the you're the
expert witnesses and I do rise
and support.
Of your bill.
However both of them no.
How I feel about bargaining
units and you and this has
nothing I know it has everything
to do with bargaining.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
But it also has to do a safety.
And like in my.
Colleague from curry county.
Stated while ago this this is
about a minimal staffing of the
train.
And one question that I had Mr
speaker.
And gentlemen is what is the
role of the engineer.
The gentleman from the Lincoln
on to operate this thing.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman what is the role of
the conductor.
It's it's quite of hi the title
of the Netherlands had said in
the cars States charges the
placement of the of the cars
making sure the hazmat is
correctly done I'm it's on and
on on.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and what what the
reason I ask you those questions
is because I know several people
that are engineers I know
several people that are
conductors.
And I know what those conductors
they end up walking miles making
sure they're checking trains.
And they're they're double
checking each other and they
have radios and they're in
constant communication because a
train is very complex.
And if you're not if you get
complacent at any time and
you're not checking each one of
those trains.
It's one of those cars and the
connections.
I can just sit here and tell you
how many people have lost their
lives doing that.
Not only have they lost their
lives Mr speaker and gentleman.
They lost limbs.
They're not going to get to work
anymore.
And I wish that we didn't have
to make a mandate I wish it
could just be handled through
the bargaining unit.
Mr speaker and gentleman DM do
you think that technology is
ever going to replace people.
The woman it's going to be tough
this is like I said I mean I can
for my amendment ready to pick
up to what I drove did manage to
go I mean it's awesome but
there's no way it always leads
that driver behind the wheel.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I sure hope not
because I think we're in the
business of putting people to
work and not putting people out
of work.
Thank you Mr speaker there's
going to be generated from
violence at Representative made
about more you.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentle lady with
the other co from eight AM way
over here in the other corner
right Mr speaker I I I too am
rising in support of this bill I
come from bill and who is a big
Representative road town and I
have to say
this was the one issue that was
spoken to me in Walmart in
restaurants in I mean I had
dozens of people begging me to
support this this initiative is
so I have a couple of questions
how long does it take if you can
if you kind of have an idea
hello to take for free trying to
get from let's say Belinda
Winslow.
With that Mr speaker gentle lady
from the lens with it's a six
hour trip but normally it takes
about twelve.
I was gonna say I thought I
thought it was more of sorry Mr
speaker I thought it was more of
the latter anymore because what
is the Mister speaker of
Representative what is the
Average length of those trains
that are going to win so right
now.
The lady from the eight to
twelve sixty thousand feet or
two to three miles.
Mr speaker of the gentleman that
it that is amazing to me to know
the amount of weight and freight
that is going across and and and
right now it has to people in
control of it I have a the we
heard that several years ago a
couple of decades ago as we used
to have five members on the
train can you
Mr speaker and and gentleman
tell me about how long where
those trains at that point.
The lady from the eight to they
weren't even the by a long.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you I remember as a kid because
again going up around trains I
would count them I couldn't
imagine sitting there counting
these trains now when we're
sitting here waiting for them to
go by so it seems to me that
through negotiating agreements
we went from shorter trains with
more people to now longer trains
with less people and that is
crazy to me.
Not to mention I agree with my
colleague up here my main
concern is having that security
for that one person on the train
even though there may be
computers that they have to
touch it every every so many
minutes when when someone goes
into cardiac arrest arrest
equipment is what.
Determines whether they're going
to live or not.
And for those people that is why
I support this I have one last
question.
Do you have any idea kind of
generally what would happen to
let's say a railroad town like
balloon if it went down to one
person on the training and they
had all of these people employed
there Senator Hemphill what
would have to happen to the
staff of the of the of BNSF at
that point.
The lady from the amendment to I
was surprised to answer this but
you would lose about two hundred
people.
Mr speaker gentleman and that is
why I stand up here in support
of it because this would change
my community and I can't say
that I'm here representing them
if I were to vote against it
thank you Mr speaker so you know
for the debate the gentleman to
close thank you Mr speaker thank
you everybody for keeping and
expanding all the stardom Mr
speaker I now move that house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill why don't I just
is have.
Final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
bill one of five asks amended.
The vote is now.
Open.
Let's amount to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
No Representative Hochman Vigil
votes no.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes.
Vote is now closed level forty
three in the affirmative twenty
five in the negative house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one of five as
amended has duly passed this
house.
Additional information already
on item.
Number.
Thirteen.
I am speaker would you give me
to that point.
The record reflect that
election is server placing house
bill one eighty one of her best
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the delimiter
explained the bill thank you Mr
speaker house bill one eighty
one is about extending the
national board certification
differential to not only
teachers but counselors and
administrators as well and with
that Mr speaker I'll stand for
questions there is a delay from
Chavis representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
yield speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Five one question I believe I
was under the impression that
we.
Provided a stipend to teachers
who receive such certification
to keep them in the classroom
because they were being
recognized as our excellence in
teaching is that is that an
accurate remember in some more
part Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that that is part of the
intention what this bill is
seeking to do is send studies
have shown national board
certification to help our
students is to allow that
differential to go over to
administrators
to improve the outcomes as
administrators for
the teachers that they work with
and serve.
Mr speaker and gentleman it just
seems to me that we were
providing a stipend to try to
keep our best teachers in the
classroom and and allowing them
to.
Receive enhanced of monetary
compensation to keep them in the
classroom because I thought we
were seen.
Teachers go out of the classroom
and into administration so that
they would receive.
The higher pay scale and so for
allowing this type in the travel
with them into the
administration are we not.
Back to the same situation of
having teachers want to
naturally go into administration
when maybe there.
More effective in the classroom
with the children speaker
gentlemen I think one aspect
that you're neglecting it is the
importance of the on site
principal in providing for
professional development and
leading educators to develop
themselves as professionals as
well that we believe the
national board certification
would prepare those who have
been educators that attain
national board certification to
apply those same skills to our
our teachers as well so just
like we have a teacher shortage
we also have a shortage in
school administrators as well so
we think that this would provide
for that the other thing that
this would provide for he is
national board certification for
counselors school counselors as
we all know we're in dire need
of school counselors and really
well trained school counselors
at our school sites.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
appreciate that and I do know
how important it is to have.
Very qualified principals and
others in the administration.
Overseeing the entire school if
you will I am just concerned
that we are private we're going
back to the former
recommendation and that is to
receive even more compensation
teachers with them want to
actually move into the
administration and there's not
that enhanced stipend if you
will for the teachers to stay
with the children
I'm I'm gonna support the
legislation I'm just
questioning whether or this puts
us back in the situation that I
thought we were trying to get
out of with that Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you for
answering my questions center
for the digital equipment
clothes and speaker I move that
house bill one hundred eighty
one do now pass we're a little
passage of house bill one
hundred eighty one.
The vote is now open.
Food some out to close.
The call those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes.
Six six in the affirmative to in
the negative house bill one
hundred eighty one has duly
passed his house.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
Santa Fe and Santa Fe ready on
item number four yes Mr speaker
will you get me to that point
that the record reflect that
election is search for placing
howls ruled Development Bank
grants acquittal Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment for substitution
provided to explain the bill.
You Mr speaker this bill Mr
speaker is designed to support
expanded broadband access
particularly in those areas that
are unserved or under served so
what we're talking about largely
although not exclusively is
giving the department of
transportation flexibility to
adjust their fees for areas such
as rural New Mexico where it is
not cost effective you might say
for providers to
pay commercial fees you to place
to have access to rights of way
so in this case it allows the
department of transportation to
waive fees when there's a
showing that will serve
under served and unserved areas
as defined in the connecting
Mexico act and with that Mr
speaker stand for questions
related from Caltrans said as
coalition representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kindly the yield.
Mr speaker I kindly yield to the
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
I know this was an issue and one
of my areas where the D. O. T.
was actually was an inflated
amount to be able to run some
broadband and so is this how is
this actually going to help
DOT to not do those fees X. so
extremely or just give them the
option to.
Mr speaker gentle lady it gives
it's a maze so it's permissive
up prior to this if this bill
when this bill passes shall I
say the department will have
more flexibility to do so they
have taken they believe they are
precluded precluded from by law
to now waive fees not
withstanding the fact that there
are these underserved areas so
we are trying to get this into
law to give them the tools that
they have they need to do just
exactly what you're hoping will
happen gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker thank you kind lady I
appreciate this legislation
thank you there's a gentleman
but thanks Gerry Harding quay
San Miguel and you
Representative Chatfield thank
you Mr speaker does the kind
lady yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
one of the things that I have
met many times about is this
very issue in my district most
of you know that is one of the
bigger districts in the state of
New Mexico and probably the
nation it's very low population
and to bring broadband to these
low popular lonely.
Sparsely populated areas I guess
is what would be the word is can
be very expensive and we have
met with the department of
transportation we've met with
some of the various people
involved in getting the
broadband out there and the
costs to purchase right away for
one of those lines is is just
prohibitive and truly the
fastest easiest way to came
right away is down the highway
right away it's already thank
you right away that belongs to
the state this broadband is a
goal of stated goal of our state
of New Mexico it provides the
ability of rural people to enjoy
the same
access to the internet about
people in some of our larger
cities it's very important to us
and so Mister speaker I stand in
support of this bill thank you
there's further debate from
Travis Senator percent of
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
would you deal.
Mr speaker gentleman I yield.
Of the lady with this bill
provide for.
Highway right of ways across
tribal properties.
Mr speaker gentleman no this is
exclusive to rights of way that
are controlled by the department
of transportation.
Gentlelady the highway right
away is
That crossed tribal lands did
they not have multiple uses are
they only single use.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
understand that they have
multiple uses but the
department.
Can not extend it beyond what
they have Authority from the
tribe's the particulate tried to
cross over the their lands.
So Mr speaker gentle lady are
there any other lands in New
Mexico.
Of where we have highway right
of ways that.
Of.
This bill would not apply.
Mr speaker gentleman a one the
one that comes to mind is plans
administered by the except
commissioner for public lands.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady is that something we should
do in order to enhance
broadband across New Mexico
could we add that authority to
kind of.
Promulgate a fast more
economical
Build out of broadband across
New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentleman that would
be the ideal however the
commissioner of public lands in
the constitutional provisions
relating to public lands record
has different requirements than
are imposed on the department of
transportation so it's a much
more
Nuanced and
complicated situation Mr speaker
and gentleman the commissioner
has expressed interest in
working on this issue but given
her constitutional duty to
acquire revenue in support of
the of the you know the early
childhood fund it cetera it's a
more difficult question than
simply doing what we're doing Mr
speaker gentle.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady does the build out
of the broadband for public
benefit a Kerry with that the
right of eminent domain.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm
informed that the department
does not have authority to use
its public domain authority to
support broadband.
That was your question.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I think for the benefit of
public use.
Of.
Bill down on public.
With public funds it might have
the right of eminent domain but
that's just a question I
appreciate Mr speaker gentle
lady as for the main gentleman
from Lee Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Los Alamos field Mr
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm I
don't have any questions we
talked about the steering house
transportation I just want to
reiterate for some of my
concerns are with where we're at
on the broadband infrastructure
side.
We have Mr speaker and gentle
lady we have eleven rural co ops
telecommunication co ops that
have been with us for seat at
the table wanting to be
involved.
In the director of broadband.
Towards the end of last summer
and in committee in science and
technology committee
Made it clear that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that.
They had given to projects to.
Co ops for rural New Mexico Mr
speaker and gentle lady neither
one of those two projects went
to a co op that have any clue
how to do telecommunications
never have.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
top of that we want to give
rulemaking authority to the
state transportation commission
and right now it suggests that
maybe that's not the best place
to let somebody make rules so Mr
speaker and gentle lady for that
reason those reasons while I
agree with the bill but I don't
agree with the way that we're
implementing the money where the
money's going and who's gonna
make the decision on where that
money is going and who will be
reading the rules with respect
to how we do this so for that
reason I cannot support this
legislation thank you there's
the debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr speaker I
just want to take a moment to
commend on the sponsors of this
bill for those of us that have
been working on the wrong pin
issue for quite some time this
DOT right away issue was
identified first and foremost is
one of the most complex and
difficult issues of the state
was going to have to deal with
if we were to ever get the state
of New Mexico to a hundred
percent broadband coverage so I
commend Representative Chandler
for taking the issue head on and
for coming up with a solution
that will finally allow us to
get around this unnecessary beer
bureaucracy
so that we can continue to do
what the state needs to do which
is make sure that our kids get
educated
no matter where they are located
in the state and so just a
moment to say thank you
Representative Chandler Mr
speaker for and bringing this
bill I think it is an absolute
step in the right direction and
it needed to happen are quite
sometime ago so very happy it is
happening now thank you so much
is generated from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Los
Alamos re read the and Santa Fe
County yield.
gentlelady from Bernalillo I
gladly you thank you
Representative Mr speaker I do
believe that this is going in
the right direction
in terms of creating
access to broadband throughout
the state.
However having served on the
middle Rio Grande council of
governments as the vice
president of transportation
board
I do know that D. O. T.
is intertwined with
Mr cog which is how we we refer
to it transportation board in
the access to federal funds.
And the Mr **** actually was
created by the state of New
Mexico and so I it concerns me
that we are not incorporating
them into these processes
because it is a pretty lengthy
processes the that they go
through and I understand that
gentle lady
Mr cog in Albuquerque is
regional and I think that it's
important and I think that there
may be some other costs across
the state as well but it
concerns me that we're not
incorporating their sort of
reference into these bills and I
am going to support this but I
am bringing that up because I
think that it's important that
as we move forward into these
sorts of decisions
these especially when it comes
to transportation the this
particular especially in my area
this particular
agency is very important to our
decision making.
Thank you gentle lady from all
of those areas and Mister
speaker there's a gentleman from
San Juan Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker well the
only.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to my
co sponsor on our constitutional
amendment a request the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you young lady Mr speaker
of.
In my district we have some of
the most rural of rural realists
and to get our internet to some
of the locations is going to
take a lot of work so also the
problems that we have is that
with the Navajo Nation we also
have a utility company that is
also of I have a sister company
called our wireless and they
take care of all the internet
installation how will your bill
help me and we have to deal with
what seems like a monopoly on my
nation.
you Mr speaker gentleman what
this will do is allow NMDOT to
waive fees for providers who
wish to provide service in your
area and as you know Mr speaker
and gentleman
The fee has been a barrier to
access from this for the smaller
providers because it has been
expensive and it doesn't pencil
out Mr speaker gentleman when
the fees were at you might argue
a market right so this I think
will add competition because
those smaller providers will be
able to request waivers
undoubtedly in your area which
I'm sure is under served and
allow you to get more
providers in your your in your
area Mr speaker John.
I hope that's true because of I
feel that the monopoly that the
nation is having with their own
carriers and stuff installers is
going to be a quite a problem
quite cumbersome thank you young
lady thank you Mr speaker si no
further debate the gentle lady
to close Mr speaker I now move
that the broadband that excuse
me that the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for House Bill
one sixty do now pass world
final passage of house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty the vote.
Is now open.
Close.
To call those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes.
One of six from zero to negative
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty has duly passed
this house gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I got about order
of Business messages to no
objection it is so ordered to
maybe.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the dually
enrolled in gross copy of Senate
bill three sixty four as amended
has been read in full assigned
by the officers of the Senate in
open session requests the
signatures of the awesome
officers of the house
respectfully submitted sure do
on Senate chief clerk Mr Peter.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six with emergency clause
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate an
open session requests the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
sherry do on Senate chief clerk
this is ruby entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports.
It should it is so ordered.
Mr speaker you Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house bill one hundred has had
it under consideration for
seventh recommendation at a do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption adoption
of federal committee report on
house bill one hundred a list of
everything that was in line.
Was me just have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill thirty three has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
For the optional favorably
report on house rural
development linguistically
Affairs Committee subsume for
House Bill thirty three all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Yes I'm a committee report up
to.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house bill one sixty five has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
it to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption adoption of a federal
committee report on house bill
one sixty five of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Opposing the as of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
one seventy two has had it under
consideration point Ms
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption run adoption of a
federal committee report on
house bill one seventy two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was made the eyes of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
was been referred house bill
three fifty three has had it
under consideration point it was
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the taxation
and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chairman Mr speaker
move adoption option available
committee report on house bill
three fifty three of those in
favor say about this and I.
Yes have a committee report
opted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is been
referred house bill four thirty
one has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation that I do pass
and it's referred to the
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
move adoption for the doctor to
a federal committee for now
before thirty one of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Jose yes I'm a commuter port up
to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to miss been referred house bill
one forty eight has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
reduction of a federal community
what it has a one forty eight
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose may be just have a
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house joint
memorial three has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it two
passed as amended respectfully
submitted G. Andr√©s Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report reduction of a
federal committee put on house
memorial three of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Proposed U. S. have a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill one forty three has
had it under consideration for
the same with recommendation
that I do not pass that house
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill one
forty three to pass and this
referred to the Education
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption reduction
of an unfavorable committee
report on house bill one forty
three but a favorable committee
report on house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
one forty three of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Yes I have a committee reported
up to.
Mr speaker government elections
in in in Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
three eighteen has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill three
eighteen of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was made the as have a committee
reported opted to.
Mr speaker your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill three twenty five has
had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation
that I do not pass for that
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
twenty five to pass in this
referred to the Education
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're on
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house with
three twenty five but a
favorable committee report on
house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House with three
twenty five all those in favor
say I just and I.
Couples may just have a
committee reported opted.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation no objection it
is so ordered.
House memorial fifty eight
introduced Representative Brown
a memorial recognizing the
important contributions of the
cal Ripken senior foundation for
providing educational support to
students in underserved and
distressed communities house
memorial fifty eight entities
Representative Brown hello fifty
eight of equipment was by titles
are printed referred to the
house Education Committee.
House memorial fifty nine
introduced Representative Brown
in the morning requesting a
study of the feasibility of
establishing and strengthening
requirements for capping
abandoned water wells on private
and public property house
memorial fifty nine entities
Representative Brown.
House were fifty nine of been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house agriculture us I guess and
water resources committee.
House memorial sixty introduced
by Representative McQueen and
the more L. identifying the
seriousness of middle Rio Grande
compact administration and
requesting the state engineer
and the inner stream Interstate
Stream Commission to exercise
their authorities and to closely
coordinate their efforts to
administer the compact House
memorial sixty entities
for Representative McQueen.
Because moral sixty amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house agriculture as a guessing
water resources committee.
House memorial sixty one
entities for representatives
read some more a and Chatfield
in the morning commending Texaco
middle school for earning a two
thousand twenty two national
Blue Ribbon school designation
House memorial sixty one
entities for representatives
receive Zamora and Chatfield
sixty one hundred twelve by
title is ordered not printed
please on the speakers table.
House memorial sixty to
introduce by representatives
Thompson and Allison a memorial.
Claiming February twenty first
two thousand twenty three public
health day in the house of
representatives House memorial
sixty two introduced by
representative Thompson and
Allison was rule sixty two into
toys by title is ordered not
printed and placed on speakers
table.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight an act relating to water
changing membership of the
Interstate Stream Commission
providing other terms of holding
office on the commission
repealing and enacting a section
of the N. M. SA nineteen seventy
eight Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty eight.
Senate conservation committee
something to present a real
fifty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house agriculture us against in
water uses committee then so
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate bill ninety six
introduced by senator Munoz
Representative Lane an act
relating to pensions increasing
the maximum amount of attention
that a state police member
correctional officer member and
appropriations and proposal for
parole officer member is
permitted to earn pursuant to
the public employees retirement
act Senate bill ninety six
introduced by senator Munoz
Representative Lane Senate bill
ninety six minutos by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house labor veterans
military affairs committee then
so house appropriations and
finance committee.
Senate bill one thirty one
introduced by senators Stewart
brand and Hemphill for the an
act relating to public school
capital outlay allowing the
public school facilities
authority budget to be based on
a five year average eliminating
offsets for school districts
reducing the local match by one
third for some school districts
reducing the local match by one
half for certain small school
districts eliminating the impact
aid credit eliminating offsets
for charter schools reducing the
local match for prekindergarten
projects by fifty percent
providing technical cleanup
making appropriations Senate
bill one thirty one introduced
by Senator Stewart brand in him
health.
Senate bill one thirty one have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
ninety two an act relating to
municipalities making
appropriation to the city of
Carlsbad to compensate for
certain municipal gross receipts
tax revenue source to Eddy
county pursuant to section seven
dash one dash fourteen in M. as
a nineteen seventy eight being
laws twenty twenty chapter
eighty section one Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill two ninety two.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
ninety two having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed.
And referred to the house
government elections and ending
Affairs Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
judges ordered members we will
not be coming back on the floor
this evening I believe there is
a very exciting in and that the
maybe not all of us are invited
to which is okay.
Understood but the Republican
caucus will be having their
dinner this evening at six PM at
yes.
Within just a few years.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon thank you
Mr speaker the house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at two
thirty today in room three oh
seven.
Member states notes the delay
from house thank you Mr speaker
your house rural development
land grants and cultural first
committee will be meeting
tomorrow and I believe that
Representative lane and Mr
speaker will be singing.
So please bring your appropriate
instruments.
I miss them but I heard my name
and seeing.
General.
Gentlelady from you are sending
us thank you Mr speaker house
commerce will be meeting fifteen
minutes after we get off the
floor in room three seventeen
members signal to lady from
Santa Fe percent of a little
thank you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will also be
meeting fifteen minutes after
the floor session in room three
oh nine there were signals the
gentle lady from anybody.
Son of also the fan tells I'm
gonna get it one day
Representative huh thank you Mr
speaker your house the
agriculture sector is in water
resources will be meeting in
room three fifteen tomorrow
morning at eight thirty.
Members from here Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
at your house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee will be
meeting in room three oh five
tomorrow morning at nine AM
thanks.
Members signaled the gentleman
from catching grant any other
version of the process thank you
Mr speaker I just want to make a
quick announcement my son turns
twenty five today.
And the reason I'm very happy I
this they can spend the day with
them but Mr speaker twenty five
years today he was born with a
condition known gas as gas rose
basis when your intestines are
outside of your body and my son
went through I don't remember
how many operations as a
neonatal in you in the neonatal
intensive care unit and I'm
blessed to have them today so
thank you Mr speaker from and
then also thank you gentlemen
that's beautiful.
The lady from McKinley is one
hundred percent of Johnson thank
you Mr speaker house state
government elections in Indian
Affairs committee will meet on
Wednesday eight thirty eight am
three oh five I'm reminding you
two days in advance thank thank
you members take note.
Any other else miss the gentle
lady from million percent no on
New.
Thank you Mr speaker this
announcement is for everybody
but also specifically reps in
Bernalillo county you may have
heard that the Walmart on San
Matteo and Zuni is closing that
is the only grocery store in the
area for many members in an
already economically depressed
areas so there's an emergency
capital outlay request to
purchase the the land in the
building to make sure that we
keep a grocery store in that
area that is LCS number three
two four eight if you have any
spare capital outlay please
pitch it my way of us keep the
building help us keep our
grocery store thank you so much
thank you Julie member signal
to.
Jennifer wanted to announce your
call because inner
professionally.
Gentlelady from Katrin Santa
support of women's and percent
of Armstrong thank you Mr
speaker I'd like to announce
there is a Republican dinner
tonight at six PM at Maria's.
Thank.
Ride the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker of the house stand in
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
Tuesday.
I see no objections the house
was in recess until ten thirty
tomorrow morning.
