Business announcements and
the work up on the table and
then be up to committee so it'll
be item number one senator
Neville item number two Senator
Hickey
closing up last a at the end of
the session this morning I know
there were some there were still
on the list and John Pinto day
and I just wanted to open up if
any senators today get a chance
to talk would like to speak at
business third reading of
legislation and I would be able
to senator Neville for item
number one Senate finance
committee sub two percent of
bill nine grand that order
that all action for placing
Senate.
The finance committee substitute
for Senate bill nine on final
passage been taken snows subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
to pull off for a number of
years we've had it going pretty
well then there would any money
and
we'd try to get things going
six different agencies ten
different entities and allow us
to put together of funding that
would help with everything from
solar water conservation through
bill and in the analysis and I
would defer to my co sponsor
senator Wirth for additional
comments before we take
questions Senator Wirth.
western state that does not have
a dedicated land and water
conservation fund of this nature
as we deal with.
is more important than ever that
we be proactive and not just
reactive and this bill is a huge
step forward in being proactive
programs what the bill does is
create two different funds a
permanent fund and then a fund
that will be spent now and it
bandy took a number of years to
get past the forced up and
watershed restoration act
and again that's a perfect
potential for huge federal match
and so again we look at the
federal dollars that will come
in by doing this this really is
a win for New Mexico so I'm
My apologies miss president of
choking back here.
I think we stand for questions
at this point Mr chairman of the
somebody's pet project so we've
put together a a bill that only
funds existing programs that are
currently on the books and not
anything new or in different and
expand the ability for New
Mexico to to do some
conservation projects thank you
thanks avail where that order
business serving legislation and
we are discussing Senate finance
committees of supercenter bill
committees that that heard this
bill so my question has to do
with is there any money left it
after finance got its hands on
it and how much is that and is
finalizing that Senator Wirth
has had his staff working on
that he might have a better feel
for exactly were going on that
I'll defer to him but we were
trying to get to that we all
got to build on this Senator
Wirth that if a utility you.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Ortiz Pena for the question so
there are two funds here the
an annual basis of twelve and a
half million dollars so the good
news I've heard that in house
bill two which is headed this
would envision fifty million
dollars into the land of
enchantment legacy Fund that
would allow for four years of
expenditures out of that fund
and then fifty million into the
building up that permanent fund
because really the that what
we're trying to do here is
create a permanent fund that'll
spin off enough money to do the
annual payments so if you have
three hundred million dollars in
step forward but certainly when
it gets to the Senate side I
think we need to work on finding
some additional resources and
one last question and Mr
wilderness areas of the eligible
for funding through this.
Mister president senator if I
might to tackle at if we could
We have center share.
thank you Mr president I don't I
don't really have a question to
ask here I think this is a great
pill in here at least in my
right mind.
It's the state forestry division
this is from this is from state
law sixty eight to twelve.
The state forestry division is
considerable group of people out
there that are very concerned
that what will happen is that
the state will simply by a big
chunks of land.
thus you harm the counties
revenue so the county can't do
what they're gonna do you take
it off the property tax rolls
you harm those the school
districts that are that are
funded by this may bond against
other private buyer.
Bothers me because the state of
New Mexicos likely able to
outbid a private buyer in order
with with this combination of
could be purchased without all
our as the legislature's
approval.
And that's that's where I really
have a hang up here and we
actually have a bill drafted
but but if this bill is enacted
and I would highly encourage
everybody to to do this limit
what the limits says is you
can't by more than a million
dollars so that we can buy
easements.
Or rights of way or things like
that without coming to the
legislature but if you go to buy
a ranch then you got to come to
concern about this great idea
with the best of intentions and
and because of that I am going
to vote no.
But if we pass this other bill
But I do think that we need to
take that in consideration I did
offer amendments in finance
committee.
They were all rejected I
understand there's a lot of
people involved in here to go
state forestry division can
purchase without legislative
approval.
And so that is my only hang up
We do have for the debate we
have Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president mine's
more just a comment and kind of
re support of this bill because
established by Congress to for
fill a bipartisan commitment to
safeguard natural areas water
resources and cultural heritage
as well as to provide recreation
opportunities to all Americans
authorizing nine hundred million
dollars annually and permanent
funding for L. W. C. F. and at
no cost to taxpayers the LW CF
supports increased public access
that has received funding from
that almost slip there on that
one there is the city of Roswell
the spring river park which had
over eighty eight thousand
city of Alamogordo receiving
twenty seven thousand dollars in
Clovis I got the chance to visit
adhoc park which is like that
community Central Park they have
three million dollars from L. W.
CF in Mescalero Apache they have
the Silverlake recreation area
which supplies point which
communities and lastly there.
Was Piner women's park in Los
crucis which received in
nineteen seventy one about five
thousand dollars but this park
will provide for us to levy our
support and matching funds for
the land water conservation fund
we have a right to that nine
hundred million dollars that
Thank you Senator Hamblen we
have Senator Kernan next.
Senator just a reminder we are
on third reading if we can keep
the discussions on the volume
down to minimum please Senator
would go to different programs
that are already established but
I think there's one that just
causes me a little bit of
concern with the amount and not
act in and we know New Mexico is
just filled with wonderful sites
and and properties that we want
to protect and and I don't
disagree with that but I I'm I'm
site and what is probably not
and and I think heard from my
local county government one of
them and they're concerned and I
think mainly because of the
funding going to that would not
create maybe I just don't know
who makes the determination on
on whether a particular area
would be doing to a site that
answer them Senator thank you Mr
is of the cultural properties
That receive grants must already
be owned by a state agency.
got earlier today clarifying the
real property situation so they
cannot acquire they can improve
our work on existing owned
properties so Mister president
legitimately answer that without
an expert I don't have one today
so Mister president I think you
might be able to see some of my
concerns from the State Land
Office already owns a
out of this particular fund to.
Maybe increase some sort of
restoration in areas that that
of them certainly those dollars
need to go there just a I'm a
little concerned and I suppose I
can do that now that if we if we
had a significant amount of
Any further debate.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you thank you Mr president
I have an amendment to move
number one to Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill money amendment sponsored
by senator Jeff Steinborn
I would say a type of but I
would probably the more accurate
way to say it is just poor
choice of words by a drafter in
the bill that will have a
spun off to game and fish limits
what it can be used for to the
propagation of protection of
game and fish what the amendment
species and that's really
important colleagues because
vulnerable species or what's
known as species of greatest
conservation need does not have
a dedicated funding stream in
the state.
species so so the problem with
the languages at limits spending
of this money the propagation of
game and fish came as a tern
defined in law.
existing programs not really
true in this case because we did
not.
Operate this money the game
protection fund which would have
authorized the department
Species that the department can
use to conserve and propagate.
And.
That's what it does I'm a little
The department said that before
the bill was introduced that
this was the purpose of it it's
really important we get it right
colleagues because we are going
to be spending off millions of
game species so with that I
stand for questions yes I
referred questions we can just
move that amenities sorry Mr
president I move for amendment
one for discussion.
disagree with with the rationale
that the senator is presented
but we were assured by the game
department during the finance
hearing that this was not just
because of the intent but
because we don't feel it's
necessary I don't know if my
colleague senator Wirth has any
additional comments.
everyone agreed to it was put
into the bill and examples
eminent domain there was a
provision to take out eminent
domain and so you know the
reason I'm just going to give
dash one dash one NMSA that
establishes the purposes and
policies of the department and
commission chapter seventeen
encompasses a wide wide ranging
out of the legacy fund can be
used in are used and the game
protection fund for conservation
actions so again what well I
know that and I respect Senator
again this is the the secretary
and the agency felt this was not
necessary and this this has been
a pretty.
Fragile balance to get groups of
in the Senate finance committee
and is opposed again on the
floor.
All any further debate.
Si no further debate on the
very prescriptive on the species
level they do not have authority
to just protect all species and
with all due respect the funding
does not go to the game
propagation of came in fast and
I would well unfortunately don't
have time now but if anyone had
taken five minutes and call
Legislative Council like I did.
And asked about the plain
it because we hearing came
protection money funds but this
bill doesn't directed towards
that and it's something I've
spent a lot of time studying so
we don't have to agree but I
really encourage you to support
this because this will can
create a dedicated funding
stream to include that.
With that I move St floor
amendment one.
misprint that's right show hands
centers where voting to your
seats please we're voting a
senator member number one.
To be adopted on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill nine.
voting no Senator Kernan voting
no Senator share voting no.
Senator Byrd voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Schmedes voting no
voting no Senator Campos voting
no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino voting no
Senator my S. this voting no.
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no
no Senator Wirth voting no
Senator by the a voting no
Senator could have had him still
loading now Senator souls voting
no Senator Lopez voting no
menu also Dino Center o'neill
voting no.
By a vote of seven affirmative
thirty two in the negative
senator member number one has
failed to be adopted into Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill nine.
the money and make sure that
this department spends this
money on threatened vulnerable
species in New Mexico.
That's what they said that they
will keep an eye on thank you Mr
president says we're back on the
Senator will identify here
expert witness legal counsel
from EMNRD and who else to.
And secretary probes.
Seeing no objection.
We're back on the bill Senators
anyone wishing to be on the
Mr president.
In center a vote for this in a
conservation but I had some
phone calls after this just had
private property level
landowners in my area are really
worried about this with your
expert witness to be able to
give us some clarification on
that this present
would it be get twenty two
percent of the total
distribution that goes to the
game protection fund is that
correct goes the game protection
game perfect protection fund has
a a lot of money in it anyway
besides us that would be coming
in there so of the we didn't
tamper with the underlying
on the same playing field no
matter what the fund was and if
that answers your question
Senator all return it to you.
had a bill from fishing game on
some property eight did not pass
and they bought the property
anyway so other some fear there
Mr president center of can I ask
and river habitat statewide in
they'd ask me what that meant
and I did not have a good answer
for him is that something you're
expert witness can explain yes
This the river improvement
Mr president center I thank you
for those on then listen to
debate a little longer of I had
had a and I could said earlier I
kids in which see what the
results are thank you Mr
chairman Mr president thank you
senator I guess we do have
further debate we have Senator
Griggs.
on on pages four and five of of
the bill we talk about that
money will be spent on projects
natural heritage conservation
act the noxious weed management
act that healthy soil Act
short on water conservation
envision or do those actions
allow for money to be spent on
purchase of property.
Mr president Senator again the
the park in the purchase of real
estate would require the
purchase real estate.
Agency presentation and and and
the payment of what would be
actually the same amount of
property tax lost if the you
know if if the state were to
It would be it would be
something that I'd like to see
you guys look at to see if you
could then your bill to include
Si no further debate Centerville
to close on the bill thank you
Mr president Mr president I move
that the record show that the
role as been called and all
Please raise your hand.
Senator Senator Kernan voting
no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
funds has passed the Senate
senator Neville thank you
president I think as we go
forward there be a lot of
landowners who will be very
happy that we have to pass this
And even Senator moon yes for
that peppy chair I just got
Mr president I ask unanimous
about my health and I can say
that today is the first J. in
two weeks and actually have some
energy back but I would like to
thank you all for your concern
eighty one.
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
a minor but very important
in addition to amending the
legislation of NMSA twenty four
dash five dash three to be
under NMSA twenty five twenty
four dash five dash three of the
public health act the bill will
allow physician assistants and
certifies that immunization
would seriously endanger the
life or the health of the child
and I stand for questions Mister
president thanks Senator Hickey
close on the bill.
Mr president I move that the
Senate do now pass and I ask
of hands Senators tier seats
please we are voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill eighty one has
passed the Senate Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you colleagues.
that order business message from
the house the reader to read the
message.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
the house has been received.
Senate floor Majority Leader
president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one seventy
six has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
Senate bill two oh six do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
do not pass but that Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty three do pass and then
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee.
Senate bill two seventy one do
pass and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Elizabeth Liz
aye.
Those opposed may the eyes have
it the committee reports have
been adopted in the journal
reflect that they're acted upon
individually reiterate this
president your health and public
do pass respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman center of the subpoena
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
read Senate bill one eighty
eight do pass.
Senate bill one ninety do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
pass as amended.
And then just referred to the
tax business and transportation
committee.
and thence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two sixty one to
pass and that's referred to the
trade reports all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee point have been
adopted in the General reflect
that they were acted upon
twenty six has had them under
consideration in response to
reports that the same have been
duly rules and engrossed
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the Senate
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt committee
report all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
opposed may the eyes have it the
committee report has been
six.
Senate majority whip by the.
To take it to the next order of
business thank you Mr president
dues by Senator McKenna and act
relating to animal cruelty
prohibiting dog tethering
providing penalties for dog
tethering Senate bill four
twenty nine.
Senate bill four thirty
introduced by senators birth and
Stefanics and act making
appropriation to the department
of finance and administration
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four thirty Senate bill
four thirty one introduced by
Senator said the Lopez and act
relating to public employee
officer member coverage plan one
providing for elections
pertaining to the adoption of
the state off a police member
correctional office member and
printed referred to Senate
health Public Affairs Committee
thanks Senate finance committee
Senate bill four thirty one
Senate bill four thirty two
introduced by Senator Hamblen
generated generated energy
generated on affordable housing
read restricting some utility
fees for solar and affordable
housing providing for our
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee that
Senate conservation committee
the right let me rephrase that
on the orders Senate bill four
thirty two having been read
bill four thirty two Mr.
Can can you read that title
again to that bill for me at
Senate bill four thirty two it's
relating to each of these
providing FOR publication
related rules regulating the tax
valuation of solar energy
systems.
we'll see when it comes out that
first committee thank you Mr
to aviation amending the rural
air service enhancement Act
increasing the passenger
capacity of aircraft used for
new or expanded air routes from
businesses transportation
committee vents Senate finance
committee Senate bill four
thirty three Senate bill four
thirty four introduced by
senator Munoz and act relating
meetings act allowing advisory
staff of the public regulation
commission to discuss public
business matters and public
policy issues with individual
commissioner allowing advisory
or decision on such matters must
be made at a public meeting
Senate bill four thirty four
Senate bill four thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered print referred to the
senator Munoz and act relating
to liquor control prohibiting
the sale of alcoholic beverages
on real property leased from the
state of New Mexico Senate bill
four thirty five Senate bill
Senate Judiciary thence Senate
finance committee.
Senate bill four thirty five.
Senate bill four thirty six
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act making appropriation the
department of finance
four thirty six Senate bill four
thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate health Public Affairs
Committee Vance Senate finance
vocational rehabilitation act
creating the vocational
rehabilitation commission
eliminating the vocational
rebuilt rehabilitation division
functions person money
probation records and other
property Senate bill four thirty
seven Senate bill four thirty
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
Hemphill and act relating to
public school finance limiting
the growth of administrative
expenditures by certain school
districts and charter schools
eight Senate bill four thirty
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate rules
committee that's Senate
education events Senate finance
outdoor recreation requiring the
legislature's approval for this.
Eight game commission to acquire
or purchase land with an
appraised value of one million
dollars or more Senate bill four
Senate bill for forty introduced
by senators committees and
Tolman and act relating to
tobacco prohibiting the sale of
committee.
Senate bill four forty one
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
four forty one Senate bill four
forty one having been read twice
by title is ordered print and
referred to Senate health public
Affairs Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
compensation of elective state
officers whose terms begin on or
after January first twenty
twenty seven.
Senate bill four forty two
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four forty two.
Senate bill four forty three
introduced by Senator Griggs and
others and act relating to
taxation providing them oil and
certain agency rules Senate bill
four forty three Senate bill
four forty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate tax business
transportation committee and
insurance guaranty association
act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance act guaranty
association repealing section
fifteen Senate bill four forty
four Senate bill four forty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee then
career have bill and others and
act relating to health
protecting the privacy of
providers recipients and others
engaging and reproductive and
gender affirming health care
for enforcement imposing
penalties prescribing relief
Senate bill thirteen Senate bill
thirteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed
The Senate memorial forty seven
introduced by Senator Campos.
And others a memorial honoring
senator Cynthia Nava and
is ordered not printed not refer
to committee to be placed on the
president's table center
memorial forty seven.
Senate memorial forty eight
introduced by senators
memorial forty eight Senator
forty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed not refer to committee
to be placed on the president's
table senatorial forty eight.
create a working group to
develop a study on the
provisions of the anti donation
clause in New Mexico as it
relates to the state forest
assistance on private land.
Senate memorial forty nine
nine.
House bill forty four introduced
by Representative Matthews and
act relating to loans defining
federal home loan bank in the
law providing exceptions for
agreements involving federal
home loan banks in regard to the
avoidance of transfers
preferences and leans providing
rights to federal home loan
bill forty four house bill forty
four having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
tax business transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill forty four.
and enacting sections of the
uniform commercial code
providing for controllable
electronic records house bill
ninety House Bill lady.
Having been read twice by title.
Senate majority whip but it to
take us to the next order of
business thank you Mr president
takes that next order of
business announcements and
business transportation meeting
committee will meet at four
o'clock.
Senator Shendo what room is that
three twenty one of relief thank
Education at eight thirty in the
morning thank you thank you
Center souls.
Further announcements.
Senator Stewart a we did have
right at the last second.
Senator when you're set up
senator Wirth is in front of
them so I didn't get a chance to
see him.
Senator one yes thank you Mr
mark and so we're gonna try to
get that finalized by tomorrow
morning so we can have that out
so members can start doing their
capital it's going to be a short
time line again I want to remind
and so if he wants to partner
with the governor to do that
he'll have the ability to do
that so there's some things that
that was the exact wants to do
So capital start coming Senate
finance we're gonna go in and
we're gonna hear some bills
and then here's some more
hearings we do know that the
that on the Senate side by
Monday.
There is some issues with with
reoccurring money the balances
that that they're sending over
to us so be well aware that
there's not a lot of room and
over the house so we prepare to
say no.
as that comes forward and we
score that but I get ready
because we're going to get
and and all the specials and
supplementals as we move forward
so we're gonna go in at ten
minutes after we leave the
Senate floor.
announcements.
Center by the I thank you Mr
president with all of that we
will stand the Senate will stand
in recess until eleven AM
tomorrow morning.
