That one you know that if you're
wonder to.
you would think that you know
would be coming in like soft and
then it just thank Dissly turns
on at that point and it's a
states that the at the low
level.
Like the.
Like I know Building services is
turn the volume up in that room
a few times to think that could
have anything to do with it is.
And unlikely but.
Yeah looked at the I looked at
the volume control stuff on the
on the audio mixer.
It says so.
The audio to the PC to the
webcasting PC is not even an
option the idea to the laptop
the one that the input on the on
the desk that's an option.
But
Yeah there's I don't think they
that audio going into the.
System then you gotta believe
it's an input.
It can ask dress.
I have I have webcast pulled up
right now.
Okay how's that sound.
Testing one I can hear you right
now I can hear you saying that
from you.
Seconds ago okay.
And it sounds good.
Yes the microphone sound good
and I'm waiting until it gets to
the part where I talk to check
this thing.
Okay.
And this is a lot louder on the
webcast it is and I mean like.
Yes
At super weird and don't know.
I can play around with it so I'm
I'm just I'm a little nervous
just because it's they're gonna
start using this room at eight
thirty but yeah.
All right I'm gonna go to the to
the witness table and just yes
so that we can just make sure
that the webcast is okay coming
from the witness table.
Wonderful are you.
Testing one two three one two
three yes one two three.
Testing one two three one two.
As a come through yet get a.
Yeah it just and just like the
testing one two three just now I
can hear over the webcast
I think.
Yes some people are complaining
that the microphones were really
low on the webcast I think it's
just that the zoom is so much
louder that they happen W.
turned down whenever somebody's
talking assumes and when
somebody talks on the microphone
maybe they are turning the
volume back up I'm not sure
okay.
All right I can hear it over the
webcast.
Perfect okay I might I might
just called set and just kind of
pick his brain to see if maybe
he knows something no okay okay
all right thank you so much do
they really appreciate helping.
I think they let me know if you
need help with anything else on.
Thank you.
That seems hard.
Very just from sitting.
And they go on to the floor and
here it some more.
Twenty pistols and.
I'm in three oh seven came
telling done.
So let's see you were for the.
Is.
