What.
Good morning and welcome to the
Senate rules committee we're
going to be hearing for bills
today were obviously started out
as a subcommittee but we will
wait until we have a quorum to
take any official action we're
gonna be hearing for bills today
SB forty two campaign finance
reporting changes forty four
deal with firearms of polling
places of the senator Wirth and
then we'll hear from senator
muny else on his Joint Memorial
for state employee evaluation
task force and then from senator
Neville has a constitutional
amendment for the state board of
education and I Senator Wirth
you're free to go ahead and get
started thank you madam chair
well we'll start with Senate
bill forty two weeks
I am sponsoring with the you
this bill is a continued.
Effort to do the one thing that
the US Supreme Court said we
could do with independent
expenditures after citizens
United and that is required
disclosure and so the bulk of
this.
Is dealing with existing.
Loopholes that have kind of been
used in the last four years
since two thousand nineteen when
we passed
kind of the initial bill
allowing us to begin the process
of figuring out where this
independent expenditure money
was coming from.
The bill also has some cleanup
and clarifications on the.
The timing for for example
donations during the prohibited
period for filing reports and
I'm gonna walk through each
section and I think that it's
And importance.
Effort to keep our campaign.
Finance code as up to date as
possible to do as much as we
possibly can to determine where
funds are coming from so with me
this morning at the table is
Mario Jimenez executive director
of common costs and common cause
has.
Worked on these issues with me
for years on some very
appreciative he he is here and
then also Lindsey Bachman who is
the director of legislative
affairs for the secretary of
state is here I know on madam
secretary herself wanted to be
here but wasn't feeling well so
again she is not here this
morning also in the audience is
Jerry Ferris executive director
of the ethics commission and
they have been helpful in
alerting and flagging certain
issues that we addressed in this
bill and so I do think it is
appropriate time I'd like to
give him a chance to say a few
words about the sections as well
so what I'd like to do is just
kind of walk through a kind of a
mid to high level the different
changes and then we've got
obviously experts here including
yourself to help fill in details
if there are questions about
specifics so section one and I'm
just going to go through each of
the sections of the bill the big
change in section one this is
the definitional section is to
expand and clarify on page six
of the definition of expenditure
so again.
We've had a lot of discussion
about what expenditures can
trigger reporting in fact there
is a yes circuit case and I
think for those who've been for
Senator Stewart you know around
for a while this is interesting
the.
The
K. and the tenth circuit came
out of the New Mexico state
Senate's and it was a non
profits filing on education
fliers about members outside of
a an election cycle The Attorney
General trying to regulate that
in the court said you can't do
it and so what we're trying to
do with this expanded definition
is go and continue to as far as
we can within the constitutional
guardrails the case law.
Has established that there's a
thirty day window before
primaries and a sixty day window
before general elections when
even education can be reined in
the case was New Mexico youth
organized versus Herrera in the
tenth circuit in twenty ten and
so what this does is that some
again expanded language in terms
of the definition to be able to
go as far as we can within those
those guidelines of section two.
is merely bringing our campaign
code Senator into the modern
world I adding electronic
communications to the other
items for example telephone
calls or other solicitations and
just requiring it within a like
trying to communication you need
to also understand there this
the circumstances the the
qualifications provided in a a
one five hundred more calls or
electronic Commission
communications or similar you
just need to say where the
communications coming from to
pay for it it's that simple and
we're just adding
electronic Commission
communication the phone calls I
think we've all we all know
about those Wrobel calls and
putting a disclaimer on that
this will just have the same for
Alectra communication.
section three is an important
change for a couple of different
reasons one this closes a
loophole that's been used by
certain independent expenditure
groups that form in the last
week of an election cycle in
under current law they're not
required to report until thirty
days after the election so what
we're trying to do here is make
sure that they are treated just
like any other kind of fully
reporting entity
so that or shouldn't say fully
reporting they're treated like
any other
Contributor or or packed that
rivets required to report during
that window and it'll just put
them under the same time frame
so that's number one the second
thing on page thirteen and this
is a this is the segregated bank
account issue this is a bill
actually that we.
In the Senate passed thirty five
to three in twenty twenty one
and just didn't get across the
line at the last minute in the
house but this is this is the
scenario for infants
that receive.
Donations and then turns around
and uses some of those donations
for independent expenditures are
currently under the law there's
a requirement that there be a
request in writing if someone
makes a contribution to that and
to do that not to use for an
independent or coordinated
expenditure.
There's been some challenges
with that so what we're doing is
we're adding a second
requirement that that money be
put in a segregated bank
account and I think it's
important so you know you're
gonna a large entity that's
collecting donations and and
these are entities on both sides
and basically making sure that.
That there is a lame.
For independent expenditures and
the person making a donation
knows they're going into that
lane but also that the entity
has a specific segregated
account so that the dollars that
aren't being used or put into
that segregated account that's
what section thirteen does.
Also we change the definition of
we have the term donation and
this goes back to the issue of
making sure that we can capture
those I ease in that last week
window.
Section four there is a.
Kind of technical clean up on
the request the secretary of
state on page fourteen lines
nineteen and twenty that just
says if they filing a purports
to on a state holiday it shall
be filed no later than the next
business day I think that's been
a practice of secretary of state
that's just putting it in
writing.
Up on page eighteen is another
change at the request of the
secretary of state currently.
In a non election year if a
political committee has not
received any contributions or
made any coordinated war on E.
expenditures it doesn't have to
file a report
If during that time
It it it basically didn't
receive contribution this is
changing that so it's just
basically saying if you're if
you are in the game and you've
got your committee you just need
to file the report I think it's
a real simple.
Click the button and say we
didn't do nothing came in but
you still need to file a report.
Section let's see the section
five on page twenty this is an
issue brought to us by.
Mr Ferris ethics commission it
is the result of some federal
litigation involving loans to
campaigns.
Currently.
There's nothing in our state law
that would prevent someone.
From receiving a loan which
currently now doesn't have to be
disclosed the source of that
loan
and having that entity that
makes a loan charge interest and
then you would pay back.
Out of campaign contributions
the interest could be a family
member could be a bank so this
makes it very clear.
That you can no longer no loan
can charge interest so we just
eliminate that issue number
that's on page twenty one line
for.
And then the second thing on
page twenty two section G..
Where there are loans we add a
requirements that the terms of
any loan the candidate makes to
the candidate's campaign
committee and and evidence of
any loans a candidate makes now
has to be reported so if you do
have a loan you've got a state
what are the terms and what's
the evidence to support that
loan so again this is this is to
address I think it's Ted Cruz K.
second member the specific
citation but lots of discussion
of the federal level this is
basically adding that language
to the state level.
Section seven deals with
legislative session fundraising
it does a couple things that are
important.
It says now this on page twenty
three line twelve and thirteen.
It will not hold the prohibited
period which is during when
we're in session or in a special
session doesn't just apply to
incumbent but now also will
apply to a candidate so if
you're running you know if
you're the incumbent and you've
got you're running against
someone who's not this is not
the incumbent the prohibitions
don't apply to them but apply to
encompass this levels the
playing field.
Senator doing it in my correct
in that
and and secretary I believe that
the prohibited period already
applies to candidates let us
know it absolutely applies to
candidates and I said that wrong
in applies to candidates what I
know it does not so you see that
this is adding that language in
page and twelve I do not think
it we have that issue and maybe
I'm wrong on that.
But I thought that we were
specifically saying because if
you take a look at that page
twenty three sections Hey that's
a whole list of incumbents but
it's not candidates yeah and.
And Senator yes I was just.
Not raise money when I should
have been back when I was a
candidate.
I was under the impression that
it did apply to candidates as
well so I I apologize.
It was the government's New
Mexico.
The past.
Years ago.
The court.
So I do know if you look on page
twenty three I mean we're
defining.
So the the there's a section the
current section B. which is
being deleted here which again
this the that the governor
lieutenant governor.
So they were put in I think
you're right though Senator I
think we did fix that at one
point so let me make sure.
We've got the list if you go to
page twenty six.
The page twenty six of the list
the prescribed offices so that's
got the governor that's got all
the messes recompiling what's in
the statute so so the fact
changes there the other the
other big difference though
currently I think
Contributions cannot be
solicited but can be accepted
during this period this is going
to stop that with two
exceptions.
one if you have an automatic re
automatic automated recurring
contribution.
That.
Is basically in the small this
is on page twenty four line
seven and line twelve.
If it's a recurring
contribution.
You know that it's not just
gonna read the language you can
accept the contribution
if it's if it started prior to
the start of a prohibited period
and it signed up to have an
automatic recurring contribution
of more than one hundred dollars
per month so it's got to be
recurring that's one exception
or two if you receive a
contribution is less than a
hundred dollars during this
prohibited period you can't
accept that provided for a
candidate or incumbent it
doesn't exceed five hundred
dollars and for a campaign
committee of legislative caucus
committee horning come better
candidates for statewide office
those small donations could
exceed two thousand dollars and
again this is a whole I think
we've seen the trend and small
dollar donations and this is an
attempt to put in place a couple
of exceptions to the otherwise
inability to accept
contributions.
So with that Mr per Mr and madam
madam chair I think that's the
general overview of the bill and
I'd certainly like to have my
two experts just say a few words
if they'd like to.
It's madam chair members the
committee thank you for having
us here today money a few
minutes executive director of
common cause you as senator
Wirth had mentioned we've worked
tirelessly alongside him in
updating our campaign reporting
act this been funded and and
being run and would really
encourage you all to to pass the
bill as as it is before you
today thank you.
Hi everyone and madam chair
members of the committee my name
of affairs for the secretary of
state's office I am also
accompanied by many of the
health issues our state
elections director in Dublin
Lang are general counsel today
we thank the sponsors for bring
forth this bill is sitting in
administrative changes as we try
to meet the needs of the
campaign reporting act we have
identified some changes and
they're clued in this bill we
hope that the bill passes those
include the administrative
hurdles regarding that that
holiday filing we really want to
codify that make sure folks know
when they are able to adjust
based on that holiday timing and
it also uniformly applies how
campaign funds may be used
pursuant to the campaign
reporting act and clarifies the
allowable and prohibited
fund raising activities during
during that privative period as
the senator aligned at that site
earlier.
Just madam chair if I could I'd
like to have asked Mr Ferris to
just come up and say a few words
I can't we really appreciate
input from the ethics.
Thank you senator madam chair
members first let me say our
campaign reporting act as
compared to other disclosure act
in the state is a step above it
really is and the reason why
it's a step above is largely I
think because the work of
senator Wirth from twenty
nineteen going forward so
first I want to save the ethics
commission really appreciates
the work of senator Wirth in the
campaign reporting act.
This this bill from the ethics
commission's perspective really
does three important things
first it's
it's three active it reacts to
gaps that in the three years of
handling campaign reporting act
issues the ethics commission has
noticed in terms of gaps in the
statute madam chair you should
know that in three three cases
where the ethics commission has
pursued litigation against
undisclosed independent
expenditures it's Washington DC
council that we see its New York
council that we see so the folks
that that are playing in New
Mexico elections are
participating New Mexico
elections independent expert
expenditures it's out of state
money and they have
sophisticated attorneys and so
in order to to reacts to gaps
that the smart lawyers from out
of state kind of see in our law
we have to respond ents Senator
Wirth bill does that in in a
large part the second the second
thing that this this bill does
it's it's proactive it's
proactive with respect to loans
that that candidates can make
their own campaigns right now in
New Mexico we really don't have
any guardrails around serious
corruption issues that could
arise with candidates making
loans to their own campaigns in
the big concern is that a
candidate makes a line to their
campaign charge is a rate of
interest and then uses
contributions from from
contributors to pay down the
interest while keeping the
principal loan there so
effectively candidate currently
under our law could use a a
personal loan that they make to
their own campaign as a source
of income and can basically
converting campaign
contributions into a source of
income.
Madam chair we we we do at the
ethics commission keep an eye on
on the debts that that candidate
campaign committees to to can it
says something that that we look
at and and so we just want to
put some guardrails there too
to prevent you know instance of
quid pro quo corruption that
could arise without those
