Because we import from the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
represents a Penske.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages to no
objection it is so ordered click
to read.
The Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
eight Senate bill ninety six.
Senate bill one thirty one as
amended.
Senate tax business and
transportation can substitute
for Senate bill two ninety two
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherrie dean on Senate chief
clerk message will be entered.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
I meant to say good evening
Mister speaker may I move that
we go to that order of business
The report.
In objection is so ordered.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill three sixty three has
had it under consideration point
with recommendation that a do
pass as amended finance referred
to the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
directly and the chair.
With speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committed
for in house bill three sixty
three all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose.
Yeah I Senate committee report
opted.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee team is been
referred house bill three sixty
eight has had it under
consideration point single
nation that to pass as amended
respectfully submitted directly
and the chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
Optional report on house with
three sixty eight all those in
favor signify by saying not.
Was me yes are committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill one fifty
seven has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that it to pass
sentence referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee respect from some of
the most intense and chair Mr
speaker move adoption for that
option with federal committee
report on house bill one fifty
seven all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose maybe this other
committee reported on.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too has been
referred house bill two ninety
two has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted as a Thomson chair of
adoption with adoption of
federal committee report on
house bill two ninety two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was made the as are committee
reported on to.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is been referred house bill
three thirty one has had it
under consideration point same
information but it to pass and
it's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption where that
option of federal committed put
in house with three thirty one
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Opposing the as of a committee
reported out.
Mr speaker covers and economic
development committee to miss
been referred house bill three
sixty four has had it under
consideration report same
information but I do not pass of
that house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill three sixty for
to pass immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption
or in adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house with
three sixty four but a favorable
committee report on house
committee house because the
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House with three sixty four
of those repairs in this and I.
So those those may be a Senate
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to was
been referred house bill three
seventy two has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair food
option for an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill three seventy two all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Posing a test of a committee
reported up to.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation no objection it
is so ordered is the gentle lady
from Bernalillo ready on item
number five.
Yes Mr speaker would you please
take me to that point that the
record reflect that election is
Sir for placing House will forty
six as amended on final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker I'm delighted to be here
tonight I am presenting house
bill forty six as amended the
public works project
contributions this is the third
time actually that I'm
presenting it on it passed the
house two years ago it was it
received a do pass from both
Senate committees and then the
session adjourned so I'm back
again hopefully to talk about it
and I will have to expert
witnesses mistreated nightmare
the secretary designate from the
department of workforce
solutions and attorney Steven
Curtis who's worked extensively
with a variety of labor issues
so house bill forty six a is
identical to the bill that
passes house except that it has
an amendment the amendment
creates an apprenticeship
scholarship fund I'm going to
briefly review some key points
of the bill and then I'll stand
for questions so as you all know
and as the budget we passed
yesterday indicates there's a
tremendous commitment in this
fifty six legislature to expand
career technical education and
to recognize value in support
pre apprenticeship programs
career technical pathways and
apprenticeships with the
recognition that traditional
college pathways are not for
everybody so this bill amends
the public works apprentice and
training that to remove the
current exclusion of type eight
contractors that street highway
Bridge Road utility and maybe.
It's contracts up from public
works projects that require
employees to make contributions
to apprentice and training
programs currently they don't
have to do that the passage of
this bill would mean that all
public works construction
contractors would be required to
do one of three options they
could contribute the established
apprenticeship apprentice
contribution to the apprentice
and training Fund popularly
called P. what for each hour of
labor or second of all they
could pay the contribution to a
registered apprenticeship
program if they're affiliated
with one and third and most
significantly a contractor has
our starts its own registered
apprenticeship program they
wouldn't have to pay into the P.
what funded all there would be
no additional cost now this bill
encourages road contractors to
join start our support existing
programs in my opinion that's a
win win.
How do you register an
apprenticeship program it's free
to register with the
apprenticeship program the state
apprenticeship council reviews
all applications for newer B. by
programs that board is made up.
Of the three employers three
public you know and those can be
you organizations or not three
public representatives at excuse
me three labor organizations
three employers and three public
representatives so there's equal
representation.
Current statistics for twenty
twenty two.
I want to note that there's
fifty four public private and
you registered apprenticeship
programs including for recognize
trades in the city of
Farmington's registered
apprenticeship program so that's
about a twenty percent increase
from twenty twenty one within
just one year what happens to
the P. what contribution.
At the end of each year the P.
what funding is split among the
registered apprenticeship
programs with qualifying
apprentices and its use for
education training instructors
and those sorts of related
expenses one huge beneficial
change that's occurred in the
last year for those type eighty
road contracted of road
contracting because construction
companies comes from the US
department of transportation and
that's the passage of the
bipartisan infrastructure law
and that's the workforce
development training and
education section this gives
states money and flexibility to
fund workforce development
activities related to
transportation and roads an area
that was not opened at nineteen
ninety four in this bill is
done.
So states can use unlimited
funds from four large federal
aid highway programs and it just
radically increases the program
for workforce development and
that includes an expense
apprenticeships pre
apprenticeships on the job
training in career pathways
outreach for middle and high
school students you can actually
create a funding pool that
registered apprenticeship
programs can draw on so I think
it's very timely that this
Federal opportunity opened up
before presenting the bill this
time and with that I'll stand
for questions Mr speaker there
is debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County
thank you Mr speaker gentlelady.
Can you explain the current
status of the law that this bill
is trying to change.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
currently the type a
construction of organizations do
not they're not required to pay
into the P. what program they're
not required to have those
alternative options.
Mr speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo and so how I
understand the current bill is
it does away with that exception
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentlemen it does
away with the exemption for the
type a contractors.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo what is a type a
contractor.
Contractor hold.
This is for you I have
everything right at your
fingertips until you actually
need to type the contractors
include street highway Bridge
Road futility our maintenance
contracts those are type big
contractors.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo in other words I I
think sometimes when we talk
about like a classic County that
refers to maybe a population
size a type a contractor it
could be up it could be business
that has one or two employees or
it could be a business as a
thousand employees is that
right.
Mr speaker and.
Gentlemen yes it could very in
size Mr speaker gentle lady and
so under this bill whether it's
a small business or a major
corporation they're gonna be
held to the same expectations
that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
might add that information some
of the trades that are included
in their partnership program
have a small number of people.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
do you mind sharing with the
body the thought process behind
giving our our local business
owners the the ability to choose
to opt into verses opting out.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This process is that it puts all
the contractors all the building
trades on a level field and
because you can start your own
apprenticeship program there's
not necessarily any additional
costs to doing it.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo and it seems that
they are already on the same
playing field because they don't
have to often under current law
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo so I I think frankly
this actually makes the playing
field incredibly on even and the
reason why I would submit that
Mr speaker is right now if I'm a
major corporation I have a lot
of a lot more resources at my
fingertips and so I understand
that maybe there's not just
there's not a registration feed
of starting my own
pretty sure program but I can I
can assure you there's going to
be costs when it comes oversight
there's going to be a costs when
it comes to manpower there's
gonna be costs when it comes to
having the energy to track down
all those things in order to
implement a new program that I
always have.
Mr speaker.
That's fine if I'm a major
corporation I have lots of
resources at my disposal I I can
take on a new apprenticeship
program if that's going to
guarantee me the state contracts
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo I what I worry about
well what about our small
locally owned companies who
don't have the sophistication of
you know I I always joke if you
want to if you want to have an
eighty hour work week have no
such thing as paid vacation then
you should consider starting
your own company
and so a lot of our small
companies don't have additional
bandwidth to take on a new
apprenticeship program and it
seems to me that we choose one
of two choices then they have to
either pay the the P. what or
the paid directly to the
scholarship fund either way it's
it's a cost to the employer that
right now they're not required
often so Mister speaker gently
from Bernalillo can you sure
thing what I'm missing here.
Mr speaker and gentlemen you
could work any additional costs
into your bed but I also want to
emphasize the department of
workforce solutions has
the apprenticeship council
that's very active.
Mr speaker there's
apprenticeship council and then
the department of workforce
development department that's
very very supportive of
supporting all sizes of
apprenticeship programs and and
helping them through the steps.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo so we say supporting.
Apprenticeship programs are they
gonna run my friendship program
for me.
Mr speaker gentlemen no.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo so I ate acting again
I can understand that and I'm
glad that there is an initial
start up that the state would
charge and I assume they're
going to offer these consulting
services for free.
But it seems that there is going
to be a cost to the employer to
operate these apprenticeship
programs is that correct.
Mr speaker not necessarily.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo can you explain to me
how I would operated friendship
program and it costs the
employers zero.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
have a journeyman supervising
the apprentice
the apprentice get doesn't get
treatment wages so you could
have one or two apprentices
working under adjournment at the
apprentice stage level of salary
levels Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo are there is
there any compliance if I have
an apprenticeship program.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
would have to have you know the
on the job aspect but the
related instruction.
Mr speaker generated from early
are you suggesting that the
compliance peace will not have
any costs the employer.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
might have some cost but it
would be like any other training
that you would engage in.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And so what's what's the cost of
to pay into the P. what for
example.
Mr speaker John at sixty cents.
For our.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that sixty cents per
hour for every one of my
employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
would be for everyone who worked
on a given public works project.
If you have the apprenticeship
do you get that few what fun is
split up and given back to the
registered apprenticeship
programs.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and what's the cost
to pay into the second option
and I think that's where you pay
directly to the scholarship fund
if I understood that.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
scholarship amendment as a
separate
you would either pay the P. what
fee because you don't have
anything for you would pay and
to if you are affiliated with an
apprenticeship program he would
paying to that but if it's your
program there is no fee you do
not pay into P. what.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo okay so I think I I
didn't quite understand the
initial presentation I'm sorry
so one option is to pay into the
you all which the people which
is a scholarship funds that
right.
No Mr speaker is not a
scholarship fund the scholarship
amendment is a separate fund the
Pequot fund itself is split up
at the end of the year among the
the amount is split up among the
registered apprenticeship
programs.
Okay that's the first option is
to pay directly because you
don't have a registered
apprenticeship program.
Mr speaker Ginnelly formerly
okay and so that one sixty cents
per hour for each employee that
works a public project what's
the cost for the second option
to the employer.
If you're ciliated option to
with the program it's the same.
It's it's option three when you
have your own that you pay
nothing because you're financing
your own program yourself.
Mr speaker John from Bernalillo.
That we just discussed you don't
really pay nothing at I think
it's maybe it seems to me what
you do is you don't have any
registration fee with the state
and the state provide you for
consulting services that fair.
Yes Mr speaker that's a fair
analysis Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo and and so.
Again under current law it seems
like the employer has the option
to support for these programs
and they sound like good
programs that are worth
supporting.
But that decisions made on the
individual level depending on
what the needs are of the
business and what they can
handle.
Can I understand why you.
In this legislation Mr speaker
we would want to take away that
discretion from the local
employer.
Mr speaker word gentlemen we're
giving us the type eighty
the company's and option to pay
into a fund that benefits all
the partnership programs to
affiliate themselves of the
program or to register their own
training program as an
apprenticeship which costs
nothing and which they would not
pay into the P. what fun but
they would still be eligible to
receive the P. what split at the
end of the year.
Mr speaker gentle lady from.
Leo.
Our subcontractors included
under this bill.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
they are.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so it's not just the
general that's sort of a
contract if I get awarded as a
subcontractor needs the general
then both the general and the
sub have to pay is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan they would only pay on
their own hours so subcom.
Sub contractor would not pay for
the overall project they would
only pay the sixty cents if they
didn't have a registered.
Internship program in many do
they would only pay on the hours
that their employees worked on
the greater project there's no
double payments.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so the fact that
subcontractors are included I
find even more concerning
because those are typically a
smaller business and they're
very specialized in the they
focus on individual things can
someone about how that's going
to affect our small businesses
well
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I was looking at the
amendment that was offered and
accepted in I think was that the
state government.
Mr speaker yes and and just to
your last question remember that
the non highway contractors
already participate in P. what.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And so the amendment that was
accepted in a prior committee.
That creates a scholarship fund
is that correct yes Mr speaker
and gentleman from San Juan that
amendment only pertains to a
scholarship fund.
that's separate from the P.
White mechanism Mr speaker
gently from Bernalillo G.
splaine have that scholarship
fund is funded.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan if you go to section
four of the amended language
section four reads
apprenticeship scholarship fund
created it creates some
mechanism for non non reverting
fund in the state treasurer
there's currently not a
appropriation for that and it
can be used for purchasing and
making available books tools
computers other materials
electronic equipment fees for
programs and any related.
licenses or certifications and
covering reimbursed expenses
incurred by the premises and
there's some federal funds that
are even available that could be
eventually put in that fund.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so.
Just so I understand the the.
The main funding mechanism for
this new fund is going to be
general fund money is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan there's two aspects to
the bill there is removing the
exemption for Taipei
contractors that's the main gist
of the P. what aspect and then
the amendment just adds a fund
that could be used for
apprenticeship expenses and that
has nothing to do with P. what
payments.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo so the main funding
source for this new scholarship
fund that's being created the
apprenticeship scholarship fund
is intended to be general fund
money is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan no that wouldn't
necessarily be general fund and
all that could be federal funds
of which I described from the
Bipartisan infrastructure of law
that was made it could be
donations from you know
organizations but it doesn't cut
it doesn't come from the general
fund.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo are you saying that
we as a legislature prohibited
from using drones on money to
fund this scholarship.
Mr speaker John from San Juan
we're not prohibited if you
would like to do appropriation
bill next session to put money
in it just remember the
procreation this committee I'm
happy to listen to it.
Mister speaker July from really
I could see the headlines a Dale
lane.
Appropriation for the
suppression fund programs until
the district three pry would be
a big fan of that but
so Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo so the bit I
understand there there's the way
the the M. memories there's
several possibilities but one of
those is that we would fund this
with general fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan it's not necessary to
do that because there's W. O. I.
A. funding that specifically
addresses those sections of the
amendment
But there's no prohibition but I
certainly don't see
appropriating like two million
dollars for the fund.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
With regard to what it or the
permitted uses for distributions
of the funds the way I read
those three subparagraphs they
all have to to be tied into into
an existing apprenticeship
program is that right.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan that would be
accurate
There would have to be.
Yes the bills written Mr speaker
and gentleman it would be
apprentices who are Prentice's
in the registered apprenticeship
programs.
Mr speaker journal during the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
That to me raises another point
of concern for me so now we're
talking about taxpayer dollars
that we've collected and now
we're saying that these items
can only be used to fund.
These oppression programs.
Which are owned.
not they're not agencies within
the state.
These are third party
information programs Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo did
you give any consideration
instead of limiting it is solely
to being tied to a principal
grams to allowing this fund to
be used to help fund our current
technical education in our tier
twelve public high schools.
The gentle lady gets an answer
there it's been requested that
members be allowed to remove
their coats members are allowed
to remove their coats.
Mr speaker and gentlemen.
Money from the fund could go
directly according to the
apprenticeship council a
decision making to directly to
an apprentice in those programs.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I'm talking about C.
T. within our public safety
twelve schools.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan they would have to be a
central.
Another bill for that
specifically.
Mr speaker excuse me Mr speaker
and gentleman there is a bill
for that.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but it's not in this
bill is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
So Mister speaker generated from
Bernalillo.
I think this kind of is the
heart of of why I think this
bill is not a good bill for New
Mexico so we're living in a
state where.
Through the pandemic small
businesses were crushed right
and left.
We as the Legislature enacted
paid sick leave and I know we've
talked about the benefits of
that but it's an additional cost
employers.
There's efforts to do something
like a paid FMLA and there's
efforts increase minimum wage.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and this seems like
again we're taxing on
additional costs on New Mexico
businesses and we're doing in
the name of trying to fund only
one institution that is these
apprenticeship programs.
And not allowing a small
business owner to make the
decision for themselves as of
whether they want to participate
in these programs or they want
to create their own programs and
you're now telling them that
they're not.
David eligible to make that
decision for themselves.
I find a real difficulty with
that concept and so Mister
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
I think that we should be
advancing policies that make it
easier to conduct business in
New Mexico not make it harder
especially when you're trying to
compete with with a major
corporation and a lot of times
the what the the award ease
under these are out of state big
businesses these are major
corporations that come from out
of state that compete for these
contracts.
And we're telling New Mexico
businesses locally owned that
you've now got to either eat
this additional cost which is
going to affect what you take
home for your family for you got
to build it into your your bid
which again is gonna make you
less competitive.
And you have either three
options you can pay into the P.
U. R.
you can pay the fee or you can
try to search our own the
partnership program.
But good luck trying to find the
time to manage that that new
apprenticeship program on top of
everything else you're trying to
juggle as a small business owner
so Mister speaker gentle from
Bernalillo I think this is not a
good bill for New Mexico thank
you Mr speaker there is
generated from captions had a
supporter of women's
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from the largest
district in America.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm glad
people are remembering that yes
we are Mr speaker.
Thank you kind lady so can you
tell me
of gentle lady what unapproved
partnership and training
program consists of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Includes two facets on the job
training and technical training
that might might occur in a
classroom or online.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady and so.
How do they become a recognized
by the bureau of apprenticeship
and training of the United
States department of labor.
Mr speaker and gentle lady our
department of workforce
of solutions Department of
apprenticeship and mentors
administers that and as the
connecting.
Organization.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady and I I heard you say there
was fifty four apprenticeship
programs in New Mexico is that
correct Mr speaker as and gentle
lady as the end of twenty twenty
two I less have statistics yes
there were fifty four thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
where are those fifty four
located or specifically how many
are located in Albuquerque.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
they're located throughout the
state if they are located in
Albuquerque the work throughout
the state.
And as I mentioned for the
trades are in Farmington under
there the city's apprenticeship
program.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
so you don't know how many are
located specifically in
Albuquerque.
Mr speaker work and sell your
happy to try and get that
information for you but we don't
have it right here thank you Mr
speaker kind lady I would say
the majority are located in
Albuquerque Mr speaker kindly
the so I was curious what does
it take to start an approved
apprenticeship program in
masonry.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
would fill out the forms that
they have you would submit how
you're doing the on the job
training and the technical
training and it would go to the
printer shipboard.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
and what do you think the time
is on getting that approval and
going through that process.
Mr speaker gentle lady there
proved once a quarter.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
so one of my questions is if
this is adding for for instance
kind lady were taking the road.
Construction of highways street
highway and bridge road.
I remember pretty sure I
remember correctly Mr speaker
kind lady there was two hundred
and forty million dollars.
In infrastructure.
And all of its roads majority of
its roads and bridges.
So if we bid out Mr speaker kind
lady.
Put it out to bid to public
works so public works has to be
approved to be a public works
construction company Mr speaker
kind lady so there's a limited
amount of construction companies
that can do that in the state
and if we put out to bid two
hundred and forty million
dollars worth of roads.
Work road and bridges here in
the state of New Mexico what
would that cost the taxpayers of
New Mexico to be able to if we
we all the bids went out for two
hundred forty million.
Gentle lady when we did the
statistics like looking at last
year the total additional cost
in scenario could be about nine
hundred thousand dollars
remember that of the contractor
has its own apprenticeship
program there's no additional
cost if they have apprentices
working with journeymen are
coming your labor costs down
So you have to take all that
into consideration to accurately
do it but I for last year
without the passage of the bill
the estimated additional costs
was about nine hundred thousand
dollars for a similar
road project cost.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady I I don't agree with your
analogy on that but if it's
sixty cents an hour.
That for every employee working
on a public works job.
I think the amount would be
quite a bit higher than that
and and these are this is
taxpayer money on public works.
for the majority.
Thank you I was just handed my
mask but I knew the answer but
it's.
It and it's an overwhelming
answer for the estimate.
Yeah I I did the math of over
seven million dollars.
And so I have a little bit of a
problem with that with taxpayer
dollars and I also believe Mr
speaker kind lady that it's not
as easy to start an
apprenticeship program as people
think.
Mr speaker kind lady I think
that the the process is
extensive the training is
extensive and I think people
know that because I am in.
I have a company that has an
apprenticeship program but to
get the approval of the
apprenticeship council is not as
easy as people think Mr speaker
kind lady I believe there was a
association in Albuquerque.
That it took almost a year to
get the masonry program approved
so I don't think it's quite as
easy as as we're putting on the
weather I don't think you're
being deceitful at all
whatsoever I'm not implying that
at all but I don't think Mr
speaker kindly that it's quite
as easy
Mr speaker kind lady.
So you're talking about the
sixty cents
An hour going to of the P. what
and then all of that if you have
the approved apprenticeship or
if you belong to the approved
apprenticeship program it goes
back to you how much of that
sixty cents goes back.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for the question if it's
your own program it goes back in
jail program and that it's
divided the recess divided into
the other registered.
P. what the P. what is divided
among the other registered
programs thank you Mr speaker
kind lady so the whole sixty
cents goes back and there's no
fee for managing that program.
Mr speaker gentle lady great
question of they're allowed to
keep fifteen percent of the P.
White for the administrative
costs of running everything.
Thank you Mr speaker crime lady
and so who keeps that dollar
amount.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
department of workforce
solutions thank you Mr speaker
kind lady and what was the
amount that they kept last year.
This is the conditionally would
checking to see if we have that.
Speaker gentle lady between a
hundred and a hundred fifty
thousand.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady I
I just think Mr speaker kind
lady I was looking at an
analysis Mr speaker kind lady
and and on one of mine it says
on New Mexico D. O. T. estimates
it would inflate contractors
bids.
on the New Mexico D. O. T.
budget at the cost of
approximately two million per
year.
Mr speaker kind lady and then I
was curious.
I'm still curious Mr speaker
kindly the about how many
apprenticeship programs there
are in Albuquerque some of our
seems like that would be fairly
easy to.
To figure out even if they do
work across the state if their
location is in Albuquerque
because Mr speaker kind lady if
their location is in Albuquerque
and I have a school in
Magdalena.
That needs to be worked on.
This is inflating the cost to my
screen.
By a lot of money Mr speaker
kind lady so people in rural New
Mexico don't have the same
advantage of someone in
Albuquerque I remember a bill Mr
speaker kindly that was sort of
to this the fact that was saying
you had to do this that or the
other and it was really
detrimental to rural New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady just a
reminder that this only applies
to adding the type a
contractors
not this is who wouldn't
necessarily be building schools
also want to add that we have a
shortage in so many of the
professions the operating
engineers many of our road
construction companies need new
people to train so this is a
drive to get that skilled
workforce of solid well paying
jobs spread out across our
state.
Mr speaker kind lady that's why
I think we put forty million
dollars in the career technical
for public at so hopefully we
can get kids that are in high
school these certificates
adjournment Palmer tournament
like tradition of whatever it is
that don't come out high school
without certificate and so
Mister speaker kindly I just
really think that this could be
harmful to New Mexico I think a
good employer.
Pays for their person to go to
get their partnership and and
get their tournament license and
whatever it is and I think a
good employer would back.
Helping their employees as much
as they possibly could Mr
speaker kind lady I also think
that
I saw who was opponents of this
bill and whose supporters and I
think that Mr speaker kindly
that it's very one sided I think
it's a bad bill for New Mexico
and I yield to my time thank you
Mr speaker there's further
debate the gentleman from
Sandoval Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind lady from Bernalillo
you'll.
Mr speaker I kindly yield to the
gentleman from Santa and parts
of for Leo.
normal in Santa Fe but thank you
to the gentleman from Santa
Kind lady can you tell me how
much is in the P. what now.
Mr speaker and gentleman wait
for one second.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa at the end of twenty
twenty two there was two million
one hundred and forty three
thousand nine hundred and thirty
four dollars.
Sh so fifteen percent of that
goes to administration of this
program.
Kind lady.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman last year the revenue
was one million four hundred and
twenty nine thousand two hundred
sixteen of one million a hundred
twenty thousand fifty nine
dollars went out to the
apprenticeship programs and the
remainder was the fifteen
percent.
Mr speaker kind lady thank you
for that
Do these classic construction
companies.
Currently have apprenticeship
programs that they can access.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa some do.
Mr speaker kind lady and where
are these programs located.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
from Santa all across the state.
Mr speaker kind lady
so there is there is an
apprenticeship program for these
companies in existence now.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
those that have chosen to
register an impressive program
yes.
Important Mr speaker and
gentleman or those who choose to
affiliate with an existing
program that may not be run by
them themselves.
Mr speaker kind lady.
And how are those programs
funded.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San about sushi combination of
P. what funding of.
Apprenticeship Act funding and
and then their self funding for
their instructors and other
expenses.
Mr speaker kind lady thank you
for that home home page to the
other industries pay into this
P. what for our.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
all pay the sixty cents per hour
on a project.
Unless they have their own
apprenticeship program.
During which they would not be
required to pay.
Mr speaker kind lady so the
sixty cents per hour is across
the board for any.
Company wanting to participate
in the P. walked.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker kind lady you stated
in your opening that the program
have grown over the last year
could you remind me of the
percentage yes there were forty
one registered programs and
twenty twenty one and fifty four
at the end of twenty twenty two.
And the number of the exact
number let's see if I have it.
Current I think there were a
little bit over eighteen hundred
apprentices and twenty twenty
one and now there's
two thousand a hundred
seventeen.
Mr speaker kind lady did this so
there's a lot more people.
involved in these apprenticeship
programs correct yes Mr speaker
and gentleman that's correct.
Mr speaker kind lady so why are
we now.
Trying to force these classe
companies into a program
The program is growing it's
spreading people are taking
advantage of it why now make the
change to force these classic
companies to.
I'll have to join this program.
Mr speaker and gentleman even
though the programs are growing
they're not growing enough and
we have a shortage of skilled
workers in this field.
Mr speaker kind lady I see road
construction going on just about
every direction I travel.
How are these companies
operating if there's no program
to train these employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa there are programs
operated to train various of
workers in the construction
field and per hour of that
training The New Mexico D. O. T.
pay some seventy cents an hour
for their time so a construct of
type a business showing joining
this if they have their own
apprenticeship program they
wouldn't.
They wouldn't pay into the P.
what fun and they would still
receive the seventy cents back
per hour of training of an
employee in those programs and I
could use those programs as part
of the technical part of
required apprenticeship program.
Mr speaker kind ladies soul.
If companies can opt into this
flight why are we running a bill
that says requiring these
companies to do it.
Mr speaker and gentleman they do
not have to
Do a certain pathway they choose
if they want to pay into P. what
if they want to fill it with an
existing program or if they want
to register at no cost their own
program which may already be
existing up in their company.
They would actually get P. what
distributions for participating
in the registered apprenticeship
program.
So Mister speaker cutting
ladies.
We're running a bill to.
Allow them to voluntarily join
this program.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
would have to do one of the
three choices.
Mr speaker time lady.
So.
We're running a bill to force a
company who is already doing the
construction.
Without having to be forced to
pay into this program.
Mr speaker kind lady like I said
every I I travel.
I forty all the way to the Texas
border I. twenty five all the
way down to Los crucis and there
is construction all over the
place.
What we are now.
Forcing these businesses.
To join the program.
To train employees that are
already doing the job am I
correct kind lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa finding skilled employees
in the current labor market is
very challenging and this would
help build the labor force
significantly as well as
building the P. what fun that
would benefit all the registered
programs.
Mr speaker time ladies so all
the construction that's going on
now are you saying that there
would be more construction that
would be I'm not I'm not quite
wrapping my mind around why this
is necessary.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa it's not enough skilled
workforce is to build a
workforce with the original
Staff was written.
Type a wasn't included now the
federal government is directing
and millions of dollars to
support apprenticeship programs
in the highway construction
trade.
Mr speaker kind lady will of the
federal government is funding
all these programs why are we
forcing a small New Mexico
company to pay sixty cents an
hour per employee to fund a
program that should be funded by
federal money.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
now the federal highway dollars
previously couldn't be used for
these programs now they can.
So Mister speaker let me ask
that question again kind lady.
Why are we forcing New Mexico
companies to pay into a fund
that now has access to.
Very generous federal dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman in the
past the federal funding could
not be used
now it can be used for the
project and I can be a passer
for the apprenticeship programs.
According to the
I was going to say by the.
Bipartisan infrastructure law.
Mr speaker kind lady from what I
remember that was a very
generous appropriation from the
federal government.
But I'm still not understanding
why if now.
Kind lady the P. what can access
that federal dollar why are we
forcing New Mexico companies to
chip in.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa the P. what program can't
access to federal funds
directly it they would only have
access if this law passed and to
pass through.
The contractors.
Mr speaker time lady soul with
the the federal infrastructure
money.
Goes directly to a New Mexico
contractor who would then have
to pay part of that money into
the P. what the my correct kind
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa before this the.
The bipartisan infrastructure
law passed
this money could be used the
company had to absorb all the
kinds of apprenticeship programs
with the passage of that law and
then the passage of this
legislation the contractor can
put the money for their
partnership programs into their
bed and that's how the money
passes to the contractor and
then they can use that to pay
the sixty cents if they choose
not to have an apprenticeship
program otherwise they could
keep that federal money for
their partnership program
because they would have a
registered program they would be
required to pay into P. what.
I hope that makes sense.
Mr speaker kind lady at.
Sort of.
but let me let me go on another
line of questioning earlier I
asked if it was a voluntary
program.
And you responded in the
positive is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa with the passage of this
law contractors on public works
projects I would choose if they
want to pay the sixty cents and
they could you know use federal
funding to absorb that cost if
they want to affiliate with an
existing program or if they want
to register their own program
and therefore be exempt from
paying into the P. what fun.
Mr speaker kind lady so we're
basically forcing these
companies to participate in this
program is that correct kind
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
already due to all the other of.
Trades involved in public works
the exception is only the
Alright.
Highway the highway contractors.
Mr speaker kind lady and how how
long has a class a road
construction company been
exempt.
Since the passage of our statute
in.
Nineteen ninety two we're gonna
check its nineteen ninety two or
nineteen ninety four.
And Mr speaker and gentleman we
believe that with the passage of
the.
B. I. L. legislation it changes
it because it gives that relief
to the type eighty firms.
Mr speaker kind lady explain to
me.
How is this.
Piece of legislation forces a
company.
To pay sixty cents per hour per
employee.
How that is making it easier for
that company kind lady Mr
speaker and gentleman already
the other types of firms pay
into it the exemption only
applies to the Taipei
construction and this
legislation removes that
exemption.
Mr speaker kind lady so we're
getting down to.
What I'm trying to figure out.
Mr speaker kind lady they they
have operated and build roads
across New Mexico.
Have been I mean we.
There's a joke that says that
New Mexico's the orange beryl
capital of the world.
Mr speaker kind lady sold this
industry has been.
Very busy.
Companies are allowed to grow.
There are some companies that
have been able to start up in
New Mexico creating good paying
jobs.
But now because of that Mr
speaker kind lady we're going
to.
Take that industry and force
them.
To not pay into this program.
I'm still trying to figure out
if if Mr speaker kind lady this
industry has been so vibrant.
Why are we putting these
restrictions on these companies
now kind lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman were
establishing equity for all the
companies involved
In the building and construction
our roads and and I believe
because the reason why it wasn't
done in nineteen ninety two as
we didn't have the legal right
to use of service highway money
federal money from highways of
for this purpose now we can.
Mr speaker time ladies so.
If I'm understanding that line
of logic because we're now
getting access to federal road
dollars.
We are now forcing private
companies to fund another state
program.
With the federal money am I
correct in that line of thought.
Eighty Mr speaker and kind
gentleman this is the third time
I've brought the bill it's
simply a plus situation that the
hi that US department of
transportation money can be
applied this way.
and again if you have your own
apprenticeship program you do
not pay the sixty cents an hour
and you get part of the money
back at the end of the year from
the P. what fun.
Mr speaker kind lady how many of
these Class say companies have
their own apprenticeship
program.
Mr speaker and gentleman they've
never had to have one and we
don't have statistics for that
but we do know that some of the
highway construction companies
to participate.
Mr speaker kind lady they
participate in their own
apprenticeship programs where
they participate in the
mandatory state program.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa some of them have chosen
to have their own friendship
programs but I don't have
statistics since they're not
required to participate in any
way we don't have statistics on
you know what they're doing and
how they're doing it.
Mr speaker kind lady I
appreciate
taking time to answer my
questions I I just have one
more.
If.
These companies who have been
building bridges and roads in
New Mexico for years at least
under this program since
nineteen ninety two.
And the industry seems to be
flourishing.
Why are we punishing them by
forcing them to take part in of
state run program.
To be a follow through for
federal dollars a fall if I
understand correctly Mr speaker
kind lady.
Making these companies but
basically finding these
companies sixty cents per hour
per employee.
It just seems to me that that's
gonna.
Slowed down construction there's
going to be less companies
wanting to start up to do road
construction Mr speaker kind
lady.
I I just don't understand the
logic if we're taking a
flourishing industries and
punishing them how.
We is a state can say.
We're moving towards a more
friendly business attitude.
Mr speaker kind lady can you
explain why we're punishing this
and industry now Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa in no way
do I consider.
Starting an apprenticeship
program the punishment secondly
we have a labor shortage to
develop our New Mexico workforce
in these areas so that we're not
relying so much on out of state
companies of frequently bidding
on some of our projects this is
an investment and the young men
and women
who can take advantage thank
shoes of becoming apprentices
and working up to a journeyman
status if they choose to do that
so it's in my view and the
reason why of sponsored the bill
all this time it's an investment
in the work force of our state
and again if you have a state
registered apprenticeship
programs
program that doesn't cost
anything to register then you
don't pay into the fund.
Mr speaker kind laid it might
not cost anything to register
but it's going to cost that
company to administer the the
apprenticeship program Mr
speaker and gentlemen if they
already have some kind of
existing training program
they're not adding to their
costs are simply registering it
with the state and taking
advantage of the end of the year
P. what payment.
Mr speaker kind lady one of the.
One of the things we got right
with house bill two was putting.
A good amount of seed money in
our our come on CTE programs
across the state and I think
that is more effective in
building the work force that is
needed in the construction
industry them forcing of vibrant
industry to pay into a program.
That hopefully the CTE programs
going to take care of
with that I yield back my time
thank you kind lady for those
answers Mr speaker in Kargil not
just reminder that to become
adjournment of.
It can take two to four years
and so someone who starts pre
internship pre apprenticeship
studies in high school could
continue in a pressure program
to get their full treatments
license and given field thank
you.
As for the debate the lady from
Bernalillo Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind lady from Bernalillo yield
Mister speaker I yield to my
neighbor and Bernalillo.
Thank you kind lady
first of all I have a couple of
questions has the state not
decided that we should invested
education.
Mr speaker and kind lady from
Bernalillo the status made a
major incredible investment in
education.
Thank you kind lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker
is it not true also that the
state of New Mexico is going to
receive
a tremendous amount of dollars
for infrastructure bridges X.
cetera et cetera Inc including
infrastructure.
Mr speaker and kind lady that is
accurate with the.
Your face with the various
funding mechanisms coming from
federal funds from the United
States department of
transportation we're going to
have access to major funding
significantly addressing our
needs and the kind lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker this
funding is not going to be
restricted to Bernalillo county
is it.
Mr speaker and kind lady no it's
not going to be restricted and
in the B. I. L. funding
addressing apprenticeship
addresses the need to make sure
that that money makes its way to
rural New Mexico two women a
timing Ortiz to underserved
areas.
Thank you and kind lady from
Bernalillo and Mr speaker
the number of hours that it
takes to complete the transition
program is about eight thousand
hours and has not done in a high
school it is done outside of
their graduation is that not
correct Mr speaker and kind lady
yes the the number of hours to
become an apprentice of very
from trade to trade but eight
thousand a certainly
characteristic of many of our
treatment programs and Mr
speaker and and kind lady from
Bernalillo.
And of after.
After completion of those
programs there is a license of a
journeyman typically.
Yes Mr speaker and kind lady and
often that licensed brings a
higher than a teacher salary.
And Mr speaker and kind lady
house bill zero zero four six
eighty is only addressing type
eighty
of.
Areas of of construction because
the scene at age are already
participating in the
apprenticeship program is that
not correct Mr speaker and kind
lady that's accurate those other
categories working on public
works already either do option
one they pay into the P. what
fun they affiliate with an
existing program or they started
maintain their own
apprenticeship program that is
correct and kind lady Mr speaker
the department of transportation
has six districts as I
understand it and all of those
districts have transportation
projects that are public works
problem projects.
Mr speaker and kind lady yes
that's a very accurate
characterization of our six
districts in D. O. T. and their
project needs so kind lady and
Mr speaker some of the
information that was discussed
earlier tonight
was not accurate because what I
heard is that.
Much of this money would be in
Bernalillo county and that of
people can be trained as part of
their high school program is
that I mean would it be
appropriate to say that maybe
that is somewhat misleading.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
apprenticeship programs and pre
apprenticeship programs very the
one thing that some of the
parameters that I've spoken to
and very suppression programs of
stated is that they learned they
could use some online training
webinars so that they could
great more effectively reach
apprentices for their technical
training throughout the state.
Thank you
Kind lady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I forgot to introduce my
guest and my experts
in this is Santos of Griego and
he is with I. B. E. W. so I just
wanted to mention that I I'm
sorry I should have mentioned
that in the very beginning
but I want to go back kind lady
from Bernalillo and of Mr
speaker so the state has already
approved article four D. public
works apprenticeship
and training and this is already
in place is it not map of kind
lady and Mr speaker Mr speaker
and kind lady that is correct
going back to nineteen ninety
two the statues in the race
those other categories and at
that time Taipei was exempted.
Thank you kind lady and Mr
speaker
and I don't want to belabor this
because we've already been doing
this for awhile but I just want
to mention that this bill is
only addressing apprenticeships
programs for new projects that
are public works project that
the state would in act one
become a participant of is that
correct and contractors would
bid on.
Mr speaker and kind lady yes
this is not retroactive to
existing projects for bids have
already been made and contracts
have been signed.
Well as.
So kind lady and Mr speaker I do
have some language from a
memorandum of understanding
between DO T..
The department of labor which
says that they would collaborate
each will draw on their unique
authorities and funding
including the reason programs
under the infrastructure law and
DOT will drawn considerable new
funding and programs to invest
in infrastructure and D. O. L.
department of labor will draw on
its strength and experience and
encouraging high quality jobs
and investments in equitable
workforce development specific
authorities to DO T. and D. O.
L. will seek to coordinate for
the purpose and objectives
include but are not limited to
and there's a whole section that
I'm not going to read into the
record but I think it's
important to mention that this
manner memorandum of
understanding would encourage
and kind lady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker would encourage economic
development activity in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and kind lady.
That's quite accurate
building our labor force which
were very short of we know in
every industry there's issues
with finding skilled qualified
workers
and so this would benefit every
area
and including especially our
road construction.
Thank you kind lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker one last
the question
The amount that you said that
contractors would contribute
would be sixty cents per hour
for
The projects and actually no
more than
fifteen percent of those funds
would be used for administrative
or would be has from
administration is that correct
kind lady yes Mr speaker and
kind lady for those companies
choosing not to affiliate with
an apprenticeship program or to
run their own apprenticeship
program they would pay sixty
cents per labor hour and then
that P. what frontier is allowed
by statute New Mexico statute to
have fifteen percent used to run
all the programs and as we know
to have oversight account team
and all those things that we
need and kind lady Mr speaker so
the remainder of that funding
would go for the apprenticeship
program the actual program to
train our New Mexicans
to be and to move on to possible
journeymen yes Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo that
P. what the remainder of the
money the C. eighty five percent
would go back into the
apprenticeship register programs
thank you kind lady thank you Mr
speaker I think that this is a
important because we are
training our own New Mexicans
and trying to get them to get on
or not been on but to be part of
a public works project thank
you.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
he'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Speaker and gentle lady several
more college over here been.
Your is not justification for
these programs and.
I think that I can find a bit of
flesh for the for the bones that
have been discussed here.
So for generating.
Do you know what the total.
Dollar volume of capital
projects that are on the books
right now.
In New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee County I don't know the
total statewide of all the
projects that have been
authorized but not started or in
progress for which we're
currently considering in our the
state budget.
Speaker gentle lady.
This information of our recall
was probably close to your old.
What was the last time I looked
around.
Dollars to send someone who
isn't a member.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
from Lee County
it possibly is higher than that
but I want to remind you that
this past this legislation would
only apply to projects carried
out after this law was passed
which I think would be June
sixteenth or something like
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes or
realize that we're going
forward.
Certainly the volume of dollars
we've got available it would be
reasonable to assume that our
capital projects list would stay
at a billion dollars or higher.
The actor.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
from Lee that's within
parameters a reasonable
assumption I would say I would
agree.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle.
Free state project.
Will cost over sixty thousand
dollars.
Wage circumstance exists.
On those projects.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman can you repeat that
question please.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
asking for wage requirements on
every state project that will
cost over sixty thousand
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
those projects they have to pay
the prevailing wage.
For that journey men and a set
level for the specific trade and
then there's a set level
determined by workforce
solutions for the apprentice
also which is lower of course an
engine that entertainment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
answers exactly correct.
So this requirement would be in
effect.
For both in shops.
Mon you shops perhaps.
Smaller contractors or help in.
A rural areas where.
These apprentice programs are
not available would that be
correct.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
this program doesn't
discriminate whether it's you or
not you.
Speaker gentle lady the question
was whether these prevailing
wages would apply to both.
No shops is that accurate Mr
speaker and gentleman from Lee
County yes that is accurate.
So
with generally speaking robust
apprentice programs would be and
so what.
Of a competitive disadvantage.
The contractor said.
Of apprentice programs in place
with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
We've already established a
Blanton's apprentice programs
called somewhere around sixty
cents an hour.
Women running through the math
to come up with some numbers
that we can attach to this this
pro these are projects.
A billion dollars worth of
projects would generally be
split fifty percent between
labor and fifty percent to
materials so that.
Dollars in projects turns into
five hundred million dollars in
labor.
Now a three percent advantage.
Not having one of the sixty
seven our programs in place
would seem to give even though
the non job is putting
prevailing wage would seem to
give them a sixty cent per man
hour.
To reach.
The process.
All of the math.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
follow the mass but again if the
company chooses to register.
In this program they would not
be paying that money
and their apprentices would not
get that journey then wage so I
believe you have to really look
at each project K. five K. to
determine who's bidding again if
this legislation passes the
company could you know draw on
the D. O. T. funding to absorb
the cost of their apprenticeship
program
I think you have to really you
can't make a blanket statement
but you have to see how each
company would respond if this
legislation passes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would submit that there are many
areas in the state particularly
in rural areas where these
programs are simply not
available these folks are going
to train internally they're
going to.
Of now liable for an extra sixty
cents on our own their labor
which I believe will make them
less competitive.
David situations now.
We can determine.
What sixty cents an hour means.
On sixteen million hours of work
but it's a lot of money.
Gentlelady from that very large
County course almost spal with
the cost.
Associated with these programs
and that would be the only order
of.
Four billion dollars would be on
the order of ten million dollars
now.
The significant difference.
Between the folks that are
providing these programs and the
folks that are not it looks to
me like what we're doing here.
Is mandating a level playing
field so that everybody has to
maintain an apprentice program
would be an accurate statement.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman no
I don't believe it's a great.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in
this circumstance.
We're going to have to agree to
disagree thank you Mr speaker
for your answers thank you Jim
let thank you Mr speaker thank
you kind gentleman friendly
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield please.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
lady.
Mr speaker thank you very much
hold on just one sec.
Thank you for allowing me that I
had to deliver some papers right
the.
Mr speaker gentle lady a
business listening to debate
them live more listen to it the
more I see it.
That this bill is going to do
nothing more.
In rural New Mexico one more
time.
Mr speaker I say that because of
all the comments that have been
made what we're doing right here
I think we have the potential.
Heard small contractors tunes it
is going to be just exactly what
we've done to our rural
physicians.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Those doctors out of business in
our rural areas.
Whenever we have construction
people in our area that want to
be able to bring somebody up.
What we're doing is we're hand
for his handout for them.
Fire Mr speaker gentle lady
where we trying to get this push
to mandate that these companies
joined I don't understand that
can you explain that.
Mr speaker and kind lady any
company of any size can register
at no cost for in apprenticeship
program and therefore they do
not have to pay any money but
they can get a share of the P.
what program at the end of each
year.
Mr speaker gentle lady before I
came up here in the months of
November and December I had the
opportunity to go to one of the
schools that does teach young
people apprenticeship type.
Skills.
They had the young people in
there the young men and young
women both that we're learning
how to wire they were learning
how to play they were learning
how to will they were learning
get to of.
We even have the truck driving
school down there.
For young people can get their
C. deals one you know as they
come of age.
We had a company that came down
to the rules will area.
And they met with some
personality and then you are.
And everybody's really excited
about this it was association of
builders and contractors I will
use their name is a great group
of people.
And all they wanted to do was to
be able to.
Help these people down there in
our rural areas where we did not
have to pay union wages on
things that needed to be built
because we knew that there was a
a resistance from the people in
Albuquerque to come to the fore
out regions of our state.
As it stands right now more
often than not those people that
do live closer to the Texas side
of the state.
Those people that do come in to
do work for government buildings
and that stuff such.
They're out of Texas they are
not even workers here in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Amendment of am I reading this
right.
Under section for your amendment
states under section four letter
B. number three.
This is covering the
unreimbursed expenses incurred
by apprentices to successfully
complete an approved apprentice
and training program senator
childcare and transportation can
you explain that to me I don't
quite understand where you're
going with that whenever that's
included.
Mr speaker and kind lady that
pertains just to the scholarship
fund it doesn't pertain to P.
what funding.
This is vigorous and kind lady
it's to make
Kind of things that sometimes
get in the way for the
apprentice may not be able to
pay for available and there's
some.
There's some funding from the W.
O. I. H..
Workforce Mr speaker the
workforce innovation act has
funding for some of that which
may be able to use but it's
separate from the P. what.
Exemption be removed.
Okay Mister speaker I'm sorry
gentle lady I got side tracked
with the the stuff that is going
on.
Right now we have a school down
there that has started up that
is taking in high school
students that are going through
this program and it's not
costing anything and yet they
are learning they are learning
to trade we don't have to send
them to Albuquerque we don't
have to have Albuquerque come
down there to teach our kids
these kids are learning in
conjunction with.
The assistance of our local
community college down there so
one of these kids to graduate
from high school they're ready
to go to work what a concept
what a concept they are ready to
go to work whenever they
graduate to help put food on the
table to help by Brandt the list
goes on and on for them to be
able to buy their own vehicle.
What a concept.
Mr speaker I'm sorry this this
is a bad deal for New Mexico
especially for rural New Mexico.
I can't it's going to make our
state even more.
Less business friendly if that
makes sense we can become more
or less business friendly.
Because you know what Mr speaker
and gentle lady well I
appreciate the work that you did
put into this.
The workforce is out in rural
New Mexico needs to flourish and
this bill will not get the job
done it will not help those that
do want to go into the trades
program Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you very much for your
responses there is a debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Sandoval Representative Kate's.
Thank you Mr speaker is the
general person from Bernalillo
Leo.
Mr speaker I do yield to the
preferred gentle person from
Santa Fe Bernalillo thank you
very much I do have some
questions
does the gentle person from
Bernalillo are you aware of any
CTE high school programs that
teach road construction.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
personally I'm not aware there
may be a skills that are
involved but I'm not aware of a
specific program at this time.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
the general person from
Bernalillo I'm so sorry I know
that you've probably answered
this question fifteen times a
night but help me how much are
we budgeted to spend on state
roads or public projects this
this budget to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not have my eight.
House substitute for house bill
two and three in front of me but
I know that in section nine I
believe it's two hundred thirty
eight million.
Tribal Billy.
That's specifically in the
budget but we have other funds
and as the gentleman from Lee
stressed probably if you added
you would have to include the
past amounts of not just the
current budgeted amounts it
probably is about a billion.
Think about that being matching
funds that were seeking.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentle person from
Bernalillo what were you able to
look at what percentage of
skilled labor are we sure in our
workforce development in the
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
have the lowest of.
Labor force participation
participation skilled labor
across the whole country
currently.
And many of those in road
construction include operating
engineers laborers and other
various skilled situations.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
person from Bernalillo.
Do you know why the state is
only taking fifteen percent
administration fees when the
federal government takes twenty
percent when they distribute had
funds.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I can
only attribute it to really
responsible oversight with in
our department of workforce
solutions thank you very much Mr
speaker and gentle person from
Bernalillo so if the opponents
of this bill were successful in
removing state funded
apprenticeship programs to build
state funded public projects.
Would build these public
projects given our shortage of
labor.
Mr speaker and and gentle
percent from Bernalillo and
Sandoval we would have to rely
on out of state labor and and
part of the effort of this is to
really
robustly build up our in state
skilled labor force.
So if the thank you very much Mr
speaker and gentle person from
Bernalillo so it's the
legislative process in securing
the two hundred and thirty eight
million plus.
Click works knowing our skilled
workforce are short.
from any place in the country.
We would have to spins the state
of New Mexicos dollars on out of
state work force rather than
invest in training in our own
Mexico workforce.
Mr speaker.
Nine percent from those two
counties yes.
Thank you very much Mr Mr
speaker and gentle a person from
Bernalillo
do apprenticeship programs cost
sixty cents an hour to find.
Mr speaker.
And gentle percent
apprenticeship program can cost
much more than that we're asking
people that don't to participate
in a registered apprenticeship
program to contribute sixty
cents.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle person from Bernalillo
does the this bill require all
public works bids to have an
apprenticeship program or pay
into one.
Mr speaker and kind person
already all the other
The other categories of B. H..
See they already are required to
do this it is only the type A.
that haven't been required to do
it for public works projects
thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentle person so just so I
understand currently all public
works besides road projects are
required to either participate
or pay into a apprenticeship
program this bill is requesting
that road projects are most
costly and the biggest amount of
our New Mexico dollars are spent
on by participating and then all
bids will be participating.
Either providing the positions
program or paying into it is
that current digital person.
Mr speaker and gentle person
they would have the three
options to either pay the sixty
cents per labor hour to join an
affiliated program or to have
their own.
Thank you Mr speaker jumpers one
last question so this this bill
passed there would not be a
single incident of a company
bidding against another company
they did not have the imprint
ship program correct Mr speaker
and kind person no because they
could choose to pay the sixty
cents P. what affiliate with
another one all our main ticket
started to maintain their own
program says is that they would
all be on the same level.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentle person I yield.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman from my same county
and the owner of creative ties.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so.
One is the one ask a couple
questions so.
This if this is an act to sixty
cents per hour would include
state road projects correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo with that includes
state road projects done by a
city or county.
Mr speaker and gentleman only if
they're subject to the public
works requirements.
Mr speaker gentle lady things
sets yes on that so I think
everyone needs to understand the
repercussions of this the gentle
man from Santa Ana gentle lady
from all those counties down
south.
Pointed out that.
The current.
School has a budget of two
million.
But with the two hundred forty
million dollars worth of
projects it's a seven point two
million in flocks into that
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo these other
contractors that are currently
going into that school.
How are they training their
individuals.
Mr speaker and kind gentlemen
can you explain what you mean by
schools because this only
applies to type a
of road related construction.
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
so this is the year whatever
class you're calling it for your
type the road contracts.
The other people the other
contractors their people were
being schooled but not going to
the class you're saying they're
going to a class that the point
that they put on is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman hi John
I understand what you're saying
idea and they would have a
choice to pay the sixty cents
into the P. what fun affiliate
with another apprenticeship
program or start their own
apprenticeship program which
they could register to use your
quote unquote school they would
simply register that existing
program for no cost with us the
registered apprenticeship
programs.
Mr speaker gentle lady so the
associated contractors of New
Mexico have a heavy highway
utility contractor training
certification and competent
person course is that correct
that they are currently training
their people under.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
companies can send workers to
those programs.
Conducted
yes.
People from companies that go to
that program are then paid
seventy cents per educational
our for participating in those
courses could be part of the
technical education of a
registered apprenticeship
program.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
now I can read all of them if
you'd like but there's fifty
three courses that they offer
starting I'll just give a couple
of just to give you traffic
control technician traffic
control supervisor flagger
training traffic control design
specialist stormwater competence
person so they have their own
training and that is required by
federal law correct.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman can you repeat your
question this is directed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is not required by federal law
that they have specific training
in that area.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
just want to repeat the fact
that those would all be those
can all be incorporated into
registered apprenticeship
program and I believe.
And I believe that program
actually receive some of the P.
what of distribution currently.
Mr speaker gentle lady so if
this were the law were impacted
they be required to say and
sixty cents an hour to the T.
walked but they could go to this
other school class whatever you
wanna call it is that correct.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman a
given company could incorporate
those courses.
In their registered
apprenticeship program if they
so choose.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady and members of the House
someone explain it another way.
I want you to think about that
we have.
We have these road contractors.
They are the associated
contractors of New Mexico.
And if you will their school is
C. N. M..
Central New Mexico university in
their training
But.
For their employees to go to
that school they have to pay
sixty cents an hour to you and
them.
And that's really wrong.
They should be able to choose
where they want to go to class
and where they want to go to
school thank you madam speaker
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman from is it San Juan
yes ma'am.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
gentlelady you stated a minute
ago that we're establishing
equity for all businesses is
that correct.
Mr speaker and kind gentlemen I
would call it a level playing
field
in choosing one of those three
options which is totally the
choice of any given company.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
does this bill do anything at
all for small New Mexico
businesses that choose not to be
part of you.
Yes Mr speaker and kind
gentleman we have a non union
apprenticeship programs and
starting with the city of
Farmington has a registered
apprenticeship program with four
trades included this is not you
are not on you it pertains
solely to prove having
apprenticeship programs.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
kind lady the reason I'm asking
that according to
the US small business
administration we have three
thousand eight hundred and forty
seven small construction
companies within the state that
have fewer than twenty employees
and and again money my concern
is always small companies within
the state of New Mexico we
cannot afford to lose any of
them and and so that's my
concern.
Mr chairman committee was there
any thought ever given to just
saying we're going to take
we're going to we're gonna be
paying out two million dollars
at the end of every year for
this was very thought of just
taking that two million dollars
and offering scholarships to
people so that they could get
their
Their partnership they wanted to
get into the apprenticeship they
wanted.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
this legislation doesn't
directly relate to that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady and the reason I ask
that question is this piece of
legislation.
Allies is small businesses that
don't want to be part of that
and that's my concern that we
continue this punny small
businesses within the state of
New Mexico and make it harder
and harder for us to be a
business friendly state which we
are not at this point in time so
that's my concern thank you for
your answers thank you Mr
speaker thank you Mr speaker
thank you kind gentleman there's
further debate the gentleman
from the Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman from the southeast.
Mr speaker tonight one of the
listen to the.
Debate.
I've heard a few things that I
think deserve clarification.
One of the items is the.
we heard from the bill sponsor
that we could rely on the D. O.
T. to offset the costs of these
expenses.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think it's.
It's important to recognize the.
As a legislative body.
Seventy members in this house
voted yesterday on an
appropriation bill the under
funded the DOT significantly by
the request.
On top of that we ever tried to
point to food service.
And in over six billion dollar
deficit Mr speaker and gentle
lady I believe you.
Has the set on house
appropriate.
Appropriations you sit on House
Appropriations right now he's
sat on transportation the past
you know the importance of those
things.
We can't turn and look to the
DOT for funding additional
faster and more under funding
them.
As as we look at the requests Mr
speaker and gentle lady we also.
Listen to debate where we talked
about in state versus out of
state workers and.
Let's let's chat about that a
little bit let's go through.
The.
Volumes of of the H. A. F. C.
budget that
Everybody should have in their
desk.
Where we have under funded but
we have funded vacancy rates for
two thousand and twenty two
alone we have over fifty four
million and funded vacancy rates
I don't see the to the one
hundred and thirty one HSD coach
coming to us asking us to start
apprenticeship programs for them
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I see is a continual effort.
To create a unionized effort in.
The construction industry when
the the contractors.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
bill road for a living.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
know.
The internal.
Training programs that these
contractors have to are not
unionized and we don't need the
help.
We don't want the help.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Fifty four million funded
vacancies.
When we look at that and we want
to talk about in state versus
out of state.
Workers.
The state construction anything
like that this isn't about
whether or not we're going to
pay sixty cents or we're gonna
have an employee pay sixty cents
to go through a training program
this is the fact that if we go
back to may of two thousand and
twenty two we have a report Mr
speaker and gentle lady from LFC
that says.
If you're a family of four and
you're taking advantage of every
subsidy.
Between the state of New Mexico
and the federal government your
base pay is a hundred and four
thousand dollars.
We pay you to stay home.
Play video games.
That's the reason why we have
this issue this is an issue
about training this is an issue
about whether or not we're
taking care of team members.
We can't hire them because we
can't pay them that much Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you.
Is John from Travis editor
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman from.
It's unclear Eddie.
It is the Chavis and Terrel.
Thank you I yield to the
gentleman and from those four
counties thank you gentle lady
gently
This process is a is
I think may be counter intuitive
but what we should be doing.
I think you and I both agreed
that we should be building a
platform for jobs and employment
across New Mexico is that
correct.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
that is correct.
In general a I think the other
thing that we would.
We would agree on is that we
both are.
Yes with the responsibility of.
Utilizing.
Tax payer dollars as of
physicians only as we possibly
could could we agree on that.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
yes I think we agree on using
taxpayer dollars efficiently in
many ways.
And gentle lady
I think it is interesting
When we look.
On.
The bill and look at the expert
witnesses supporting.
This bill.
There's.
A.
there's a difference.
Jan lady and I I would tell you
that
In order to keep taxpayer.
In order utilize taxpayer
dollars efficiently.
We are driven to be more
efficient to lower the cost of
projects of.
And that our main that is one of
our main purpose is that plus.
Providing safe working areas
those kind of things so gentle
lady when I have when I listen
to this.
Again this year.
I would tell you that.
This process although.
Supported by bargaining units.
it is not necessary to good
companies.
Good companies hire good
employees.
They spend the time and effort
to train them
And and pay them.
great wages and provide futures.
This unfortunately in my opinion
gentle lady increases the costs
of projects in will actually
result in the and in less
employment.
Could we agree on that.
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
if you're increasing the cost to
the to the taxpayers.
How in the world can we say that
we're doing something that's
beneficial to the taxpayers in
the.
Mr speaker and kind gentlemen
we're investing in growing our
New Mexico and work force of
young men and women and older
men and women so we're investing
in their careers and if this
legislation passes.
Companies that do start
apprenticeship programs do not
pay sixty cents.
So I don't think it necessarily
results in a significant way
higher cost when we actually
practice it one estimate of was
that at the most it would be
point of C. zero zero one one
thousandth.
The gentle lady did you delve
often the something that I wish
this body would do and that's
called dynamic scoring when we
look at the total impact of what
we did.
And and
we should certainly could agree
that that we should look at the
total impact of what we do and
and that's not what we did
gentle lady do you have any
contractors of people that
actually.
right checks and payroll are
they supporting your project
that you're you're of the
proposed bill tonight Mr speaker
and kind gentleman some are and
some aren't.
Like most of the legislation.
The gentle lady I didn't see any
sitting as expert witnesses and
that could cause me to to
consider the fact that if
they're not supporting it.
Why you.
Why a of of I mean.
Why not.
Mr speaker and gentleman we went
through the committee process
and many supporters spoke in the
committee process.
Including contractors.
The gentle lady
I think there will be
revelations that come out on man
who supports this and how they
do it before before long but I
would tell you that gentle lady
this.
I'd I'd I think without a doubt
this increases the cost of
projects.
You can go look at the
prevailing wage law you can look
at public works costs you can
look at public works projects
verses similar projects that are
not required to be part of
public works and the difference
in the cost is probably in the
neighborhood of twenty five to
thirty percent and I don't think
any of us in here can stand and
say that's good a physician
utilization of taxpayer dollars
So gentle lady I.
I think we would be it would be
because of the body to build.
Opportunities for more.
Companies.
To come in and hire more people
and quit trying to force
the issue from the far end but
because you're not going to
create jobs increasing the cost
of operation you're not going to
increase jobs and opportunities
for New Mexicans when you have
to force a company in order to
do something.
I I would just encourage
everyone to think about the
effects on their communities
whether it be cities counties it
is going to be a negative
affected it will drive the cost
up will be able to build less
roads in in the in in in we all
doing this.
It will be detrimental to many
New Mexicans so I'd appreciate
it thank you very much gentle
lady.
Scene for the debate the gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker and everybody
gathered I really want to thank
everybody who ask questions and
consider this I really
appreciate the discussion as you
know I'm carrying this because I
believe it's an investment in
our work force that will benefit
us in years to come and so I'm
just grateful for this
opportunity to have this
important discussion and with
that Mr speaker I move that do
pass for house bill forty six as
amended.
We are on final passage of house
bill forty six as amended.
The vote is now open.
It's about to close.
Loser close level to thirty six
in the affirmative twenty five
the negative house bill forty
six as amended has duly passed
this house.
J. lady from Santa Fe Los Alamos
and Santa Fe ready and item
number eight.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one thirteen as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain of the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this bill
changes the qualifications for
magistrate judges and it is a
bill that the Supreme Court has
asked us to consider it does I
guess it's fair to say for
things it changes the
qualifications it creates a
magnet requires it turns the
magistrate courts into a court
of record.
It changes the jurisdiction of
American magistrate court in a
couple of ways one is a
magistrate court judge can now
be a judge in the entire
district for which it's a
there's a corresponding District
Court and that was a really an
elegant way of explaining it so
let me give you an example
Los Alamos County as part of
District one the for the
districts so it's Los Alamos
County Rio Arriba county and
Santa Fe County so if I were of
the Los Alamos magistrate I
could hear cases in from any of
those three counties so I hope
that helps folks understand it
also for traffic violations
allows magistrate to hear cases
from any anywhere in in the
state those are done
electronically you know
virtually now pretty much all
the time except for the wide
cases and do you why cases are
excluded because I think there's
a recognition that there's some
community values associated with
it and we want local to the
local judge to be considering
those issues in terms of the
change of the qualifications Mr
speaker it.
It currently to be a magistrate
judge you have to be eighteen
years or older have a high
school degree or GED that is it
and
Perhaps when we lived in a
simpler time and Mr speaker that
worked but we don't live in a
simple time and we believe that
we need a person with staff
somewhat greater maturity and
qualifications so the bill as
amended now provides that the
person must be at least thirty
years of age and have a it state
at least a two year degree
from unaccredited school or
higher so that's that's I think
a fair summary of what the bill
does Mr speaker and I'm happy to
stand for questions there is a
bit the gentleman from the
representative of Scott.
Thank you miss the generator
from Los Alamos for rural
communities.
The
from Lee County I have four
yield Mister gentle lady just
one question what about to the
magistrate judges currently
serving that do not to the new
specifications Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you for that
question but we for answer I do
want to just know that I have an
expert with me from the Supreme
Court name Carl rice staff.
And now that Mr speaker
answering your question we have
grandfathered in current
magistrates and thank you for
that clarification find question
Mr speaker gentle.
Speaker gentle lady that was the
answer I was hoping for that's
all I have thank you there's
further debate the deleted
Catrine said US courtroom
L. as a representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady from Los Alamos Santa and
Santa Fe yield Mr speaker a
happily yield to the gentle lady
from the catcher and and all
those other counties.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
so Mister speaker families so
they are grandfathered in but
when it comes back to running
again are they still
grandfathered in does that does
that include that Mr speaker
gentle lady it includes them
their grand I fathered until
they choose not to run again
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so just
just some information for rural
New Mexico are from rural New
Mexico we have a hard time
finding people that will run for
about this position Mr speaker
currently they either stay for
ever or they rotate a lot
because we can't ever find us
people to run for these
positions so Mister speaker
crime lady.
I think.
You are correct in making it a
little more educated but at the
same time I think it this might
be really harmful for rural New
Mexico Mr speaker kind lady.
Can you tell me or what prompted
this kind of legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady it I
think what prompted this
legislation is a recognition
that the magistrate courts now
handle some very serious cases
and more complex cases Mr
speaker gentle lady then perhaps
when our
you know we've we were firsts
when magistrate judges were I
guess you might say considered
the people's court I've heard it
referred to as that but actually
Mr speaker gentle lady their
jurisdiction has grown more
complex over time and generally
I would point out in response to
your comment about rural New
Mexico which I hundred percent
appreciate understand we it's
there is a balance you know
there's an age requirement which
I think obviously you need there
shouldn't be any issue with I
hope and it's a two year degree
or higher so we're not setting a
super high bar but we do want
some some form of education
there have in the past gentle
lady been the suggestion that
all magistrates the lawyers and
we know that won't work so this
is a middle ground that I think
really kind of strikes the right
balance gentle lady and Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady in
Mr speaker had you has anyone
ever thought about just doing
some type of training instead
because Mr speaker kind lady
what if they have a two year
degree an underwater basket
weaving is that going to be
sufficient to be able to be a
magistrate judge or is there a
specific to your degree and
there's people Mr speaker kind
lady sitting in this.
In this on this house floor that
would not qualify.
To be a magistrate.
Judge.
Well of a few things Mr speaker
gentle lady there was
Task force of magistrate judges
that actually came up with this
proposal so I want to make that
point clear and it they were
comprised of both you know you
might say city magistrates and
rural magistrates who were
involved in the conversation as
to what to do
as to your question about
someone whose learn basket
weaving I didn't know the you
could do it under water but
okay.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'll I'll
go with that I don't know of any
two year programs I you know
it's most two year programs have
which in my classes type
training programs but it shows
that Mr speaker gentle lady that
you know there's a person who
wants who can integrate
information can you know study
information and then hopefully
you know come out with a
reasonable out kind of outcome I
think Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I disagree with that analogy
Mr speaker gentle lady there may
be several people on this house
floor that would not qualify to
be that judge.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I
don't think that just because
you went to college mixes that
make make sure a good decision
maker it's following the law I
really.
Do not care for the fact that
we're adding a two year degree
to this
situation especially rural New
Mexico or anywhere.
Mr speaker kind lady and now if
it was a degree in something
specific possibly.
Because that they would have a
higher they would possibly be
moving on into they may be going
to college to be an attorney or
they may be going to college to
do something else and they're
just taking up time doing this
job that.
That they have probably of.
When you get a lot of of of.
Regard for for their
opportunities so Mister speaker
kind lady.
I'm gonna have to vote against
this because.
We're we're some people in this
room for lawmakers with no
college at all Mr speaker kind
lady and we're making decisions
every day and I just don't like
that we're putting people in a
box Mr speaker kind lady once
again because here we don't have
a degree you don't you haven't
gone to college you're not smart
enough to do this job thank you
Mr speaker kind lady there's
further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
supporters and one ambulance at
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from
from the wall and hello a little
more out of problems as yield
Mister speaker I kindly yield to
the gentle and are beautiful
orange shirt on.
It's gorgeous.
The only reason I speed it up to
speak I want to.
Mr speaker gentle lady of the
one question I have two
question the to your credit is
that to be in the football
field.
Mr speaker gentleman absolutely
not and just to be clear at the
bill originally had specific
degrees and in Judiciary Mr
speaker it was brought up that
that wasn't fair so we made it
more open and we lowered the
recovery it and then we it just
of the requirement to a two year
accredited school so just want
to be clear about that that we
have that conversation and we
opened it up to more people by
eliminating the specific field
requirement Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
the next question I have I know
you're grandfathered Magistris
that are on this right now do
that grandfather clause good see
the into the term after we run
again is that cover the show on
there.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes and
if I could point one more thing
out magistrate judges earn over
a hundred thousand dollars a
year unlike us who earn zero
dollars a year so I just wanted
to point out that a very
important point it is a job that
will Mr speaker attract people
in rural New Mexico if you can
earn a hundred thousand dollars
occurred a year I think really
we it's and I think that's very
critical to our conversation Mr
speaker.
Indian lady up I'm glad it
doesn't have to be two years of
law school because of you know
and and our smaller communities
that's not gonna happen
Representative Armstrong we the
point and all Mr speaker of
that's all of which didn't have
a Mr speaker one more think it
would take a Jack of of security
measure.
This survey and granted that
permission about two hours ago.
Thank you Mr Gardner thank you
gentlemen there is a debate the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind lady.
From of Los Alamos you Mr
speaker gentleman from Santa I
yield to you.
Mr speaker kind lady.
Could you clarify something for
only I I know that the lord
point there's a magistrate
there's a municipal and there's
a metro court could you tell me
the difference between those
three.
Mr speaker gentleman I think so
municipal courts are courts
that.
Generally if not always
adjudicate city ordinances okay
magistrate courts adjudicate the
state law and city ordinances at
the end they can adjudicate city
ordinances and metro court I
believe Mr speaker maybe there
is only one and that's and and
Bernalillo county and it.
Has both state state and city
Authority and it's a combined
municipal a magistrate type
court.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that so this bill.
Yield.
Just with the magistrate
judge's.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady soul.
Mr for court judges and metro
court judges this bill has
nothing to do with that.
Mr speaker gentleman it does not
affect them yes Mr speaker kind
lady thank you for that
clarification.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentleman there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Torrance
Representative Representative
Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I will yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Torrance counties thank you Mr
speaker so the question on
something so up on these jobs
for magistrate judges it like a
nine to five kind of job.
Mr speaker gentle lady they are
expected to work at least forty
hours a week and from time to
time they may have to be called
in on the weekends to hear
warrants and and problem because
types situations.
And Mr speaker gentle lady did
you say that they're paid a
hundred thousand dollars to
interpret our laws and bills
like we're drafting here Mr
speaker the only.
Mr speaker gentle lady they are
paid
a hundred and seventeen thousand
dollars to perform their duties.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think we're on the wrong field.
I do is a serious question about
that so Mr speaker delay so
there's nothing like I said
there's no stipulation though
where there's an associate
degrees and like pre law or
something so it's just they
could get a degree in early
childhood development born art
and they would still be eligible
for that how would that be
applicable to the training
that's needed for the job Mr
speaker gently.
Mr speaker generally will look
let's just step back a little
bit right now they require no
degree other than a high school
degree so let's be clear so
we're we're increasing the
qualifications to at least a two
year degree the courts also do
and I should have answered this
with another question that was
asked to me but the courts also
are about to assume their own
judicial education program
currently it's at UNM but it is
potentially going to be moved to
the courts where the judges from
you know District Court judges
all the way up will be receiving
additional training they do get
training now gentle lady and Mr
speaker but that may be stepped
up yes the Supreme Court is
trying to improve on and and to
make better the judicial
training process that we're
going through Mr speaker gently
at the all the only thing I
really have is I'm looking at
is.
It seems to me.
They do agree with some of
things the other representative
and whether some people who
don't have degrees we're here
and we're making laws and
there's some people here we're
interpreting laws
to me I would think I would be
more on board if it was we're
going to have the specific
training course or to pre law or
something that has to do and
there's more substantial
training so they're gonna have
this even a certification I
would even be okay if anyone
even associates group they went
to a local community calling on
it is so a certification and
this one thing and had all this
training I think I'd be okay
with that but I'm a little I'm a
little bit Larry on this just
because I don't see how somebody
could graduates causing is a
really smart people graduate
high school
I don't see the difference
between having a high school
degree really I've hard time
making the jump and the getting
associates degree in art and
that being a more applicable so
anyways I I yield my time to set
a few questions on that thank
you Mr speaker generally.
Thank you to a lady there is
further debate the gentleman
from Pateros Representative
block.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
generated from Los Alamos Santa
Fe and Rio Arriba please you.
Mr speaker gentleman yes I yield
thank you Mr speaker and I sure
hope I remember your counties
correctly so my question is
really simple regarding the
requirements for this Mr speaker
gentle lady it's as thirty years
of age and older has at least
eight years of experience as a
magistrate court judge.
Court clerk or the equivalent or
has a four year degree from
accredited institution I believe
there is also provision for in a
so does this not allow anybody
who just has a high school
diploma or GED to be a
magistrate judge of this bill
would pass Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentleman you are referring
to the bill before it was
amended in the house Judiciary
we struck Mr speaker and
gentleman.
All of those requirements about
Let's see that right now under
the bill it has at least at
least six eight eight years
experience.
As a magistrate court judge
clerk for the equivalent or has
a two year
degree or higher from an
accredited state tuition.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so this so if there
is an individual who is eight
years experience on the bench Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Let's just say in the future.
They would still be able to
service that correct Mr speaker
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating so let's just say
this individual has four years
experience on the bench and then
let's just say they get defeated
in the election.
And so they decide to not go
back to school after word but
they want to get back on the
bench Mr speaker gentle lady
so since they only have four
years experience and they wanted
to run for judge again could
they technically not be allowed
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman anyone
having
sitting on the bench as of July
one twenty twenty three.
Does not have to meet the the
new qualifications so under your
scenario I would say they are
qualified to run again.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I appreciate
that answer because I just want
to make sure that we weren't
just cutting out a big secretary
of folks if they ran if they
were able to but I do think that
there are a lot of good people
that have a lot of years of
experience you don't have a a a
I know I have a friend I I won't
say what County he's from but
he's also he's a judge and he
doesn't have a bachelor's or an
associate's degree but he is
like decades of experience so
with that experience amount to
not being able to run let's just
say in the future if someone has
twenty years experience no a but
they do have twenty years
experience in the legal field
what they still not be able to
run for judges.
Well under your scenario as I
understand it Mr speaker and
gentleman the person has not
state is not sitting on the
bench as of July one twenty
twenty three.
and.
Has not has not the eight years
of experience as magistrate
court judge court clerk and has
no two year degree or higher.
That person would not be
qualified to run.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so someone I guess
with the certificate was just a
from an accredited institution
in legal studies I don't even
know if this exists Mr speaker
gentle lady but if it did and
they did have let's just say a
decade of experience they would
not be able to be a judge if
they were not a clerk magistrate
judge in the past four if they
didn't have a two year degree.
Mr speaker.
Yes gentleman up although I
don't know what experience means
if you live you have experience
so I I'm not sure what kind of
experience you're talking about
because we all have experience
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I guess I should
have said legal experience so
thank you for those questions I
had some concerns about this
bill I think we're really
leaving a lot of folks who may
have a just high school degrees
but have a lot of legal
experience and so I am still on
the fence of this but I
appreciate the time and I
appreciate you for answering
these great questions thank you
Mr speaker thank you generating.
Thank you gentleman see no
further debate the gentle leader
close.
Mr speaker and body.
I think we need to keep in mind
that the magistrate court.
Here's a lot of serious and
often complex issues.
And.
The judges are very well
compensated.
So that concerns about being
able to attract people across
the state I think
Really aren't legitimate
concerns and given the fact that
we need to ensure that we have a
high level of individuals on the
bench to consider that these
important matters I urge the
body to support this legislation
and with that I move that house
bill one thirteen as amended do
now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one thirteen as amended the
vote is now.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty six in the affirmative
fourteen in the negative house
bill one thirteen as amended has
duly passed the house.
It's a little early you.
Representative Thomson ready and
item number one.
Thank you Mr speaker can you get
me to that point the directed
flick that election to serve for
placing a zero forty as amended
has on final passage has been
taken it is now subject to
amendment debate for
substitution.
Thank you Mr speaker so the
purpose of this bill is to
prevent tragedies and I'm gonna
tell you a really quick story a
friend of mine's son was and is
an adult man with autism he was
picked up at work by a care
giver and they were rushing home
because the man with autism had
to go to the bathroom they were
stopped for speeding the man
with autism jumped out of the
car because he thought he saw a
bathroom and the police pulled
their guns the caretaker with
saying he's got autism he's got
and luckily nothing happened but
we hear stories from around the
country I also talked to my deaf
friends and I say when you get
stopped by the police what do
you do well I reach in my pocket
to get my card and if the
officers yelling.
Hands up or we'll shoot our
hands on the steering wheel
overshoot they don't hear you
and something tragic could
happen which would be bad for
the officer and obviously for
the person so what this bill
does Mr speaker is it allows you
a choice when you register your
car to check a box that says the
driver or someone in the car may
have a disability there's a list
of disabilities things like
deafness autism
dementia those kind of things
it's totally voluntary if you
don't want it and people always
ask why don't you just put a
sticker on the license plate and
I talked to the deaf community
and they said we are already
targeted we don't want anything
else to target us so we've
checked that that box when you
are stopped by an officer when
practicable they put that you
put it in there the information
in the system and it will pop up
that the driver maybe death for
being a passenger may have
autism without with PED is the
most of you know that and I
couldn't swear that he wouldn't
spit on an officer he could he
would he couldn't he wouldn't
run away I don't know what to do
so it's very simple it's
voluntary and the the state
police have been working with me
they were they were concerned
that some places that are world
they may not be able to get a
signal X. cetera so it says when
practicable and with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions
there is a the gentleman from
Travis Etienne of the
Representative Townsend thank
you Mr speaker of the gentle
lady L. Mr speaker I yield.
The lady
You said something that I miss
reading the bill.
Two days ago is this totally
voluntary.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
And there are no requirements on
in motor vehicle for tracking
that.
Mr going forward is that correct
Mr speaker could you please
clarify I'm not understanding.
Well.
I had all sorts of questions
when I read this to mean is PTS
the would it be a viable
condition that might be I'm I
was just trying.
To determine the impact but when
you said it was totally
voluntary that candidates to
the.
The edge off of that for me and
I just want to make that is
correct it's totally voluntary
Mr speaker and gentleman that to
to put your car on the registry
is totally voluntary thank you
gentle lady that's all I need to
know thank you Mr speaker
there's a gentleman but as a
representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll please Mr speaker I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady answers all my
questions in the in the
beginning the introduction but I
do have a couple more questions
of Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
the list to try to talk about
the as far as the rest of
disabilities are things that
make all is out on page five is
at an all encompassing list
forms Mr speaker and gentleman
that that's a good question and
I'm going to use this time to
educate people people had
concerns about that so I asked
drafting it could be including
but not limited to and they said
we don't do that including is
open ended.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but a dancing with
the lack of clarity because
again as you know I too have a
background in
Individuals with disabilities as
well so with the list of
disabilities as members of the
list of people's there my
question Mr speaker gentle lady
is what would be a qualifying
condition and who would make
that determination Mr speaker
and gentleman that would be made
the rules and there has to be a
medical diagnosis.
and and thank you Mr speaker
thank you generated and I the
medical diagnosis is is it
something you get a medical
diagnosis for for many things
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady for the medical diagnoses
isn't we're talking about a
medical doctor are we talking
about a psychologist or are we
getting creating groups like
eastern medicine or other types
of providers or is it just going
to be.
Medical doctors and
psychologists are other.
other persons in that field Mr
speaker and gentleman on page
five eight seventeen a licensed
health care practitioner.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and and again I am
not.
It's more about really
understanding what this is
because I I I get it I
understand that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
But with the providers out there
with all the list of these
things
I I don't believe that is where
but the clear about who could
potentially be in call I I just
want to go to get of the a
diagnosis for my from for this
condition that I have.
who's going to make the
determination if that.
Qualifies me to register this Mr
speaker and gentleman as I said
it will be in rules what
conditions are are included and
the reason we didn't want to
limited is because there are
things we may not have thought
about so we want to protect
people with disabilities as well
as protect law enforcement and
all pretty much all of the law
enforcement I've talked to said
the more we know the better it
is so it's for both sides.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
generally I I actually I I
understand the point the other
thing Mr speaker gentle lady is
the time was because sometimes
with the with some of these
disabilities we have they may be
more of a Q. timelines or that
you know some of that we do with
other chronic that we do with
them for the rest of our lives
some of the some point in time
the changes that I may have this
condition where the building is
I. eighty of.
Some other kinds of a
disability.
The state has been
Representative or once I
register the vehicle.
can I then take that off the
vehicle if I choose to.
Speaker and gentleman it's
always voluntary.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the other question I
have is regarding minor children
you've actually kind of touched
on this I I mean Mr speaker
gentle lady have a a qualifying
condition myself I might of
children under the age of
eighteen they may so Mister
speaker gentle lady how how is
it that we will be in place to
address that as far as with
those individuals Mr speaker and
gentleman as it says in the bill
the driver or an occupant of the
vehicle and one thing I failed
to mention is that this would be
extremely impolite sudden lives
in a group home this would be
extremely important for the van
that transports folks that from
his group home so it doesn't
have to be the driver it says
the driver or an occupant.
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I do is I said I I
understand and I I think that.
Part of this is really my
concern is not about to not
advocate or not to understand
this because I do understand
that for situational get even
for myself when I see the lights
behind me hi my heart also
raises I do understand the need
for I guess Mr speaker gentle
lady I'm actually trying to find
some help or clarified
clarification so that we can
make something that's going to
make an impact and do that what
you're asking to do Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
said I have been working with
the state police and they have
agreed that this is what it
needs to be.
Thank you Mr speaker thank
internally my last questions are
really about the training and
what is in determine what the
training will be or deemed
appropriate or differences far
as to how they would deal with
the situation when when it does
come up Mr speaker and gentleman
I wish I could wave a magic wand
and solve all the problems I've
been carrying this bill for
years this is the first step I
want to get this passed because
I haven't been able to get it in
the past generally because it
ran out of time so I I would
welcome anyone to do a bill on
training for law enforcement
I've been working on getting
that done for training for
autism with law enforcement for
nearly thirty years and haven't
made a lot of progress so I
didn't want the perfect be the
enemy of the good.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
general idea and I understand
that but I mean if we're talking
about the one of the bills to be
an active sign is to be one of
the bill to be enacted.
Thank the date is January one
twenty twenty four.
So Mister speaker gentle lady we
have about eleven months the
lesson that are this far as to
provide the gentleman what train
is appropriate to determine how
and make sure that we have this
system registry because for some
individuals the registry of the
vehicle that member ID
registered so that's just
something I would like to kind
of point out Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
said this isn't going to solve
all the problems it's step one.
Thank you Mr speaker generally I
don't believe that I'm trying to
suggesting it should solve all
problems Mr speaker generally I
don't think I just saying it
should not create new ones I do
see it has the potential to
create some when we talk about
the passes lawmakers built here
there's no you cannot account
for every scenario you cannot we
cannot think of everything but
Mr speaker gentle lady what
we're talking about something in
some important as this is when
we're doing the law enforcement
and also those who they will
come into contact with I think
there has to be some very clear
guidelines are simpler process
and will be the ones that will
determine it is is going to be
those are going to be a
committee that's going to be
important those are going to be
a group that's going to be
looking as and the current
what's appropriate.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is not as I said this is step
one training maybe step to I'm
pretty sure that most officers
if they read on the screen that
the driver's death they will
know what that means they most
people know someone with autism
I wish everybody had universal
knowledge about disabilities but
that's not the case as I said
this is step one even if it
saves one deaf person because
when an officer read staff they
understood that they weren't
reply we're complying with their
commands because they were not
hearing them.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but again deafness
is only one part of this and
we're talking about the other
disorders which is addressing
your bill regarding
this call I am conditions it's
not gonna be as this as deafness
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
always the World Wide Web to
look up conditions Mr speaker
gentle lady but when I'm on the
side of the road I pulled over
but I'm not going to look at the
World Wide Web when I'm dealing
with the with the traffic stop
especially for a traffic stop
that may be involved in a
service corps of crime Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
what it says if practicable.
My last question Mr speaker
gentle lady is really about the
the cost of this it I didn't see
in this though there may be and
if there's a of FIR regarding
this program in this training
can you point to that Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman there is no training
involved in this bill the end of
fiscal impact report says in
twenty twenty four it it will be
two hundred thirty five thousand
nonrecurring to set the system
up.
Mr speaker generally so the two
hundred thirty five would that
mean for the total training with
a band for nifty that would
oversee this Mr speaker that is
not spelled out this is that is
what I believe to Mr do the
information technology division
has estimated that it will cost
to set it up.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen ideal but I think
there's a delay from Bernalillo
indoor Torrance Representative
Lord thank you Mr speaker the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I yield.
Okay Mr speaker and delayed I
have some questions on this so
is this going to include various
types of disorders like
Some of things will actually fit
into like the mental disorders
in the DSM of like a brain
injury or we have spectrum
disorders Senators three hundred
different types of disorders.
What they goes back to the same
training question I guess what
I'm looking at Mr speaker gentle
lady how are we going to prepare
our law enforcement officers I
do agree with you on when to
pull somebody over be nice to
know that they have a
schizophrenia or something but
my concern is on the training
portion going back to that and
and he said there's nothing how
would they know how to interact
with somebody who has a certain
type of traumatic brain injury
but there's three four different
types of how would they know
whether it's one two or three Mr
speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentle lady I'm not
asking them to treat that did
disorder I'm not asking them to
be experts on the disorder I'm
asking them to be aware.
Mr speaker generally that.
That's that's where I think
there should have been more
clarity in this because of a law
enforcement officer I know they
have a lot of contact with
people schizophrenic and I know
they have some training but they
may not have specific training
for a certain time I mean
deafness you can understand
maybe schizophrenic
Representative Rick is my main
thing is there's so many
different types of disorders
again end of fitting into this I
don't understand how they would
have enough knowledge to handle
the situation correctly and I'm
not saying that they shouldn't
I'm saying that how are they
going to know that this person
has asked burgers this person
has a different type something
else in the spectrum and maybe
the person does not want to be
touched how would they how the
inherently know with that Mr
speaker and gentle lady they
wouldn't inherently know that
every officer I've talked about
talk to you about this has said
the more knowledge we have the
better it is for everyone so no
they're not going to know that
asked burgers is no longer in
the DSM they and those kind of
things but it's just a hold on
caution you know stop if there I
I can't say I mean you cannot
possibly prepare for every type
of person as I said before in in
rules with the department they
will determine what what
conditions will be under this
and that's all I can say.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I I what I'm thinking trying to
think like there's something
very suspicious specific I'm
thinking of that if somebody had
borderline personality disorder
and they were splitting I don't
know how the law officer would
even know what that is and how
to deal with that so that's kind
of my concern I mean I I get
you're trying to put it in there
but at the same time of the
officer doesn't know what to do
that still kind of leave them
stranded so that that that's all
the questions I have the but
Madam Mr secretary lady to let
let let's wait for the question
of the COVID finish before you
you thank you you know I will Mr
speaker out of respect to let
her answer the question before
we move on to the next one of
that's okay Mr speaker and
gentle lady they don't know
anything without this registry
so even a little bit of
knowledge that the person may
have something is helpful.
You Mr speaker delays so I do
have a question about something
that came up earlier we were
talking about and I don't
believe you're on that committee
there were talking about how in
our next system there's a huge
backlog we have nobody to put
data entry in right now who is
going to be putting in that data
entry and if we have issues with
backlogs how are we going to
sure that doesn't get backlogged
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentle lady as I
said TRD is doing it.
Mr speaker telling how many
states have this type of
registration right now Mr
speaker and gentle lady I do not
know but I would love for New
Mexico to be the first.
Mr speaker delays some gonna go
to liability question so if
let's say a law enforcement
officer pull somebody over.
And they haven't been properly
trained but it says in there.
This person has access and they
don't handle it correctly is
that going to be an extra
penalty towards the law
enforcement officer as a as at
how that's going to play out Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman gentle lady there
is nothing in here about.
Any civil or criminal intent.
Yeah Mr speaker in New Delhi and
think about the Civil Rights Act
so I'm thinking about lawsuits
on that and how that's going to
play out because now that I'm in
this role that's what I'm
constantly think about aware
that repercussions on this with
the end result so Mister speaker
gentle lady so what happens if
the person submits let's say
their information to the MVD and
it doesn't get in there and god
forbid something happen where
somebody.
Jumps out of the car goes to
attack and it doesn't say that
they are schizophrenic or they
have issues who's responsible
for that Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's what we have right
now.
Mr speaker Delaney what would
you mean I'm trying to I'm
trying to get at this we can
hold on the total Sir if Mr
speaker if if.
A person said I wanted to have
this put on my my license in
this registry and nobody does it
and there ends up being a
catastrophic injury to that
person by the law enforcement
who would be at fault would be
the end of the day because it
didn't entered or the law
enforcement officers fall
because they didn't know somehow
Mr speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady it is part of registering
your car if your car is
registered it will be there.
Okay Mister speaker delayed if
they've they've B. D. forgets to
put it in the how how the law
enforcement officer know that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
cannot tell you what if what if
that's I I mean that's
hypothetical I don't know I'm
not a lawyer this has nothing to
do with any kind of punishment
civil or criminal.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady
I see that happening because
that's how the bill start and
the next time it's this happened
and we do need to put that and
we need to write a bill to fix
that the law enforcement to do
this we need to fix that the
civil rights as this and we need
to fix that so I see I see that
as beans one of the potentials I
mean I see the good side to it
but also see the exact opposite
side of what happens if and
who's liable for so
Mr speaker and gentle lady at
one last question I do have on
this would something like.
And I'm again going back to this
to this training.
There's some people have
seizures when the lights go off
and I could see that as being a
benefit but does the law
enforcement officer no want to
get to that how to treat them
that that's correct they
wouldn't have any idea how to do
that because they have the
training after this pass is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
as I said before that could be
in rules that when you checked
the box it there might be a box
that says seizure disorder
triggered by flashing lights and
throughout the bill it says if
practicable if it's not safe to
turn off the flashing lights
then they will not have to do
it.
Okay so I guess Mr speaker delay
I'm trying to think we'll
beforehand when they when you
get there but the last question
I have is how does a person and
maybe it's in her name miss it
how to somebody was like let's
say a TV are can function but
may not be function of to sign
on to a contract how would they
do this how would they sign up
for this if they couldn't
technically.
Sign up for anything because of
their disorder Mr speaker and
gentle lady if they are
registering their car
They should have the
capabilities to drive a car and
to fill out the registration
form on the website.
Thank you generally Mr you would
hope so but that doesn't always
turn out that way but thank you
for into my question thank you
there's further debate the
gentleman from current about the
with the result to send me and
representative someone.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Does this create any kind of
liability for the police
officers Mr speaker gentleman no
more than what it is now and I
would like to say that it isn't
really good PR for the state or
for any police department if
they shoot a deaf person dead.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
If a death person pulls a gun on
an officer.
Does that officer have the right
to defend himself.
Even though it said that there's
a deaf person in the vehicle.
Many stop Mr speaker and
gentleman it says if
practicable.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Does a and an officer have to
react different to being shot
from a death person or or a
normal person.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
think that's I I'm not going to
answer that because it doesn't
make sense the gentleman that
the thing that prophetical
really goes Mr young's overall
rephrase my question.
Does an officer have to react in
different.
To somebody that he pulled over.
If he knows that person is
death.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
hope so I would hope that they
wouldn't be screaming commands
at them to get their hands up or
they're going to shoot I would
hope they would see that that
person was staff and realize
that they now somebody pulls a
gun that's a whole different
story but yes I would expect
that they would treat someone
differently because talking to a
person who is deaf isn't a good
way to communicate with them.
Thank you for that answer.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's on my question is for the
debate related close Mr speaker
I move that house bill forty as
amended do now pass please we're
on final passage of house bill
forty as amended the vote is now
open.
It's about.
To close.
Representative closed by a vote
of fifty one in the affirmative
ten in the negative house bill
forty as amended has duly passed
this house.
Is the gentle lady from.
Chavis carriers of bills ready
on item number ten.
Thank you Mr speaker can you get
me to the point.
Let the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
Bill one fifty five on final
passage as we taken it is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
And that Mr speaker I also have
Elisabeth Johnson here with me
as an expert.
I'm explaining the bill all this
bill does house bill one fifty
five is a deal with section see
the statue that raises the
penalties when a crime of
aggravated battery upon a peace
officer inflicting great bodily
harm or they do so with a deadly
weapon or they do so in a manner
where by death or great bodily
harm can be inflicted is now
guilty of second degree felony
verse the third grade.
Without a stand for questions.
This really is our first bill
motivate
anyone present plans just for
fun.
Yes please.
Soon debate.
The gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker I move now that house
bill one fifty I do now pass we
are on final passage of house
bill one fifty five the vote is
now open.
Is about.
You all can keep it read we get
to the bottom of close.
What about the clothes reels.
It is.
Is it is House Bill defined as
we passes house.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
addition it is so ordered are
there now some is the gentleman
from Santa and Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment that's resources
committee will meet tomorrow
morning at nine o'clock we will
not hear house bill ninety one
we.
Well here house building for
three great finalization and
house bill four thirty one local
government utility service
restrictions thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thompson thank you Mr speaker
health health and Human Services
will meet Monday morning at
eight thirty in room three oh
seven.
Members signaled the gentle lady
from McKinley is no
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow at
one PM in room three zero five
members take note the gentle
lady from the you are present a
Ferrari thank you Mr speaker
here house consumer and public
affairs committee will meet
Tuesday and we didn't of it's on
the web but we didn't have it
published on the golden rod
we're going to be hearing house
bill three oh nine three forty
three forty three eighty six six
three seventy six three seventy
nine three eighty nine and two
twenty five.
Member state noted in your
meeting and three seventeen.
Yes at one thirty on next
Tuesday thank you Mr speaker
thank you to lady to lady from
Los Alamos Santa Fe and Santa
thank you Mr speaker here House
Judiciary Committee then will be
meeting tomorrow starting at
noon in room three oh nine
members take note any other
announcements.
I have an announcement.
Members of the tension.
House Bill five thirty nine this
is one of our generic bills.
I will remove the referral to
house rules and refer House Bill
five thirty nine to the house
health and Human Services
Committee then Stackhouse
appropriations and finance
committee the two to five number
at the bottom is point two two
five three four seven point one
again that's point two two five
three four seven point one.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr speaker just
another reminder that your house
transportation capital
improvements committee will be
meeting in room three oh five
starting at noon
it should be fun thanks members
signal.
Any other announcements.
All right members we have
committee work tomorrow the
floor will not meet this weekend
but we will reconvene Monday at
eleven and will work with the
respective leadership offices to
decide to to alert you as to
what bills will be coming on
third reading on Monday.
with that.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until eleven AM
Monday.
House system eleven o'clock on
Monday have a great weekend.
