The money would go to them every
day F. environmental health
epidemiology.
It is.
Then
you'll.
We'll see if we might need that.
We we seem to have a quorum here
I think we're we're going to go
ahead and get started so.
Welcome everybody to the.
Two for one meeting of the.
Senate health and public affairs
committee we're going to have a
brief organizational meeting and
then we'll launch right into our
our bills for today I did want
to say if you're here percent of
bills thirty nine.
That one will not be heard today
that Senator up by the as built
and solemnize the marriages by
notaries.
and he's he's withdrawn it too
to re write it he's he's still
going to introduce it but it'll
be re written so we're not ready
to hear that one today but
everything else on the agenda
will be here today.
And we're gonna start with an
organizational meeting.
I'd like to members who are here
to introduce themselves and just
to give a little bit of
background about you know.
Yourselves.
We'll start with you senator
Maestas welcome.
You very much Mr chairman for
having me hi my name's on Tania
Maestas a Representative Senate
district twenty six so what's
myself all the Kurki west of
west central corridor and little
bit of south Philly neighborhood
and you to school area I would I
served sixteen years in the
house the first six of those
years on on C. pack so we did a
lot of policy in the committee I
look forward to.
So learning about this committee
and now and working with all of
you thank you.
Senator aching.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon everyone my name's
Martin Hickey
I am a physician but have
practice in fifteen years but
I've also done a lot of
administrative work in the old
days as we like to say lead
loveless back in the nineties
the faculty practice at the
university of New Mexico one of
the largest Blue Cross is in New
York state have been all over
the map hospitals health plans
and physicians groups anyway I'm
very just thrilled to be on the
committee Mr chair and look
forward to trying to bring up a
little bit of what I've learned
along the way as we look at
different house bill so thank
you all right thank you senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr chair my name's Antoinette
Sedillo Lopez I represent the
area around the university of
particularly to the south and a
little bit to the north and I
have well to a little bit about
me I'm from New Mexico I was
born in Albuquerque I was raised
in Valencia County I was a law
professor for twenty seven
years.
and then I retired and I ran in
lexically died you which is a
domestic violence agency that
serves all of course but the
target out which was like the
new immigrants and that was a
very very profound experience
for me and then I got into
politics as my second career
great great to be here thank you
Mr chair thank you senator
Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman and fellow
members wonderful to start off
the legislative session of
twenty twenty three with this
meeting my name is Brenda
McKenna and I represent Senate
district nine which includes a
little bit of quite a few
communities including
Albuquerque Rio Rancho town of
Bernalillo corral Esposito's
pueblo of Sandia all good don't
just I'm originally from non bay
Pueblo and when I'm not being a
public servant I worked for
congresswoman Melanie Stansbury
and I do constituent services
for her as well as field
Representative work and when I'm
not doing that I'm working with
my mom on our dictionary of non
they tailor some thank you
chairman
of the screen.
And the Senator committees.
Thank you Mr chair Greg smitteez
some district nineteen.
Which is basically all of these
mountains and I have a little
pocket of southeast Albuquerque
can that for hills area and then
now I have a little bit of
Sandia heights Senator Hickey so
we think about.
are you willing twenty well it
will will thank you I got the
map in the office.
And a surgeon my wife not been
married for eighteen years four
sons and four daughters we home
school
I love that it's very very near
and dear to my heart.
And yeah I love this committee.
It was my top choice so thank
you thank you for making the
trip Senator Schmedes is the
ranking member of which means
the top Republican on the
committee that it looks like
he's also going to be the only
Republican on the committee for
that because Senator Gallegos
who usually accompanies him and
is faithful in his attendance is
held up in I think he's in
Roswell.
Is that what they said in
Roswell is that resume is mother
is very seriously ill and so
he's attending to her needs and
being there with the family so
he could he won't be with us
today but hopefully by Wednesday
he will be back and we'll we'll
be able to have him present as
well.
And Senator Ingle is gone to
lunch with Tom ran and there's
no telling when he will be back.
And senator Tom and I I thought
he was following the out of the
office he was right there of a
he'll be here shortly senator
bill Telemeds is the vice
chairman of the committee.
And with that we'll go to the
the committee of staff and have
you introduce yourselves Franken
berry you want to do that I'm
primary.
And American are that.
That and analysts free to the
pool to.
just got maybe the early
nineteen.
That for me you could just
introduce me.
This is an introductory.
Very good thank as an attorney
by the way so.
They're awful back here this is
my nineteenth year initially
with development and Mr took
over the reins of the heroes and
to have a public health
background.
Rural health EMS and and then
public.
Look forward to working with you
this year.
Right at home and did you want
to introduce yourself we just
finished with the the committee
members introductions Senator
Tallman is our vice chairman.
Good afternoon everyone those
Senator Neville tone
representing Anna's Senator
sixteen which is a portion or
the sites
Very glad to be here look
forward to this discussions and
joy working with this committee
is that just for this and that
for several years and and we
handle some interesting issues
and
We have an excellent chairman.
And staff so looking forward to
another successful productive
here thank you thank you senator
then we have three other
analysts
we have the pool analyst for the
majority would you like to
introduce yourself L. yes.
Two analysts.
Thank you.
I.
Health policy.
Thank you Carol.
And did you want to introduce
yourself or our technician.
Okay.
Okay.
Senator Gallegos.
Good morning Mr chairman I hope
you can hear me now yeah it I'm.
I'm Senator David Davis calling
in from a unison Mexico my
mother's Center last days been
primary care giver for two years
you madam cancer some
unavailable today at I
appreciate the opportunity zoom
in I've been in the house is
starting my third year and eight
years in the sorry about that
thirty in the Senate eight years
in the house really work with
gas coming New Mexico for thirty
years currently I work from my
wife's family Romero's funds
construction coming.
Lauren Holman New Mexico but I
have my Senate district has it
in Lee County so look for the
conversations today and sorry
for the inconvenience hopefully
this will give a good enough
information and discussion so
thank you Mr great thank you
senator.
And then I I guess the analyst
for the minority is not yes
there she is okay.
Great good to have you here.
Okay so are committee secretary
is brand new this year of those
of you who are a long time the
attendees of the health and
public affairs committee would
remember
payment does so who is who is
the secretary for this committee
for I don't know how twenty
years something like twenty
years she retired this year and
of replacing her is our new
committee secretary Cecilia
Flores.
One introduce a something about
yourself sure my name secede not
Senator and this is my first
year working here I'm super
excited and ready to learn.
Right thank you when you're
gonna be helping her today hi
you introduce yourself for I'm
Merion Roberts this route and
this is my twenty first year and
that twenty of those years have
been an asset education is the
committee secretary and I am
helping Cecilia.
The over path forward.
Okay sec.
Very good and then we have our
attendance and the since you
want to introduce yourself.
Yes good to have you said.
And to where those bottles of
water that just arrived or what
was that they just came in.
If anybody needs cleaning
supplies.
yes so if any if any committee
members need water we've not yet
been provided our own supply but
we have some in in my office of
anybody needs water just lets
said no and we'll get it for
you.
To get some
Then we have we have of others.
What we call the guys that are
here our security our security
yes we have people here with
security
You want to introduce yourself
yes please.
Thank you everybody wanted to do
another that on his I am from
Santa Fe retired police
detective from the City of Santa
Fe this is my first legislative
session so happy to be here okay
thank you for being here and
then yes.
chair and members now the mold
I've been working.
The.
Right thank you and we hope that
you have very little to do.
But if the if the crowd gets
rowdy we know you can handle
them so everybody's been fairly
warned
Yes.
Just.
She just introduce yourself
yeah.
there is okay good.
You introduce yourself.
One of the Mr Garcia good.
Three times good.
Well great it's good to have you
all thank you.
So this is a health and and
public affairs committee we
added health couple years ago
before that it was just public
affairs but we also did health
we just formalize the
arrangement.
Our committee is one of the
first ups for legislation
typically legislation it starts
with either us.
Conservation or education and
then goes on to the second tier
committees that the.
Judiciary.
will cultural affairs also
Indian cultural affairs of the
end of the first line committee
but then Judiciary or finance
usually polishes up anything
that has escaped our clutches so
by the time it gets through here
hopefully it's it's it's it's
been.
That thoroughly and and and and
can move through the other the
next committee on its way to the
floor very seldom do we have are
we the final committee before it
goes to the floor except unless
it's a memorial in which case a
lot of memorials will go to
rules and then here.
And then a few other items will
go they don't have a financial
impact Representative there
involve the need for legal
scrutiny they'll come here and
and and and it we may be the
final committee before goes on.
It's a it's one of the hardest
working committees I mean every
committee would say there's a
hard working committee but I
think it just ensure numbers
ensure volume of work our
committee gets a lot of things
referred to it not only is it
all the health matters you know
the behavioral health matters
and all the the anything with
the word public and if so a lot
of the.
Things dealing with local
government will come here things
dealing with public security and
safety come here
And so as a result in a inner
ordinarily in the sixty day
session where the Senate may
have seven hundred or eight
hundred bills introduced will
wind up with three three hundred
of them here through this
committee and as a result Mike
my policy and and it's not
always wise but my policy is to.
Here every bill that comes
before us we don't try to say
well this is the important one
so we what we'll hear them but
years we just won't have time
for we we we we actually buckle
down and try to get through the
whole list it's not always
possible.
But we try and and sometimes
some committees and the place
where yeah we meet three times a
week we meet on Monday Wednesday
Friday and and at this time
slot.
and if we can handle eight to
ten bills every time we meet you
know we're we're dealing with so
let's say thirty bills of of a
week in six weeks that's a
hundred and eighty.
That that is going to be enough
we will have more than that so
we've got it that we will have
some pretty long link the agenda
is later on what we've devised
as a way of dealing with some of
that workload is a system of
What we call the Berrics of of
the we appreciate it yes please.
Right there for those bills are
simple appropriation will have
one today we created a special
appropriations calendar
grid we still expect sponsors
and advocates but to keep their
comments.
these bills are mostly going to
go out to finance and there's a
team up with all the rest of the
appropriation bills and they get
prioritized in the magic that
happens it Senate finance so
again we want to go through
those bills rapidly we don't do
our own analysis will have the
FY ours and we expect our brief
testimony by the Sanchez and
then we'll move them
individually but we'll move them
off if anybody wants to pay more
attention to a given
