Representative can.
Representative diet goes here.
Representative Parker.
Nineteen.
Representative Ortez here.
This guy.
Representative Serrato.
Townsend.
Thanks to.
Chair landed more.
We have a client yeah Mr chair
good morning for those with us
in the room and listening resume
today we get to hear House Bill
five forty seven Mr chair when
you're ready thank you madam
chair good morning good morning
members thank you all for the
opportunity to present and work
with all of you on house bill
three forty seven with that we
have a committee substitute
there's been passed up the
correct
version we have a motion to move
this committee substitute for
the session.
So.
Thank
you.
The with those being passed out
let ME just simply begin by I
have a couple.
That's where you begin to feel
the the number for us on this
committee absolutely committee
substitute numbers give us one
second so we make sure everybody
gets okay.
Are ready to go out to see
really.
