Senator by this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Center guy across.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto happy
Valentine's day madam clerk
center our meal.
Senator Kernan.
Etcetera then yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz the pandemic.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
You now have a quorum Mister
president.
Would like to welcome everyone
to today's session with just the
be led today by Senator Brandt
pledge of allegiance in Spanish
to relate today by center how to
meal and the salute to the
Mexico flights read led today by
senator Wirth.
We come to you in humble prayer
to ask for your grace and help
in sharing this gift of love
your love in the many decisions
that are made by this body of
forgiveness charity and love to
all the decisions that we hear
me.
We pray also for those who could
not be with us today because of
But most of all we ask for your
guidance as we take up the many
challenges that we face as New
And now may the lord bless you
and keep you.
The lord make his face shine
upon you and be gracious to you
the lord lift up his countenance
But I'm at the let them.
I salute the flag.
majority floor leader Senator
Peter Wirth to get us started on
to the next order of business.
Thank you Mr president good
morning everyone happy
father Britto thank you for
being here this morning
a very appropriates prayer about
good to take a pause every
morning I'd like to think about
our reflection an indication and
so I just really want appreciate
you being here Mr president
order business announces lane is
Senator Padilla thank you very
much very much Mr president
happy Valentine's day it is
consent to allow cameras in the
chamber.
See no objections cameras are to
the Senate floor in their
standard uniforms.
Seeing no objection so ordered
Senator Padilla I thank you Mr
president units consent to
excuse Senators my Estes
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so back to our
announcements today it's a
Hispanic cultural day at the
legislature and we will have a
Henry Kiki survey drug which is
at the end of Loretto the
luncheon of begin following the
joint session by invitation only
Senate memorial twenty eight
which is senator John Pinto day
from the president's table place
that on today's calendar.
Hearing no objection will remove
read that memorial today just a
reminder the deadline for
introduction of bills is this
Thursday February sixteenth
seventeenth is a rosary at six
o'clock French's mortuary
seventy one twenty one Wyoming
northeast in Albuquerque and the
funeral masses on Saturday
events the national Hispanic
cultural center foundation
reception has I'm foundation has
a reception at the palace prime
restaurant tonight at five
today the some media project is
a center for transformational
building a strong generation of
by apoc leaders through
leadership development civic
engagement and the outdoors
access to the outdoors and the
opportunity to connect with the
protect ecosystems that all New
Mexicans are dependent on since
its foundation in twenty twenty
backpacking snowshoeing and
outdoor leadership development
courses
and so Mister Mister president
what.
on Vladimir Madrid Gabriele
cardio body on a more DO
Christina Garcia Andrea obelus
and board this of a loss let's
Senator Wirth and with that Mr
president I yield to other
members up front for
announcements and introduction
of any guess thank you senator
throughout that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous all you'll to
not only have you been active in
advocating for fairness and
justice when it comes down to
our climate and our planet but
you are also walking the walk by
I'm very excited to see you here
today and I just get really
excited when I see you in
committees so Mister president I
love the fact that we've got
these young folks here today
Senator Hermio Mr president I
also want to welcome this to be
a project to the Senate chamber
and thank them for what they do
have a introduce them to the
thought of coming to visit us
and Abbey Q. with our project
department of transportation
last night I did the late night
shift from seven thirty PM to
twelve AM and worked on slower
snow and ice removal off of New
see actually cars honking at us
and passing us at a high rate of
speed well the blade was down
but the hard work they put into
keeping New Mexicans safe means
they are truly New Mexicans
love during Valentine's day
thank you Mr president.
Thank you center how to mail.
Senator crystalline.
Happy Valentine's day Mister
our caucus we are spoiled on
Valentine's day slide thirteen
of our Valentine's we're away
from our sweethearts they make
us feel so special so on behalf
of Senator Kernan I our offices
as ladies we appreciate it so
thank you gentlemen for all you
do for us.
Thank you thank you senator I'm
in any further announcements we
have Senator Brandt.
Hearing no objection thank you
senator Representative.
Any further announcements
Senators.
Si no further announcements.
so just to give everyone kind of
a road map we're going to do the
memorial honoring Senator Pinto
now
I think the plan is to go over
time for folks to go over and
have lunch and center and re
gets to be honored and then when
we come back on the floor we're
just gonna do to bills because
we need to get up to committee
reading of legislation and I
would be able to Senator Pinto
for Senate memorial twenty eight
thank you before we go to the
next order of business which is
third reading of legislation.
With that we'll go ahead and to
yield to senator Pinto for
senatorial twenty eight.
Thank you thank you Mr president
I move that Senate memorial
twenty eight.
I don't know if I want to talk
before the reader reads are
after but it's been a request to
have the reader to read.
The right all right.
twenty three Senator John Pinto
date in the Senate or as senator
John Pinto was born in nineteen
twenty four to a family of
Navajo sheepherders and was
raised in left and Arizona and
in fort defiance Arizona and
after many unsuccessful
unsuccessful attempts to run
away he finally graduated and
whereas he received his
bachelor's degree at the age of
code talker and in two thousand
one received a congressional
silver medal of honor for his
service as a code talker and
we're just Senator John Pinto
work for twenty eight years in
the Gallup McKinley county
and we're just Senator John
Pinto served as president of the
Gallup Indian community center
from nineteen fifty through
nineteen seventy during which
time he help feed the homeless
chapter of the Navajo Nation
from nineteen fifty to nineteen
fifty four and whereas center
John Pinto served as secretary
treasurer for the redrock
chapter of the Navajo Nation
sixty and whereas senator John
Pinto was elected in nineteen
seventy two to the McKinley
County board of county
commissioners where he served
four years as a commissioner and
was picked up in a snowstorm in
Albuquerque by David fellow
freshman senator Maddy then the
arrival and and whereas senator
John Pinto was a member of the
nineteen eighty seven or just
senator John Pinto was
instrumental in the passage of
numerous legislative initiatives
including the designation in
nineteen eighty seven of
one between Gallup and Shiprock
and we're just Senator John
Pinto worked tirelessly for the
improvement of state highway
four ninety one one between
Gallup and Shiprock quits the
spearheaded by senator John
Pinto during his work in the two
thousand nineteen legislative
session and we're just Senator
John Pinto worked with the
interim legislative Indian
nineteen amber asked senator
John Pinto would annually
entertain his colleagues in the
Senate with his rendition in
Navajo of the potato song and
leader whose kind demeanor
earned him the full respect of
the Senate and harass center
John Pinto had been married to
his wife Joanne for sixty three
legislative organizations now
therefore be it resolved by the
center of the state of New
Mexico that it extends its
congratulations to the family of
the late senator John Pinto on
and the people of New Mexico and
be it further resolved that
February fourteenth twenty
twenty three be declared Senator
John Pinto date in the Senate.
the Navajo Nation signed and
sealed at the capitol the City
of Santa Fe Senator Shannon D.
Pinto.
How we see Morales president
Be put on its final passage
subject to debate amendment or
substitution say no objection
Senator Pinto to explain.
express our love for each other
and those that we care for and.
This Dr Pinto.
to distinguish.
His approach to many things.
I wish he was still here.
But we move forward.
And it is A. M..
To our young ones and even to
those that sees here everyday
from the top of the roundhouse
We be accountable and be
responsible.
For our actions and we are.
And to also conveyed that care
And I I really that I mean
there's a lot of words that I
could use to describe him and
what he was able to instill in
me.
here at the Senate and I'm
pretty sure there's a lot of you
have I still hear do stories
every day it in there most of
the time they're funny but
spare to if people were hurting
it and just like you know glass
over people but he really looked
at people I don't know if you No
Way seem like he could see
important to him to to address
it in that manner.
And like I said he was just very
is still something we still are
trying to tackle today and I
hope we get there one day where
we can really
thank you Senator Pinto we do
have several of the legislators
who would like to speak on this
memorial will go to Senator
Pirtle thank you Mr president
and thank you Senator Shannon
that you know really made me
feel welcome and and and part of
the legislature and it was with
this little jokes he always had
these little jokes that we would
on the new senator from Russell
are you are you the senator from
Gallup.
And and so we just always a
funny little interaction that we
could have together and you know
one of my favorite memories Mr
hard for anything to really keep
his attention I mean you can
kind of see it for me right I I
don't sit still very well and if
we were in the Senate lounge and
was just one of those moments
that you know becomes a core
memory right away you just put
it away because you know it's
going to be something special
that you'll go back to and
that's really the legacy that
chair that committee a few times
Mr president so I know that
meant a lot to me and I think he
knew that it meant a lot to me
to to have that responsibility
and he was able to share that
roll call and my name was called
and there was no Pinto in front
of it.
There was no Pinto called before
me it really shook me in a way
that I wasn't really ready to be
really helped me to to take in
and and really appreciate
everything that you've done but
now I get to be after roll call
after our new Shannon Pinto
Senator Pinto and I'm very
grateful for that because it was
really strange and weird that
Senator Senator Brandt center by
the end senator Wirth Senator
Lopez thank you Mr president.
my S. this is is sitting and
Senator Pinto John Pinto sat
Stewart Senators Shannon Pinto
is is sitting and I got to know
earlier but his advice was
always listen to all the sites
in the state he said before you
commit your vote.
other side and I'll never forget
that he gave me that advice so
early in in my career and how
helpful that advice has been.
and he joined the committee it
was just back committee and he
kept writing notes to me and and
writing question so we kept
writing back and forth and
having sort of a side
your vote too early.
So I just I had such warm
memories and I was very very
saddened when he passed but I am
granddaughter Shannon Pinto who
is carrying out the tradition
and I'm so grateful for that
thank you Mr Mr president thank
eating at our house with Navajo
Nation presidents and and some
celebrities I can't remember one
guy was from like Gucci or Italy
that they brought in for this
and and we grow up as.
People Gallup Susan the gap and
we learn languages but the learn
Navajo he learns any right and
and you know we refer to that
brother.
It has a return from family and
you talk to che is my grandpa.
And she Maez my grandma right in
you greet them in their Navajo
about culture and life but what
you learn from a man that's been
here this long and that had
struggled with where he came
you saw the man who quietly did
that didn't make a big scene
about anything quietly asked for
what he thought was respectful
and what he knew he needed.
you know east always call him J.
in the John always John was
always famous for this.
You don't want to waste any food
and and in center printer would
that wasn't gonna have something
that night and sense in there
laughing in the and one that I
think he left for like ten extra
meals and we and I said Senator
always never really thought
about himself.
Right he never went by the high
dollar suit.
He never really bought five
hundred dollar shoes R. three
hundred dollar parent cowboy
He was here Representative is
people in and it says a lot at
the end of the life of a person
right or what happens in our
Are part of the state to leave
the Navajo people to be at a
traditional leader and a leader
with values that that led us to
where we are today so I'll never
people in your life remember me
every day Center Pandora
probably gets up every day and
walks in this building your
members or grandpa in in the
struggles he had to do to get
that little corner in your
morning prayers he's with you
and and he's asking you to do
certain things for for you for
your family for the state and
for your nation.
yes we do have further comments
I I just want to remind the body
that movement is taking place
for the joint session so I just
want to remind the members
that's we will be going into the
joint session about twelve
stand up and strong support this
memorial thank you Senator Pinto
very befitting to bring this
before us today
Offices with Senator Pinto and
he with me for twenty five years
and so I do know him and I feel
like he's so much here with us
people right in front of my
secretary's desk and I walk in a
hurry as usual and he'd say
Senator.
I need to see you and I said oh
Senator very well so let's talk
and that's how we would joke
around throughout the day and
many times he would share his
food that he had in the
whatever we were family we
shared everything we had in
there in the office and you know
John Senator Pinto was
he is from the heart deep
sincere and caring and I was so
blessed to have an opportunity
to to share offices with him for
with so much that we've learned
from him so that we could use to
better New Mexico thank you Mr
president thank you center there
has Senator.
these meals and things but he
was so quiet practically had to
sit in his lap to hear him but
he had the greatest stories
which is why I wanted to sit
next to him all the time.
Asked to share a little capital
outlay money in you know like I
can say no to everybody in the
room but I couldn't say no to
him.
So we have some big projects
And we came into here and it's
very quiet.
Almost humble very humble.
Navajo Senator.
cow where did this little quiet
guy all of a sudden he was a
marine rated fight I was shocked
by that because there was
nothing about him that was that
Whether he was quiet or not.
But the last thing that he did
for me Mr president is he gave
me a sister in Shannon so thank
you John Pinto.
Pinto you know he.
served with me on education but
and we got to know each other in
their and
He worked with me on a few bills
with the same hotels.
And so we would we would always
eat breakfast together in the
morning and just got to know him
very well and actually got to
with a man who knowledge serve
the state in this body but serve
our country.
And served our country in such a
unique way very few people could
speaking a different language
today.
Because without them we would
not have won that war.
That was a code that could not
be broken.
service I thank him for the
honor of serving with him and I
thank him for giving us his
wonderful granddaughter the
service with us today.
Si no further.
about of the Senator John Pinto
I would like to say did over.
But one thing that in addition
to the potato song which is a
Lopez is and he were turned
around and he get the phone.
And he would always call and
wait until you would answer the
phone and then he'd sit there
and wave.
know me.
That was always this question is
do you know yes so yes senator I
do and I would explain and then
he you know give a hug and he go
so appreciated by about that is
it broke you know that we we all
kind of get in the zone on
debate here on the floor but he
would in the just kind of break
your grandpa he was a legend he
has stories about how he was
picked up by Senator are gone as
he was driving up here for their
first day of coming up to the
of who was coming up to Santa Fe
at that time those are the
stories that we've heard the
legend that your grandpa is
share our stories but to share
the space with you to thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez see no
further debate.
Senator Pinto to close.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that all forty two members and
the lieutenant governor be shown
as a voting in the affirmative.
Seeing no objection by a vote.
Yeah thank you members of the
body.
Majority floor leader Senator
Peter Wirth to take us to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
going out of business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
into the chamber they're going
to serenade the Senate as the
lead us to the house of
representatives for the joint
session today and I do believe
we have some Representative is
Representative Garcia.
This is the most Baker we went
to the US than in the US
to join us in the joint session
across the street.
To listen to our our number of
guest for this very important is
thank you to the members of the
house for inviting us we do have
to be Martinez and affiliate
release that are going to
serenade the Senate as we make
our way to the house of
joint session on Hispanic
cultural day and we returned
back to the chamber an hour
after the conclusion of the
joint session so that'll give a
little time for folks to go to
