Senator guy across.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Center my Estes.
Senator McKenna.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez there Senator
smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Stewart
here senator Tom in.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
president.
Thank you ask all the members in
the body.
All of our guests in the gallery
please rise for the invocation
Senator Joshua Sanchez pledge
allegiance in Spanish with that
today by Senator Michael Padilla
and the salute to New Mexico
flag to be led today by Senator
Bobby Gonzalez.
Syria and Turkey this is our
spiritual homeland Antioch our
church is a member of that
picture Kate is now in Antakya
Turkey most of our churches have
In the name of the father and of
the son and of the Holy Spirit
one god and glory to the our god
fight in us cleanse us from
every stain and save our souls
our gracious lord only god holy
mighty all the more to have
mercy on us when the god for the
into ages of ages and all holy
Trinity have mercy on us lord
cleanse us from our sins master
part in our iniquities only god
visiting healer infirmities for
padre Nuestro K. Dustin this
yellow thank difficult us at the
number mandatory in all of this
at two one taught and led to get
ruffing says come with them you
know sort of us but on the most
of us can also provide an none
of none of state hasn't looked
into us on the left eleven
Austin malignant our father who
us not into temptation but
deliver us from the evil one for
that is the kingdom and the
power and the glory of the
father and of the son and of the
Holy Spirit that whenever and
I salute to the flag of the
over to our Senate majority
floor leader center Peter Wirth
to take us to the next order of
business Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president good morning
everyone unanimous consent we go
and thank you to Reverend
Robinson for your words and for
being here and I very much
appreciate you.
Advocating for help to those who
our honor to have you here as
well and big shout out again to
our Senate chaplain father Rick
for bringing in the diversity of
voices every morning something
sponsored by Landel legal women
voters date and future farmers
of America day in the halls of
history today is the deadline
for introduction of bills
have for memorials to that we're
gonna have read and then to that
will be introduced but not read
so first unanimous consent to
remove Senate memorial twenty
the president stable to be face
in today's calendar Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
that'll be Senator Diamond and
that's one of the memorials that
we will read a reader will read
table and place that on today's
calendar.
Seeing no objection we will
remove Center moral forty seven
in honor of senator Cynthia
Nava.
Thank you Mr president that'll
day from the presence table in
place on today's counter seeing
no objection will remove Senate
memorial thirty one off of the
president's table and be placed
on today's calendar Senator
Lauren and Barbara Nelson
recognition from the president's
table and place that on today's
calendar see no objection will
remove central moral fifteen off
the president's table and
to those
That are carrying the memorials
and other members of gas on the
memorials just way to the
memorial is voted on and then
we'll introduce guests after
each one of those we have a
number of guests to introduce
convention center this evening
from six to nine by invitation
only and the New Mexico State
University college of aces Aggie
after fast at the end at Loretto
to allow cameras in the chamber
and in the gallery.
Seeing no objection cameras are
permitted in the chamber and in
the gallery today center for the
thank you Mr president just
Say no objection Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president what one
thing I need to just announce
and and really an apology on
behalf of the Senate we had an
incident that happened as a
result of that law enforcement
has been notified and is looking
into it there was a security
Collett sh that allow the camera
has now been fixed so there will
be no cameras for public
testimony it'll all be done.
Or early in the in the
Senator Wirth we do have one
announces miscellaneous we do
have several senators who would
like to speak start with Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president members
Hawthorne elementary is the only
elementary school that does a
mesa program I'm I'm sure it's
already spreading to other
Thanks Senator just a reminder
to the Senator is that if you do
I thank you very much Mr
president and I was consent to
introduce my guests hearing no
objection proceed Senator thank
you very much Mr president of
located in Albuquerque and as I
introduce you if you would just
please stand.
we have of the sea.
pop out to experience all that
it has to offer and is currently
studying jazz dance guitar and
visual arts we have Roslyn
Vargas.
to I apologize business picks a
committee costing yes and he's a
freshman at public academy for
performing arts and he's been
she's a sophomore at pop up and
has been again attending Pappas
in seventh grade she is studying
dance in the pre professional
company contemporary dance and
Who is a senior at Papa and will
graduate of course this year as
a possible life for
she is vice president of the
I was a junior at Papa she is a
member of the state champion
twenty twenty two treble choir
and has the honor of singing in
eighth grade student at pop up
or serious studies visual art
and film he's a proud honor
student and Services teacher's
aide for younger students in
contemporary dances sample as
well as studies advanced ballet
he has represented Papua New
Mexico for dance in the January
Lopez our grandchildren of our
long time friend who recently
passed of Gillen of a jeep
Gillen so if we could welcome
Thank you Senator Lopez we have
for the centers would like to
make some announcements with
Senator Gallegos followed by
center how to meal Senator
Hickey.
Misprision unanimous consent to
Santa Fe again Martinez owns is
vice president Jammeh motions
there's a lot of the road work
here in town you've been here
sixteen years but he's also vice
our chaplain they're working on
a project to help each other out
and I I just wanted to have
again here to see how the
government works he lives here
in town is been up in the
Senator Hotmail.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to introduce my guests
no objection proceeds Senator
eighty nine with eleven members
in one agricultural class now
that chapter has sixty three
members and six classes such as
times during twenty twenty one
twenty twenty two the best of is
a chapter submitted the program
of activities which is the forty
three page document Mr president
and competed at the national
these that was recognized on the
national FFA stage in October
where they received a two star
rating for the twenty twenty to
twenty twenty one and the twenty
Mr president I also have two
other guests with me here on the
floor I have Mister on the Honda
then yes I do that I who is the
prepares students for academic
research as well as graduate
school his students have a
ninety six graduation rate I'm a
proud of love nest of U. N. M.
University majoring in civil
engineering with a minor in
mathematics Daniel wanted to
experience the capital and
represent the south as a proud
native son of Southern New
help the entire state Daniel is
part of the cap program which is
the college assistance migrant
program which gets first
generation farm workers to
navigate through college and on
Senator Hickey.
Mr president then I have
lot about health care and
medicine
you know I haven't really
practiced in fifteen years but
Mary has practice started with
fact when I was CEO at love us
and she was there everyone in
town knew me as doctor contains
husband.
a year ago and
so I really appreciate her for
patients in that you know a lot
of times you you all will ask me
answer is so not only did she
keep up with medicine it she is
it was the medical director of
sexual assault nurse examiners
in Albuquerque for over ten
years and now sits on the board
than I have and you know most of
all what I value is that she
absolutely has the common sense
Thank you Sir Senator Hickey
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president and I'm
not gonna ask unanimous consent
who is also responsible for this
head of hair but if everybody
here would please help me
welcome Asia back to the
chambers thank you.
desk or VIP tickets for
tonight's long awaited accessed
so access is taking place
tonight six to nine at the Santa
Fe convention center we hope to
have here in Santa Fe they have
this event to remind legislators
it Ag the agricultural industry
the second largest industry just
behind oil and gas with over
twenty three thousand jobs
further announcements Senators.
Any further announcements.
before we do though to give
members a heads up on third
reading today we're going to do
items one two and three in that
order so Senator pope Center
Gonzalez Senator Duhigg once we
for Senate memorial twenty four
FFA centers where that order
business third reading of
legislation.
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president I move the Senate
Diamond.
Thank you Mr president will the
reader right please read
reader to read Sen memorial
twenty for a memorial
celebrating the FFA youth
organization declaring February
leadership organization in New
Mexico for more than ninety five
years and whereas FFA sponsors
chapters in rural and urban
areas throughout the state and
development programs are diverse
and help participants to acquire
important life skills such as
leadership responsible
citizenship critical thinking
problem solving decision making
and whereas FFA participants
report having more confidence
and positive self identity
greater control in their lives
in a better ability to make
things in their lives have
purpose and meaning now
therefore be it resolved by the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico that in recognition
Representative recognition of
this memorial be transmitted to
New Mexico's FFA organization
signed and sealed that the
capital in the city of Santa Fe
Senator Crystal R. diamond how
Senator thank you Mr president I
move that sent memorial twenty
four be put on final passage
subject to debate amendment and
substitution hearing no
objections centered I went to
explain the memorial Mister
president we are excited today
twenty eight nationwide it has
eight hundred and sixty thousand
members here in New Mexico we
have over five thousand members
that feels like most of them are
and beginning this week and will
be kicking off national FFA week
many of the members that you see
here today will be participating
in leadership events taking
the gallery and on the rotunda
would please stand.
FSA members of why are you here.
You may be seated thank you guys
thank you Mr president point
honor to welcome these FFA
members to the rotunda thank you
senator I'm in senators we're
and thank you to all the FFA
students were here both on the
floor and up in in the in the
gallery one of the
One of the real honors that I
and the largest of the FFA
competitions at at national.
And that is the problem it's
procedure competition.
And its largest one because
And to be one of the people
judging their competitions is it
is a humbling experience for me
thank you all for being here you
are all learning life lessons
that will carry you in all kinds
of different ways throughout the
rest of your life in this
you Senator Diamond I I really
enjoyed the
of words that were said earlier
by the members and FFA is truly
also a leadership organization
in their communities on school
boards all the way in here to
the legislature's we heard
Senator Diamond serving here as
well when I was at the end of my
high school years I was the
national president of business
professionals of America had an
maybe thirty five forty thousand
people and it was truly a great
experience integrative and and I
got to spend a day or two there
and got to see a lot of the work
that's done at the national
Senator Sanchez.
Thank you Mr president I sent a
full support of this memorial
Senator I'm is brought I was in
introduce a guest as well who is
with FFA for many years and now
Erica Garcia Senator.
And she is kind of competition
because she shows against my
boys at the Valencia County fair
then she's great I I her parents
and her work so hard caller
Mr president thank you senator
Sanchez.
Any further debate.
Saying no further debate wearing
her own FFA jackets.
four do now pass and ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that all forty two members
including the lieutenant
governor be shown voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
by a vote.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
to take a moment just just
introduce my guests here in the
front of the Senate we have hot
springs high school at the state
has joined us the and we have
Senate please welcome me and
welcoming them including my
middle school daughter Reese
diamond here on the end to snack
along with them please join me
in welcoming them to the New
Senator Pete were taken to the
next order of business thank you
Mr president next up ideal to
Senator Campos percent memorial
president members of the Senate
this is a great moment for all
of us
I move that Senator more forty
seven B. not printed not
referred to committee and that
memorial honoring senator
Cynthia Nava and recognizing her
significant servicing
contributions to New Mexico or
as senator Cynthia Nava a fierce
three representing district
thirty one and on the Ana County
and we're just Senators Nava
dedicated self the public
service for twenty years serving
five terms in the Senate and
thousand twelve having served as
vice chair in nineteen ninety
four nineteen ninety five and as
member in nineteen ninety three
and we're just Center nama
received a bachelor of science
curriculum degree from New
Mexico State University and
we're just Center Nava was
dedicated to the legislative
process serving on numerous
committees including finance in
committee from two thousand five
to two thousand twelve and
whereas during the interim
Senator Nava continued her
services chair of the
legislative education study
Navajo was a very effective
legislators spear heading in two
thousand seven the students with
disabilities scholarship act the
map mathematics and science
and in two thousand eleven bills
requiring free school breakfast
programs and the expansion of
eligible prekindergarten
providers providers and whereas
students to qualify for state
and institutional financial aid
and whereas a student driven
campaign for the passage of the
Senate bill five eighty two was
students and whereas the
legislation also allowed
undocumented students to be
eligible for the legislative
lottery scholarship and whereas
childhood arrivals recipient to
obtain a White House
presidential appointment in
twenty twenty two and we're just
Senator novels work to expand
from Santo novels efforts and
whereas during her legislative
tenure etcetera etcetera nafas
Gadsden Independent School
District made great improvements
whereas her famous homemade
bread to greet G. league to the
subject to our culture chili
sauce and incomparable crewmate
About basks in the company of
her daughter's a Honda alley
Navajo Emiliana me ma Nava and
so cheating such Nava and her
husband Ron curry and whereas no
be honored for her significant
contributions to New Mexico and
her on wavering dedication in
assisting the underserved
students of New Mexico and be it
Campos how we see more on this
president sherry do Lujan chief
clerk New Mexico state Senate.
substitution no objections
Senator Campos explained thank
you very much Mr president of
course to the members of the
Senate this is a very difficult
she has really gone to bat for
the children of New Mexico
regardless of where they live.
Our list of their economic
status and regardless if they
had some issues that they needed
And I wanted to make sure that
she was here today of course
with our friends setting of a.
And the reason that I wanted her
ahead and be a vital if you will
resource for all of us when it
comes to education she not only
deals with education as you can
tell she deals with family who
share for each other and so for
that reason Mr president members
of the Senate we stand in case
there are others who wish to
and one helps the other and
again we talk about all boats
lived at the same time these two
ladies here continue to go ahead
and do that for all of us so
with that Mr president I would
president different this time to
center how to me who also is a
co sponsor on this and then
again we open that up to others
who wish to go ahead and share
their favorite recipe or their
able to serve with senator Nava
but as somebody who is a
community activist and Espanola
watching her navigate through
Senate bill five eighty two was
me and so I want to thank
senator Nava for Senate bill
five eighty two the bill that
was passed in two thousand five
which opened the door for
dreamers right here and New
behind Senator Campos and with
you on the start rostrum a
dreamer like Mabel ID on this an
attorney who is with us today.
We're here because you believed
memories that led to their minds
I want to thank you because of
you our dreamers are able to
pursue higher education despite
being undocumented and to be
with us here on the Senate floor
Mr president thank you center
how to me we do have others who
wish to speak on this memorial
we have center Stewart followed
by Senator Kernan Senator Ingle
say about Cynthia not I I served
with her I can you remember how
long on the legislation
legislative education study
committee she and representative
things in education she was the
champion of the high school
reform that we did many years
ago only now are we slightly and
doing some of that after twenty
else we could do she is someone
who can think outside the box
she's not afraid to mix things
up she's not afraid to go
outside of the state and learn
three plus she made such a
difference in the lives of those
children and then of course came
setting up at some people don't
so I just love sent in all the
so appreciate everything she did
we've actually Mr in that
committee so thank you Senator
Thank you Mr president and it's
such a pleasure number one just
to see since you're not on the
floor and it brings back so many
memories for me as the new
through so many things related
to education and the way she
handled that committee with such
respect for everybody of the way
Senator Lovell and I actually
Support well it you sometimes we
did things that the rest of our
caucus did not do and one thing
I remember was supporting the
but the pre K. bill was the one
that was the hardest I think it
was the only one in my caucus
it's supported that at the time
and I remember in committee that
morning it was really tough I
promise and I did and I'm so
glad that I did because we
needed to get it out of
committee and on the floor the
Senate where did pass that just
such a privilege to see you
Thank you Mr president certainly
really great saying this morning
What was amazing about it is she
always smiled when she and
created part of me.
And the.
And it was just so sincere I
just hardly could get mad.
you something it didn't waver.
And when we hated the greener on
something it was always there.
It was always for the good of
ever had here.
You know sometimes disagreed but
he kept his word to and he did
think of the businesses in New
You know when you serve here in
the Senate we get a
We get a cordiality towards each
other once we get to know each
other and it takes a little time
because she truly love the state
and she service well.
And it's my pleasure to get to
compliment her and see her again
and I've told her that if she
Anyway now we we have a great to
we have great things here on the
floor of the Senate she was
certainly one of the.
Thank you so much Mister
president thank you Senator
Ingle Senator fenics.
small band of women here in the
Senate and we had to forge our
own way and we had a bipartisan
women's caucus and we at that
she really stood out for her
leadership not only in education
but and paving the way and I of
regret that secretary Ron curry
contributed greatly to our state
not only to serving legislators
here at the roundhouse but also
at the of federal level and I
into the Senate the the year
Senator novel was leaving Mr
president I
I just have to say that every
interaction I've ever had
whether it's over something we
agreed under disagreed on it was
to seeing that I wonder how that
when for that other person so I
just want to stand and say I'm
I'm surprised that we haven't
named a high school after this
individual in the area where
we're she Representative because
just want to acknowledge let her
know that that you community
loves you and we all of you here
in New Mexico and and and and
thank you for all of the work
over so many years thank you Mr
Mr chairman
You know I have the honor of
serving was senator Nava and
actually senator for vice chair
proceeded during my tenure here
Mr Chairman there are always
stories that we all have about
many of our members that we've
served with
in New.
Senator number to find a way to
get around it
and those of many of the
attributes that this woman
brought to the state Senate when
she was superintendent of the
immigrant students was just
phenomenal and the dedication in
the words words just don't quite
express Mr president exactly
Mr president I remember some of
you when you were younger and
it's so wonderful to see as
you've grown into young people
but it's all credit to your mom
who sitting back here too so
And as I was saying hello to
both of them Mr president they
both coordinated their outfits
today in case nobody noticed.
education chair's seat.
And with Senator Hanover brought
setting of a to work with us
and now look where she's out and
I believe it's all attributable
to senator Nava and the guidance
that she has given so I could go
on but I just want to say thank
you for being here thank you for
Thank you Mr Senator Lopez
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president and I to
support to stand to support
the Senate and people have
mentioned all the work she's
done in education which is of
course our primary focus but I
wanted to share one other issue
that she I think left a terrific
set aside in the children's
trust fund and to supplement
that and to create an adolescent
component to that trust fund
could be used for positive youth
development programs in the
funding but in the future this
is a I think one of the things
that we will remember Senator
not before certainly I will
because she had the foresight to
do that and also the opportunity
school and and most
superintendents when you come in
and say we would like to start
charter school we're very
and ultimately led to I think a
the charter schools that that
served a lot of kids that for
one reason or another weren't
attending the regular mainstream
senator is a panel senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos for bringing this
memorial which is incredibly in
a proprioceptive do this and
little different in our caucus
back in the days you will no Mr
president and one of the things
that I will always remember
about senator Navajo is her
passion and her willingness to
it wasn't the same as it is
today and so I have distinct
memories of senator Nava.
Caring so deeply and being
but again it's it's it's
important to to recognize those
who've taken dedicated so much
time here in this building for
this to teach us how to do this
and continue the work in the way
that you did it so thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Campos thank you center not.
Thank you senator Senator
Senator great people and Senator
knob of I just want to say you
know we didn't get a serve
together but I was watching the
legislature and thinking about
superintendent really flipped
the script on the narrative of
what we were hearing about
schools and low performance and
then suddenly out of that came
result and it was just so
outstanding that your work was
really
Quite excellent and so kudos to
you and I'm sorry we didn't
you I mean I think it's this all
of us here you are destined to
do great things in your public
service career you're on your
way and those to the president
for for nominating Ewing giving
because he is no lightweight
he's no slouch
but Ron curry
your husband is a former New
Mexico Environment secretary for
those that don't know and did a
secretary for your great work
and advocacy for New Mexico's
environment and citizens so
thank you again and and good
have you all in the Senate thank
box of them and there are
hundreds of the Clinton quit.
You know everybody's saying all
kinds of great things and I
things about Cynthia.
Let me homie dampen the parade
up said Joe your Representative
you'll Representative my
district in the autumn run for
my seat you know to get elected
to it so you all have heard to
blame for that as you're reaping
the praise on her you can the
falter for that on the way out
that Cynthia's district my
district.
Borders Mexico.
we represent some of our.
And it's been described as the
pores it really is one of most
colonia with no infrastructure
no roads no water no sewer and
secretary curry helping along
with that too it's a it's an
incredibly rewarding thing that
that struggle for many years to
get on its feet
and now is the source of great
pride and it's it's a community
that probably doesn't know as
much as it should about what you
successes and sent to us in
terms of our state economy but
once again incentives K. nnen
thirty years ago there was no
sign that that us there was no
for us or when we celebrate all
the accomplishments there
Senators time word made a great
point.
For the the the district where.
Banishes probably by far the
most common language spoken
Of but but she was the
superintendent who everybody
knew and respected and she took
guests into a whole new level
In those in that in that
community that is on the border
with Mexico.
And then and then to see the
those schools.
those kids to realize that that
wherever they started the
meeting that's where they're
gonna end up.
And so the push them all the way
through not just their school
but got amended New Mexico state
somebody said there should be a
school or a mission a lot of
things probably and incentives
name besides the school.
And I and I just wanted to
follow up on the things that are
Lopez is point that the
Cynthia was serving the Senate
with Mary Kay Papen.
And over the house my TL Mary
Helen.
And Mary Jane Garcia that's
tried and so you all may have
together with merry Jane and
with merry K. A. and Mary Helen
and they may have run out of
names to give the women down
there with merry merry merry but
encourager all along but I got
to see you as a mother because
she raised daughters.
And I've had to learn a lot
about a hundred dollars and I
learned a lot about how to
resolve since it is simple so
mail time should be a few
minutes ago that Jennifer's
gonna get or the school of the
arts are you still working it
hard back over here I'm trying
really hard to get it through
the box of Kleenex as
residential we're working on our
but thank you center for being
thank you to senator Pete the
for Pete Campos for.
Having the Senate bill forty
seven before us.
late Delores right
Representative Delores right.
And so I almost feel like I
lived in Galveston you know so
and then she said what you have
And we had a lot of things in
common both of us work for the
schools and both of us had a
similar positions but all I'll
never forget the first
okay and she drove a jeep to
school you know it's gonna be
tough sure enough she was in the
justice her jeep that you talked
parts of the state we met many
individuals many educators that
in the as we make this travels
you know it's always on the same
provide the objective you know
working with everything but
Senator Navajo this has not been
mentioned I don't think today
but Dr Nava you know in very
interim committees bringing that
focus to when we have all the
regular session and you have
always been since I know New
including the jeep you have
is so he have been beyond a
champion for bilingual education
multi cultural education the
linguistics aspect you know of
this opportunity because so many
times so when you figure the
number of years that she serve
the number of hours the number
of miles that she traveled this
thank you Senator Gonzales.
Any further debate.
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr president
You're very much touched by this
presentation from a place.
See no objections thank you
Senator Campos and and it's an
journey and along that journey
you meet amazing people in this
chamber and throughout the
building.
But I just want to share with
a wonderful job keeping a secret
unicenter comp us.
But when we recognize the work
is been done you know I just
want to share personal
ever had to testify Committee
was a bill for western New
Mexico university and
establishing a rodeo and a
cycling club.
And I have to testify in front
listened you gave me advice and
you passed my bill.
I always remember that I carry
that forward because in this
building it's about
relationships is about
outlook of how they want to make
sure and proceed forward so I
want to say thank you and thank
you secretary Kerry who did the
same as a public servant in the
office of Environment Department
when I was a new Senator as I
place secretary Kerry took time
to find solutions that the
business can continue to provide
jobs within that community well
being of our environmentally
responsible.
make drastic decisions that many
of those who were celebrating
the budget that we have right
now we not only have to try to
make sure that we didn't cut any
Senator Kernan Senator Campos
then Representative Stuart.
Representative yeah.
And others who were there who
education system was able to
survive and is able to continue
to thrive from the investments
that are made.
And I want to say thank you for
your the way you handled
yourself here on the floor.
state of New Mexico we're better
place in the state because of
you Senator Santana.
Senator Campos thank you very
senators who have heard about
legacies within the Senator the
house of representatives.
Have a better idea in terms of
what it means to not only be a
experience it's a teaching
moment for all of us because
when we sit here and we listen
we understand what the future
truly brings we know who's been
So that Mr president members of
the Senate.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called in all
forty two senators and
lieutenant governor.
By a vote of forty three in the
affirmative zero on the negative
Senator more forty seven center
something of a recognition day
has passed the Senate and
called upon to speak but I just
want to say thank you to senator
Nava my goodness Senator Campos
for bringing this up I shared
offices with senator Nava and
worked with her closely and I
Campos Senator Campos thank you
very much Mr president of course
so as we see that Senator Mario
forty seven has duly passed the
Senate forty three to zero
wait until I finish and then of
course the last person that I
would introduce would be Senator
novice so she better get ready
because I don't know what voice
I'm gonna go ahead and use when
housing and urban development we
have
Ron Corey who is a very special
person to all of us most people
known if you will is the
secretary for the department of
ensure that the little kiddos
that were there in the community
had a first hand experience as
to what a a balloon was whenever
it came to that and I really
think you're wrong over the
years for what you've done for
Brad Schroeder do Schroeder FE
Schroeder Rebecca the little
Mexico representatives there in
the gallery we have a so soon
Pueblo when you we have Marcella
the US who incidentally went on
ensure notes as we move forward
and then we have response I
listen and we have Rico and we
have so many more but ladies and
ladies and gentleman from Los
crucis New Mexico we have our
president I think what we'll do
said Senator Campos is winding
up I'm gonna go to senator
Correa Hemphill for her memorial
sent more than fifteen which is
not going to be read we'll do
that one and then we'll go back
Claire Hemphill thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
memorial fifteen be put on its
final passage subject to debate
Lauren and Barbara Nelson they
moved to New Mexico back in two
thousand and two and they
started the Dolly Parton
and they have handed out over a
hundred and fifty six thousand
Bucks Justin Grant County and
an opportunity to bond and to
read together and I'm just so
incredibly grateful for their
work and the impact that it had
Mr president I stand for debate
centers we're debating Center
moral fifteen Lauren and Barbara
Nelson recognition Senator
Stewart.
Parton spends a million dollars
every year with this library
program that goes to children
every month I think I have that
morning saying look who stopped
by the roundhouse and I had to
ask him what he didn't introduce
me to that Dolly Parton
apparently it's only a to do cut
out of her but never the less
family no money and learning to
read was important to her so
bringing this program to New
Mexico is very important I just
stand in strong support of the
Senate memorial and want to
thank senator Siah Correa
Hemphill for bringing this
forward I want to personally
thank Lauren and Barbara for all
that they're doing for children
few rural communities in my area
which benefit those are the
areas of Abbey Q. kind he law on
civil a Chama and Lindroth and
have a book sent to them is
something that they look forward
to and helps to spark the
imagination of students and help
to keep.
thanks under current handle for
bringing us
I'm also very grateful for the
work of the imagination library
and the way that they're
promoting literacy across New
senator Senator Duhigg any
further debate.
Si no further debate senator
Craig Hemphill to close.
Mr president I move that Senate
voting in the affirmative.
Seeing no objection by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
on the negative sentiment moral
guests today I have my colleague
and good friend Nancy Stephens
who is of social workers from
Silvercity and one of my
favorite social workers of all
beautiful children and they're
also friends of my children so
we go way back and I also have
Lauren and Barbara Nelson here
Please stand.
And welcome my guests to that
Senate chamber today thank you.
today will be sent memorial
thirty one which will not be
read out of the Senator Campos
ideal Senator Campos similar
thirty one Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr president I
be explain preparatory to its
final passage.
Thank you Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr president first
of all I move that the Center
we have continued to go ahead
and present if you will in New
Mexico small business
development centers memorial and
with that over the years we have
it be a family owned business
small business of one or two
employees that through
everything with if you will the
help of the small business
development centers throughout
to expand they continue to serve
people in all sizes sizes of our
communities and most importantly
with the work that they do they
centers and the people that that
go to them for the additional
help as they prepare to go ahead
and up a small successful
president thank you Senator
Campos seven as we're debating
Center moral thirty one Senator
fenics.
Thank you Mr president I will
pandemic it was really difficult
for some of those especially in
the hospitality industry to stay
afloat and I would like to thank
each and everyone of them for
small businesses throughout the
entire state we wouldn't have
many people employed so I thank
them very much.
Thank you senator CENIC's any
further debate Senators.
year after year bringing
attention to the small business
development centers in New
Mexico
you know over the prior to the
pandemic and and I think I'm
sure that will highlight them
again Mr president multiple
they provide through the small
business development at work and
Mr president Senator Campos is a
phenomenal job of highlighting
this work every year and I just
want to support him this way
because the I can't even tell
senator by the.
Si no further debate Senator
Campos to close thank you Mr
president members of the Senate
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the records show the
memorial thirty one recognizing
New Mexico small business
development center network has
passed the Senate Senator Campos
agreements Mr president members
of the Senate and course we have
New Mexico small business
development centers in that full
network and we also have Mister
Patrick Vanderpool who is the
executive director of the two
can carry Konami development
businesses here in New Mexico.
Thank you very much Mr president
mountain air he sits on the
board for this New Mexico small
business development center and
also his wife Roseanne Roberts
Archuleta and of Mr president
and as they shared with me they
those books have really told the
history of the state of New
Mexico throughout the entire
state so could everyone please
welcome them to the chamber.
the floor Majority Leader Peter
Wirth to take us to the next
order of business.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements miscellaneous
we're on that order business
pope Senator Gonzales and
Senator Duhigg just before we go
there we are in the process of
finalizing the bills this is the
last day for introductions so we
numbering allow our clerk to
begin numbering those bills so
please just come over and let me
know if you're waiting for a
bill expecting one to come
because we need to get that
information as soon as possible
president members of the Senate
with me today I have the mayor
of Cappy ten and from licking
county and Smokey bear country
county so let's uh please
welcome him to the chambers Mr
Ron Lawrence.
to third reading are chief clerk
just reminded me as well those
of you who have not turned in
capital outlay and there's a
number of you we need to get
that in as well those have got
sure we circuit circulate around
so no one in adversely.
Ends up not submitting a capital
outlay so with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
third reading of legislation
that we have and also before I
go to that Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt.
Mr president if I could be able
your attention for just a moment
we've had a loss here on the
Senate floor.
I know most of you have noticed
Senator Pat Woods has been not
here and tenants on the Senate
For the wood family certainly
percent for Pat Woods.
Thank you center and of all
those in the chamber and those
in the gallery.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Ingle Senator
at Mr president I could excuse
senator Morris answer Woods
except for the purpose of the
call.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
Senate bill one twenty amended
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
family living in temporary
housing awaiting placement are
pending a move to permanent
housing the ability to enroll in
a public school in a different
their temporary housing in that
school district or the new
school district where they will
have permanent housing with that
Mr president a real simple bill
I see no debate Senator pope to
close.
Mr president I move that Senate
bill one twenty amended do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
Senate seats please also this
tier seats.
amended has passed the Senate
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president thank you
the body for the sport move on
today's calendar one third
reading of legislation I yield
Senate that the record shows
that all action taken for
placing Senate bill twenty six
on final passage it's been taken
in that it is now subject to
Hello Mr president at this time
I would like co.
The permission to allow my
witness expert witness to be
into the chamber thank you can
identify who your expert
witnesses Senator.
objection.
The sergeant R. as a please
escort and bring a chair for
expert witness.
Mr president he'll be here
severance tax permanent fund oil
and gas revenues were six
hundred million in FY sixteen
and they were one point five
in ten years or less even though
our current revenues are high
our state economists predict
that the revenues will start
second point is the bill solves
two problems without affecting
the transfer to the early
childhood Trust Fund or
for the eventual decline of oil
and gas the third point Mr
president and members.
The general fund is currently
receiving a windfall of oil and
Interest earnings in more stable
sustainable manner.
Gonzales Senators we're debating
Senate bill twenty six as
amended.
Anyone wishing to debate.
See no debate.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the rule has
been called in that all those
present voting in the
affirmative except the what's
How Senators tier seats if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative there on the
negative Senate bill twenty six
as amended has passed the Senate
center Gonzales.
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill forty three.
On final passage has been taken
to this body because we passed
it unanimously last session
under current law if someone
seeks to.
for the purpose of interfaith
interfering with them voting for
them in our industry preventing
them from impartial
administration our election code
that is a fourth degree felony
election workers ever from
secretary of state to county
clerks to municipal clerks as
well as their employees and
agents since the twenty twenty
election there's been a sharp up
found that nearly one in three
election workers had left their
job and at least in part because
of fears for their safety
increased threats or
intimidation this bill will
address that issue here in New
three anyone wishing to debate.
I
see no debate Senator do have to
close thank you Mr president I
the negative by show of hands
Senator is also matters to your
seats we're voting.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative zero on the negative
Senate majority floor leader
Peter Wirth.
To take us to the next order of
business.
I thank you Mr president Ms
because that we go about our
Mr president your finance
committee to who has been
referred Senate bill three has
had it under consideration
Present us as consenus said
three be allowed to read all the
committee reports to the vote on
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator George when
you lost chairman sentiment
just.
Move adoption the committee
representatives we have a motion
to adopt the committee report
The reader to read.
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
two twenty nine.
twenty nine do passed and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
German Senator Ortiz having all
acted upon individually say no
objection the reader to read the
reports Senate bill two thirty
eight to pass and that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee.
pass and dense referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senator two forty six do not
pass but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
pass as amended.
And that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two eighty six do
Senate bill two ninety seven do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
the adoption of the committee
report says we have a motion to
adopt the committee report all
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed may the eyes
whom has been referred Senate
memorial thirty four sentiment
Morial thirty six sentiment
Morial thirty nine seven
memorial forty two has had them
under consideration and reports
Kerry Hamblen Senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairs.
Senator Campos thank you Mr
president move adoption the
committee report centers we have
a motion to doubt the committee
report all those in favor
signed an open session Center
moral thirty four cent memorial
thirty six Senator more thirty
nine and Senate memorial forty
two.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill one sixty
nine house bill seventy nine
message from the house has been
received Senator Peter Wirth
takes the next order of business
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
said they're waiting for a bill
so we're gonna go ahead number
I'm and we're gonna start
introducing them so again.
Based on no one else coming
Senate bill four sixty nine
introduced by senators to
phonics and act relating to
insurance amending and enacting
sections of the pharmacy
an investigation requiring
transparency in pharmacy
benefits reimbursement providing
for confidentiality provided for
changes in the reimbursement
process addressing the appeals
itemized in a contract
addressing costsharing making an
appropriation Senate bill four
sixty nine Senate Bill endorsed
Mr president.
the next one and then we'll get
reintroduced the reader to read.
federal Endangered Species Act
of nineteen seventy three upon a
determination by a fire response
official of imminent risk to
human health or property
providing a definition Senate
bill for seventy.
Senate bill for seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate conservation
committee events Senate
amending the end of life options
to clarify that health care
providers are able to refuse to
participate in medical aid in
dying for reasons of conscience
affairs committee then Senator
district committee Senate bill
four seventy one.
Senator for seventy two
introduced by senator serve on
this and act relating to
consumer protections prohibiting
to obtain outstanding balance
information Senate bill for
seventy two Senator for seventy
two having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
appropriation the department of
information technology for
payment of digital trunked radio
communications systems
subscriber fees.
Senate bill four seventy three
four seventy three Senate bill
for seventy four introduced by
Senator Shendo and act relating
to industrial revenue bonds
amending the industrial revenue
bond act in the county
seventy four.
Senate bill four seventy four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
gross receipts tax deduction for
services rendered by persons
licensed by the counseling and
therapy practice act Senate bill
for seventy five Senate bill for
bill four seventy six introduced
by senator Maestas.
Act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration for but only a
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four seventy six.
Senate bill four seventy seven
Senate bill four seventy seven
Senate bill four seventy seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate.
Judiciary Committee thence
design plan and construct a
Fitch at fish hatchery in the
vicinity of our money out Senate
bill four seventy eight Senate
Bill endorsed seventy eight
having been read twice by title
Senate bill four seventy nine
introduced by senators share
diamond and Burt and act
relating to the legislature and
acting the capital outlay Reform
the capital outlay oversight
authority to serve the council
and administer the capital
outlay process making an
appropriation Senate bill four
seventy nine Senate bill four
Senate bill four eighty
introduced by senators share
diamond and Burt and act
relating to public assistance
requiring Medicaid applicants to
Committee vents Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill four
eighty Senate bill forty one
introduced by senators share
diamond and Burt and act
relating to higher education
amounts awarded to students
participating in the opportunity
scholarship program Senate bill
four eighty one Senate Bill for
anyone having been read twice by
introduced by Senator Shendo and
act relating to public education
and acting the state tribal
education compact schools act
providing authorization to the
public education department to
providing requirements for the
operation of state tribal
education compact schools
exempting state tribal education
compact schools from most state
statutes and rules providing
admissions prioritization Senate
bill four eighty two Senate bill
forty two having been read twice
by title is ordered pretty
and Pirtle and act relating to
public affairs establishing the
second Monday in February as a
public holiday designated as
football Monday Senate bill four
eighty three.
the Senate Indian rural and
cultural affairs committee Vance
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four eighty three.
Senate bill forty four
eighty four Senate bill Forry
for having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate health
Public Affairs Committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
transportation network company
services act provided for the
facilitation of provision of non
emergency medical transportation
services by transportation
network company drivers
Senate health public affairs
Committee then Senate tax
business transportation
committee Senate bill four
eighty five Senate bill four
eighty six introduced by
forty six having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee vents Senate finance
The New Mexico insurance code
the health maintenance
organization law nonprofit
health care plan law to
establish limits on cost sharing
and coinsurance for acupuncture
To the Senate health Public
Affairs Committee vents Senate
tax business transportation
committee that Senate bill four
eighty seven.
Senate bill four eighty eight
to limit retroactive denial of
reimbursement to healthcare
providers Senate bill four
eighty eight Senate bill four
eighty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by senator Maestas
and act relating to criminal
justice providing for the
authority of the district
attorney and the Attorney
General to convene a grand jury
forty nine Senate bill four
ninety introduced by senator
Maestas and act making
appropriation to the public
education department to
distribute to school districts
ordered printed and referred to
Senate Education Committee
that's the Senate Judiciary
Committee and Senate bill four
ninety.
Senate bill four ninety one
law enforcement protection fund
including a portion of money for
fees from health insurance
business to be credited to the
law enforcement protection fund
providing that a certain amount
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee vents
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four ninety one Senate bill
four ninety two introduced by
period of sixty months Senate
bill four ninety two Senate bill
four ninety two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee Vance
the office of the state engineer
for brackish water reuse
exploration treatment and
aquifer recharge water projects
making appropriations to the
board of regents of the New
Mexico institute of mining and
department of environment to
promulgate rules for appropriate
mineral levels in the water of
water projects and conduct
activities to advance or water
Senate finance committee Senate
bill four ninety three.
Senate bill four ninety four
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to higher education
appropriation act providing a do
they'd repeal Senate bill four
ninety four Senate bill four
ninety four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
mortgage finance authority act
oversight committee and act
making an appropriation to fund
the oversight duties related to
the affordable housing act
finance committee Senate bill
four ninety five Senate bill
four ninety six introduced by
senators guy goes and Lopez and
others and act relating to
criminal penalties providing a
private right of action Senate
bill four ninety six Senate bill
four ninety six having been read
twice by title is ordered
Senate bill four ninety seven
introduced by senators guy goes
engineering services and
construction that state agencies
and local.
Public bodies may enter into for
and for purchase orders under
those contracts providing for an
and for purchase orders under
those contracts Senate bill four
ninety seven Senate bill four
ninety seven having been read
twice by title is ordered print
pharmaceuticals amending
sections of the pharmacy
benefits managers regulation Act
creating additional restrictions
for pharmacy benefits managers
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill four ninety eight.
recommendations for policy and
legislative changes to improve
local county state and federal
jails and detention and
correctional facilities
compliance with the federal
This is the memorials.
We're gonna have a right to pull
that back.
Pino and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill five hundred
Senate bill five hundred having
been read twice by title is
ordered print it referred is
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five hundred one.
Senate bill five one is ordered
not printed and referred to the
Senate health public affairs
Senate bill five hundred to
Senate bill five oh two having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the Senate finance committee
hundred three Senate bill five
oh three having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
fence referred to the Senate
finance committee Senate bill
five oh three Senate bill five
five hundred and four.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the Senate finance
committee Senate bill five oh
four.
Senate bill five hundred I
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee
Senate Bill I I.
Senate bill five hundred six
Senate Bill I six having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
Senate Education Committee
Senate Bill I six.
The reader to read Senate bill
Senate bill five oh seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed this
referred to the Senate Education
Committee Senate bill five oh
seven.
Senator five hundred eight
That's referred to the Senate
conservation committee Senate
bill five oh eight.
Senator five hundred nine
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and act relating to the public
committee Senate bill five oh
nine.
Senate bill five ten introduced
by Senator Brandt an act
relating to public peace health
safety and welfare Senate bill
five ten.
eleven introduced by senators
Stefanics and act relating to
the public peace health safety
and welfare Senate bill five
eleven Senate bill five eleven
to the public peace health
safety and welfare Senate bill
five twelve.
Senate bill five twelve having
been read twice by title is
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five thirteen.
Senate bill five thirteen having
been read twice by title is
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five fourteen.
Senate bill five fourteen having
been read twice by title is
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five fifteen Senate bill
five fifteen having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
Senate bill five sixteen Senate
bill five sixteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed this referred to the
Senate Indian rural cultural
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the Education
Committee Senate bill five
seventeen Senate bill five
eighteen introduced by Senator
thank you for to the Senate
health public affairs committee.
Senate bill five eighteen.
Senate bill five nineteen.
Introduced by Senate by the up
Senate tax business
transportation from the Senate
bill five nineteen Senator I
twenty introduced by Senator
Stewart and act relating to
twenty Senate bill five twenty
one introduced by Senator
Stewart and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill five twenty
Senate bill five twenty two
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty two.
Senate Bill.
Five twenty three and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty three Senate
bill five twenty three having
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty four Senate
bill five twenty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed this
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty five Senate
bill five twenty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed thank you
for to the Senate tax business
Senate bill five twenty six
introduced by Senator Shendo and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty six Senator I
seven introduced by Senator
Shendo and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Senate bill five twenty
seven.
Introduced by Senator Duhigg and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty eight Senate
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five twenty nine Senate
bill five twenty nine having
been read twice by title is
health safety and welfare Senate
bill five thirty.
Senate bill five thirty having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed this
referred to the Senate rules
committee Senate bill five
thirty.
one Senate bill five thirty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed thank you
for to the Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill five
thirty one Senate bill five
thirty two Senate bill five
thirty two having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill five thirty two
Senate bill five thirty through
bill five thirty three having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed this
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill five
thirty three Senate bill five
thirty four introduced by
Senate bill five thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the Senate and
general counsel for his
committee Senate bill five
thirty four.
Senate bill five thirty five
Senate bill five thirty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed thank you
for to the Senate Indian rural
cultural affairs committee
Senate bill five thirty five.
Senate bill five thirty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the Senate Indian
rural cultural affairs committee
Senate bill five thirty six.
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act relating to the
public health.
Peace safety and welfare Senate
The Senate Joint Memorial twelve
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
a joint resolution ratifying and
magistrate court facility so
Senate Joint memo Representative
resolution twelve.
Senator Senate joint resolution
Senate Joint Memorial eleven
introduced by senators.
Senator Brandt and
Representative Martinez a Joint
Memorial urging Congress to
determinations in a timely
manner Senate Joint Memorial
eleven.
Senate Joint Memorial eleven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not is ordered.
Senate memorial fifty one
introduced by Senator pope a
memorial to carry February
twentieth twenty twenty three
military and veterans day in the
president's table center
memorial fifty one.
Senate memorial fifty two
introduced by Senator o'neal a
memorial requesting the
acupuncture and euro acupuncture
as a modality that may solve
many of the neurological issues
facing New Mexicans Senate
memorial fifty two.
Senate memorial fifty four
introduced by Senator pope.
A memorial requesting the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
correctional facilities
compliance with the federal
prison prison rape elimination
act of two thousand three Senate
memorial fifty four.
Senate Joint Memorial thirteen
introduced by Senator o'neal RTZ
Pino Kernan and others a Joint
Senate Joint Memorial thirteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to committee.
To be placed on the president's
relating to insurance amending
and enacting sections of the
pharmacy benefits manager
regulation Act adding new
requirements for renewal of
for confidentiality providing
for changes in the your
reimbursement process addressing
the appeals process requiring
the provision of certain
addressing costsharing making an
appropriation Senate bill
fourteen.
Senate bill fourteen.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered print referred to the
Hochman Vigil and act relating
to insurance mandating that a
hearing to consider promulgation
of premium rates and other title
House bill seventy nine have
ever a twice by title is
referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee sent house bill
relating to professional
licensure amending and enacting
sections of the pharmacy act
repealing the impaired
pharmacists act house bill
Committee sent house bill ninety
three.
House bill one sixty nine
introduced by Representative
suspense the Chandler and
or investigation of a complaint
made to the interim legislative
ethics committee alleging
misconduct of a legislator.
referred to the Senate rules
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee house for one sixty
nine.
Senate former G. R. Jordan
leader Peter Wirth to take this
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill ninety four
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it to pass
Respectfully submitted senator
George when you lost chairman
Samuels.
Mr present us as consent of the
Senate the record that the.
individually the Senate reader
to read.
Senate bill one thirty one as
amended do pass.
Senate bill three oh seven as
amended do pass respectfully
submitted senator George when
you lost chairman cinnamon yes
reduction the committee report
Senator have a motion to death
individually.
The reader to read Mr president
your engine rural and cultural
affairs committee to whom has
been referred Senate bill eighty
Pinto co chair Senator Pinto Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports and that
we build on that with one motion
and that the general reflect
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Shannon D.
Pinto co chair Senator Pinto I
move the adoption of the
committee report centers we have
a motion to adopt the committee
Senate foreign majority floor
leader Peter Wirth to take us to
the next order of business thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
clerk and her staff this is a
tough day getting all this stuff
done an inter introduced and
read in and so let's give our
chief clerk and everyone up at
Mr president will be in tomorrow
at eleven o'clock so now's the
time for committee chairs to
make announcements about
to announce Senate Republicans
will be having a caucus meeting
tomorrow right after the floor
session in room three twenty
six.
Thank you Senator Brandt
centerman us.
It has not been reconciled
you'll get it in two different
forms by agency and then you'll
get it in the long form by
county and the dollar amounts
with the executive one part per
se with us
you will get in your email.
A space sheet and each member of
getting funding she.
purple are between five and ten
million dollar projects and
blues are between three and
five.
each delegation and I'll use my
still have one project on each
threshold for the what I ten and
above one to five or five to ten
we just want coordination and
will coordinate with the
executive and and see where they
are on the list and the
statewide list because we have
an I have not seen those and
delegation or how we're gonna
find your capital and so will
start to spread those out so we
can get the spread out by
Tuesday and given back to you
and say here's here's where
Wednesday and then we'll know
exactly where you can place your
capital on big projects that you
can completely fund
so we're gonna hand these out
LFC if we go with a Lynda Keogh
and I Kelly I remember forget
Kelly's last name they'll know
But the problem is we've been
waiting and waiting and waiting
and now we just got to get it
done and so I'm sorry about the
time frame but that's just the
way capital works remember that
to be for everyone as we move
forward so with that Mr
president Senate finance is
going to go in
bill two in that house right now
and so on Monday I'd urge
members to come and listen on
bill two and see where agencies
are at there's agencies in the
budget that are over funded on
the executive request so if
gonna have a lot of reoccurring
money as it crosses over from
the Senate until we make some
adjustments in finance but just
for members agencies come to you
exact or they took the LFC wreck
which was matched up with the
exact so they're gonna be
hitting us pretty hard on the
Senate side so
got issues and and completing
projects and completing with
agencies need I don't want to
leave them short of what they
need to could be completed but
be well aware that they've
Senator Duhigg.
started the green amendment on
Wednesday we will continue that
discussion on Friday and then we
have a number of other S. J.
Thank you Mr president Paul guys
I was in full with the another
Senator of your Senate tax
business transportation
committee will meet at two
thirty.
meeting tomorrow merely after
the floor session in the Senate
lounge.
Thanks Center for.
at eight thirty in the morning
thank you senator pope any
further announcements Senators.
Senator Peter Wirth to take us
to the next order of business.
introduced that's done told is
coming down a sap so once we get
the committee reporting we're
just gonna stand in place for a
minute and wait for that but
unanimous could consent we go to
that our business committee
two has had it under
consideration and report same
without recommendation and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
Saying no objection the reader
to read.
Senate bill two sixty six.
Do not pass but that Senate
conservation committee
Senate bill three oh one.
Do pass and thence referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three thirty to do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill four thirty do pass
and that's referred to the
committee report all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed nay the eyes have
it the committee point have been
adopted in the journal reflect
that they were acted upon
senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president I understand we got
the final capital outlay down so
just gonna verify with our chief
clerk we're good to go.
I'm C. hearing good to go so
