working with staff, working with
our legislative finance
committee staff working with our
legislative council staff to
talk about options for
recognizing that this morning,
uh, we took some boats, we uh
made some amendments to the bill
and uh in many cases, uh, we
excluded parts of it that left
us with a passport that we had
to work towards. How do we fund
this thing? How do we do it in a
way that's responsible? How do
we do it in a way that's
responsive? How do we do it with
the way that's intentional so
that we can hopefully bring um
Partnership to this matter, but
I think eventually and really at
the end of the day, bring
product and benefit to the
people of New Mexico. That being
stated, uh, I, I, I would like
to at this point in time, Madam
Chair, with, with, with your
indulgence.
Put up something that, that, uh,
our staff came back with in
terms of maybe what would work
in terms of a dollar amount and
then how maybe we could look at
some of these options here that
may fit into that puzzle piece,
if, if, if that makes sense,
Madam Chair.
Very good. Thank you. So in
working then with um
legislative finance committee,
they were, were, were, were
quick to, to make note that um
some of the options for, uh,
wouldn't work because of some
Uh, legislative process that
would have to be followed and
with uh 20 something hours left
in the session would likely lead
to not enough time during this
session. So we work creatively
and um actually they they they
brought in the house
appropriations team and the
reason why they did that is
because the legislative Finance
Committee, uh, chair, chairship
will then turn to this legs this
interim session to the house for
the next 2 years. So the house
would be chairing the legisla
Finance Committee and in doing
so, uh, it's the intent of this
bless you. It's the intent of,
of how we move forward
intentionally to not tie the
hands of the of that, of those
of that person in the house that
will take that chairship before
the legislative finance
Committee for the next 2 years.
So, doing that much, we worked
with, with Amanda, uh, Dick
Petty, so thank you for your
help today, uh, in regards to
how do we move forward in
finding and creating a package
and utilizing capacity in future
years, but not tying the hands
completely for legislatures, uh,
years out past in in this case,
house terms.
Senate senators will like to
still be here, but for house
terms. How do we do that in a
way that's responsible and
intentional. So that being
stated, uh, working with, with
the staff here this past uh
afternoon, we came up with a
number and that number is $113
million.
$1130 million represents what
They feel most comfortable with
that we could use towards next
year's, uh, balances, and in
doing so, uh, would then just
reduce our capacity for a
potential.
To then have a tax package in
future years. So recognizing
that much, that's how the number
of 113 million came about.
So Madam Chairwoman and ranking
member Sanchez, uh,
representative Parajona, ranking
member Duncan, uh, if I may be
so bold then to talk about maybe
some inclusions to help with
Those initial with, with
initiatives that we've talked
about openly, but I think with
some that will be able to be
plugged into this to try to
make, create benefit for New
Mexicans. So, allow me to begin
with something that we had, uh,
earlier this morning, and that
is house built 14. Earned income
tax credit, keeping that whole
to make sure that that benefit
is once again appreciated by not
only just the 200,000 New
Mexicans that already claimed
that.
Benefit, but it be also extended
to the next 101,000 New Mexicans
that will be able to experience
that benefit. And that benefit
once again for the reminder
folks is that it would
extinguish the state tax
liability for those that are
making minimum wage, all the way
up to those families of 3 that
are making upwards of $70,000.
And what that means, I think for
a lot of our communities is that
that includes the people that
work in this building to help
clean this building. What that
means is that
That's likely those level 12, or
even 3 teachers that are in this
state. What that means is that
affects those firefighters and
those police officers that help
protect us and keep us safe. So
I think that's a far-reaching,
very broad benefit that we would
be able to protect in this tax
package.
The second one
That we are looking at is foster
parent and guardian tax credit.
Reminder that this is one of the
initiatives that the governor
spoke about in her state of the
state, just about 2 months ago.
This is one of those that
recognizes that we have to do
more for our guardians and our
grandparents that are taking
care of their grandchildren or
that have elected to take care
of those, those younger, most
innocent in this state and in
doing so, making sure that they
don't have to um break the bank
in doing so that we can provide
some type of benefit that will
help them along to make sure
that they can provide for them
to buy the clothes, to buy the
groceries.
to pay for the rent, to do the
things that they have to do as a
guardian. That's a great
benefit. That's again, that's
the governor's initiative and
that's one that is a bipartisan
initiative that was sponsored in
the Senate by Senator Padilla,
as well as in the house by
Representative Doo.
Part of that, I, I, I think it's
a, it's a great benefit that I
would suggest as well is health
practitioner co-insurance.
That's a great initiative that
was brought on by the Senate.
And thank you for bringing those
to, to, to our, to our tax
package.
That means medical GRT to bring
doctors to New Mexico. That's
making sure that New Mexico can
hold on to their doctors.
In this package,
According to the way we that
that our staff was able to
budget, we can fully fund that
type of initiative to make sure
that we can retain or attract
doctors to New Mexico, and as
the conversation goes in this
state, that that's one of,
that's been one of the
challenges for our state. So I
once again want to thank the
Senate for bringing that
initiative to this package.
Finally, this is something that
we talked about earlier, that is
a, a, a revenue neutral piece of
legislation and that is Senate
Bill 378, which is the liquor
excise tax, as made mentioned
earlier and we voted on earlier
is that this is one of those
things where, uh, Senator Sheer
brought this initiative again in
the Senate that provides that uh
Alcohol industry would pay 20
20% more at the wholesale price.
Which generates close to $10
million per year.
And a $10 million per year, it
was once directed towards just
the general fund.
But in this committee this
morning, we talked about it and
agreed upon that maybe perhaps
instead of just to the general
fund, that that money should
actually be going going to
something more productive to
harms alleviation Act fund. So
that being stated, we made that,
that motion this morning. It was
accepted by this committee this
morning to instead of it going
to the general fund, it goes to
that that alcohol harms
alleviation fund and uh that's
why it's a revenue neutral.
Madam Chair, I mean, this, this,
I
I, I know we had a lot of
initiatives. I know that we did.
I, I know that we did, and this
is by no means a slight or
disrespect to the work that you
have done, and, and I hope that
in many cases, the work that we
have done in the house, but I
mean if we're looking at
salvaging a tax package, if
we're looking at funding a tax
package. I want to once again
thank the staff for coming
through the way you've done LFC
staff you guys continue to amaze
me with your brilliance and your
ability to think outside the
box, but again,
I offer this. I put this on the
table as, as a, as a pathway
forward.
To ensure that we can do
something.
That works for the Mexicans,
that's not just for political
stunts or political optics, but
that this, these are the real
things that will affect people
every single day. So Madam
Chair, thank you for obliging me
for that. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chair, and I appreciate this,
and this was something that, you
know, we, we had a number of
things, uh, on this roster of,
of things that we would like to
fund, um, and given the, the
limitations. We wanted to make
sure that we brought something
to the tax package that would
impact everybody. That would be
in
in some way a positive effect
on, on everybody. Yes, we have
other ideas that we would like
to, to fund. The, the beauty
about this is that we've already
got a head start to next year.
And uh and that I'm very excited
about because as we know during
the 30 day session, it can be
quite chaotic. So, I'm grateful
for that. It's um, you know, I
don't want folks that would have
been impacted by other um other
text uh opportunities that came
out of the Senate, uh, but, you
know, know that we will still
continue to move forward with
those because that was something
that I feel very honored to to
be able to work with.
ranking member Sanchez, uh,
about an agreement with um the
minority of the Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee. So, um, I'm grateful.
I think we've, we've got this
really great foundation, and
we've got our hopes and dreams
of what we get to look at next
year and uh I'm excited about
that. So I think, I think we've
got a good start, uh, especially
with, uh, the GRT for medical
practitioners, because we need
to start moving on that. Um, we
need to start, uh, being able to
impact that to recruit and
retain, and this is the
beginning of
that it is not the end in any
way. It is the beginning and if
we don't start taking those
steps forward, we're never going
to get there. So I feel that
this is what this does for us.
And so I'm grateful and I'm
grateful for the collaboration.
I don't know if ranking member
Sanchez wants to say anything as
well. I thank you, Madam Chair
and, uh, Chairman. I just see
this as a huge win for the, for
the house and for the Senate and
for the people of New Mexico. We
worked very hard, very diligent
on this plan today took lots of
hours, but it's a huge win for
New Mexico. So thank you, madam.
Mr. Chair.
Health membership.
Mr. Char do you want me to go
all right.
Um
There's not a, there's not an
item on this list that isn't
good.
They're all good, every one of
them.
The problem I have with, with
this is we uh
We had to take $171 million out
of reserves just to balance our
budget this year.
Now we're gonna take another 113
million out.
Uh, and put that in there. And
does this, Mr, does this go into
effect in 26, 27, 28, can you
tell me when that goes into
effect.
Ranking member Duncan, according
to our legislative finance
committee staff, it goes into
effect in FY 2027.
Mr. Chair. So, so I'm, I'm just
gonna be uh John Q. Public here
for a second. So this tax
package that I'm gonna get,
we're gonna, we're gonna say
you're gonna get it and so next
year we're gonna start that in
27 when I file my tax, I'm gonna
be able to get a tax credit. Is
that correct?
Um, uh, ranking member Duncan,
yes, sir, if, if you qualify,
obviously, right, OK, if I
qualify.
So
Um,
I guess my next question would
be, so
We're going to take 113 million
out. So what does that leave our
balance?
reserves.
Either percentage wise or yeah
present percentage wise I
appreciate.
rank remember Duncan I can ask
uh Chief Ismael Torres to once
again join us to provide a
little insight on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Duncan, a couple
of notes, um, the majority of
the tax package does take effect
in fiscal year 2027 to the point
that was earlier made, except
for liquor, which still is on
track for FY 2026, since that is
revenue neutral, and because of
that, there is no impact to
reserves expected in this year,
um, and so this would then be
sort of applied towards next
year's overall capacity rather
than necessarily reserves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Izzy, let me ask you another
question. And so, um, we're
obligating.
$113 million of
chair small as a budget next
year.
With this act. Is that correct?
Mr. Chen and Madam Chair, um,
of, of the entire legislature.
That's right.
OK.
Um, Miss Cha and, as I've said
before, and, and uh
Um
Did we get a, a percentage on
what the reserves were gonna be.
Mr. Chair and Madam Chair, of
course, uh, uh,
We need to see how the session
ends, to, to know exactly, but
on track for 30%.
OK I heard rumor a little bit
earlier today that we dipped
into the twenty-eights.
Mr. Chair and Madam Chair, um,
I, I think that, uh,
conversation has has been
avoided with the proposal as
discussed.
OK. All right.
I was, I still think this is a
bad way to do business. None of
us would budget this way in our
homes.
Um, and in this house, I think
it's uh what sets a bad
precedent in doing it. And like
I said before, there's not one
item on this list that's not
good and the people in this
state will not benefit from it.
I hope this list, we can do this
again next year and, and maybe
we can put tort reform on there
and keep a few more docs.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have to say. Thank you,
Ranking Member Duncan,
Representative Parajun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Like, uh, my neighbor here, I
also agree that some of these
taxes are really incredible. The
earned income tax credit
expanding that to 100,000 more
families, um, and many of those
folks will be receiving that if
you make under $70,000. I mean,
that's our young people, that's
our working families, that's our
elderly, so I'm really excited
about this, um, about the tax
credit and you know, New Mexico,
we've advanced. We're now the
9th most.
progressive, um, in the way that
we do this taxation and this was
one of the first things that we
learned on my first day in tax
committee when we saw that chart
of how we tax folks, um, that
the middle class is is still
getting taxed heavily. So I'm
really, really proud of that
work, you know, I think, um, for
me as a young person in our
state, it is, um, and we'll
disagree on this is, you know,
that the oil and gas
equalization Tax Act did not go
through, um, because that was a
way that we were gonna pay for
our earned income tax credit,
um, but Mr. Chair, I am really
proud of um the package that
we're proposing and how we've
worked with the team to find
capacity to continue to provide
this really continue progressing
even further on our tax, um, and
how we're advancing in it, uh,
you know, the, the, the GRT for
health practitioners is
something I heard the first time
that I ran, um, from my
community.
And I think the foster parent
and guardian tax credit, um, you
know, that's been mentioned, uh,
by the governor as a really
important priority. We want to
certainly continue helping those
families, uh, so, and, and of
course, uh, having worked
heavily on liquor excise tax,
Mr. Chair, I'm, um, I'm grateful
that, well, this is not the tax,
um, that was initially proposed,
uh, Mr. Chair, we are setting up
the distribution, I think to be
in a way that benefits.
So communities that are
suffering the most harm right
now, um, and happy to continue
working on that, so, um, Mister
Charon and all the folks here
who have done um a lot of work
both on our respective sides,
Senate and House, um, I'm
excited to support this, this,
um, tax package.
Thank you, Represent Paro Jun.
If, if, if, if I may say a
couple of things in terms of
maybe a process forward then,
uh, because, uh, this is a
proposal that, that we envision
with the staff here that, uh,
we've taken a little bit of
liberty to call LCS and, and
have them to draft something up
and and I'm hoping that in, you
know, and, and not too long of a
time that we could probably
recess for a while to hopefully
come back to then take a final
vote on this so that we can
finalize this in an open
meeting.
Uh, and in doing so, I, I, I
just
I appreciate uh both sides. I
appreciate everybody that's been
a part of this uh conference
committee today. I appreciate
and respect the Senate Tax
Committee and all the work that
you did over the past two months
and the bills that you brought
and the priorities that you
brought, that's meaningful.
That's not meaningful just to
your to to your chamber or to
the Republicans or the Democrats
in your chamber, that's
meaningful legislation that has
been now made a part of this tax
package. That's fantastic on on
our house site, I again, I want
to thank the, the
work for, from all of our
committee, but especially the
folks that work with us today. I
know it's been a learning
experience for, for, for the all
of us. But the fact of the
matter is that when we saw an
issue, we came together, we had
to, we had to work together as
adults, and I, and I believe
that we did so, but we could not
have become or have come to this
point with again, the incredible
work of our staff and and those
that help us out every single
day, and I'm looking at these
young people in front of us that
are proud New Mexicans.
that, that, that, that showed
the best and promising true uh
nature of, of what it is to be a
young professional in this state
because they guide our, they
guide our, they, they guide our
financial path every single day,
and I, and I brag on them a lot
and they know that I do, but I
do it intentionally because I'm
so incredibly honored to work
with all of you.
Bless you.
And so as, as we, as we then um
recess, I would like to, I would
like to suggest maybe we recess
for
1520 minutes, 30 minutes. I
don't know if you can be gone
from the floor that long.
Um, let's say 30 minutes cause
then we can go and check and see
where we are. We have a consent
calendar and then we have a
couple of other things, um, so
let's do 30 minutes. We'll be
back here Heart start at 9:30,
Mr. Chair. Absolutely. So if, if
we can all maybe you you can,
you can be I guess at this
point, you know, maybe what we
can draft up, but if you want to
come back and, and see the vote
at 9:30, you're more than
welcome to. And in the meantime,
I'll work with the go LCS and
see if we can get that draft. So
in the meantime, we'll recess
for about 30 minutes. Thank you
all so much for coming out.
Thank you.
