Representative Zamora.
Your.
Vice chair Johnson.
Here.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with that we have a
quorum with nine present.
Great thank you good morning
again good morning to the public
thanks for joining us today the
first bill on the agenda is
house bill twenty five and we
will get Representative Romero
over to.
Analysts and.
You see him there.
Good morning Representative
morning madam chair are you all
doing.
Thank you do you need us to
promote any experts no although
I'll be I'll be trying to solo
today great again when you're
ready great thank you madam
chair and thank you committee so
house bill twenty five is a bill
that's been around and those of
you that have
been here for a few years have
probably seen it in various
forms but it's too.
Yes the Legisla- are interim
legislative education study
committee oversight into and
working on issues related to
higher education currently the
legislative education study
committee
only overseas the the K. twelve
system along with the college of
education but as we all know
secondary education along with
higher education are very much
intertwined so this would give
our inner on legislative
education study committee the
ability to work on higher
education issues writ large so
This is a bill that it passed in
two thousand fifteen had passed
the house unanimously is carried
by Representative frost on the
two thousand seventeen it had
passed the Senate so this year
I'm hoping to complete the
trifecta and get the house
Senate and the governor to sign
it so with that madam chair all
state.
Thank you Representative we will
go ahead and pull the audience.
Great so the ball is now open
for the attendees that would
like to vote in favor or against
house bill twenty five.
The poll is now closed we have
eleven for and zero against so
we will now take the comments if
any by the attendees let's go
ahead and take
those that are in favor of house
bill twenty five if you would
please raise your hand.
Okay we have merry Lyndon Mayer
you are now unmuted.
Mary I'll just have to unmet
yourself.
I am in support of this bill I
think it's essential for our
students.
Thank you merry and I think we
only heard part of that are you
with an organization I'm with
the the McKinney vento advocacy
program.
You.
Are
are now omitted.
Thank you madam chair
and what the the executive
director of the New Mexico
council university presidents
and I just want to let me know
how much we appreciate the LFC
is willing support and work with
with higher education
and one thing that you know
we've just mentioned in the high
in the higher committee will a
couple weeks ago is to make sure
that we don't have to
duplication in terms of
valuation and and an oversight
regards the LFC and LESC
currently also provides a lot
the day we we do a lot of work
in the they do a lot of
evaluations with the higher it
so we just we ask for
coordination and not duplication
whether this bill passes not we
look forward to the also
increasing support for example
funding to hire department
adequately providing more
funding for dual credit
compensation for faculty and
staff and then also looking at
how we can support our at risk
students as well with that said
members committee when this bill
passes or not with four always
working the LFC and I just want
to thank the members of the
committee and sponsor for or on
bringing this bill forward thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you.
So now we will go over to anyone
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay seeing and we will go to
the committee Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero
I just want to tell you that I
served on education and then on
the on the estate when I was
first elected and I think a
couple of years into my service
we have a special higher and
interim committee and I think
it's only
at the very most it lasted for
years but I think it was only
two years.
It's always surprise me that we
don't have we don't include
higher ad so I just wanted to
say and I'm very much in favor
of it thanks for thanks for
bringing the bill.
Thank you representative
Representative neighbor.
Thank you madam chair
I have a number of questions on
this and don't mean to be too
negative but.
I was looking at the statutory
history of of of the alley
Astrium
I noted that it goes back to a
period of time when I was in
elementary school.
Yeah
It seems to me that the
legislature.
If we've been studying education
for most of my life.
Thank you there is no excuse for
New Mexico.
To be ranks fiftieth among the
states and in education or
toward the bottom
and all right I think that it's
incumbent upon all of us as
legislators as educators as our
bureaucrats and PED or higher at
it's incumbent upon all of us to
to start demanding excellence
and so.
I support the bill but I really
think that I made the statement
the other day government does a
really good job of studying
thanks to dance.
But there's gotta be some
connection between the studies
and the end product what are we
doing to accomplish goals what
are we doing to in this case
educate our students so they can
not just compete on a local
basis but that they can compete
internationally.
And that they can assume their
placed in in the world market
place and and.
And I am very fearful that of we
are are failing our our children
that said I do have a couple
questions with respect to higher
education and so madam chair and
and Representative
would it be in the intent of
this effort to
maybe micro manage the the
regents of the various higher
education institutions of the
state.
Madam chair representative no we
would not be
Is is the short answer if you'd
like a little bit more detail
like color it and.
Madam chair and Representative
what I think that I would like
to flesh that out a little bit
because I I think that the you
know the our.
Five or six seven our university
systems that we have are all
guided by the board of regents
some and I think that they might
want to be or they might be
interested to see what the
intention of this legislation is
going to do with respect to
maybe their authority maybe the
oversight that you're intending
to
Placed upon them and then we'll
get into the community college
system in a minute but I'd like
to focus on the you know the
the.
Institutions that are governed
by a board of regents.
Sure madam chair and
representative so you know the
the governance structure of
higher education has been the
topic that comes up periodically
in the legislature and and
actually the the intent of this
legislation is is not geared
toward the governance structure
of the higher education
institutions really what we're
looking at doing is being able
to look at higher education more
holistically as you heard from
from the representative from
from cups that spoke on behalf
of the bill LFC does to work in
higher education and we're
certainly not looking at doing
duplicate of work what we're
looking at doing is
Really being able to to do a a
bit of a deeper dive into higher
education issues sort of the
issues that you mentioned in
your your opening remarks
Looking at outcomes for students
how can we
achieve desired outcomes how are
these aligning with the goals of
secondary education these are
all things that that is is
really the intent behind having
Ellie as C. being able to to
weigh in on on higher education
issues because all those issues
higher education secondary again
there are very much intertwined
and to to remind the committee
as well as that.
We will still have the same
amount of time during the
interim so it's not like we're
looking at creating something
like that additional committee
that solely based on higher
education right there are plenty
of K. twelve even early
childhood things to look at
within
L. E. S. C. we just want to be
able to to delve into these
issues as the legislative
education study committee.
And then looking at the some of
those outcomes for students and
things like that would what part
of the part of this effort be to
to look at the.
Our degrees offered the the
curriculum the needs of society
whether the institutions are are
among themselves duplicating
Degrees are duplicating efforts
and and the maybe not
concentrating the best resources
at one institution or the other
And maybe even looking at
whether or not the the the
universities are producing
agrees that that really do not
the dance of.
The needs of society in terms of
preparing people to to enter of
the work workforce of any
comments with respect to those
issues.
Madam chair representative so I
mean I think which which you're
weighing in as is a bit of a
matter of perspective because I
have a degree and my master's is
in history in the American west
I have a degree in philosophy
and and I would say that very
much I would say that my
education in those fields very
much help me prepare for this
legislative working for my work
as a as a high school teacher
into certainly we can weigh the
outcomes and where they are I
think four four faring
especially in the liberal arts I
think we hear this criticism
will not saying your saying it
in in your comments but I think
sometimes a liberal arts gets a
little bit of a bad name for
this and and I would point you
there there are several studies
talking about how employers are
looking at liberal arts majors
because what we're needing in
the job market are are problem
solvers and that's what liberal
arts does is really teaches the
teaches and trains the mind to
think in various ways and to
problem solve more readily but I
mean those are all things that
that we definitely would want to
look into in the outcomes of the
students where they working are
they staying in state more they
going off elsewhere what's
luring them push pull factors I
mean all of these things would
certainly be on the table to to
to look at for sure.
I was not madam chair and
Representative I was not
throwing stones at level arts
are are certainly
Are you one of those two trees
and and agree that they brought
of.
Educational experience.
Is beneficial to not only the
individual but to society
I'm I am a little more concerned
and some of the concentrated
areas and we'll just I'll just
pick on my own profession of law
we have one law school in New
Mexico at the university of New
Mexico
and I'm not sure the demand
would be there for a second law
school but let's suppose New
Mexico state wanted to go in
competition with that would it
be the job of this our our study
to maybe our value wait whether
or not that
Effort may be in the best
interest of the state of New
Mexico not just institution but
in the state of New Mexico yes
there are adequate resources at
another institution that are
already meeting those needs.
I Madam chair representative I
mean I I guess it's it's
possible it's it's it's possible
that that might be a topic that
could come up.
You know and and I think one
other area that really needs to
be investigated is the.
What I consider geographic
footprint so I find it very odd
that maybe there's some perfect
explanation for it but it's very
odd that drive and Albuquerque
and see a highland University
banner in New Mexico State
University that are
flying.
At at various locations and yet
in Albuquerque when you have the
University of New Mexico there
and like wise we have other
examples around the state where
the.
There seems to be competing of
foot prints in certain
communities of by the various
institutions and and just just
looking at it from my.
Hey
Fission see standpoint I think
people question will have her
not that's an efficient way of
dispensing our tax dollars with
respect to higher education and
and I think it raises some
concerns and I would hope that
this this group might look at
the and some of that the what
appears to be competition going
on and and what what are they
doing when they expanded the
certain areas
I'll get off the university's
first second maybe look at the
The community college system
that we have with with this
study look at the efficiencies
of the community colleges that
we have around the state and
whether those colleges are.
Delivering
tangible benefits to the to the
state of you know it seems like
every larger community in New
Mexico has a a community college
and the there's some some
concerns that maybe that is.
A very expensive
way of.
Providing those educational
opportunities to students may be
a more concentrated
system might be might be
preferable but but those with
thank this study with that be
something that this group for
that this yes the would would
take on and and try to evaluate.
Madam chair representative
diapered I mean it it may in the
realm of possibilities I mean
this this is why
The the legislation may be
Enabling to look at I mean I
couldn't say specifically if it
would be eighty eight targeted
Kohler not but certainly F.
members and enough members voice
their concerns enough I think I
mean yeah it would be possible.
Are you indicated early on that
you wanted to look at education
holistically and it seems to me
that that maybe one of the past
for this study would be to look
at the the delivery of education
statewide and whether we are us
the should we delivering those
educational opportunities yes I
am in an efficient and cost
effective manner or whether we
have great kids overlap
duplication of.
Maybe some inefficiencies and in
the way were delivering those
educational opportunities so I
would think that would be
something that this so our study
would would engage them
You know one one complaint that
I hear is that.
Higher education is one of the
the few industry and in the
United States where there is a
constant increase in
the cost to the consumer being
the student and and there's it
seems like even in recessions
and times of hardship the
universities are still passing
on tuition increases the to it
students and and continuing to
expand their footprints expand
their role or whatever and
certainly we've seen.
Some of our universities in New
Mexico have declining student
population demands which puts
other stresses on the system but
with these study are.
With the L. yes three also
study of.
The issue of.
Tuition and may be.
Get into the dollars and sense
of what it costs for students to
attend the universities and
colleges within the state.
In Madam chair representative I
mean that might be another
possibility for sure and I think
the the gentleman that spoke
from representing
The diversity council presidents
you know this would be work that
we could
collaborate with the with the
LFC so there isn't that sort of
duplicative work but we can see
both sides of the coin right the
educational outcomes I think
from the educator perspective as
far as early as C. but then also
the financial side with the LFC
and get a more holistic picture
of of what's going on in a
diverse a more diverse set of
the input as far as as these
issues so I I I yeah again it
would be certainly something to
consider but I think it's one of
those opportunities where we
could collaborate with LFC.
Madam chair and representative
will M. my community
Partially in my district is a
unique institution of higher
learning at the as students
ranging from the ninth grade or
freshman year in high school
through the second year of
college New Mexico military
institute.
And that the institution has
been
around for for longer than the
state has been a state and.
Yes Sir its role is quite unique
and and one of the.
challenges that we faced.
Particularly with respect to
this
Pandemic is.
The spell your of the higher
education department.
To recognize the unique mission
and maybe the unique
Physical.
Structure of that particular
campus that
we were called in we've been the
the legislators and Russell were
called in a number of times to
help interface with the higher
education department on a
variety of issues concerning its
operations during during the
pandemic and and there's
there's a huge lack of
understanding of.
Montoya.
College and and how it operates
particularly among
You know that the people that
oversee that department in Santa
Fe because it it's not the it's
not like a college.
When the general jobs in order.
The order gets followed.
You know the question was asked
to one of the meetings they said
well how do you keep the cadets
on campus in the General said
well I tell not the eight.
And in a normal university
setting people don't understand.
Just because the president says
don't go off campus.
You know what I know that
everybody's going off campus if
there's a party down the street
or whatever.
It's a little bit different at a
military institute when the
general says don't go off
campus.
Those things happen our and so
I I would hope that is the as
the saying goes forward it maybe
looks at New Mexico military
institute that
there be some recognition of its
unique nature of its unique
status among schools in New
Mexico and and the unique
commission that it serves not
only for the state but but
really for the for the nation
and
Yes yes for our the study would
intend to began to micro manage
some of that it it it would it
would cause some some real
problem so I just throw that one
out as well as a local concern I
do agree that it's time we study
of higher education I do believe
that we as legislators ought to
demand excellence at all levels
and that the we.
Who are responsible for of.
The purse strings of of the
state that that we make sure
that our tax dollars are being
wisely spent that we have a
fission systems that we try to
reduce duplication of I think
one thing that this the study
can do is to delve into some of
those really tough issues and
and it's not going to be easy to
look at our higher education
systems and say.
You know we have too much
duplication or we have some
inefficiencies in the system and
we need to address those I think
you're it it's a real challenge
but it's also a real opportunity
for us as a state to begin
delivering
Education we have a in a more
efficient fashion so madam chair
and representative thank you for
bringing this and I will support
it.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero of you
know I think that when we look
at why businesses are relocating
here.
What they name is number one is
is order number wanted to is
crime you look at Albuquerque
New it's the second most violent
city in the nation and the
educational system.
But
let's go over to page one line
twenty five and in the stricken
languages provided that such
studies job not duplicate
studies.
I need I go back to the old the
the olds.
You know you hear we're going to
conduct a study to study the
study that was just conducted
why would we deal leaked.
You know multiple studies.
Madam chairman and
Representative I think what the
language is referring to is is
that we in the education field
will be looking at some of these
issues through a different lens
so that's why both the languages
stricken there.
Thank you madam chair I just you
know.
Studying the same thing over and
over and not.
Been out making any changes that
goes back to the Einstein saying
it but.
Thank you let's move on so what
does the L. S. L. E. S. C. have
a budget for this madam chair
and Representative Romero madam
chair and and Representative
Rehm so I had.
Director gradual with me when I
presented to the Education
Committee and of course this
question came up I think it's a
it's a pretty big issue in here
and like I had mentioned to
Representative Nibert is
questioning is that they're
still the same amount of time
that'll be a lot in the interim
to
the legislative education study
committee so the same amount of
work will be there now she did
mention that there would be over
time as we delve deeper deeper
into
higher education issues is that
she may need over time and
additional analyst for higher
education issues.
Madam chair and representative
then I didn't see an
appropriation on this is that
correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct and again I mean I
would say that at this time it
need it wouldn't be necessary
but over time maybe.
Okay.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero has the of colleges
waitin on this legislation and
how do they feel about.
White madam chair and
representative I think you heard
from the the gentleman from the
council of university presidents
is that so long as it's not
duplicative and that we're
working with LFC on these issues
that
I think they're they're they're
a little lukewarm on it
Okay thank you madam chair
that's all I.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative Rehm
Representative Mr Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning colleagues and audience
and Representative Romero I
don't have a question but I just
wanted to thank you for bringing
this bill forward.
We have Gallup UNM campus here
in Gallup and it's a very nice
education community and I think
this bill will support the
foundation and the continuing of
our the continuation of our our
Education our branch and many
times we have our interim
committee legislative meetings
and hearings at the branch we
have a very nice library and our
students travel from miles
around to attend at our campus
and you know of course now it's
virtual education but I wanted
to thank you and at one time our
campus was very well known for
graduating nurses and creating
that education and to the
medical and nursing field so I
just wanted to thank you for
bringing this bill forward thank
you and I have a little just say
no Representative night there
and running out of corners thank
you madam chair.
Thank you vice chair
yeah.
Madam chair mad COVID
Representative neighbors on that
point.
I'll be happy to replace the the
the quarters it if she will
graced me with her presence.
Thank you Representative.
And what is the pleasure of the
committee.
We do pass.
We have a motion by
Representative Johnson and a
second by Representative guy
Ecosse is there any opposition
to the day passed motion.
Seeing and hearing then I
Representative Romero you have a
do pass on health bill twenty
five.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you committee.
Thank you we are now moving on
to House Bill and ninety three
Representative Lotta.
If you would raise your hand.
And if you have any experts.
Good morning Representative.
You're in New.
Good morning.
Welcome you do you have
experiences that attrition merry
I yes I have a petition petition
and make it.
Okay.
We have merry okay merry's
probably for COVID merry Linden
mayor she's not a.
Expert of yours no I have a
tradition Julian L. and Megan
meet.
Great reading them over.
Thank you go ahead and again
when you're ready.
Thank you madam chair
Each three ninety three is a
bill about
the school suspensions
specifically.
The into the bills for
specifically homeless and foster
youth and not necessarily
because the general population
of the school so so the intent
of this bill is to deal with out
of school suspensions for
homeless and for up faster you
this bill.
asks that that school districts
and school personal utilize
restorative justice practices
before the suspension process at
no time does this if if a
student has a has an IP the IP
obviously takes precedence so
that those would not really
factor into this this is
determined by the IEP team that
that it would be so you so
there's a lot of us so this is
another thing that I would like
to mention madam chair is that.
Many school districts around the
state already have.
Wesley's ons as a matter of fact
each school district and charter
school has almost use ladies on
that works directly with the
with our homeless students so so
there's all the staff in place
at the school sites in the tort
of schools okay who can work
with and assist the students in
in their in in their in their
situations we'll get that set of
those students are doing I just
almost also also receive of
federal funding for professional
development and other services
and indeed this is a this is a
very important things to to
mention because these systems
are already in place at the
school districts and charter
schools so it's not new over us
is that the school districts and
charter schools consider these
restorative justice practices
before suspending the students
from school.
And now
Would like to improve have my
expert witness is is.
Maybe
they will let you some COVID.
Madam welcome.
Hi addition Gillian L. can you
hear me OK we can.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chair and members of the
committee I am very much
appreciate the opportunity to
speak today for eighteen ninety
three I want to give a little
context about where this idea
came from and and why echo a
connection we think it is so
important I'm in New Mexico I I
work for a national organization
school have connection we work
on state policy focused on
students experiencing
homelessness around the country
I'm in New Mexico in particular
I've been partnering for over a
year with the public education
department education of homeless
children and youth stated by
Gerry Committee I'm in the state
of advisory committee consisted
educators their service
providers community members and
young people also have their
views heard and considered from
across the state and it's
committee's been meeting
regularly for over a year to
consider policy reforms to
support children youth
experiencing homelessness and
the policies identified in
eighteen ninety three came out
of that committee their policies
the group formed some consensus
around in terms of
making sure that students can
stay in school during traumatic
times in their lives so I'll try
to be brief I don't want to
repeat research that in the bill
analyses there's a lot of
research in there about the
benefits of trauma informed and
restorative discipline practices
so I won't repeat all that but I
did want to point out one study
that would not in the analyses
that really showed from
Pennsylvania how using trauma
informed models actually
resulted in an increase in
attendance and also academic
achievement the percentage of
students meeting or exceeding
benchmarks in both math and
writing so we know that trauma
informed practice and discipline
work and considering as
Representative where laid out
the impact the build on behavior
is good for schools as well as
student but we also know that by
this that schools are
disproportionately punishing
many of our most vulnerable
students that includes two color
and it also includes the.
Anything homelessness.
In New Mexico discipline data is
not activated by homeless status
but my organization have look at
every state that doesn't
disaggregate discipline data for
homeless status and in every
single state in experiencing
homelessness was subjected to
punitive discipline at least
twice as often at their house
appears on an even more often
than other low income students
so we certainly have no reason
to expect this is any different
in New Mexico I'm one of those
states with that research with
Texas and in Texas the
legislature actually responded
to the research a couple of
years ago by passing a law with
the flat out prohibition on out
of school suspensions for
homeless students in all but the
most serious cases that H. B.
ninety three is not that it is
not a flat out prohibition of
the thank yous I wanna make that
clear but I just wanted to
provide that contact that other
states are looking at this and
taking legislative action to
address these disparities and
make sure that in New Mexico
all.
The thing I want to add for the
committee consideration is you
know when you talk about sending
a student home for behavior when
that student is homeless they
they literally have no home to
go to so we're talking about you
were extremely vulnerable and in
New Mexico we know from research
at the high school level that
more than one in every three
homeless high school student has
attempted suicide we know that
more than one in every five
homeless high school students
have been right so these are
just are extremely vulnerable on
this subject to try on that that
you many of us can only imagine
and of course that affect their
behavior but we have to realize
that if we send them out of
school I won't say from home
because they don't have a home
to go to where we sending them
where they can be during the day
and how are they going to
protect the physical and the
mental health so in addition to
just needing a dictation we know
that not graduated from high
school is the number one risk
factor for young adult
homelessness so education is
important for the student portal
for the state but also on an
individual level the impact of
of sending kids home quote
unquote home to discipline them
is really just extreme and much
more dramatic than than would be
the case from all students.
so with that I just want to
again express my support for
eighteen ninety three and I'll
be more than happy to address
any questions that the committee
and when they have thank you.
Thank you and would you like to
add.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I think
Representative Lara and Patricia
covered it pretty
comprehensively I'm a staff
attorney New Mexico state and I
was also on the committee
and we are fully in support of
HB ninety three because we know
it'll help keep our children and
youth experiencing homelessness
and school and with that will
stand for questions for the
committee please.
Great thank you and before we go
on to questions we will open the
call for the audience.
And we are now on House Bill.
Ninety three and the poll is now
open.
We will keep it open for another
fifteen seconds.
Okay we will close ripple in
five seconds.
The poll is now closed and we
have a twenty one for the bill
and zero that voted against.
So now let's hear from
supporters of the bill.
Jacob Vigil you are now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name become
with New Mexico voices for
children we're in a nonprofit
children's advocacy organization
and we stand in support of this
bill
for for several reasons.
Most of which were were
mentioned by the experts but we
appreciate that if passed this
would require schools to examine
and address these long standing
issues of
You know the ways in which our
unitive discipline really has
not taken into account the
social emotional needs of of
kids before they are suspended
or expelled so we we strongly
support restorative justice and
social service interventions
And the schools are being
required to have sufficient
training and workforce
development so and we also
appreciate that their services
strong equity focus of this bill
given the children of color
disproportionately harmed by
current policies so for those
reasons New Mexico.
Thank you take up I'm now is
that merry Linda Meyer you are
muted.
Very well just have to admit
yourself.
Okay let's we'll get back to
merry.
And we will move on to Marshall
Martinez you are now and made
it.
Correct thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marshall Martinez and the
executive director of equality
New Mexico the statewide LGBTQ
civil rights and advocacy
organization.
LGBTQ youth are at increased
risk of facing incarceration
homelessness and substance
addiction largely because of the
stigma as we sometimes face and
our families communities or our
schools when we come out in fact
for many of us the only safe
place we have is school where
there can often be one tier one
counselor or one friend who
provides us with the confidence
and listening ear as well as
helpful advice to get to know us
better so that we know it gets
better.
But using out of school
suspensions as a disciplinary
method for behavior we believe
two things are happening
students and teachers are being
pushed away from each other
forced to ignore the causes of
behavior and disengaging from
the solutions well creating
situations where students
especially LGBTQ youth of color
are in increased danger of
training to cope and coping
mechanisms that are addictive
and unhealthy reducing out of
school suspensions as a matter
of public health it is a matter
of safety especially for queer
and trans youth we strongly
support any effort to bring
equity and to bring students
into restorative justice
programs to engage with the
communities around us rather
than pushing us out of them
thank you so much.
Thank you.
What primary again.
Very your now and it.
Okay it looks like we are having
technical difficulties with
merry and let's move on to a
request Sanchez you are now and
made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm with New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care juvenile
justice and homelessness to
improve their transition to
adulthood we stand in support of
this bill in our work with young
people we see that students in
foster care or experiencing
homelessness face increased
barriers in completing their
education due to the many
disruptions in their lives we
believe students especially
those dealing with difficult
life circumstances need to be
supported by schools and
connected to resources not
suspended expelled or pushed out
of our schools and we hope that
you will support this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Three celery you are now and
made it.
Hello can you hear me we can.
Great good morning madam chair
members of the committee I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness to
ask that the committee vote to
endorse and support this the
house bill ninety three.
Many many students that are
experiencing homelessness go
pass under the radar and that
doesn't even include many of the
students that are have families
at home that are experiencing
housing insecurity and other
difficult issues and so many
interventions that can
He had to help find support and
break the cycles of poverty and
difficulty that comes along with
that we support so again I just
want to urge for the support of
this bill thank you.
Thank.
Sure Ben como you are now and
made it.
Thank you so much and madam
chair members of the committee
my name is surely but hello I am
the executive director for
preachers we are in support of
Hospital ninety three and would
like to thank Representative
Lotta for bringing this
important bill forward I'm
specific show that students of
color particularly boys are over
represented when it comes to
disciplinary action including
suspension and expulsion the the
only exacerbated when you add in
other circumstances such as
poverty and insecure housing
particularly for those who are
LGBTQ as a former special
education teacher who left after
mentor to better system to
support students living through
a physical mental and emotional
ramifications by adverse
experience president I think
we're effort to keep it in
classrooms with all available
resources possible to help and I
I'm thank you we look forward to
any amendment to strengthen the
intention of the bill and we
appreciate your
at a previous legislation thank
you.
Thank you.
In the back you are now and made
it.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Maryland back and I'm a former
licensed foster parents to the
state of New Mexico in my time
as a foster parent I had over
thirty nine children in my care
including twelve teenagers today
I stand before you as the
executive director and founder
of New Mexico child first
network a nonprofit organization
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in New Mexico foster
care empowering those who serve
them by training policy reform
direct mentorship and support
and we are proud to endorse this
bill.
More than five thousand youth
experiencing homelessness yes in
the City of Albuquerque allow
on.
I'm using have to make
homelessness often like Mrs
Sanchez spoke about over lack on
to the foster care system
Education stability is one of
our key concerns with foster
care and I want to read you
three separate case reviews from
the New Mexico substitute Care
advisory councils most annual
report one for use to enter
custody at the age of thirteen
and was at age fourteen this
year at time of the you they
have experienced eight changes
in placement and an estimated
four teenagers in school the use
was not currently attending
school to for you to enter
custody at age eight and was
aged eighteen at the time or if
you experience thirty nine
changes in placements an
estimated twenty changes in
schools the sequence the
response was the use was in
rural enrolled in elementary
school at the time of removal
from care uses currently in the
process of enrolling in the
first year of high school.
Three for use to ensure into
custody at age eleven and was
aged fifteen at the time of you
they had experienced twenty five
changes in placement and an
estimated eighteen changes in
school the CYFD responses to the
schools and dates attended since
the last court hearing however
there was only one mention of a
best interest determination
being completed associated with
the schools we understand how
important educational stability
is and how important these
educators like previously
mentioned from former testimony
as to keeping use in school
keeping our eyes on the students
so we appreciate the efforts
done by Representative Lara and
all who worked on this bill to
insure that user experiencing
homelessness are not punished
but again restorative justice is
part of their plan and we thank
you.
Thank you Victoria Torrance you
are now and made it.
Good morning can you hear me we
can hear you also given Good
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I I my name is
Victoria Taurus on the program
assistant doubled futures I'm
here today is the mother of the
young men of color that attends
an APS public school is that
he is fifteen years old and a
ninth grader he does have an I.
eight an individual education
plan and the behavior
implementation implementation
plan.
My son has experiences pension
and exclusion from class to due
to over use of the current and
ineffective discipline methods
for use with adverse childhood
experiences instead of support
he was labeled as a problem
child at a really young age I
know that if you had more
restorative justice practice in
school it would have had a
positive impact for everyone.
Students who understand how to
manage complex successfully can
transform their schools into a
safer and kinder place to learn
passing eighty three ninety
three is a great start to
implementing positive math
methods for addressing
discipline for children of color
and struggling from the pipeline
to prison in New Mexico for our
young people thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
If there is anyone that would
like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Seeing none
we will go back to the
committee.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay sorry Representative Lori
did you want to respond to some
of that yeah actually no madam
chair I do have amendments.
Okay.
And the number is two one nine
six zero nine point one.
We please repeat the number
again two one nine six zero nine
point one.
Thank you.
Thank you in the amendment madam
chair but if I may the amendment
addresses some issues that came
up during the house education
Committee hearing and out we at
the we address some of those
issues are
on on each to number one on page
two nine eleven we're striking
including inserting such as.
That is also so school districts
and charter schools will feel
that they are being forced into
doing it to implementing
restorative justice practices
number two on page two line
twelve after practices insert
and positive behavioral
interventions and supports.
Number three on page two one
sixteen strike the only safe
response in certain in certain
there are required for the
safety of students for staff or
by federal law.
Representative you Madam.
I can move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
My bird on the amendment.
Not on the amendment
Representative Ortez not on the
amendment okay any discussion on
the amendment.
Is there any opposition I guess
we need a motion.
Committee members what is the
pleasure on this amendment.
And.
You Mr dot the amendment yes
madam chair.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendments and just buy a were
brushed her Johnson in the
second by Representative Ortez
is there any opposition to
adopting the amendments.
Madam chair could you give me
one second I just about.
Think I pulled it up on share
file it Sir are point two one
nine six of nine point one.
Yes that's correct.
I don't have any comment.
Does anyone have any objection.
To adopting the amendments.
Okay seeing in their hearing
none we have adopted those
amendments Representative.
Will move on to the bill
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative.
What madam chair what what is
required to have.
A learning environment the
classroom.
Madam chair a there are you
based on my limited experience
with the with classroom
it again there's there's quite a
few factors that factor into the
answer Madam.
And madam chair representative
would one of those be you have
to have some control over the
classroom it has to be somewhat
the free of distractions and
you know focus on the teacher
or eight eight eight if they're
reading maybe a quiet
environment to read.
Madam chair representative yes.
And madam chair and
representative that so but
that's what I'm concerned that I
have.
Our our job is schools is is to
to teach our students and.
All right up I.
Have a real concern the that we
as legislators and we as the
state are continuing to impose
upon our education system.
Things that.
Go to a lot of issues that are
beyond their primary mission and
yeah we're placing in the or
were putting demands upon
teachers or administrators of
schools things that are frankly
they're they're ill equipped to
deal with them so when you talk
about our restorative justice
practices and and things of that
nature of those those are are
bigger issues that education and
I would suggest that they
require
Maybe a different level of
Person with certain training to
deal with some of those
behavioral.
Issues that you're talking about
and.
All right I think that we as a
state are not going to advance
in education if we don't focus
on the classroom and allowing
the teachers to have control
their classroom allowing
teachers to to teach and I think
that's one of our our major
problems I may be wrong but but
that's what I hear from teachers
in the district so I cover is
that they need to have the
ability to keep control of their
classroom to have a learning
environment.
And you say well how does this
bill.
Deal with that issue you know
what we M. M. so Madam chair
representative on I do have
several questions regarding the
bill.
Madam chair representative you
used in your comments you use a
word that you're asking
districts.
Yes.
When I look at the language on
the piece of paper page two.
One three one nine.
And elsewhere I see the word
shall every local school board
and every governing body of the
charter school shall provide.
That's not us that's a demand is
it not.
Madam chair are Representative
no that's incorrect because the
the ask was for the use of
positive behavioral
interventions and madam chair on
the point that you had made
earlier Representative teachers
part of bald in the expert on
the in the suspension and or
expulsion process so they would
be property would be part of
this and this would they
wouldn't be burdened with this
task you madam chair mist
Representative I hate I forgot
to mention in the in my
instructions that I work with
that particular program for
twenty years and I know that
there are systems in place
already with in the schools
within the school districts to
deal with discipline.
All we are asking chair is that
students are fall under the
subcategories homeless and
foster be given that extra
consideration thank you madam
chair.
Well again Representative or
madam chair and representative
of.
We're not asking the school
boards to to place these are
things in their disciplinary
process.
We're in essence demanding that
that is not correct.
Madam chair representative the
students already have certain
protections already under
federal law so all we're doing
is just giving them the
opportunity to in in
implementing these practices in
order to keep the students in
school it was Madam chair it was
mentioned that
you know the how the importance
of of classroom teaching as but
you know these Madam these
subgroups in particular the
homeless students.
Or protected by federal law in
the have the certain steps in
certain implementations in place
and and dust the this is just
one additional step to keep the
students in schools.
Madam because one of the rights
of the Fisher of the Mickey
mantle to act which is a federal
law.
States that the students that is
particularly identified students
should be given every
opportunity to remain at their
home school should be given
every opportunity to participate
in the educational process and
what we're doing here madam
chair used giving those students
that opportunity to stay in
school so they could continue
their educational process.
And madam chair Representative
what was the federal law you
decided madam chair it's of
making the dental homeless
Education Act.
Kenny.
Madam chair and the if you look
on the PED website they'll have
that information there as well.
I'm sure I'm Representative
thank you for that I I will I
will take a look
at that.
I am a proponent that
We of New Mexico ought to be
allowing more flexibility and
more ability of local school
boards to.
Of.
Run their their schools and not
concentrate the
procedures the powers.
In Santa Fe.
I realize to that that's not the
direction that we continue to go
in the the that's my by that
would be my preference
In this seems to be just another
area where we are going to force
down certain policies on our
local school boards and so I'm
I'm concerned about the.
Madam chair and and
representatives of everything we
do in schools.
Educates our students and.
If I read this bill correctly.
This bill.
Is going to result and differing
treatment of more students would
that be an accurate assessment.
Chair representative for the
specified subgroups
yes you could say that but
Madam the students already have
those protections under federal
law we're just hearing.
Chair to monitor water usage.
Madam chair I didn't catch the.
And so madam madam chair missed
Representative member it up.
These protections are already in
place these protections are
already in policy with the
school districts the only thing
that we're asking for now madam
chair is for these particular
subgroups to be given that
opportunity to say in class.
Madam.
And Madam chair representative
but that that gets to the very
heart of the point we we want.
The students to stay in class.
Even if of.
They are.
Causing disruptions that harm
the educational process.
That's that's that's the heart
of the matter is that not.
Madam chair Representative yes
it is that's why we are asking
that restorative justice
practices or something similar
to be implemented before the
students are suspended and or
expelled.
Madam.
And and.
I I guess.
What my real hang up is.
We want the educational process
to work we need an educational
environment and yet.
We're going to say a certain
subset of students.
Can be disruptive and continue
to be in that classroom because
we are going to treat them
differently than another student
engaged in the same type of
behavior.
It is not is that.
Is that a concern your is that
the ultimate outcome of what
we're doing here.
Madam chair and I would like to
ask if any of my experts have a
have a of something to say about
all all continue.
That's fine picture sure Megan
would you like to write some of.
Response.
This is Patricia I I know Megan
have to go and go make and I'm
happy to give you the
opportunity to speak first if
you'd like.
That's fine go ahead projection
thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you madam chair
Patricia Julian now again
I think it's been listening to
the conversation a couple of
things that have come up for me
one is I think some of the some
of the representatives concern
might be presuming that
suspension and expulsion work
and are you active discipline
practices and that positive
discipline like restorative
justice and and positive
behavioral intervention support
you don't work on it so if we
use those positive programs we
will have a destructive
Environment because those
programs are going to work and
so I would just sort of share
some of the research to show
that impact actually those
positive practices tend to be
more effective in maintaining
the environment in a school that
is conducive to learning for all
the students as well as for the
staff what you need to practices
actually have been shown to to
foment environments actually
less conducive to learning to
achievement so I think that
might be one point worth
considering
yeah I think I think a published
out there I'm happy to address
my questions as well.
The madam chair and and
Representative.
I'm Representative Robert could
I get Representative Chasey on
that point I think she might be
able to and respond to that
question Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative number and in
this may be a a question for
Representative Lotta
but.
I don't interpret.
No one.
I don't interpret this to mean
that this that the student stays
right in the same classroom.
For that here she disrupted or
disrupts continually but that
that student not be.
The suspended I'm told to stay
home I know at my son's high
school they had in school
suspension programs where and I
don't know so I don't
necessarily think this teachers
are being asked simply to do
that.
to to just like live with that
but it seems that this is
probably gone
Are there in in its
Application and usefulness by.
including restorative justice I
know at highland high school
in school suspension but they
were not in the classroom and
they did all of their work at
school so I think the your
presumption that there just have
to stay in the classroom may not
be
What happened.
Madam chair and Madam chair of
that wasn't the testimony the
testimony was that they would
stay in the classroom and that's
why I was exploring that line of
questioning
that.
That's what was stated and and
so you know that's that's my
real real concern it if for if
we're.
If we are handcuffing.
Teachers and administrators
from.
Creating and maintaining a
learning environment we are.
In my opinion we're doing a
disservice to all the students.
All of them and and and that's a
real concern
for me because I think that we
as a legislature we as a state
ought to be doing everything we
can to getting our children.
Educated as I stated on the last
bill so that they can compete
not only locally but they can
compete M. M. an international
work environment and.
That's the that is of paramount
importance to me is that we we
create.
That impairments so our children
can not only learn but but
thrive and that we do not.
Put put the barriers in front of
the teachers that that may be
a compromise their ability to to
to do that
The amendment on page two line
sixteen and I got it correctly.
Determines that suspension or
expulsion and see is the is
required for the safety of
students or or by state law
So the the idea of that well let
me ask this question first madam
chair.
When you say suspension of.
Madam.
Share Chasey talk about in
school suspension is up the
suspension that would also be
covered under the work
suspension in line fifteen on
page two.
Madam chair representative these
are these these determinations
are made on a case by case basis
so if the disciplinary team at
the school madam chair which
usually doesn't include the the
teacher.
You decides the that the is what
the what the what the punishment
for the consequences going to be
because of the students actions
they they they are they're the
ones that determine that so you
so yes and and to to another
point madam chair you know you
know we we do want to help
students and school we want them
to be competitive but if we're.
Taking out our most vulnerable
students from the from the
classroom and from the schools
we're not making those students
competitor we're just
perpetuating that cycle of
homelessness and of poverty so
the the point of the point Madam
is this house this it's about
equity so we're trying to give
the students the opportunity to
continue their education.
In Rick regardless of the there
are there are their ability or
their circumstances so so we you
we have to do Madam we have to
remain we have to remember that
this has to be an equitable
process for everybody and madam
chair the students that were
particularly targeting or a very
small subgroup of the general
population of the schools.
It's not like there's now you
know hundreds of students or
thirty students one classroom
they're all homeless so this so
to to paint madam chair this in
such a wide swath and make these
assumptions I think I feel is
right correct because this is a
very small subpopulation in in
the school districts and it went
and madam chair if you if you
have an opportunity if you know
that that website you'll see
exactly the numbers of students
that have been identified
homeless in all school districts
in in all the charter schools
and it's a very small percentage
of the overall student body
madam chair.
So again my my question is is
the words to suspension online
fifteen page two.
Is that just suspensions out of
the school orders that include
suspensions as our madam chair
Tracy was talking about in
school suspensions.
My apologies my apologies for
that answer the question.
Once again it is up to the
discipline team and the people
for working with these
particular students in school
suspension madam chair is the
best option then that's that's
of course they're gonna take you
innovative requires if there's
if there's an I. E. P. in place
and there's other requirements
that we have to take in
consideration those will be
taken in consideration also but
the the point of this Madam is
to give the schools that option
to to do that so is so you know
what I mean by that manager is
to implement some kind of
restorative justice practice for
or
other interventions to prevent
the students from being kicked
out.
So so it's completely on a case
by case basis madam chair I I we
cannot you know see this is
gonna happen to all the students
for this particular student aid
this the news that the the the
termination madam chair to the
school site as to how they are
going to work with that
particular student.
To keep that students school
whether it's in school
suspension or any other
alternative maybe maybe are
going to alternative school or
some other alternative program
but the point is that we keep
the students in school Madam.
So if I sent the size what you
just stated that suspension
would include in school
suspension let's look at the
language on fifteen and sixteen
now.
So the only time you could have
an in school suspension would be
if that's required for the
safety of students or required
by state law and I would suggest
there's no requirement of state
law so we're really looking at
the only time you can suspend
the student.
Yes for safety of students so
the destruction aspects do not
factor into that yet they're
only being disruptive but not
violent.
Then you can't do the in school
suspension that Representative
Chasey was talking about and and
so how does a teacher maintain
the educational environment in a
classroom yes that is the
criteria.
Chair before I responded up I'd
like to ask if any of my experts
have a comment on that.
Yes Representative fine.
Madam chair representative this
is Patricia joined now from
school have connection again in
current New Mexico law The
Simpsons right before the
language that I H. B. ninety
three would add uses the phrase
in school suspension school
service suspension or an
expulsion and so the COVID legal
interpretation would mean that
it would interpret that to mean
that suspension need out of
school suspension that same term
is also used in the face
cultural impact in New Mexico so
the legal implication is that
the ten suspension out of school
suspension in this context.
Why doesn't this bill say that
madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
Ely now against the law says it
in the sentence right before
where this bill will be inserted
so there was no need to repeat
it again in the language of the
bill.
Wellpoint which show line you're
talking about madam chair and
madam expert.
Madam chair representative is
not in the built in current New
Mexico law I can pull that up
and give you the citation to the
current law if you like if you
could give me a second I'll pull
that up.
Madam chair she said it was in
this this law this law starts on
page one
No sorry excuse me madam chair
and misrepresented it can
current New Mexico cold state
code that exists now it's not a
part of this bill.
Madam chair representative the
title of the bill to Austin says
an act relating to public
schools and then some Michael
and limiting the use of out of
school suspension or expulsion
of the disciplinary not that.
Madam chair of the title of the
act does not do anything in
terms of placing that involved
in the law that's just for our
purposes generally
Madam chair representative.
I would suggest that you look at
the word suspension online
fifteen a page two and if it's
your intent to only include out
of school suspension as the
coverage here and continue to
allow in school suspension to be
a disciplinary tool that I think
it ought to be clear
and I think that would address
my concerns of teachers being
able to have tools available to
them to maintain that and
educational environment within
the class for because I don't
care.
What the students are.
Where they come from what their
resources are lack or resources
are anything else if they are
causing disruptions in the
classroom the student should not
be permitted to continue to
disrupt the class for and this
rocked the learning environment
that affects one hundred percent
of the students in that class
for that M. I mean we can feel
sorry for for for the one
student and their background and
all that but we are required by
the constitution to educate the
students.
And we have an obligation to do
the best job we can part of that
my opinion is making.
Making sure that teachers have
the ability to maintain decorum
maintained and educational
varmint in their classroom so
learning can occur and so I
think the the if you work on
that word you can maybe bring me
around a little bit on this
let's move on to a little bit
further down on page two.
The new paragraph the which was
a whole paragraph C. basically
says the school districts R. J.
M.
Adopt discipline policies in
addition M. and this and that
how does that occur
How much discretion do they now
have yes we put in paragraph
being and see up above.
As Representative.
Madam chair representative of
the the way I interpret that is
that we are providing or us the
schools in the school districts
to implement it additional.
steps before the students are
suspended and or expelled.
And so we get back to that word
out so I I would suggest if
that's the intent wind line of
page two that the words shall
should be may and so it says
every local school board ever
governing body of a charter
school may find and it's
disciplinary sanctions that are
the that then gives them the
ability to have the discretion
to modify those things as
provided in paragraph the at the
bottom of the page because of
the word shall always use that
does that.
There's going to be much more
discretion but they're going to
be able to
exercise and finally on page
five line seven.
we have a definition for
restorative justice practices.
And it says it means non
punitive intervention at my
question is what is meant by non
punitive.
Madam chair representative you
if what anyone experts would
like to to to try and I would
appreciate about my
interpretation is with with the
win of counselors school
counselors school social worker
would implement these practices
of based on on the the students
that are working with madam
chair petition which is have
anything to say without.
Thank you representative madam
chair yes school there are very
familiar with what restorative
justice practices look like they
tend to be more of a mediation
format where two individuals who
may have been involved in a
conflict will sit down and
resolve that conflict here in
mediation type of format and
it's been shown to be very
effective in improving behavior
in creating a learning
environment that is positive for
all students in the school.
I would madam chair I would
suggest that there were more non
punitive is simply the eyes of
the beholder one one person
thanks it's punitive the other
does not but that yes Sir.
As to yes award that I just
me as odd because.
I'm I think that what's
happening is is up unitive where
the person next to me thanks
that I just got away with with
us sometime and you know what to
do but all it just seems to be
one of those are the older type
things.
Madam chair representative
I I certainly of.
I am concerned with the social
aspects that the we're trying to
to address here.
I'm certainly very sympathetic
that we have children being
raised in our communities that
are frankly we have children are
communities that may not be be
raised raising
our maybe raising themselves are
not being raised at all bought
by all and M. and you know more
more hard and sympathy certainly
goes out out to them.
one of the schools in my.
District one high schools in my
district we have high school
students who are raising their
younger siblings and they're
having to get them ready to to
go to school before they
themselves can go to high
school.
And so I certainly appreciate.
What we're trying to do here
social.
But I I also have tremendous
concerns with the state of
education in New Mexico and that
we are placing on the shoulders
of our school teachers or school
administrators.
and asking them to solve
problems that they're not
equipped to to deal with that I
firmly believe.
Firmly believe that we have got
to get our classrooms.
Are you.
Situation where learning can
occur we have to deal with with
the with distractions we have to
deal with those things and and
we have to deal with the for the
sake of all the students and
I I kind of see this measure as
as just another one of those
things that that are going to be
discouraging to teachers and not
giving them or basically telling
them that they don't have the
tools to maintain that learning
environment and and again that's
that's a real rock so
maybe maybe there's some words
here and there that you could
Grant that that may bring me
over to to support it but for
now I I I don't support it thank
you madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank Representative neighbor
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair
representative Lotta I I have a
couple comments and a question
first Representative Lotta I I
am grateful that you put forward
this bill I live in a community
that is very poor where many
many children here are you have
adverse childhood experiences
aces you know some with as many
as seven to eight we know that
aces lead to other challenges in
their lives with their health
and their ability to provide
jobs and whatever we can do to
educate our educators and other
members of our community about
how children are experiencing
aces and and what we can do to
help mitigate those those issues
I think is a really really good
thing you know schools our
communities our educators are
literally on the front lines
interacting and managing a
classroom you know filled with
children with with high aces
especially those young people
that are experiencing
homelessness or are in foster
care they have they have extra
aces which put puts them in
really challenging situations a
friend of mine who works with
young people who are
experiencing homelessness
homelessness just.
Tell me a story about a young
person in the classroom who was
suspended after being asked to
read aloud and cut that that
person because disruption with
that educator didn't know and
what the administrators in the
school didn't know was that
young that young person was
experiencing homelessness and
didn't know how to read so you
know that that's what that's why
the destruct destruction
occurred on this person was the
same person is put in a in
untenable situation and I
believe that this bill would
provide educators and
administrators those that make
those does disciplinary
decisions on in in a better
place to to better understand
using this year asset based
trauma informed approach on exit
you know to managing and helping
those young people who are
experiencing homelessness are in
foster care are you really to
understand how to navigate that
the system a little bit better
I do have a question.
You do you believe that PED has
resources that it needs to
training educators and
administrators on you know the
street asset based trauma
informed approach on and
restorative justice to approach.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative to my knowledge
yes and I I say that because you
know once again I I I work with
I worked for twenty years all
the students and and and and and
the homeless populations in in
my school districts and that PED
continuously offered
professional development and
training to staff who works with
these with with with these
populations both foster and
homeless so to answer your
question in general yes there
may be are more of money
available and I was I was told
that the other day madam chair
that cares Act funding can be
used also for for this
professional development so I
went to the thank you madam
chair of for I want to thank you
Representative for making those
comments because that's the
reality of the students in in
these classrooms and and and I
appreciate your understanding of
this and and unfortunately with
the with the pandemic it's
become a lot more wide spread
and of given the opportunity to
educate all our children is is
is of utmost importance to me
and and the team who put this
together and in manager and I
want to thank you for that and I
hope I answered your question.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative Lotta I I'm I am
grateful for for this bill and I
will support it thank you.
Representative Ortez.
Committee members.
Madam chair I move it to pass
second we have a motion for a
day pass by Representative guy a
goes and a second by Oakes use
made by vice chair Johnson and a
second by Representative day
goes is there further
discussion.
Okay seeing none that click to
call the roll please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative by a ghost yes.
Representative my part now.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Thanks chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair with that we
have six in the affirmative and
three in the negative.
Thank you Representative Lara by
a vote of six in the affirmative
and three in the negative house
bill ninety three as amended has
passed this committee thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you next we will go on to
vice chair Johnson house bill
one twenty seven.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you colleagues an audience house
bill one twenty seven.
Well.
Allow the company homeless youth
age twenty five and younger to
be permitted to apply for and
receive free of charge a real ID
card or standard ID card without
the signature of an adult.
And this bill will also
designate a supervisory level
staff to serve as the homeless
liaison to assist in the
processes and policies of
acquiring the application and
processes for the homeless youth
so that they can acquire an ID
card.
And the bill and further
explains that
Now presently a lot of home or
are homeless you have a hard
time transitioning back into the
world of education or work or
even applying for housing or
snap or things in that situation
so that they could improve their
quality of life so this is what
that bill entails I have two
expert witnesses the first
expert witness is Patricia
Julien L. you just heard from
her in the previous bill and and
and next.
Second expert witnesses merry
land in Miner so with that I
thank you committee members and
madam chair.
Representative and we do have
your experts on do you want them
to add or are they going to be
available for technical support.
They will be available for
questions thank you at thank you
representative so we will now go
to opening up the pole.
So that attendees can vote in
favor or opposition of health
bill thirteen.
And the poll is now open.
The poll will close at
approximately ten seconds.
The poll is now closed we have
thirteen participants that voted
for the bill and two against so
if anyone would like to speak in
opposition eight.
Please raise your hand.
If anyone would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Okay Jacob Vigil you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I take up the
hill once again from New Mexico
voices for children we strongly
support this bill given that.
you know the you are you that in
the foster care system faced
many disadvantages and barriers
and so this would help remove
just one of those that would
allow them to serve pursue
schooling and education for
their schooling and work and
build that economic stability
that that they need so we
strongly support this bill thank
you.
Thank you
Verlaine back you are now and
made it.
Thank you madam chairman
chairman and committee members
my name is Maryland Act and I
may first former foster license
here in the state of New Mexico
in my time as a foster parent I
have thirty nine children and
twelve teenagers I'm one of
those teenagers in particular.
Spent over six months trying to
get a public ID with her CYFD
case worker in approval three
CYFD for the reimbursement and
so that she could simply apply
for a job so this is interesting
because to apply for a job in
New Mexico you have to have an
ID I'm most will not be a
driver's license most will
simply just be eight non
driver's license identification
card I'm and through a lot of
barriers this is actually very
difficult program so it took my
Houston Care over six months
with working with CYFD in her
case worker to get approval for
her to get an ID card it's
interesting in these are some
really interesting facts for you
there are currently more than
five thousand homeless youth in
the metro area area of
Albuquerque alone so if you talk
about that and I know many of
you are from rural districts I
only have the statistics for
work for Albuquerque and their
five thousand when we think
about homeless youth often we
think those are the youth in
foster care and that's actually
not true there are only about
twenty five hundred use of all
ages and foster care so many of
these youth experiencing
homelessness are in fact not in
foster care we think that the
many homeless youth shelters
like new day and just died
caustic you for the good work
that they do and this bill will
really help empower those used
to if they need an ID for
specific purposes of getting a
job or any other purpose that
they do this would be that I'm
in January my organization New
Mexico child first network
dedicated to improving the lives
of children impacted by foster
care hosted a weapon are with
United Way of central New Mexico
in tax help New Mexico to ensure
that these youth specifically we
call them independent use maybe
use experiencing homelessness
who could not be claimed on
someone's taxes for twenty
nineteen or twenty twenty would
be able to apply for stimulus
funds and so as we're looking at
ways to give indeed.
That you possibly experiencing
homelessness that there are a
record number of ways and a
helpful hand to help themselves
out of these situations ensuring
that they get an ID and the way
that Representative Johnson has
proposed without barrier for the
relinquishes the burden that
many of these years face every
day so with that we stand in
strong support on behalf of New
Mexico child first network in
the good work of house bill one
twenty seven thank you.
Thank you Erica Sanchez you are
now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I'm with New Mexico can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
the foster care system are
experiencing homelessness to
improve their transition to
adult.
We stand and support this bill
we see the accessing
identification documents is an
issue that most of the young
people we work with struggle and
lack of ID prevents them from
securing employment housing
banking and the list goes on and
on so we need to remove barriers
to access and the fee is a
barrier to someone in this
position and navigating the
process of obtaining an ID can
be a barrier in itself so having
a liaison for these young people
to work with will help ensure
that they can get an ID and move
forward and all of these other
domains of their lives so we ask
you to support house bill one
twenty seven thank you.
Thank you Bree Sillery you are
now and muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness
again to ask that you vote to
support house bill one twenty
seven homelessness itself is a
challenging obstacle to navigate
while many years with this
experience have higher impact in
significant issues and barriers
simply because because of their
minor status and are you Soto
this high leverage policy change
will provide significant
improvement for youth
experiencing homelessness to
have the ability to pursue
housing employment thank you.
Thank you current record you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kurt
record on the director of
littering and see administrative
New Mexico we speak on behalf
New Mexico conference of
churches as well I'm here this
morning to say our support for
H. P. one twenty seven for all
the reasons for support Boller
for all the reasons of support
already stated thank you.
Thank you.
So that concludes public comment
Representative Johnson you have
an amendment.
Thank you madam chair I.
My apologies I am not aware of
the amendment.
Madam chair she may have
amendment here in a minute.
Thank you I'm I'm navigating
through my ShareFile so let's go
to Representative neighborhood
I'm sorry about that
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair Matt vice chair why
age twenty five.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative night for it
I believe that is the.
Identification of.
As the status of youth.
Thank you for is a person who is
age twenty five and younger and
I would like to do for to my
expert witnesses to further
explain that in detail thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair representative this
is Patricia Julien now most of
the federal homeless youth
programs do define you as up to
each New Mexico to including age
twenty four New Mexico for
consistency for the programs and
schools that are accustomed to
using that definition that was
what was included in the bill.
Madam chair madam vice chair all
right I guess I'm a little bit
confused because if we're only
worried about a parent guardian
foster a parent having to sign
off on something then the H. R.
B. eighteen and younger because
someone eighteen does not made
their parent to sign for.
Not not required at all under
any of the normal circumstances
the only ones that would
baby need to have a guardium us
or conservative or signed form
are those that have been
adjudged to be mentally
incompetent.
so the the age of twenty fives
seems a bit odd if the purpose
is to.
Allow.
Homeless individuals to receive
ID cards without having to meet
that barrier payment maybe there
should be no.
age limit.
If that's a barrier the maybe
every homeless individual ought
to be able to receive a a a New
Mexico ID card without having to
pay the the fifty so I'm a bit
confused as to what the real
goal this wasn't only to avoid
the parent's signature or was it
to try to give these people an
opportunity to address of get
them some credentials so that
they can secure jobs because if
it's if it's a first then it
ought to be eighteen and younger
if it's the latter it shouldn't
have any aid for.
Thank you representative nine
Brett.
Patricia would you like to
respond to that thank you madam
chair.
The intent of the bill is both
so there is a section the lady
to see waivers that applies to
all homeless individuals start
on page seven of the bill.
there's also chairman I think we
missed the first part of your
comments Patricia.
Yes I'm sorry I'm having a
little trouble with the internet
connection madam chair and
representative can you hear me
OK right now.
Yes.
Okay thank you I just want to
clarify with the purpose of the
bill is actually both so there
is a section with the fee waiver
that applies to all individuals
regardless of age on page seven
of the bill and there's also the
piece regarding unaccompanied
youth being able to get ideas
without an adult signature I
don't think there's any
particular problem with amending
the age from twenty five years
or younger you Representative
seventeen years or younger if
that would be more amenable for
the committee.
Madam chair madam vice chair
Yes your phone paid service
where the age of twenty five
appears on line twelve.
If that's just simply there are
to avoid having to get a
parental signature them I would
suggest that what the expert
just stated is probably a more
accurate.
Situation.
Out of the.
Individuals who are eight
seventeen years or younger
because a nineteen year old cam
and signed without.
Current.
All
all certainly do you whether or
not you want to Amanda it just
did not make sense to have that
are yet ours.
Your for allowing.
These realized these two to go
to homeless individuals out of
three I think this bill could be
a lot easier have a lot more
streamlined process the second
you know all was individual can
receive these ideas about the
without
having the and then for the the.
Minors those under eighteen our
to be maybe it has to have some
stuff for the Lyles others.
To us Sir thank you.
Let's look over on on the pages
eight nine.
Begin in a line eighteen on page
right through the line for a on
page nine.
it strikes me as odd that the.
Hey homelessness.
Can be verified through a nafta
station and we go through a
variety of things but at the end
of the day.
If if I read this correctly
homelessness can be verified by
the homeless individual so if
individual says are homeless
their home was why do we need
the other stuff to say their
home once it I mean.
You know why can't we just say
all want a homeless whose
homelessness can be verified by
the individual of who is
applying for this what what do
we need a B. and C..
Thank you Representative Nighbor
a Tricia.
Yes madam chair representative.
These give more options to the
state agency to determine how
they would like to implement the
program make provide them with
the idea of agencies that
already there I homelessness for
other purposes such in federal
programs federal financial aid
school district programs and
runaway and homeless youth act
program so it's providing
flexibility to the state on how
they would like to implement the
provision and how they would
like to develop I I presume they
will develop some kind of a form
for the implementation that's
what we'll say do.
So so madam chair and and madam
expert you you're saying that.
You could have a person who
doesn't Dave them selves to be
homeless but if a social worker
license practice in New Mexico
deems them to be homeless
they're homeless.
Representative matter other
expert Mary Landon Mayer has
Hannah so she might want to also
answer that question.
Thank you madam chair merry.
Thank you madam chair madam vice
chair representative.
As a McKinney vento coordinator
and liaison for one of the
largest school districts in the
state.
I find myself often either
having to pay out of pocket good
for ID's because parents are
unable to for them of their
whole list.
And our unaccompanied youth.
Our without ID's many times they
don't even have their birth
certificates and the like so as
they make can evento liaison and
coordinator it is my
responsibility to be the parent
in loci.
Are you you need to have.
ID's for jobs.
For.
even access to libraries alike.
So I would ask that you really
consider supporting this bill.
Under McKinney vento we follow
the federal guidelines for
homelessness which are included
on page I believe it was eight
nine a B. and C..
And that is what we use.
To verify the state of
homelessness for the purpose of
federal funding.
So I hope that answers your
question.
Madam vice chair and
representative line for.
Representative neighbor you're
on mute.
I don't know how that happened
Those I'm sorry madam chair and
this one of our.
I I do not understand if if we
have a situation where.
Homeless person that doesn't
have to be used with just a
homeless individual says that
their home was.
We're.
To do then that person to be
homeless why do we need anybody
else to do anything I mean if if
they're applying for the ID card
of their line for budget or
whatever they say the homeless
they're homeless under under
this bill.
If you want some verification of
their actual homeless status
that maybe you need A. B. C..
And take out the.
But yes if you're allowing an
individual to just simply say
I'm home was and give it back to
that statement.
You don't need third parties to
to to verify that and this bill
doesn't do that and so on I'm
just.
I mean it really doesn't matter
but.
I'm just confused as to why we
have a long provision would
basically you could just say to
use homelessness can be verified
through an attestation by the
person.
Get out.
That's essentially what all of
paragraph two sets.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative night for it
so.
When when individuals go to say
for for example when an
individual goes to apply for
housing under a certain income
guidelines or if they go to the
local and food.
You know where they give where
they give out food.
The food pantry or they go to
social social services or things
of that nature each of these
departments ask these questions
and I think this section covers
all of those and it's each
department that determines these
questions that are in this bill
we were always answering those
types of questions.
Rep Patricia would you like to
add on to that.
Are very.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair I would just add
that it's very common for
homeless individuals to have
assistance in applying for
Aidid's another document I think
we got a couple witnesses
reference that so it may
actually be easier to simply
have an agency provide a letter
than to have a person an
individual try to have to
actually write down some kind of
action station about their
situation their own personal
situation and may millions not
be capable of doing that.
Representative.
Johnson this is merry Linda
Meyer and Representative night
bird.
Again.
We do need to have some.
One verify that they are
homeless even under federal
guidelines with McKinney vento
because we are allocating
federal funds I know the ID
doesn't come under that but you
know like.
If they want to be staying with
a hotel or with the eight
apartment complex that's had I
have to write a letter that the
tests that they have been
homeless for a certain amount of
time and I think that we need
that verification if we're going
to be giving ideas and the like.
Four families.
The.
We the guidelines the federal
programs.
The madam chair and missed one
of more of I would suggest that
may be that section needs to be.
Ended slightly to accomplish
exactly what you say is I would
also.
Just suggest that the
madam chair brought vice chair
of the the you look at the issue
of of of age in here and
determine what your real goal is
if it's too wet in a homeless
individual receive the ID's free
of charge I would suggest you do
that if the ideas just to avoid
Parental signature of them them
putting the age of seventeen or
younger thanks a lot of sense to
me but those are my comments I'm
not going to suggest that
changes I think you need to
figure out what you want to do
and and maybe look at a couple
moments I'm happy to support the
bill as it is not I I just.
Thank you all.
Ought to be a little clear as to
what what a real intent is in
this thank you madam chair thank
you madam vice chair your
quarters on the table.
Thank you.
Neighbor thank you the eagles.
Thank you madam chair and the
thank you Representative for
bringing this legislation
forward I am the executive
director for a nonprofit that
advocates for children that are
have their foster care
during the pandemic we have seen
an incredible increase of kids
who Y. Gallegos use that
age out of the system and don't
have the the documentation that
they need and have fallen
through the cracks because of
the pandemic of federal
buildings are closed it's harder
to get in with had there's just
there's just so many barriers
and so I think this type of
legislation to help that those
used to get that documentation
is is essential I also want to
mention that you know we talk
about the age of eighteen being
a cut off
you know having children of our
own many times at eight eight
age eighteen I know that they're
adults but date they usually
have a softer landing with their
parents and you know I haven't
you know I would have my sons
diploma is his insurance card
his birth certificate where
child in foster care may not
have those those documentations
and they lose them along the way
so that's a really important
piece to remember I would also
say that many times that the
children who have
Been in foster care and once
again have graduated out of that
system
may have several mental health
issues that they're dealing with
they may be
maybe at a minimum level of of
being able to function and so it
may not have a guardian to help
them through this process and so
I think this bill really helps
them to navigate through and and
make sure that their basic needs
are met so I applaud you
Representative for doing this
bill and I supported a hundred
percent.
Thank Representative A. goes.
Committee members.
Madam chair all the do pass on
the.
City house bill one twenty seven
as we did not amend.
Sure we have a motion by
Representative neighborhood and
a second by Representative Eli
is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Not only are the only have that
but I hope we do see some
amendments that as a cause of
the process.
Thank you representative
neighbor to seeing and hearing
no objections Representative I
sure Johnson you have a do pass
on house bill one twenty seven
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Thank you madam chair and death
thank you for the Representative
night requests and then met
suggestions those are friendly
amendments and we will work on
those before we move on to the
next committee thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Next we will switch over to
House Bill thirteen we will get
Representative but I left over
as well as her witnesses expert
witnesses.
Representative if you would
raise your hand and have others
that are with you thank you
raise your hand and we'll get
you over
Ladies and gentlemen and
committee members we will also
have a and interpretation
interpretare local
if you can look to the bottom of
your screen there's a little
glow like looking by an
interpretations so
that can be pressed in the event
an interpreter is needed.
Welcome Representative.
We have your witnesses here.
And.
Stay stable Shakti he.
Representative is yes she's
right there sovereign is is
online accused us sovereign in
media.
I also have Nicholas quarter
amending one it could last for
the last he is on it is time the
state look like we have everyone
on Representative is taking most
of the recent this.
Thank you madam chair members
assisting Division of members of
the state.
Bring to you today and let's say
this hello.
Thank you Medicaid.
They got it I can share this
bill does too simple a I
mentioned.
She does not need
not a little bit simplifies the
process is seen qualifies for
their emergency Medicaid this
ticket for that the medical
direction share immigrants are
important.
This is on members to bring
their.
That is not in any in the have a
similar.
This magical season they can't
get access to access so the
coverage for all COVID nineteen
testing and that commitment
about it that the need
to host their providers does
that is the last portion of the
order states have we shall not
act.
Representative I have needed you
you can hear me we are having a
little difficulties with the
interpretation and so I needed
both of you right now until we
can get assistance from Gabby
probably because right now I
believe the interpreter is
supposed to be on one end and
you're supposed to be on another
but they're going simultaneously
so we can't hear what you're
saying so let's calls for a
quick break and we'll see if we
can get that corrected.
I think they need to assign me
as an interpreter so I can go in
there and nobody else will be
able to hear me except those
individuals needing at that that
selected.
Thank you I think we tried to do
that so we're going to try again
yes ma'am thank you and I
apologize for interrupting no
problem thank you.
I'm gonna let you do your thing
on the back and here.
I'm sure you said you might make
me a host really quick.
making eighty hosted I'll hand
it back over to you in a minute.
Thank you.
Thank you.
okay as a madam chair members of
the committee it's my
understanding now that Dr mata
is set to give interpretation
I would ask that we do a little
bit of a test so
Dr mata could you go ahead and
just translate what I've said so
I can test out the.
Okay it is working on the
Spanish speaking side and then.
I believe drive mode out if we
have someone getting public
comment in Spanish members of
the committee if you go to your
global and select English you'll
be able to hear her translating
from the public commenter
Spanish into English and I'll
stand for a bit to see if if
it's we've ironed out the Kinks.
Perfect we can hear the last
thank you doctor mata.
Okay we'll pass it back over to
you representative.
Thank you Gabby.
Of course yes thank you Gabby
and the thank you madam chair I
was also confusing on my and so
I was trying to focus on what I
was saying so I I apologize let
me start again thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I bring to you today
house bill thirteen which allows
the use of federal emergency
Medicaid for COVID nineteen
testing and treatment.
This bill does to simple things
it adds testing and treatment
for COVID nineteen to the
emergency Medicaid for
immigrants thank you Jim so any
simplifies the process so
patients can qualify for and
such before their emergency
medical conditions arise and not
after.
Important members of our
community and they are on the
front lines during this
pandemic.
Well they are more likely to
work in jobs considered
essential.
They are they can't access
essential health care coverage
for all COVID nineteen testing
and treatment without this
coverage hospitals and
healthcare providers don't get
reimbursed for the cost to care.
At this time madam chair if it's
okay I'd like to introduce my
two expert witnesses Nicholas
Cordoba and sovereign Hager I
take it away requests.
Welcome.
Thank you madam chair
Representative but it just
members of the committee my name
is Nicholas Cordoba I'm gonna
turn it the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty organization
dedicated to social and economic
justice.
In in New Mexico through legal
representation and policy
advocacy.
We are members of the New Mexico
to get together for health care
campaign which is a community
led movement seeking affordable
quality healthcare for all New
Mexicans.
Since the COVID nineteen disease
researchers say March twenty
twenty.
We've lost over thirty four
hundred lives to this horrible
pandemic.
So now more than ever our state
must ensure that every New
Mexican can access testing and
treatment for COVID.
Without worrying about whether
they can afford.
And we at the center long
poverty work with families who
test positive for comment and
never see a doctor for treatment
of confusion and out of fear.
Can afford it.
We'll get reported to ice.
These families need easy access
to these services.
Indeed our state has a moral
obligation to provide the
services to New Mexico residents
who have immigrated to the
United States.
They are healthcare workers
teachers home care workers.
There New Mexicans doing
essential work in New Mexico
must make sure that they're
given the essentials needed to
survive this pandemic.
And H. B. thirteen does exactly
that just two things first it
leverages federal money to cover
COVID services through New
Mexico's emergency Medicaid
program and second it
streamlines the application
process for emergency Medicaid
so what operates just like
regular Medicaid.
What is emergency Medicaid.
Well it's a federal Medicaid
program that matches state funds
to cover the cost of emergency
care for people who meet the
income eligibility requirements
for Medicaid.
But still do not qualify for
Medicaid because of their
immigration status.
An emergency Medicaid is a very
unique program because states
have flexibility to determine
what Medicaid medical conditions
and services are covered.
In fact twelve other states have
already use their emergency
Medicaid programs to cover COVID
testing and treatment.
We are hoping to do the same
here in New Mexico.
No I want to recognize the
laudable public health response
taken by our governor and our
state.
And to that end up our Human
Services department has already
said that emergency Medicaid
covers COVID testing and
inpatient treatment.
It currently already covers
labor and delivery services and
soon HSD will cover COVID
vaccines to this program.
But our state's program needs to
go further I covering all COVID
treatment including out of
hospital treatment.
And although Congress created a
federal program through which
providers can seek reimbursement
for the services for uninsured
patients.
Providers are still confused
about how to access that money.
And providers are required to
check for social security
numbers and that acts as a
barrier for several of our
immigrant residents.
And to add to the problem
Congress is dedicated only so
much money to this program.
Eventually it is going to run
out.
COVID is going to be with us for
awhile and we need to make sure
our health care programs can
handle that in the long term.
And that's where House Bill
thirteen comes in I expanding
New Mexico's emergency Medicaid
program to cover all COVID
testing and treatment including
out of hospital treatment.
We can sure more New Mexicans
have easy access to these
critical services.
So having discussed why we need
to expand this program I want to
turn now to help cost effective
it is to do so.
Again our current emergency
Medicaid program already covers
testing an inpatient treatment.
And will soon cover vaccines.
So really what we're talking
about in added costs for the
state is comprehensive coverage
of all COVID treatment through
merchants Medicaid.
HSTS means that building out
emergency Medicaid to do this to
cover all treatment would cost
the state about two million
dollars over three years.
Which leverages almost seven
point eight million in federal
funds.
So the feds and the pain for
most of this.
And this is an incredibly a cop
cost effective measures to make
sure our community stays healthy
during this pandemic.
So just as twelve other states
have done so too should New
Mexico cover all COVID testing
and treatment through emergency
Medicaid.
Because during this pandemic
when each of us is helping all
of us are healthy.
So now I'd like to turn over to
the central properties legal
director Southern cater to go
over the application process.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee briefly just on
the second part of this bill
which is for everyone who needs
to access emergency Medicaid
program changing the application
process to align it with the
regular Medicaid process right
now for an individual to access
this program they need to apply
after they had an emergency and
they have to deal with the help
of a provider.
I'm and then going to HSD and so
that means that folks are
usually applying for coverage
after they've had surgery
after they're recovering from an
illness and it creates a lot of
barriers and also puts a big
onus on providers for making the
connection on this coverage what
this bill does is change is that
so that
HSD opens up the application
process folks can apply and they
are pre approved for up to a
year and then if they have an
emergency it works just like
regular Medicaid that the
provider can build and what this
means for folks just to give you
an example we worked with a
couple
In southern New Mexico who were
about to have a baby and they
both work as farm workers and
they went to a hospital
indemnity because the wife was
about to have a baby and she
need to schedule C. section that
is covered by this program and
so she went to schedule a C.
section and was told no you need
to put money up front in order
to be able to schedule this
ensure uninsured hospital did
not know about our didn't have a
process to get folks on Ms we
advocated for this family and
were able to get the C. section
scheduled but then asked this
new mother and family is you
know recovering from childbirth
and then with with their baby
the hospital didn't help them
get on and sat in the family
ended up being sent to
collections we are still working
to get that family out of
collections because they were
covered by a should be covered
by and fixing the application
process here is really a win win
for providers to be easier for
them to get reimbursed for the
services for up a largely
uninsured populations very
important for our rural
hospitals in particular
it's a win win for families who
don't have to be worried about
applying for coverage after they
are recovering from illness
think about someone who's COVID
positive potentially having to
go and turn in income
information to Human Services
Department while they're
recovering just to get this care
and it's a win win for HSD it
doesn't have to manually
determine eligibility each time
someone has an emergency and
that was noted in the FIR is a
cost saving of this programming
overall I think it's important
to remember that HSD the federal
government is just come out and
said they will continue an
enhanced federal matching funds
for HSD in Medicaid through at
least half of the next fiscal
year in HSD is counting on an
extra hundred eighty million
federal dollars that can be used
for Medicaid that were not part
of its original budget request
so taking that in.
Your account in particular you
know wrapping in these
extensions of coverage
certainly our portable within
agencies current budget and are
critical for our state thank
you.
Thank you is that
all Representative are you ready
for questions once we get
comments and poll the audience.
I yes madam chair thank you very
much and for you go to the
audience and.
To legislative thank you.
now we are going to vote the
poll for those in the audience
that would like to vote on house
bill.
Thirteen for or against.
The pro is now open.
And it'll remain open for about
fifteen more seconds.
Okay the poll is.
Going to close now.
We have thirty five of our
attendees voting for.
House Bill thirteen and four of
the audience members voting
against.
So if anyone would like to speak
in opposition of the bill please
raise your hand we will take
opposition first.
Charles.
Bill you are now and made it.
Charles you have to admit
yourself.
Okay let's skip Charles and we
will go to Nicole.
Comey you I believe you are now
on muted.
Thank you.
Madam chair and sorry Mr chair
representative and into the
sponsor and I I would like to
say just first in my name's
Nicole Comeaux start the rest in
I'm that Medicaid director and
and we actually are not in
opposition or support of the
bill that we just don't have it
an option to be neutral but did
need to speak about a couple of
concerns I that we're working on
with the sponsor and to try to
make sure that we can get those
addressed a potentially an
amendment this bill makes its
way through I'm so I just wanted
to say very quickly
regarding the dollars
Representative and the testimony
that are at the additional
funding that we get from the
federal government is actually
on a forty five million dollars
net reporter I'm so while we do
receive additional money from
the federal government we have
many many additional lines to
cover currently during the
public health emergency and so
the cost of their coverage has
to be subtracted from that
total.
I would also say that currently
are projection with the LFC
recommendation still lands
Medicaid with a thirty million
dollar shortfall at the end of
fiscal year twenty to and the
executive recommendation was
just of the seventy million
dollars shortfall so I'm we
cannot actually covered these
changes within our existing
budget so while we agree and
this is certainly an important
population especially here in
New Mexico we've taken steps to
proactively engaging coverage
during the public health
emergency where we could and so
again testing I'm in vaccine
coverage I'm axing coverage
we're still waiting for approval
for but we project that that
alone will cost about ninety six
thousand dollars in general fund
that's not built into our budget
yet either so again these are
some significant dollars but I
think we need to continue to
work with the sponsor and and
her experts on to try to address
some of these issues I think
within appropriation we can
start to work towards making
some of these changes.
Couple of things I would just
point now as well as my last
couple seconds here the I. T.
side we do intend to make those
changes however we wouldn't be
able to begin that work until
January of twenty two and then
lastly would reiterate that
while this is an important area
for us to cover there is a
federal mechanism to cover the
treatment outpatient services
that are being asked to be added
with only federal dollars so
what it requires to use any
state dollars to cover those
services platform is available
and while it is an extra step
for providers it would address
some of these outstanding issues
that we have with the projected
shortfall facing us it's very
significant still on the
Medicaid side so we could still
get coverage for these folks and
not grow our existing deficit so
I think without all pause and
thank you for hearing the
comments.
Thank you we will now try
Charles again Charles you are
and muted you just need to and
then on your end.
I'm sorry I must've hit the
wrong button I have no comment.
Okay thank you.
James you are now and muted.
I'm sorry is this for opposition
or I'm not sure yes it's for
opposition.
I got the wrong one are you in
support Tania.
Yes okay we don't have anyone
else listed proposition so we
will now take support and we'll
we'll begin with you Tania.
Okay thank you.
Hello madam chair committee I'm
twenty James from Gulf McKinley
County Westport together action
I support H. with thirteen
because I believe every human
needs equal and accessible
health care no matter race or
the position they may be in
please support XP thirteen thank
you.
Thank you.
Bill Hicks you are now and made
it.
Hello chair committee members of
my name is still takes on the
intensive case manager with the
City of Albuquerque New Mexico
system clinic and I'm here to
speak it's part of this bill and
so is it really really essential
program that we just health care
workers utilize all the time to
ensure that are uninsured
undocumented community members
still more comfortable speaking
that higher level of care with
the off to be without this
program are patients would be
struggling with even more
medical that for emergencies and
they already are even with this
program we are still seeing
uninsured patients being denied
essential care given your in a
public health emergency COVID
treatment needs to be covered by
emergency Medicaid in many folks
in our communities are avoiding
testing and treatment for COVID
due to these costs and for
public safety to work toward
ending this pandemic we need to
protect these uninsured
undocumented folks in these
community members of color which
are disproportionately suffering
this pandemic so I would urge
all the committee members to
support H. thirteen thank you
very much.
You starlet McDaniel you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
chair New York and I work with
Juliana coop on behalf of
Planned Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains today we urge you to
stand with us in support of
critical health care for all
people regardless of citizenship
I voting to pass on house bill
thirteen thank you.
Thank you Louis Carrillo you are
now and it.
Yes good morning chair members
of the chairman members of the
committee my name is get on the
legislative and political
organizer for the Sierra Club
and the chapter I was actually
here to comment on a different
bill that that's that's up next
on the schedule but I wanted to
just this is me as an individual
just offer support for this bill
health care is a human right
regardless of people's
immigration status color income
where they're from and I think
this kind of bill is really
important I really really
applaud Representative about us
for putting this full or I am
married to a social worker that
works mostly with the people
that deal with a mental health
problems some of them are
undocumented and you know me
like they deserve every single
rate as far as health care that
the rest of us have especially
because we are still in the
middle of a of a pandemic and we
still have the COVID crisis it's
going on and so yeah I'm just
asking for your vote and support
and thank you so much members of
the chair thank Representative
but as for this great bill.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor Jesse Barnes
you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jesse Barnes I'm a family
medicine doctor and I work at a
community health center in
Albuquerque's south valley along
with a couple dozen colleagues
of mine we formed a group called
primary care advocates for
healthy communities we get to
come as no surprise that this
has been an exhausting year to
practice primary care as we have
had to really redesign the very
nature of what we do
both seconded you taking care of
patients ongoing medical needs
and then in a sort of desperate
effort to keep people out of the
hospital so that we can utilize
hospital beds and and
ventilators in ICU beds as best
needed.
And I think we need the
legislator and our state
government to work with us and
give us additional tools
including this expansion of Ms
utilities as we have several
months ahead of us before we are
going to be able to widely
distribute the vaccine and and
get this pandemic under control
but I appreciate that state
government is is beginning to
work with the Sanchez on this
bill it simply will not be good
enough to make IT changes in
twenty twenty two and to wait
months and to rely on the
federal program which is been
cumbersome and and we'll leave
for practices to access and use
need to give our patients this
will now so that we're able to
expand testing an outpatient
treatment services to everybody
who needs it to keep people out
of the hospital to save lives
and to get this pandemic under
control thank you for your
support for this bill.
Thank you what is Lopez you are
now unmuted.
Thank you good morning madam
chair committee.
Thank you for allowing me to
share my concern today.
Love Lopez and I am a case
manager for.
In the south valley and I have
seen the struggling burden of
many of my clients and family
members who do not have medical
insurance in which will not
cover COVID treatment applied to
the emergency room or ICU.
They are faced with difficult
decision of whether to pay their
utility bills are paid twenty
dollars to their medical debt of
thousands of dollars in hopes
that even twenty dollars will
make an impact.
It may not be much for many
people but that could be thanks
a lot of the family do not
qualify for public assistance
that would be a loaf of bread a
gallon of milk and perhaps even
a whole chicken
Education manager who see the
firsthand and fielding mentored
and I am important to HB
thirteen thank you.
Thank you doctor along you'll
want you are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Dr
Lonnie all I'm an obstetrician
and gynecology resident here
training in New Mexico I have
worked across the spectrum of
health care settings during this
pandemic working with COVID
positive patients and I see you
as well as labor and delivery
floor and outpatient clinics
I've seen up close the ruthless
nature of this virus and the
horrific deaths comment has
caused
and see the destruction of
families and communities left
behind suffering we know that
COVID nineteen threatens all of
us regardless of our legal
status.
Keeping sick people in need of
health care out of the hospital
or care centers due to their
fear of their ability to pay
only poses greater risk for
community spread putting
everybody's life at risk by
providing all of our community
members regardless of their
legal status with the necessary
medical care they require we
help keep all of New Mexicans
safe and strong as we fight this
pandemic and I urge all of your
support for house bill thirteen
thank you.
Thank you Gabby at casa de
salute.
You are now and made it.
One of the S. madam chair and
committee members my name is
Debbie and then this and I'm a
daca recipient and community
organizer Senator.
I'm here in support of H. B.
thirteen.
Many of my loved ones like my
mom sister and aunts are
essential workers who are
uninsured doing this pandemic we
live in concert constant fear of
any of them getting sick because
we know they will face them the
complications I even more as we
are scared of the thousands of
dollars of that the hospital
could charges by just taking
care this has happened before
and has continued to happen
during this pandemic please
support age thirteen and ensure
essential workers like our
emerging get that covers a need
to get tested and treatment for
COVID nineteen thank you.
You are now omitted.
Good morning again madam chair
members the committee court
records with that Luther
advocacy ministry of New Mexico.
We to believe that health care
is a fundamental human right and
especially during this ongoing
public health emergency that all
members of our New Mexico
community should have access to
care and treatment regardless of
their legal status thank you.
Thank you Jacob thank you there
are no immediate.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Jacob Vigil
with New Mexico voices for
children and we also for all the
reasons stated staying stand in
strong support of this bill
coverage is essential for child
well being especially now and we
know that many immigrant
families include essential
workers who are more at risk so
yes we stripped we stand strong
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Denny's are no less
you are now unmuted.
Hello Terry committee members
thank you for taking the time to
listen today my name is Denise
CENIC clinic flow coordinator
because of this on the move and
I am here to speak in support
for bill HB thirteen and that is
how we we are sure our patients
date can get accessible care in
relation to emergencies so a
global pandemic and treatment
for COVID should be covered
under the same program sadly
this is also my reality my mom
is an insured and she was billed
hundreds of dollars for the
COVID testing because we were
under the impression that her
test would be covered by the
state accessibility is the
reason people don't get treated
or testing prolonging the
pandemic we all share the same
land and we can defeat COVID in
that we can't defeat COVID in
the system that doesn't include
everyone on that land my mom is
now terrified of getting sick as
many other people are because we
know not even our state is there
to support us throughout this
pandemic so I urge you to
support H. B. thirteen to
protect our families our
patients and our community
members from the current
financial braided of needed
COVID treatment thank you guys
so much.
Thank you Rosalinda Dourado you
are now and made it.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rosalie noted though I'm an
organizer added to that I want
that it shows it said grassroots
immigrant rights and workers
justice organization based in
Albuquerque New Mexico with over
five thousand members composed
mainly of low wage immigrant
workers from New Mexico.
I am here asking you to please
vote in favor of HB thirteen I'm
here speaking on behalf of our
members who have been impacted
greatly during this pandemic
many of who have lost their jobs
and have been struggling to make
ends meet.
And this pandemic has made it
even harder especially for
families who don't qualify for
health care programs and can't
afford it many of our members
have that have been impacted by
the virus have now can't afford
to pay the hospital bills and
some
are even afraid of going to go
get tested because they're
afraid of losing their jobs and
the fear of the cost so we're
asking to please past HB
thirteen we should learn from
this pandemic to move forward
and include health care
regardless of people's
immigration status many of whom
are essential workers who are
out there risking their lives to
be able to provide for us to
have food on our tables and
taking care of our elderly and
keep the Economic running
we know this pandemic is nine
exclusive so neither should our
health care system we all get
sick less so I urge you to
please pass this bill thank you.
I'm sure we can you are now and
made it.
Thank you chairman members of
this committee my name's
underway today to.
I'm a family physician the
executive director of because of
the Saluda clinic in the south
valley of Albuquerque and I also
work out on the Navajo Nation.
I was appointed to the
governor's council on racial
justice and in the health
subcommittee.
And this very bill in concept
was presented to the governor's
desk passed from our committee
to the larger governor's council
and passed from there because
everyone felt the importance of
it.
I work with many patients who've
gone to the hospital had
emergency room bills full paid
for but then are stuck with
thousands upon thousands of
dollars of hospital bills and
then very little resources for
us to be able to provide low
cost care in terms of their
follow up care when they don't
have insurance others I work
with others who fear for their
lives and delay care even though
they have all the typical
symptoms of COVID and symptoms
are getting worse this worsens
potential spread of this
terrible disease this is a
racial justice issue of this
bill is sophisticated.
And it eases up a process for
everyone involved and it's not
expensive it's a win for
patients it's a win for
hospitals we get to recoup the
costs of their care and it's a
win for reducing the spread of
the Covid pandemic in this time
I urge the committee to support
this bill and for us as New
Mexico to be a model for the
rest of the country thank you so
much.
Thank you we worry so you are
now omitted.
The royal have to and then on
your end.
You're gonna yes.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Li right so and I am from
Gallup McKinley county and with
four together action I strongly
support XP thirteen every time
the should be able to get
medical services without having
to worry about financial
disaster from medical bills
including many members of our
immigrant community who are
locked out of coverage right
now.
In Houston DeMint no one should
have to worry about how to pay
for COVID nineteen testing and
treatment thank you for your
time.
Thank you thank you you are now
unmuted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is out
there Yazdi with frontier
together action.
I've been fighting for
affordable health care for the
whole state of New Mexico.
And families of the Navajo
Nation also for four years now
I've been fighting for
affordable health care we are
still fighting to get help with
medical bills and do till last
year my family was hit with the
COVID now bills are coming in
from my mom's medical bills are
being flown out to Albuquerque
an ambulance bills taking her to
the hospital I I believe that
families of New Mexico should be
counted in the medical process
because all of us don't.
Can't afford health health bills
now medical bills for medit
medicine.
medicine is getting high price
also so I really urge you to
pass house bill thirteen thank
you.
Thank you.
Mariana Mejia you are now and
made it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members for the
opportunity to voice my opinion
on this important matter my name
is my enemy here in a family
medicine doctor working here in
New Mexico I want to make sure
that we expand and set to a
cover COVID testing an
outpatient treatment because
this virus as you know knows no
borders and does not
discriminate based on
immigration status by passing
this bill you'll be giving us
providers an easier and more
accessible way to offer
outpatient treatment to patients
with cold but early on in their
illness and that way we can
prevent patients getting
seriously L. and ending up in
are already overwhelmed
emergency rooms it just really
makes more sense from unethical
and also from a financial
standpoint so please I ask you
to vote yes on house bill
thirteen to keep all New
Mexicans state fund to help us
keep this fire is under control
thank you.
Thank you Christina you are now
unmuted.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Christina James I'm from
McKinley County and a leader
with forward together.
I support H. B. thirteen because
I myself caught COVID and lost
many family members as I was in
the hospital I met with many
health care workers that had a
story of family and friends
struggling with COVID.
And how some cannot afford the
cost of COVID testing treatment.
And I don't understand that and
and.
Now that this bill came up and I
want to stand for them and I
want them to be treated how I
was treated when they were.
Give me care in the hospital we
should all be together in
support of HB thirteen no one
should be discriminated because
of their immigrant status
especially our frontline workers
and their families.
Thank you.
Thank you a line Gonzales you
are now and made it.
Thank you so much our good
morning madam chair members the
committee my name is Elaine
crystalline and I organized at
the New Mexico Dream Team I
strongly advocate for HB
thirteen after daca recipients I
have been fortunate to amend
some wonderful people in my
community your to a program
right but then you opportunity
however during the school
pandemic.
We are committed field where I
disadvantaged not only because
for uninsured but also because
we're constantly and director of
economic hardship we see many of
the wonderful people falling
behind as a result of the strain
that comes from medical debt
madam chair and members the
committee I hope you can all see
the necessity for H. B. thirteen
and finding yourself to offer
healthcare to families in need
the most thank you.
Thank you Erin bolt you are now
I needed.
Erin you'll need to and you on
your end.
That.
Yes we can okay thank you yeah
my name is Erin bolts I am a
registered nurse in favor of HB
thirteen.
It's urgent and necessary to
expand and said to cover COVID
testing and treatment in health
care we have seen that
communities of color and
uninsured immigrant communities
on which we all depend are left
more vulnerable to the herring
and long lasting effects of this
disease so now more than ever.
It's clear that our livelihoods
are deeply interconnected and
extending protections and
community protects all
communities so please act
accordingly by voting for H. B.
thirteen and allow the emergency
medical services to be extended
to COVID testing and treatment
and what is undoubtedly a public
health emergency thank you.
Rachel Biggs here now and it is.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs I'm the policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless a federally qualified
health center serving
approximately seven thousand
individuals experiencing
homelessness across Bernalillo
county think of access to
affordable healthcare as a
primary structural cause of
homelessness and poverty and we
see the impact costly medical
bills and lack of access to care
has every day in our clinics and
on our streets Medicine
outreaches throughout Bernalillo
county everyone should have
access to COVID nineteen testing
and treatment and access for all
the public health issue that is
an interest of everyone in our
state we see the need for and
support the bill's intent to
simplify the ends of process and
allow patients to qualify for
brands that before an emergency
arises we are just part of HB
thirteen thank you for your
time.
Thank you right now I needed.
you'll just have to admit
yourself.
Okay let's move on to Valerie
bills on your now and made it.
Good morning my name is Valerie
Boston and I I'm only there was
forward get action and I've been
learning a lot about
on immigration and the Hispanic
community with my fellow leaders
with forward get action and I
support H. B. thirteen because
COVID does not discriminate it
affects all of our families one
were having to deal with issues
health issues and I believe that
our Hispanic community and the
immigrants in the state of New
Mexico are deserving of health
care thank you.
Thank you and Kirk I don't know
we have your hand up from
earlier if not you are unmuted.
Okay let's move on to.
So how Kilbride I'm sorry if I
mispronounce your name but you
are now unmuted.
No worries I I always know by
the pause before.
I'm not.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Siobhan Kilbride it's a.
And I own a small family
business here in New Mexico
called salute recruiting
services I'm here to support
house bill thirteen because the
implications are not just for
patients which is very important
but as you for their
implications for our health care
providers here to.
In my business we recruit
healthcare professionals to work
here in New Mexico we also try
to keep them here because we
have a major shortage of nurses
and doctors in the state.
A lot of our recruitment is done
in Canada since there is such a
shortage not just here in New
Mexico all over the U. S..
I spend my days speaking with
health care workers.
Trying to convince them to move
here and in my experience most
clinical professionals come to
New Mexico not just for the
beauty and fantastic food and
rich culture but they come here
for meaningful work and I think
we're hearing a lot about that
today.
One of the best ways we can
recruit and keep good health
care professionals here is
through progressive legislation
like house bill thirteen.
In fact we now use the
progressiveness of New Mexico
and our great governor as part
of our recruitment pitch we
really do talk about a point
that it appeals to people.
Good nurses and doctors want to
focus on their patients they
don't want to worry about which
patient has what insurance if
any or which patient is eligible
for what treatment especially
during the pandemic.
COVID nineteen has been brutal
for health care professionals.
We need to make it easier for
them to do their meaningful work
and treating their patients all
of their patients.
So that those doctors and nurses
want to stay here and continue
their practice serving our
communities.
Thank you all for your support
of this bill.
Thank you Fernando.
Banda you are now and muted.
Hello everyone can you guys hear
me yes we can.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is for non the pandemic and I am
an organizer with the New Mexico
Dream Team I strongly advocate
for H. B. thirteen today as an
immigrant woman who is currently
uninsured this really puts my
family and my community at a
huge disadvantage more now than
ever COVID does not exclude in
the last committee the biggest
concern was the cost of the
program the lives of New
Mexicans and they're the health
of their families is priceless I
have consistently seen my
community fall through the
cracks of medical neglect and
debt something the frozen for
years madam chair members of the
committee committee I urge you
to see the necessity for H. B.
thirteen and finding yourself to
offer health care relief to
those rural families that need
it the most thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment period and the so
now we will move to the
committee Representative Chasey.
Sure did you calling me.
I can't hear you now.
And I was needed but we yes your
time.
All right let me fix my screen I
hate it this way.
All right there we go.
So thank you madam chair thank
you representative funded us
I I wanted to.
Just.
Back to the concerns raised by
the Human Services Department
about not.
Thank you.
This enough that they can
withdraw federal funds to pay
for it.
So I don't have a solution.
But.
What I do suggest is that we
don't want to have an intended
consequence of.
How do you others say
opportunities because we have to
use the state funds when in fact
there federal funds available so
I want to raise that issue and I
just want to say generally.
I'm.
I'm in support of this and it's
a public health issue.
Really
Whether or not people are
citizens of this country we all
share the same error.
We share the same neighborhoods
and communities and if we all
want to be healthy everybody
needs to be healthy so with that
I hope you will work with Mr
about so that we can to make the
most the opportunity here.
Thank you to all I'm sorry
me and yeah I was just going to
go back to you because I know
you have an amendment that we
need to address so
Representative I will move the
amendment for this discussion
purposes and if you will explain
the amendment place.
Thank you I have the the
amendment number here and I
believe it was are passed on to
the committee it's two one nine
seven one one and I'm going to
to turn it over to my expert
witness Nicholas Cordova to just
kind of go over that amendment
for you all thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative so really with
this amendment
There's a lot of moving around
at the text but I I'm just gonna
go over I kind of run struck see
that does five things so the
first is it changes the title of
the emergency Medicaid program.
FOR from members and see medical
services for aliens to emergency
medical program for non citizens
this is in part just be
completely respectful not
referred to humans as aliens but
also to really just clarify
because an FIR the department of
health had some confusion about
kind of conflation of terms for
emergency medical services
verses under EMTALA and what
would be covered under emergency
Medicaid and so this is really
just to clarify and so there's
several points at which in
section one that's.
Any any point which says
emergency medical services
that's just taken out is
clarified is emergency medical
program for non citizens and so
that's the first change the
second change is a technical
change to the language in
section one do
right now it's just it's written
without the amendment says that
services described in paragraph
two of the preceding section
subsection rather I shall be
covered but.
Section one C. two doesn't
doesn't provide services or
doesn't say services it it
states a condition for which
services would be provided so
this is really just again
clarifying that
It changes it to subsection do
will say covered services shall
include and then in paragraph
one of subsection D..
It has that I think current
sentence in subsection D. which
says such services shall be
covered for the duration of the
public health emergency
that was just a drafting error
on our parts which just trying
to correct that on the third
amendment is.
Addressing your concern
regarding the complications in
comment sections that would be
covered under the during the
duration of the public health
emergency and so if you look at
section one subsection D.
paragraph one it says those
necessary to immunize against
evaluated treat or to see can
get medic medical condition
including.
Any complications or confections
this is really just clarifying
that HSD has the authority to
determine which complications in
which co infections are covered
just so that there's not no
confusion that you know and
tangentially related downstream
complications could be covered
under this granted HSC has would
have that authority right now
but this is just making it
crystal clear that that's the
case.
The Fourth Amendment is a
proposed new section to and what
this proposed new section to
would do.
Is we're just just to back up we
we've been talking about this
federal program for reimbursing
providers for uninsured patients
it's it's run through that the
federal HHS department and so
what section two does is it it
provides HSD with the authority
to really
Clarify for providers in New
Mexico how to access
prioritizing maximize that
federal funding because there is
some confusion it from providers
as to how they can access that
funding
and and really this is just
saying HSD clarify as much as
you can because providers need
that clarity.
And the final in fifth.
Amendment is a section three
which would have been Martin
emergency clause because I mean
this is we are in the midst of a
an emergency a public health
emergency and we cannot wait for
ninety days for the the covered
services under emergency
Medicaid to take place and does
need to take place as soon as
possible.
And with that.
That does cover the full breadth
of these amendments.
Right thank you discussion on
the proposed amendments.
Representative night bird are
you on the amendments.
No okay.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
To adopt the amendment.
We have a.
Senator Chasey to adopt the
amendments and a second by
Representative Eli.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendments.
Seeing and hearing none we have
adopted those amendments
Representative.
And now back on the bill
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I'm
probably gonna suggest that
there be a couple other areas of
maybe need amended as well but.
Our Madam chair representative.
Is this going to appropriations
yeah that's journey through the
process.
I thank you madam chair and
representative my part I know
it's not.
Okay so so madam chair
of this bill even though it has
the affects physical act impacts
of the.
The department raised it's not
going to go to to appropriations
so
That may affect some of the
questions I have
Madam chair representative.
On page one.
Winds twenty one three twenty
three.
That that I may need the.
Madam chair J. C. director or a.
Correct me if I'm wrong but I
think this may need to be
reworded slightly because it
would be my understanding that
you have to be a Senator and
I've been Mexico to meet the
Medicaid eligibility
requirements would that be
accurate.
Madam chair I would like to
refer to expert witness Nicholas
this question.
Thank you madam chair
Representative neighbor that is
cranky would you there is a
residency requirement for
Medicaid and so what emergency
Medicaid does is it I just
it applies the same standards
but for people who are left out
because of immigration status.
What's more than a residency
requirements of citizenship
requirement as it not.
Madam chair
Representative so this program
is a specifically federally
funded program just like regular
Medicaid that is for folks who
do not qualify for Medicaid
because of their immigration
status so citizenship is not a
requirement for any Medicaid
program actually many
noncitizens qualify for regular
full Medicaid which I think is
what you're discussing this is a
program that is a specific
emergency Medicaid program for
folks who do not qualify because
their migration status and this
is in federal law so this bill
just changes
what is that covered emergency
for that specific program which
the state has discretion to say.
Okay back madam chair and and of
miss Hager the the.
So one does not need to be a
service to be the Medicaid
eligibility requirements that I
heard you correct.
Madam chair Representative
that's true.
Okay sure it'll Representative
just to clarify for emergency
Medicaid not for Medicaid in
general.
I just just to clarify for for
Mr cord but you don't have to be
a U. S. citizen to get regular
Medicaid you just need to be and
not qualified immigration status
and those are laid out in the
federal law and that's a
completely different program so
you can be a noncitizen
qualified only certain
noncitizens in if you're not in
one of those.
Those statuses or US citizen
right and you meet every other
qualification you can get
emergency Medicaid.
Okay that that helps me
So I'm wondering in lines twenty
two or twenty three of we ought
to reimburse.
Right reverse the to
Conditions are and and make it
read something to the effect of
begin L. line twenty one
noncitizens with an emergency
medical condition.
Who are not.
Who.
R. N. M. immigration status of
those not qualified does not
qualify for Medicaid comma but
meets all other Medicaid
eligibility requirements because
I think you're really focusing
on the immigration status.
And not the.
Medicaid eligibility
requirements you guys do what
you want on that but I think
that by state that a little
we're
and then
I'm I'm wondering on page two
line twenty one.
this bill seems to.
Have some.
The fact though sunset
provisions in other words this
is tied specifically to a public
health emergency is is that
correct.
Madam chair representative.
Representative night that is
correct it is directly linked to
the federal or state public
health emergency.
M. M. Madam chair in Mr color or
of a our I'm wondering else.
Big because there's not a real
sunset provision other words
this statute would go on in
perpetuity
Ella I suppose whenever the
secretary of health declares a
state public health emergency
the provisions of this act would
then be resurrected for lack of
a better term and so I'm
wondering.
Yes it's the end of the sponsor.
To have these provisions
resurrected.
At every point that the
secretary health declares a
public health emergency whether
it's limited in scope to a two
block area and quite New Mexico
or whether it's a statewide.
With health emergency that we
see to that madam chair
Representative what your intent
with respect to the scope of of
this legislation.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for the
question I'm going to turn it
over to Nick my expert witness
for.
Thank you madam chair
representatives so this is.
Essentially whenever there is a
public health emergency state or
federal that is attributable to
a disease this would be
necessarily activated in those
circumstances that is the
intent.
So some madam chair and Mr court
about that the intent would be
even if the public health
emergency is very narrow in
scope.
Affecting maybe only a portion
of a very small community it
would be your intention for all
of the provisions in this bill
to to go into your do you to be
available for utilization if I
heard you correctly.
Madam chair representative
neighbor just to clarify so it's
it's not on all the provisions
this is only activated for
at subsection D. subset impaired
Representative one is so what's
key to remember too is that
these are services provided to
care for that medical condition
and if the medical condition
gives rise to a public health
emergency any would be necessary
even if it's just limited to a
small community or the state at
large.
So madam chair if I heard you
correctly miss court of a.
The the breadth of why
hypothetical if it only included
a two block area and Clayton
then the provisions of this act
would likewise be limited to
that to block area in place to
deal with that specific
emergency it would not be
available for the rest of the
state that is not subject to the
public health order.
Madam chair representative that
that is a good way of putting it
would be the people who
absolutely need these services
and if it's in that hypothetical
it's just not to block.
Right yes then yes it would be
limited to people in that area.
Okay madam chair and and
Representative score of a thank
thank you those are the the.
Questions that I have I'm
concerned about the fiscal
impact and and we we may need to
address that the maybe it does
need to go to appropriations for
that but the thank you for
clarifying those points I thank
you.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Committee members.
past yes ma'am thank you madam
chair thank you we have a motion
by Representative Eli.
And I'll second that motion I
think we have further discussion
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair representative is
this something that will be paid
by the indigent
Care taxes that are collected in
each county.
Madam chair and representative I
will turn this over to either
one of my expense that wants to
take that one.
Thank you representative.
Madam chair representative
remain so this is paid by the
Human Services Department
through their Medicaid budget.
If that makes sense because that
the county indigent care funds
are administered through the
counts and selves.
Madam chairman and expert.
None of the indigent care funds
chair the uncompensated funds
that are collected in the county
will be used to pay this.
Madam chair is there is there
would there be any way that we
can get
Call call mom who is in the
attendees to answer the specific
question.
You have to raise your hand
please.
Great yes Nicole thank you we'll
move you over to the panelists
mode.
And you can amuse yourself.
Thank you madam chair and
members the committee
representatives that that it is
correct to say that it's and
these expenditures would not
come out of that indigent care
fund as it come out of our base
budget I which is the budget I
was speaking to earlier or
projecting the significant
shortfall headed in the fiscal
year twenty to.
That's all my questions.
Thank you representative.
I'm okay that concludes our
discussion we have a motion for
a do pass on house bill thirteen
as amended let's take the role.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey yes I'm
in.
Representative Eli yes and I
have no comment at the at.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night part.
No and I have a comment at the
end as well.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora.
Madam vice chair.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative and three
and the negative.
Thank you and before we
officially call that boat back
to Representative Chasey to
explain her vote I'm yes I I do
think that we want to be sure
that everyone in our community
our state is properly covered I
just think that.
I really encourage the
sponsor to work with this comes
at the Human Services department
because you just don't want to
deplete state funds if you don't
need to because that might
affect our local services so I
hope you can work with I'm with
her on that so that we really
can make the most of the federal
dollars thank you.
Thank you Representative
neighbor to explain your vote.
I would echo.
Chair Tracy's comments at and
also really feel that it does
need to be looked at by
appropriations do fiscal impact
and I would encourage the
sponsor to look at a couple of
comments are made and see of.
If it needs a little bit further
amending before it gets to the
house for thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative you have a to
pass on house bill thirteen as
amended with a vote of six in
the affirmative and three in the
negative thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I I
appreciate this and just to go
back to Representative said I I
will take all that into into
consideration and we'll continue
to tweak it and get it in order
to thank you.
Great thank you
Before moving on to house bill
seventy six I neglected to
inform the committee that house
bill and the public the house
bill one zero eight has been
rolled per the request of the
sponsor so we will not be
hearing House Bill one zero
eight until Monday and with that
we will move on to house bill
seventy six and Representative
Chandler if you and your experts
will please raise your hands and
we can promote you over if we
haven't already I see the
representative there.
Welcome Representative Chandler
so nice to see you madam chair
it's great to see all of you and
I do have an expert whose name
is Sandra Ely so she should be
in the audience she's been
keeping me apprised of the
progress of your meetings great
we have moved her over.
Is Liz cho in also it one of
your experts I will defer to
Sandra Ely Stella Mizzi eight do
we need another expert with us.
Z. Li.
Last year.
Center I'm sorry we you broke up
a bit would you repeat what you
said.
Good morning.
Madam chair yes Elizabeth Liz
became air quality bureau chief
should be admitted as well right
she's there so I just want to
make sure.
Good to see you Senator.
Well thank you madam chair would
you like me to proceed yes
please very good thank you this
is house bill seventy six it
amends a provision of the air
quality act and allow those the
department to have add to
it's toolbox the ability to deny
or revoke a permit
when it's found the certain
matters to have occurred in
eight they tend to focus on did
the applicants or operator
engage in bad axe bad axe prior
to or even during our did when I
discover that the the entities
involved may of provided false
information may have been
convicted of a crime those kinds
of things then there's a lit and
there's a list of them and
within the application and with
that madam chair I'd like to
defer to my experts ms easily.
Madam chair members of the
committee and certainly a
pleasure to be back in front of
this committee and to to see all
the.
Your faces and how state
governmental actions and Indian
Affairs
this bill is a it provides
certain minimal standards for
air quality permit holders to
obtain or to hold the permitting
and to obtain a new term that
under current law the
environmental Department must
issue an air permit even if the
applicant is convicted of an
environmental Fallon.
Why don't put their permit
application has had an
environmental permit revoked or
suspended in another state.
Refused to disclose required
information to the Department
were has operated a permanent
without a facility without a
permit significant emissions
associated with that facility
under H. B. seventy six C.
applicant is required to provide
the department with the
disclosure statement so that way
we know if they've met any of
the criteria that would enable
us to deny or revoke apartment.
I'm H. re seventy six insurers
protection of New Mexico
businesses as much as it ensures
New Mexico residents are
protected businesses that do not
intend to comply with air
quality permits or rules
undermine the economic
investment of the vast majority
of New Mexico businesses that do
further it puts communities at
risk for illness or death
illness or death for me from
reading their contaminants thank
you.
Madam chair I'm in terms of
process there is an amendment to
the bill that was delivered to
the committee earlier in the
week I don't know how you would
like to handle that we we could
explained it if it's your
pleasure or we could move on and
address that at your
convenience.
Representative thank you is it a
substantive amendment that would
change the public comment.
I think it has the potential to
have that affect madam chair
would you not agree Mizzi Lee
yes.
Okay let's go had and
talk about it and then will
formally introduce that up for
discussion purposes.
So.
So madam chair members of the
committee this is amendment
point two one nine seven zero
four point one
these amendments addressed
concerns that were raised in
house energy and natural
resources committee and reflects
conversations with certain
industry representatives these
amendments to five things one it
puts a time limit on ten years
of criteria outlined in
paragraph Pete these criteria
are what we the department would
use or the local board would use
to determine whether permit
should be revoked or denied to
it limits convictions to courts
in the US in the state for
consideration for our permit
denial or revocation excluding
international course there there
by it enables Environment
Department or local board to
provide an operator with the
conditional permanent if an
action plan is approved by the
secretary or director this
language is similar to that and
hazardous waste tax so rather
than revoke or deny a permit an
action plan could be approved
and conditional permit could be
issued.
For it clarifies that the
disclosure statement are that
list the criterion subsection P.
for denial or revocation it
clarifies you know what must be
in that disclosure statement.
It also states that this
disclosure statement must be
provided by existing permit
holders upon request and lastly
it removes the exemption from
the US and states for providing
a disclosure statement we want
to be able to request that
information because there are
times when the department does
issue permits to the US and we
may want to deny those permits
for cross thank you.
Thank you
Representative Chandler is that
all before we go to have a great
yes ma'am.
We will take a call from the
audience and right now we are
and house bill seventy six if
you would like to vote in favor
or in opposition to it the bill
on the bill the call is now
open.
A poll will close in five
seconds.
The call is now closed.
Representative within our
attendees we have I for the bill
and thirty eight against so
let's go ahead and take a public
comment from opposition first.
So please raise your hand if you
would like to speak and
opposition.
Okay we will go to Amy Barbie.
You are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Amy
Verity and I am the registered
lobbyists New Mexico oil and gas
association motorists actively
opposes this legislation the
legislation is duplicate the New
Mexico environment department
and specifically their air
quality bureau already has the
ability to deny or revoke permit
applications if they discover
that an applicant has knowingly
misrepresented or withheld
information from the department
we sincerely appreciate the
amendment that was introduced
earlier by the sponsor as it
addressed a couple of the
significant concerns our members
have expressed however I'm the
act were you looking apartment
is a semi serious undertaking
that should be reserved for the
most egregious offenses this
bill as introduced.
Does include.
Sufficient in profit does not
include sufficient due process
for protesting the revocation or
denial of permits issued by that
department hello that urges the
members of this committee to
oppose house bill seventy six
and encourages the department to
utilize the authority already
granted to them by current law
thank you.
Thank you
Winchester you are now and
muted.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
Representative respectfully
opposes H. B. seventy six for
several different reasons
personal just wanna make it
completely clear that we
strongly appreciate the need for
compliance and we are always
willing to work with our members
to ensure that they are up to
speed with all operating
procedures and work with the
regulatory agencies they
represent.
In protection of the human
health freshwater environment
are paramount to all of our
operators but our concerns are
really surrounding the broad
nature of the new power that
would be given to the E. I. B.
and the discretionary authority
without specificity on what
grounds the board could deny a
permit
now there's no limitation on
Harper how far back they could
reach in no time frame to return
to compliance to get back into
good standing now I guess the
amendment stipulates ten years
but this still doesn't give
comfort to industry given the
broad nature of the powers the
SB would now have.
There are also provisions that
allow out of state records be
applied to in state permitting
compliance in our opinion that
does not represent due process
especially as there are
extenuating circumstances in any
permitting process especially in
cases where saying operator me
agree to penalty to more quickly
remedy an environmental
situation and that may not be
taken into consideration in this
case.
Finally just want to point out
that the in unintentional
mistake could lead to a company
not being able to do business in
New Mexico
in this leads to several
questions what if you have an
employee in your company that
makes an unintentional error on
require permit say simply in
just filing it the whole company
then therefore gets penalized
second of all what if management
changes hands and a company with
an outstanding record acquires
wells that were not otherwise
permitted are they now placed in
the penalty box with the I. B.
and finally the way that this
bill reads that once a company
is in this penalty box they are
always in the penalty box in of
course that we raise a lot of
questions about the ability to
do business in the future
finally we are discouraging
operators from out of the state
coming into the state to do
business here so for that reason
and many others we do respect we
stand opposed to HB seventy six
thank you.
Thank you TJ Trujillo Hugh are
now unmuted.
Can you hear me Madam we can
hear you.
Chair thank you for the
opportunity to test by members
of the committee my name is TJ
Trujillo I'm a registered
lobbyist for Occidental
petroleum.
for the reasons stated before
and I'm sure you're gonna hear
other reasons and additional
testimony
oxy opposes this bill I would
though the instead of repeating
stuff like to point out of so
some for you technical issues
that I think are involved and
what the bill.
So I'd like to ask the committee
to look at page well I got my
two minutes look at page eleven
why twenty of the bill.
I believe that.
If you look at line twenty there
we believe there should be a
men's recommends raising
element.
Prior to the work refuse in
other words you know put
knowingly or intentionally in
front of that particular.
Reference on page eleven line
twenty five.
The bottom on that same page and
then continuing on to page
twelve line one.
References environmental crime
we believe that thank that's
such a broad references to be
actual statutes that the
that is intended to reference to
be referenced with up with a
particular section is.
same issue of needing to explain
what's statutory sites on page
twelve by two to four you'll see
another broad reference to
federal and state statutes again
the statue should be cited.
On page twelve.
Why eleven again you'll see a
broader reference to
environmental laws the term
Berman allows.
The actual reference to the
citations of locked we believe
should be put in there the
reason these references are
important with the remaining
fifty seven seconds that I have
is it's important to put folks
on notice including businesses
the what's laws are expected to
comply with you brought
references to of our
environmental laws were
problematic.
I mean Madam not sure if the the
man that took care of this but
on page twelve eight fifteen.
The end of the sentence we
believe a phrase such as as
defined by rule should be put
put in after the words
aggravating and mitigating
factors.
As defined by rule another word
you may consider aggravating and
mitigating factors but again
there's no not notice the person
apply for a permit of what those
aggravating or mitigating
factors would would be
considered I think it's only
fair that you put such folks on
notices to what's required
again the we remain opposed to
this bill leave that is not
ready for prime time I would
have gone through this if this
bill is going for two Judiciary
perhaps as the necessary
solution thank you.
Thank you Michael Miller and you
are now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Mike Miller PDPA
Permian basin curling
association we understand the
need for a vehicle to take
action against habitual bad
actors however this bill is too
vague on how those actions may
be taken and I will reiterate
what T. J. in J. M. and Amy have
said they they took the many of
the comments I was going to make
I would just say that it at as
written and maybe even as Amanda
we feel that it's still too
vague and for that reason we
have to oppose the bill thank
you.
Thank you Mike bow in your now
and needed.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm Mike Bohn executive director
The New Mexico mining
association I won't repeat all
that's been said the we to
oppose this bill.
And for the reasons that have
already been stated yeah we just
feel it's too great thank you.
Thank you Ashlee Wakker you are
now unmuted.
Reckoner excuse me.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director public policy with the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
and we respectfully oppose house
bill seventy six for all of the
reasons stated above but also we
believe that this creates a
significant barrier and unstable
business environment at the
chamber's concerned will deter
new business from coming to New
Mexico or existing business
testing thank you.
Thank you carbon.
Casteel you are now and muted.
Good afternoon chairman members
money was courting Casteel on
the registered lobbyists for
centennial resource development
and oil and gas operator in Lee
County New Mexico.
For the reasons mentioned
previously we do respectfully
oppose this legislation it will
harm my client's ability to
continue producing the natural
resources that contribute to
over forty percent of New
Mexicos budget funding schools
hospitals and many other
benefits years centennial's
already undertaken intense
initiative to reduce our for
income less than two percent
company wide and we're not alone
in that industry is leading the
way into next greenhouse gases
emissions methane emissions like
many my competitor like many of
our competitors my client's
ability to continue to do
business and that and New Mexico
in the future will be and out of
legislation like this becomes
law in the great state of New
Mexico thank you for your time.
Thank you that concludes the
opposition if you would like to
speak and support would you
please raise your hand.
Okay Eric chance you are now and
made it.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee this is
Eric chance staff attorney for
the New Mexico environmental law
center The New Mexico
environmental law center is the
only organization legal
organization the state that
works primarily with under
resource community solar and
environmental disputes
the Law Center supports HD
seventy six for two main reasons
first of all is a fundamental
transparency bill for better or
worse our society has
made a fundamental transparency
the Guiding Light in other
contexts for example for
employment for violence to check
the box about prior felonies and
also in the context of
neighborhoods for
sex offender registries and this
is basic so such that employers
know who they're hiring and
neighbors know who's moving in
next door to.
The same the same thing should
apply to folks who are going to
be neighbors to industry they
should know that record of the
industry that they're living
next to and they should have the
ability to address those streets
the second reason that the Law
Center supports this bill is for
equity reasons
it's an unfortunate reality that
most heavy in polluting
industries located in or near
under resources communities of
color.
Those communities ought to have
one the ability to know who is
and doing business in their
neighborhood and to the ability
to a lot of the latches
regulatory agencies to
deny a permit if that actor is a
bad actor and has a history of
putting other communities at
risk ultimately this bill really
just make sure that New Mexico
invites those businesses in that
they the law same as every other
sentence and every other
resident of New Mexico.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Luis Carrero you are
now and muted.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee
appreciate the op need to speak
to you today
I am res get I am the
legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
dragon approval under chapter
and I am here representing our
over thirty five thousand
members throughout New Mexico
and we support each be seventy
six this bill is extremely
important the name of first of
all of it would allow bad actors
to abuse our planet we need to
act on climate change now and we
need to act on making sure we
preserve our beautiful planet
for future generations.
Opposers of this bill have said
that no one will want to do
business with New Mexico because
of our regulations I'm I think
I'm sorry but we want business
in New Mexico that that cares
for our planet and this does not
abuse of it
we are open for business here in
New Mexico this bill as well as
has been mentioned already you
know areas where a lot of oil
and gas production happens
thanks to be areas were also
marginalized communities and
communities of color eight.
Will our work they are their
health is affected by by the
fossil fuel industry and by
polluters that do not follow the
guidelines that require people
deserve to to have healthy work
conditions people deserve to
have a healthy future for their
families so I'm asking you
please vote yes on this bill
because we we need to have
a companies in New Mexico that
that the respect for basically
respectful offered and and
protect our environment thank
you very much.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment Representative
Chandler we do have a caucus
that began at noon so what we
are going to do is we will
continue probably on Monday we
have a floor session on Fridays
have three bills that we are
going to hear so for everyone's
attention we will pick up on me
with how many six.
Yes to speaking so the
representative John St we just
sent a notice to cancel the
caucus meeting
We are.
We will just send a notice for
the reschedule caucus meeting
A couple of the committees are
behind schedule and so we're
going to continue.
Our committee meetings thank you
thank you for that notice
so we'll have some time now.
Representative Chandler if you
want to address some of the
comments and then we can move to
Have your amendments for
discussion thank you very much
madam chair and I may ask that
these comments be supplemented
by my expert but I just wanted
to point out a few things one is
with regard to the suggestion
that there's no due process and
people don't have the ability to
challenge the denial that's just
not correct there is an appeal
process that goes through the E.
I. B. board and I believe even
then there if there is the
potential to go beyond that so
that's one point madam chair
another point madam chair is
that other states have laws like
this and notably arm our sister
state Texas has a law like this
and madam chair I'm sure ms
easily can expand on that but
that's some this is not some
shocking new idea that's being
brought by the state of New
Mexico this is something that
the industry should be
comfortable with and understand
and lastly I just want to echo
madam chair some of the comments
from the environmental advocates
You know we I think all care
that we have people and entities
operating in the state who are
honest who follow the law that
provide the information that's
being requested of them and I
think it's a very small thing
for us the state to make that a
requirement for the issuance of
a permit the continuation of a
permit madam chair and I I don't
know if this Ely would like to
supplement that but I did want
to correct if you see things
that for the record.
Madam chair members of the
committee also want to note one
of the objectives behind HB
seventy six is to find some
consistency and predictability
in the New Mexico environment
department enabling statutes and
this language comes from the
water quality control act solid
waste act and the water and the
mining act as well as a
hazardous waste tax so this is
also not new in New Mexico it's
just new for air quality.
And I must point out that much
of the language in this HB
seventy six is much more
narrowly defined that in those
other acts which allow for other
states which allow revocation or
denial based on violations of
environmental laws period this
doesn't go that for it has a
very specific criteria for
determining when a permit can be
revoked or denied thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler let's go ahead and
moving your amendments for
discussion purposes.
Up.
Thank you madam chair and I
don't know if ms easily has any
comments that you wish to make
on the on the amendment.
And now I think my explanation
was
I think I explained earlier I
wish you'd like me to read the
amendments but it's amendment
point two one nine zero seven
four point one and again these
are a result of conversations
with representatives in the oil
and gas industry as well as
addressing the concerns from
house to energy and natural
resources committee right thank
you and we actually did want to
the right
Number so we got it and
so.
Committee members on the
amendment.
Chair of the Dodge.
We have a motion by
Representative it lie to adopt
the amendments we have a second
second we have a second by
Representative Ortez is third
discussion.
On the amendments.
is there going to be objection
to adopting the amendments.
Okay seeing and hearing none
we've adopted this amendments.
back to the bill Representative.
My part.
It made me to the punch.
Thank you madam chair.
Of.
All right.
I guess my first question Madam
chair representative you you
made reference to
Texas has a statute could.
I'm not familiar with the Texas
statute so could you kind of
tell me your is this identical
to the Texas statute or or what
by the some of the significant
differences between this bill
and the existing taxes statute
that you referenced.
Thank you for that question
madam chair and representative
if I might defer to ms the lady
or our other expert I'd very
much appreciate that.
Madam chair representative
Nighbor at this the Texas in
Texas the commission a denier
Amanda and the permit for
unsatisfactory compliance
history is fairly regularly
brought.
It is that the majority of.
The the major difference are
madam chair the stateLee.
Yes Madam chair representative
number yes.
Okay so so madam chair and and
administrative Lee let's let's
discuss that a little bit our.
I I know that you may not like
the Texas language but it
appears my read of the bill
verses that language
Maybe gives the taxes agencies a
little more latitude that what
we're providing in this bill in
other words and satisfactory
compliance history so just to
may that it's of on going
Tell your to to meet are there
compliance requirements and so
one and so that may not revoke
the permit.
But a continuation of
a series of.
On attainment or non compliance
would.
And and so my.
Maybe reading too much into that
or or and my being a little too
harsh on the bill that's
proposed before us
Because it seems like
Our bill does not go to a
history it's basically looking
for maybe it possibly a singular
of that.
Madam chair representative in
either.
The New Mexico enabling statutes
to have that brought other in
environmental statutes to have
that broad language and say that
if the applicant exhibited a
history of willful disregard for
environmental laws of any state
or the United States
that's in the water quality
control lacked the solid waste
hazardous waste at to me this
seems like a non starter for
industry and so we to that's not
included within include that in
this bill language there are a
number of companies that have a
history of non compliance to
continue to exceed their permit
limits and we opted not to deny
or revoke those permits in this
case but to take enforcement
action to try and and secretive
Education of those situations
that the denial revocation would
allow us to actually prevent
potentially some of those
applicants from operating in the
state in the first place so that
up so that a portion actually
not be required.
Well.
Are you still
see some concerns with the
language in our bill and the.
It.
Seems to be directed at you know
maybe some pretty specific stuff
but it it's kind of a one strike
you're out the current situation
the way our readers madam chair
make matches comment on that if
I might Madam and you know I
would point out one thing and
that is this the blanket
language am online sixteen page
eleven is permissive so it's not
an absolutely requirement that
these be triggers for the denial
or revocation of a permit that's
point one madam chair and
representative and secondly in a
little confuse I I thank the
Texas language gives much more
discretion and latitude to the
regulator which I would think
that those being regulated would
not find great comfort in but
you know that's just me but that
that's just the COVID madam
chair and representative
Nighbor.
Thank you but let's let's look
at the at the language in the in
the bill and I don't have the
amendments and contact so I. may
not be picking up everything
that the amendments the.
Rast not apologize for that but
the.
How does.
M. operator or an applique.
R.
subject
To the vile or a replication
is our first is there any
requirement here that requires a
hearing or some type of the
administrative process that the.
Applicant or the operator can
avail themselves to when a
permit is is going to be a
divider is divided for a current
permit is revoked madam chair I
believe one of our experts can
answer that question.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would like to to
start with by saying that I
think you would start with the
discussion especially with the
new language in the new
paragraph are where the
applicant can file an action
plan to demonstrate that they
will be in compliance with the
applicable permit and
regulations so there's that
option spelled out there for
them to to do that and and the
department to allow it if it's
or the local agency allowed by
the secretary or the director so
that in my my would be the first
step but there is certainly a
formal administrative process in
which any permit decision can be
appealed to the environmental
improvement board and if the
applicant for Committee is not
satisfied with that a connect
with and go to the court of
appeals.
Okay so in in subparagraph P. we
we have they can do that the
Nile but but then you're saying
are that process make sure can
which we're which gives the
operator or the applica maybe
some ability to to do some
additional things to
have a conditional permit for
August show that there are that
they can can try to bring their
operation into compliance or
what have you and maybe be given
some time to do so.
It is is that how I'm reading
and then if they get the box
there and can't do that then
there's a a formal
administrative appeal process
that occurs.
Madam chair representative labor
that's correct okay since
What looking at the.
Winds twenty and twenty one on
page eleven
The question that immediately
came to my mind is why is that
even in there because every time
you apply for a permit if you
don't the.
Disclose the required
information your permit gets to
that if I go in for driver's
license and don't give them all
the information I need for
driver's license I'll get my
license.
And I think that's true across
the board and so I I was a bit
surprised to say the city that
if you refuse to disclose
information then your permanence
gonna debate tonight that's not
a surprise.
I I wonder why there was a
necessity to say that.
Madam chair if if misty Lee
could explain.
Madam chair representative I'm
very you know if we don't get
all the information that we need
to process an application we
generally can't deny it but it's
not it's not clear in the in the
act that is the case there are
other requirements that
you know that are required to be
submitted under the air quality
control act and if they don't
submit those and then it's
possible we can deny that permit
but it it's not clarified in the
act itself.
CF our bureau chief was this
became has anything to add to
that if if that's okay with
madam chair.
That's fine Hey the record
reflect you shook her head yes.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert there
there are other requirements for
information to be submitted to
the department under the air
quality control act after the
permit is issued and so that
that provision of the bill would
also potentially allow us to
revoking a permit for
information that was I knowingly
withheld from the department.
So let me understand the process
so so there's there's
information you require to
secure the permit but then there
is other information that the
air quality control last may
required to be revealed after
the fact and and if you don't
reveal that information then
your permit that you just secure
the result.
Madam chair representative never
got is correct and those would
be
information about facilities
operations.
Records of emissions that are
housed in.
Requirements in permits or in
air quality regulations that are
incorporated into a permit.
And so I just want my next
question would be Madam chair
representative.
Would.
Applicants and operators secure
trying to secure these types of
permits would they be well aware
of the quality control act is
that a federal statute.
Representative never puts a
state air quality control act.
Okay it's a it's a state act at
and our it's.
The the the information you're
requesting is that Ravalli set
forth in the actors are buried
and regulations are or how.
I guess how are.
How easy or how common are those
requirements
and what I'm getting at if there
should law firms instruction
memorandum that bets in
somebody's file I don't.
Are they refused to disclose
that information that's one
thing if it's up for than the
act itself that I don't have
much sympathy for.
but.
Yes what level of information
and how readily assessable as
information about your you're
wanting that then triggers the
ability to revoke the permit.
Madam chair representative
number.
Date the information that's
required can be in the can be in
the statute itself but is more
commonly.
Build out in specific air
quality regulations which are
explicit which are clear clearly
defined and that are adopted and
incorporated into our quality
permit that language is it's
clear from for most operators
it's clearly defined about what
exact information is required to
be reported.
So it's it's out front it's it's
explicit it's clear Ms provides
concise required reporting.
Okay so madam chair I understand
just try to be information that
set forth in the act or in the
agencies regulations that would
be esoteric information and
somebody's instruction
memorandum or you know internal
files or what so
if I'm incorrect about.
By rendition of your answer.
All.
Madam chair representative
I think Mr Trujillo aus the.
A question about the the.
issue of a man's right
requirement all one twenty of.
Yeah I don't I don't know
whether if you refuse to
disclose information that's
required
Yes Sir.
It kind of speaks for itself.
I just want to make sure this is
not an effort to well you failed
to timely disclose that and
Therefore gonna revoke your
permit use is there a process
madam chair representative to
try to work with operators so
that if there.
This same reporter missing some
data on a report that they can
rectify that information before
it gets to the replication
portion.
Madam chair I asked that one of
our experts answer that
question.
Madam chair her head yes.
Madam chair representative never
thank you for that question
that's an area that that you
just provided was would be more
commonly handled under.
Enforcement action if necessary.
When it when the department
becomes aware of information
that was required to be
submitted was withheld we first
notify the applicants or that
the committee about that
required information we allow an
opportunity for the company to
take corrective action.
And to submit additional
information to us for review.
And and if they have satisfied
that requested that corrective
action to can we take that into
consideration when we're
determining whether or not a a
formal enforcement action is
appropriate.
And madam chair and
representative the work the work
reaches jumped off the paper at
me and refused I think
automatically conduct some
members right requirement and I
was wondering why the word fail
was not utilized because I could
see where you have an operator
of particularly operators taking
over operations of an entity
that the.
Is new to them and they're not
familiar with all the procedures
maybe new people coming
employees have their not
familiar with all the reports
and things and and so
things.
Do fall through the cracks
unfortunately of and things
don't get reported correctly
what have you and and I think
most agencies
should be encouraged not
discouraged our.
Encouraged to work with those
operators and bring them up to
speed M. to
tried to.
Train them so that they're
reporting requirements are
consistent with the statutory
and regulatory requirements and
and not be
maybe overly heavy handed on
that I I guess my question will
be in your experience the secure
without be how the
air quality of folks deal with
these matters generally ballot
is that your anticipation but
that's how they would deal with
them in the future.
Madam chair Representative
Nibert in in the example that
you provided we have a a new
owner audit procedure that that
mimics the federal government's
new owner audit procedure.
We have a lot of divestitures
and acquisitions of oil and gas
assets that frequently change
hands and we so we acknowledge
you ought New owners coming in
and needing to perform the type
of audit on those new assets to
make sure that the those
facilities are complying with
what their quality requirements.
So that would be how that would
be handled for new new owners.
But I would certainly encourage
the this agency of and others to
of.
Try to bring about compliance
through cooperation cooperative
efforts instead of through use
of the hammer so to speak on
page twelve.
We're gonna line I
So this goes back.
One of the sub categories of why
you be revoked or denied.
And and and and program for it
says that you've constructed or
operated the facility for which
apartment is sought without a
permit required.
And so.
M. in my experience in the oil
patch it reduced there's many
things that get constructed or
are in the process of being
constructed be for of maybe all
the.
Final permits are secure and and
I suspect that they will quality
permit may be one of those
things that get secure maybe
later in the in the process but
if I read this right.
That permit can be denied
because you constructs what
operated you constructed
something without the permit
building in place and so I'd
like some discussion regarding
hello hello with the agency.
Deal with that situation where
they are in the process of
constructing their facilities
but they don't have the air
quality a permanent place
there for the birth of you may
divide the very issuance of the
permit because you started your
construction TIRS.
Madam chair for one of our
experts could address that
question.
Madam chair representative Liber
the air quality permits are a
little different from other
apartments in the construction
business in that construction
cannot start until a permit is
is issued they're very limited
activities I'm not even sure you
can find the ground without your
permit in hand this is
consistent with the federal act
because we are implementing the
federal lacked in New Mexico
through the air quality control
act so construction cannot begin
until that air permanent is is
issued for the person will be in
violation of the air quality
control act.
Okay.
This is wholly outside my area
of expertise but let's just say
that you for some reason need a
and air quality control permit
for a.
Thank battered place where oil
and gas are stored on.
A location.
And.
Those type batteries are
constructed when the oil and gas
wells are completed
because you have to do something
with the drugs.
R. M. and often times.
The construction of a lot of
that stuff gets done before a
lot of other permits are in
place including maybe rights of
way taking that product from
point a to point B. words
ultimately put into interstate
pipeline or or elsewhere so and
maybe maybe my example as is way
out of line because I don't know
what their requirements are for
tank batteries but but if that
permit was required for that
type of facility you're saying
that they could not even begin
blading go land.
To put those facilities and
until they have that permit
employees.
Representative night chair madam
chair we don't permit well
drilling right so they can go
ahead and get started on that
the infrastructure around the
well though where the air
emissions calms like from a tank
battery we do permit and they
they can do some minimal ground
moving that they cannot start
real construction in till they
obtain their permanent now we
can work with them in advance of
the well drilling and have a
conversation with them about
what they think might be in
their tank battery with those
emissions might be and how to
permit it and get that permit to
them early but there are the air
quality control act does not
allow construction until the
permanent is is issues madam
chair by May
chief.
I have a few additional comments
to that.
Madam chair you're welcome to
go.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert.
The temporary tanks constructed
during the well drilling phase
can be authorized without in our
quality permanent that portion
of that of the activities not
required of does not require an
air permit.
Once permanent storage tanks our
our prior to the construction of
permanent storage tanks
associated with a tank battery
the operators would need to come
in and obtain their permanent.
I'm a madam chair and Mr chair
and I'm I'm get.
I'm a bit confused because
Temporary tanks.
Thanks.
Often times look the same to me.
The.
I guess what I see in the oil
patch is your you put you put
the tanks M..
Good to you anticipate you're
going to need for the production
capabilities of of that well
when you start centralizing
facilities are having a lot of
things built them that I can see
where you don't construct those
until you have maybe a permanent
place but the normal
circumstance it it would not
surprise me at all to see.
What a better construction occur
before that permits in place and
it and it really concerns me
that that you can't.
What the grounder or start some
construction for that
unless you have some of those
permits employees because and on
the oil and gas contacts it's
not white.
Many factories where you know
exactly what you're you're out
what's going to be.
In the oil and gas parlance you
don't know what you're going to
be dealing with until you
complete the well again
determine its productive
capabilities.
The lucky up produces
Representative lucky you just
but a lot of money for a dry
hole in the ground
and so requiring a lot of
permitting processes to go
forward before you can put some
of that stuff them in place I
think for oil and gas operators
which would be my experience the
places them and somewhat of a
disadvantage not only a
disadvantage but if they can't.
But in some some of the if they
can't begin construction a lot
of that construction by may
serve multiple purposes but if
thank if I can't do any
construction before the permit
and if they do the construction
that is because for the denial
of the very Madam.
I have some real problems in not
giving some flexibility in the
words on in the stature I'm.
Madam chair representative I can
just weigh in and I know I'm not
an expert but just thinking from
common sense are well we've
already established this year's
it's a may language so there's
some discretion by the agency to
work with the the operator or
the person requesting the permit
the second point is madam chair
that I would make and I can be
corrected by any of my experts
if they choose to we've only
focused on one part of that
section
there is there's a second part
in it Sen and part
Representative Snyder madam
chair that requires that
emissions from the un permitted
facility actually exceed the
permit requirement threshold by
twenty five percent for any
pollutant so the scenario that
we've been talking about for the
last little bit seems to not
quite Smith what paragraphs for
madam chair in and this and
Representative
Is addressing.
These are agree just issues
where the missions will could be
quite high and from which the
operator in the person seeking
can't you know exceeded
emissions at a very high level.
And madam chair representative
but that's that's really what
I'm trying to to understand
because when you complete an oil
and gas well you your insurance
your additional tests to
determine the capability of it
some of these horizontal wells
are producing thousands of of
our.
Barrels of oil
many thousands of barrels of
water and many thousands of
cubic feet of gas.
Not gas in your car but the
natural gas.
That day per and.
That occurs during.
The.
Completion process though of a
well.
And.
There has to be a mechanism to
to deal with with those products
and.
I know that the the the words
BENNINGHOFF learning the.
AP Schardin Schardin among some
but but the that's how you deal
with some of the vaporous
apparitions you you certainly
want to store the crude oil does
that has great value you need a
strong produced water because
that is a.
Product that used to be
reenacted or go through a
process of creating and and so.
It it's it's not beyond the by.
Of imagination that in that
process you could potentially
have emissions from the
permitted facility exceeding any
requested permit requirements
of.
And meet that threshold I am I
mean I don't I don't know enough
about this area to make that as
a definitive statement but in my
mind I could see how how that
would occur early on in the
completion process of the oil
and gas well and if you come
down to Carlsbad
and look across the landscape
the at night you'll see a lot of
the.
Learning of gaps
at least now and because wells
are coming online you have to do
something with that I don't know
whether that extra exceeds
threshold by twenty five percent
or more but.
In my mind the.
You certainly have some issues
that operators would have to
deal with on a practical basis
here and the the the word
constructed.
If they've done something to
construction without the permit
the permit gets divided and
where are we I'm just a little
concerned that this doesn't give
us the practical.
We way for the agency or the
operators to to deal with that
situation and and so I think you
ought to look at it and and see
if there's something that we
need to put in here to get I
realize we're trying to get bad
actors.
We're trying to to force
compliance but I don't think we
ought to have language in here
that has some.
Unpractical of facts and could
be used as an excuse to devise
some things.
Just because
That's the way.
Physically things have to be
done particularly on on oil and
gas locations which would be the
area of the
in my.
District to my part of the state
of the would come across this on
a more regular basis
M. my next question would be the
Environment Department divine
application that is.
That is filed to correct.
The construction or operations
without a permit another words
yes.
If the construction began our
there but build something and
they didn't have a permit.
With with the environment
department just simply divide
that permit or would you have
some ability to try to go back
resolve those issues and and
ultimately grant the permit so
that that operation or facility
them
proceed in compliance with your
rules.
Madam chair if one of the
experts might answer that
question.
Madam chair representative
neighbor that that would be the
situation and in most
circumstances
you know especially if we have a
corrective action plan that the
they submit about how they are
going to continue to to comply.
We want them to come into.
To our office and get a permit
the permit has operating
conditions that will help the
chief public health requirements
and so we do want to issue those
permits we do want them to come
into compliance and I just need
to point out that all of this is
is the department may the DOT
Department doesn't have to deny
or revoke any permanent will
look at the circumstances if
this is the third or fourth time
we've seen somebody who has
constructed and operated without
a permit at twenty five percent
above the threshold will
probably deny that permanent.
And if you deny that permit then
you do not have the production
of the resource for the ability
to produce that resource.
The alternate result madam chair
there is an appeal process and
and Representative Robert nine
the call.
Madam chair and representative
there may be an appeal process
but it but it's going to be very
hard for a company to
Peel and bear the burden that
would be required of it to
overcome that is it the ultimate
question is did you construct
your your.
Facility without a permit.
Yes I did.
I don't see court be into
sympathetic on an operator in
that regard and and you know the
the crux of the matter is at the
end of the day
you don't in all patch you don't
get the resource of the young
and the state the.
The state doesn't get the the
record from that either so so
it's it's kind of a
I mean it's an important issue
compliance is important and I
grant you that going after bad
actors I I commend your but we
also have to make this where it
is not only practical but that
we give the HSD and operators
sufficient
latitude.
To.
Engaging
There are.
Engage in their business.
And try to have the mechanism to
to.
Deal with the practical aspects
of the because in my oil and gas
example of you know if if the
admissions.
From a facility are much higher
because the production is much
higher than anybody anticipates
then you ought to be celebrating
that we're but the your your
permit us says you're going to
do this but it's a factor of
three times that you're all of a
sudden in trouble and you don't
know those things until you
actually put things online and
am I don't see sufficient
Sufficient language in the bill
to address some of those
situations and I think that's
why you heard of so many from
industry raising raising some
questions
And then the.
My next question and I believe
the Mr trio took touched on this
as well on lines thirteen
through fifteen subparagraph Q..
Of the aggravating and
mitigating factors could you
define or provide some examples
of what you would see as
aggravating or mitigating
factors.
Madam chair if the one of my
experts might answer that
question.
Chair representative line for
an aggregating aggravating
factor could be a repeat history
over time in another state
a mitigating factor could be
that the violation or the
suspension of that permit and
neighboring Oklahoma which has
similar rules
could have been eight or nine
years ago rather than two years
ago this language simply gives
the agency some leeway and in
some way to think about whether
that permit should be denied or
revoked.
We're we're there madam chair
what there be anything
Well Sir.
You know I I appreciate those
but I'm just trying to see what
the breadth of.
Activating mitigating factors.
Well was it was the
violation in another state
intentional is it clear that the
operated constructed without a
permit renewable because it's
also not allowed there either
and and did they do that
multiple times to indicate that
it wasn't an intentional
violation of the law that might
have led to their replication
because they have a similar
similar stature.
What would one of the mitigating
factors be the the.
You know you have.
What we have a situation of
consolidation of the oil and gas
industry the cause of of
economics of.
And so you have.
Operators that are now acquiring
many more wells and they're used
to operating would one of the
mitigating factors be that there
are wiring so do properties and
they're not familiar with those
therefore they should be given
some leeway at least of that
time period
or.
Would they be given some some
credit for taking over
operations of what you might
classify as a bad actor and give
them time to bring those
wells are those facilities into
compliance.
Representative if I may yes we
certainly weren't and we I think
checking touched on this
previously that happens a lot
and what we often see is that
the the company acquiring those
assets will do an audit and then
they'll come to us and say Hey
we discovered these operations
that may not have a permit or
may not have met this
requirement and we go through
that audit we provide a timeline
to come into compliance we may
or may not assessed penalties
depending on the circumstances
and how it's addressed under
civil penalty policy but yes
that would certainly be a
mitigating factor absolutely.
Madam chair and Missy lie are
really the.
You know one thing if you're if
you're trying to get the so
called bad actors.
And get them out of business.
Then you're going to have to
have a mechanism to have.
The operators that a properly
handle their affairs you're
going to have to provide some
encouragement for them to take
over those operations and to
give them some assurance that
they're going to have some time
reasonable time to bring
maybe non.
Attainment facilities into
attainment and M. M. the their
needs you know we talk about
certainty.
There needs to be some some
certainty that the that.
Of the ministry of.
Process your is going to work
favorably or you're not going to
have people are expanding their
capital to acquire some of
these.
Nonconforming facilities that
and putting the capital into
that plus having the additional
capital and to bring them into
compliance so you know I hope
that those those are facts are
considered by the agency program
forward because I think in New
Mexico we're going to see more
consolidation not less I think
you're going to see.
Four of mergers and acquisitions
of smaller companies
and and that's that's going to
be a trend in the oil patch.
That I think will continue for
for some time just because of
the the cost of doing business
Moving down to paragraph are
which is one sixteen for
nineteen all page twelve
Talk about filing a disclosure
statement.
And is that disclosure statement
limited to the items in
paragraph P. up above or or what
is to be disclosed.
Madam chair representative are
you referring to the language in
the original bill or the
language in the amendment
because I believe.
I'm sorry it would be the new
paragraph.
Just so we're all on its own
it's the original our on page
twelve one sixteen through
nineteen but since our was
inserted it would be the the
next the members of the
paragraph as.
Thank you for that clarification
madam chair Rep I'd ask one of
my experts to answer that
question.
Madam chair representative
that we we did clarify that that
was one of the suggestions I
think chevron provided to us and
so we did clarify in the
amendments that the language in
of the original our should
reference that paragraph P. up
above.
I guess I don't I'm looking at
the amendment right now.
This.
Representative if I may.
I don't see an amendment on on
this paragraph other than
striking the word issue.
Representative if I may it's
amendment number six.
On page four line eighteen
strike required and insert in
lieu there of okay it is
subsection P. of this section.
Madam chair Missy we thank you
for pointing that out I I didn't
realize there was a second.
So so it's now clear that the it
is in fact limited to the up
above as to the items to be
disclosed on the disclosure
statement.
All.
And my my next question may be
resolved by paragraph are but
are when when I originally read
the bill by my question that I
wrote down was should there be a
third alternative a corrective
action plan and if I read the
new paragraph are correctly is
that really the third
alternative allowing for a
corrective action plan to occur
so it can be to hi it can be
approved or you can have this
corrective action plan that that
amendment may allow our.
You Senator the granting of the
permit ultimately is that.
I probably would say that very
well but that's how I see in.
Madam chair if if my expert
might answer that thank you.
Madam chair representative fiber
that is correct.
Was added at industry request
and came up and Henrik and and
so we made the amendment to
include that.
Madam chair my my last question
would be
Hello mandible would you be to
trying to look at the language
particularly and subparagraph
four at the top of page twelve
good to deal with some of the
issues I did or brought up to
try to address some of those
concerns about timing
Are you locked in stone on the
this or will we have an
opportunity to maybe try to.
By G. was some additional
language to deal with some of
those issues that are raised
Madam chair representative for
always open to improving the
bill and if if you have
something to offer madam chair
and representative that actually
improves the bill will be happy
to work with you.
Well it would be my Madam chair
representative to to to have a
bill that that not only.
Reach your stated goals but but
to make sure that the people
that are are trying their best
to to comply or given the
latitude that they may need to
properly construct and and get
their operations online
particularly in the oil patch
so I will be reaching out to to
some of my folks and see if they
have some suggestions and I will
be happy to for those to you for
consideration and you know we
can always do some for
amendments yes I assume this is
headed to the for next year if
it passes Committee.
Mr chair Representative that's
my understanding of that we'll
we'll try to I will try to get
some maybe floor amendments run
that by you as quickly as
possible and you and your
experts can can take a look and
and see if there's some ability
to address what I would consider
some of the practical
considerations that I'm a little
uneasy with in the bill as
drafted thank you madam chair
thank you representative of
thank you to the experts for
testifying.
Thank you representative
Representative Eli.
You madam chair sorry about
another zoom call ongoing
I move adoption house bill
seventy six thousand and.
Course we have a motion for it
to pass on house bill seventy
six as amended I will second
sound.
And I if we could call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative my part.
I'm going to vote no I'm not
there yet but to all work with
the representative.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused I in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Representative I we have by a
vote of five to three house to
house bill seventy six as
amended thank you Representative
thank you so much madam chair
and thank you committee for your
attention have a good day thank
you.
So we're gonna have to roll
Due to time House Bill one zero
three two Friday I think will it
be able to address that then
we'll also have three more bills
on Friday it's going to start at
eight fifteen so will have about
forty five minutes for for bills
and if we could start promptly
I'd appreciate that.
And with that we are adjourned
committee members.
Thank you to everyone for
joining us today take care we're
device chair owes me all the
quarters back if we don't start
promptly at eight fifteen.
We're talking about chocolate
quarters here.
Thank you.
