emotion for discussion. Thanks.
These are powerful.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee. Good morning. I'm
here to talk to you all about um
The committee substitute for
House Bill 477, the first bill
that you had seen, uh, and I'd
asked and appreciate you all
rolling it over, basically, uh,
I think was candidly poorly
written and also uh poorly
titled when it was uh states,
it's an act to provide an
exemption for for members of the
legislature. It simply is a
true, Madam Chair, what this is
is a fix for what happened in
the 2nd session of 2020.
the fifty-fourth legislative
session, the 2nd session of
2020, House Bill 117.
Amended the lodger's Tax Act to
alter certain exemptions,
changing the allowable costs of
occupancy tax.
Tax revenue and Madam Chair
Committee, what happened, the
issue that I want to talk to you
about today was, was caught up
in that. It was on page 7 lines.
34 through 8.
And that's when the change
occurred was in 2020, and
basically what it boils down to
if, um, and it does affect
legislators, but there's more
than legislators involved. You
stay in a hotel here, um, in, in
Santa Fe.
After 30 days, you are exempt. I
don't know how many of y'all
stay in hotels. I have for the
last 25 years.
And
The last few years, and I've
asked our hotel manager, why
that exemption hadn't been
provided, they said because you
guys didn't reauthorize it.
So for years and years, uh,
after 30 days, um, the largest
tax is removed if you've stayed
in a hotel.
More than 30 days, but
The other thing about this bill,
Madam Chair and committee, not
only would it affect legislators
that are up here for
60 and 30 day sessions. It
affects groups like uh fiery
evacuees from uh the area.
When people had to move out of
out of their uh homes here in
the north.
We're looking for temporary
shelter.
Um, this would affect folks like
that.
It would also affect uh what we
call unhoused folks in um in
Galt McKinley County, our school
district actually has unhoused
high school students.
Uh, we used to call them
homeless in the day. They were
homeless high school students,
and they'd have to find a
temporary shelters for them and,
and, and, uh.
Certain cases they'd end up
staying in hotels.
I'm not sure if the school
district works that way here in
Santa Fe. What, what happens
when you have um.
On H's kids.
Where, where they put them or
what, what have I just don't
know what they do in this
county, but I do in my, in my
home county they find hotel
spaces for them.
There's also a need for this
kind of um.
Consideration for better
families. I know when our
battered family shelter in
Gallup gets filled up.
They then use hotel.
So that's what this bill is
about. It's a fix to what
happened in the 2nd session of
2020, it was house tax and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 117, and I believe
that this piece was.
Uh, just inadvertently picked up
and I'm here to answer any
questions.
Representative, uh.
Let's go ahead and um adopt the
committee substitute.
So that we can go to the
audience comment.
So movement.
Do we have any opposition? OK,
seeing none. We will be
discussing the committee
substitute for House Bill 477.
With that, let's go to the
audience. Do we have anyone in
the audience who'd like to speak
and support.
Any opposition in the audience.
Let's go online.
OK, so we're going for uh in
support of the bill, we have
Talia.
Hello, can you hear us?
Hi, we're so sorry, um, our, we
had our hand raised for the next
bill. I apologize. No problem.
No problem at all. OK. Anyone
hoping to speak in opposition to
House Bill 477, please raise
your hand.
Hey, Representative Zamora.
You, Madam Chair, and, and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward. So,
The timing of the bill after 30
days.
Will, will you still get taxed
on the first.
30 days and then thereafter not,
or if you stay more than 30
days, you don't get taxed at
all,
man. Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, you don't get
taxed at all. If you're there
for more than 30 days, the
lodger's tax portion is removed
off your bill.
OK. And, and Madam Chair and
Representative,
So lodgers text is something
that's taxed by the hotel.
And then
How does that money get divvied
up from there, Madam Chair and
representative. It's a, it's a
uh lodger's tax is imposed by
the Santa Fe and County and the
city of Santa Fe.
So the um loggers tax just would
not go back into their coffers.
It's not, it doesn't affect the
state.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, how does Santa
Fe and Santa uh city of Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County feel about
this. I don't know, Madam Chair
Representative, I haven't heard
anything out of them, uh, in any
way regarding this bill, but I
do know that started in 2001,
that's how the system worked.
And I, I would imagine the
thinking is when you, at least
on the legislative side.
The amount of gross receipts
that's generated by the activity
that's happening up in this
community.
By the legislative activity more
than makes up what's happening
in lodgers tax.
That would be my assumption, but
I, I just don't know. I haven't
heard anything from anybody on
it. So, Madam Charesentative, do
we have any kind of numbers on
how much money this could add up
to be. Well, what it says, Madam
Chair Representative in the FIR
for the first bill, which I
As again, I do not believe that
it was.
Properly titled, it says lodgers
tax exemption, and it says um.
Here, the occupancy tax for FY.
Uh, 26 is $30,000 for Santa Fe
County and for the city of Santa
Fe, it says $30,000 but there
hasn't been an updated fiscal
impact report tied to the
committee sub.
So that's as close as I can get
here. And, and Madam Chair, and
uh
Representative, do you think
that
FIR is, is consistent with all
the groups you just named off.
Like, I would think that might
be just for legislators matter
turn representative. Yeah, Madam
Chair Representative, uh, I, I
would agree to. I mean, I, as I
said before, I thought it was
poorly drafted. I'm disappointed
that there wasn't 1 ounce of
research done into this when
this bill was drafted by Ledge
council and um when I went up
and asked, actually asked him to
dig into this and asked him
point blank to talk to the
former directors.
You know that this was in place,
then all of a sudden we find the
bill that.
Inadvertently took it out.
So
No, I, if you're asking me, do I
think that is relevant? No, I
don't, but I don't think that.
Um
The other groups that I named, I
don't have a number for those
either. When you're talking
about fire eva evacuees or when
you're thinking of, um,
People that would be tied to
maybe domestic violence shelters
that are filled
Like I was explaining in my, in
my home county.
We have unhoused high school
kids.
Put him in hotels.
Um, so
It would be hard for me to
predict because I don't, I just
don't know. And, and Madam Chair
and Representative.
And this just pertains to Santa
Fe County. Why would we not do a
bill that would pertain to the
whole state of New Mexico.
Um, you could, Madam Chair
Representative, I think the key
for this though is, is that
there it is tied to uh 60 days
of a legislative session that
brings a whole bunch of people
up here for 60 days.
Um, unfortunately, the area has
been ravished with fires, which
is unfortunate for everybody.
Um, um, these people would be,
it would be hard for me to know
because I don't, I just don't
know. And, and Madam Chair
Representative.
And this just pertains to Santa
Fe County. Why would we not do a
bill that would, uh, pertain to
the whole state of New Mexico.
Um,
you could, Madam Chair
Representative, I think.
So is is that there it is tied
