World comes close. We have a
quorum, Gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements of miscellaneous
business ordered.
Ah, good evening members. We're
going to take up some
housekeeping this evening and
then we'll move on to some third
reading and also an item on the
concurrence calendar.
Um, just to give you a heads up.
We're going to start with house
Bill 130.
I don't see the gentleman from
all those counties here, but
he's got a little time because
we're going to do some
housekeeping. But if you guys
want to shoot him a text that
would be healthy.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I go. I move. We go
to that order of business
messages. Objection is ordered
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed. House Taxation Revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 252 as amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments Respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate floor substitute
for Senate tax, business and
transportation substitute for
Senate Bill 146 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted.
Sherry D. Luhan, Senate chief
clerk message will be entered.
True lady from, uh, scientific.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business committee
reports. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr Speaker, your commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to whom has been referred Senate
Bill 176, as amended has had it
under consideration, reports
with recommendations that do
pass respectfully submitted
during White Guy Goes Chair, Mr
Speaker. Moved Option Adoption
about favorable committee report
on Senate Bill 176 as amended.
All those in favor say Aye.
Suppose, nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 301 has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker. Move
Adoption option of a Federal
committee report on house Bill
301 All those in favors, You
know, people say, Ni
I was supposed to be a
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 14
has had it under consideration
reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Centerville 14.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Opposed. Nay. Yeah, let's have
it. Committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Bill 17
has had it under consideration
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair.
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Adoption of Federal Committee
report on the Senate Bill 17,
all those in favor of public
said I.
The Civic Committee report
adopted
Mr Speaker, your appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Bill 106,
as amended has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker Move
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate Bill
106 as amended all those in
favor and if I was in I
I suppose, in a
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your appropriations
and finance Committee to him has
been referred. Senate Bill 116
has had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker, Move
Adoption.
The adoption of a favorable
committee report on the Senate
about 116 all those in favor
prison. I
In E.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to Mizban
referred Senate Bill 126 has had
it under consideration reports
seen with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Nathan Small chair, Mr Speaker
Moved OPTION We earn adoption of
a favorite committee report on
Sanibel 126 soldiers favors and
if obviously not
Opposed nay.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted him.
Gentle lady from Bern. Leo
represents J C.
Let's just be great movie. Go to
that order of business
Introduction of legislation is
so ordered
Senate floor substitute for
Senate tax, business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 146
as amended and act relating to
hospitals and acting in new
section of the Hospital Funding
Act to provide affordable,
affordable payment plans to
patients under certain
circumstances. Senate floor
substitute for Senate tax
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 146 as amended Senate floor
substitute for Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute percent
about 146, as amended by title
is referred.
To the house because a swimmer
in public affairs committee
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business. Third
reading of legislation.
Objection. It is so
Ordered.
Gentlemen from
Colfax.
Gentlemen, from Colfax, Curry
hard and quay son Miguel and
Union representative Chatfield
Are you ready on item number 12.
Yes. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Can
you get to meet to that point
that the record reflect that all
action is there for placing
house Bill 130, as amended on
final passage has been taken. It
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Has Bill 130 creates a cloud
seeding Weather modification
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker,
Will the gentleman from
Millions and millions of
counties please yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I really
appreciate it. I just had a few
questions here about your bill.
Uh, so pretty much the cloud
seeding project. Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, could you just tell
me Will this be a statewide
project or will this be
regional?
Mr Speaker. This will be
regional.
Great. Thank you so much. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Well,
there's mostly being I'm
guessing your area of the state
or which counties will this
affect Mr Speaker? This will be
in southeast New Mexico. Great.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, that is helpful. So,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, um, I see
you're appropriation here.
It's a 1.98.
Million dollars, at least from
the original. The original bill
was this included in House Bill
two.
Mr Speaker. There is $1 million
in House Bill two for this
project.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and I really
appreciate that. Do we know if
that million dollars will be
enough to to implement this new
project because I see the
original bill head much more
money, and I just want to make
sure that this would be
sufficient. Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. The original
bill was funding for two years.
So for three years. I'm sorry.
Ah, the original bill was
funding for three years, so this
ought to get us started pretty
well.
Come back and ask for some more
money if it looks like it works
well.
I hope so, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. That is very good. I
think that's important. I did
have a few questions I wrote
down here, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
regarding scientific
experimentation in the field of
artificial nuclear, Asian or
cloud seating. I guess that's is
that a synonym for cloud
seeding. It's a It's a pretty
cool term. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. I believe it is.
Hmm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Yes. So
How will we be be monitoring the
efficacy of this project? And
how are we ensure that
We're getting the results that
we're looking for. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker by measuring the
rain, See if it rains after you
after you go through the
process.
Well, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I mean, I guess the I'm getting
a science lesson here, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen on nuclear
ation, and I didn't even know
that was a word until I looked
it up. Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
something new Every day,
Gentlemen, I I guess I shouldn't
be a weatherman. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I don't think that
would be my calling. It might be
yours, though, Mr Speaker, so
I'm seeing the terms and
conditions in the bill regarding
the joint powers agreement.
Could you just go over that with
me, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. What page?
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, So I believe it
starts off at the first page
says Department of Agriculture
shall create.
And then at the bottom, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, where it
says the appropriation we're
talking about. I'm sorry on page
two and says Roosevelt Soil and
Water Conservation District and
the Department of Agriculture
shall enter into a joint powers
agreement that's on page two
looks like lines 7 to 9.
So, Mr Speaker.
I believe they'll just they will
enter into a joint powers
agreement. The money, the
funding will be through the
Mexico Department of AG
agricultural they'll, they will
be the fiscal agent. Uh, the
Cloud seeding will be conducted
through through the so on water
conservation district, and I
believe it will be in
conjunction with the Egg Science
Center so that
We can study it and see if it
works as well for us, as it does
for the other seven states
around us that do it. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and it
seems like if it's in seven
other states, that's really
that's really awesome. Can you
just tell me which which those
states are?
I can tell you that Texas does
it all the time, and I'm hoping
to get some of that.
Water that we keep having to
send the Texas kept in New
Mexico. I've Colorado, Utah,
Texas.
Kansas.
Of California.
California.
And Washington.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and that's a
good array of states. You know,
from the Western all the way to
Right around where we are So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
wondering regarding this joint
powers agreement.
That we're going to be going
into. Do we output any terms in
the bill regarding what those
agreements will say, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, or is that already
currently being spoken about Mr
Speaker?
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, One
thing I have done is written a
lot of joint powers agreements
and a joint powers agreement
sets down the obligations and
duties of each of the people
involved. So in this case, it
would say so, and so is
Is the fiscal agent therapy. The
money comes from so and so on
this, uh this person is in
trouble in charge must hire the
Before now because there's no
funding or no project.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that does
help me And so it says here in
the bill that they were going to
collect data, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Which data are we looking for?
We're just looking at it, like
rainfall like inches or what are
we looking for? With that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen would think
we would be looking at results
that it didn't make it. Rain
like said a while ago. It's just
kind of simple, you know? Did it
did it rain and at times when it
wouldn't how much residue
Is left in the water that hits
the Earth, You know they can do
it with several different
things, uh, of course of most
most famously silver. I died,
but but that's not necessarily
what they use anymore. They
might use common table salt and
also dry ice, which is C 02.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, That is really
interesting. So how does that
work with the
Let's just say, table salt. How
do we get a result from that Mr
Speaker that into the cloud.
By a rocket or by an aircraft.
And water droplets form on those
Nuclei and and they form a
Nuclei and and they form little
ice crystals.
And the ice crystals get they
pick up more water. They get
bigger until they get too heavy
to be held up.
By the cloud. Then they fall
towards the earth. Then they
melt and they fall as right.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I feel like I'm in
science class again. I love
this.
How? I always liked science. Me
too, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So
we spoke about rockets and
aircraft. What is the most
common use?
To to get this
Can completed. I guess Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, is it
Rockets? What kind of rockets?
Are we talking, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I am told
that what they uses regular
flares that are attached to the
wing of a plane.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Is that the most
common way to do this? Or is
there any other forms of
injection? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen?
Type of work were doing Yes,
that's the most common but if
you do it in the mountains, they
will use a rocket launched type
of, of, uh
Whatever, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
the updraft carries it on up
into the cloud. If you're if
you're up there at that
elevation in the mountains
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and I appreciate
that. And I appreciate Mr. Is it
Charlie? Marcus over there? I
believe.
Is that correct, Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker. My my expert
witnesses. Charlie Marcus. He
has all the answers. Clouds.
Sitting expert did not know
that.
Super Cool, Mr. Speaker, You
learn something new every day.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, So I
see in your bill. We're talking
about current and evolving
scientific methods. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, we spoke
about those rockets and then
other things with the aircraft.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, what
are the evolving?
Ways that we're doing this now,
Mr. Speaker, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, to my knowledge.
They used to do it with silver.
I died. Then they moved to a dry
ice and now
Common table salt so
So any of the three can be used,
But I think it's time goes
along. They realized that they
don't just have one choice.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
And so with this
Let's just say common table
Salt. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is
that more cost effective that
way, And is it as
Does it work as well as dry ice?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't I
really don't know as far as how
effective any of it is. I think
there's less people.
Opposed to salt in there is
Silver iodide.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I've
never gone to an anti salt
protest myself. So I I'm pretty
sure you're correct on that Mr
Speaker.
Gentlemen, so
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. We talked
about
Here on Page two line 11
evidence based
Weather modification Destruction
project. I'm sorry Demonstration
projects. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, how are we basing
this on evidence? What evidence?
are we looking for? Other than
just does it rain?
So, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
have one correction to make the
the salty uses sodium
silver. I died Sodium chloride
or potassium chloride.
And, uh, please, Retweet. Repeat
the last question. I'll
Run at it hard. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. So that does
actually I'll repeat my
question after because you just
gave me another question, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Potassium chloride. What is that
Most commonly used as where do
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Ah!
For a point. I know it's used to
make rain crowds. Rain, uh,
Representative Pedigree says
that used for Salt Lake and the
Lord brought art increase your
blood pressure.
It's an electrolyte.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. I did not know that I
will have to check the
ingredients on my electrolyte
formula. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
So
Continuing on Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we were talking about
Current or we're talking about
evidence based weather
modification demonstrations Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, other than
just just how much does it rain
extra because of our cloud
seeding.
What other evidence are we
looking for? And what will make
this project effective other
than just rain, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
we're trying to look at the
residue that's left when it does
rain. You know what? What is the
percentage of that? Uh, salt or
or silver? I died that falls to
the ground that's traded in
trace elements in the in the
water.
Is it a Does it matter?
We think it probably doesn't
because, like I say it's being
used in many states all around
us all the time now.
But that's something we want to
look at. And we want to see what
the results are.
The egg science centers are
Overseen by Dr at level.
Professors that will know a lot
more about what to look for than
I do. But
But that's some of the things
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and currently I know
we talked about Texas and a
couple other states. Are we
currently benefiting from
current cloud seeding in states
like Texas? Is it pushing over
somewhat to the state of New
Mexico? And if so, how do we
know that that is also not
included in our just basic
rainwater? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Whether in the United States of
America travels from the west to
the east.
Sometimes from the southwest to
the Northeast.
And so whoever seeds the most
upstream of the weather gets a
rain right, So it's going right
over the top of us and being
delivered into Texas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. So pretty much. Let's
just say something starts in
California works its way
eastward toward New Mexico.
That would be included in cloud
seeding that we are benefiting
from currently. Correct, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
it they're going to see it at a
point where they think it's
going to rain in California. If
they're going to spend the
money, they want to get the
moisture.
Some of these states Sita in the
mountains.
And that increases their
snowpack, which would matter to
New Mexico a lot, but
I don't think we currently
benefit from California. They
They see that the point where
they intend for that water to
fall on their state.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
That does help me a lot, and I'm
seeing here on Page two line.
15. We're talking about all
water derived as a result of
cloud seeding shall be
considered a part of the natural
water supply. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm just wondering,
how do we How do we
differentiate what's in the
current natural water supply
With what? We've cloud seated
because it says all of this will
be pretty much included in one
part, so to speak.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, first
off I was just told that we we
see the clouds 85 miles ahead of
where we want to see the
rainfall. But secondly, the what
That means is that that water is
not differentiated for
For purposes of the state
engineer and our state water
laws. It's just considered
natural rainwater that fell out
sky. In other words, I can't say
that. Okay, I see the clouds so
I own 2500 more acres feet than
I did last year. I can't say
that it's just
It goes by the same laws as any
other water in the state of New
Mexico. So that's what that
means, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. That helps me a lot
regarding that. And then Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen we're talking
about on page two line. 19 shall
be administered and distributed
to users in accordance with
existing water. Right. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, we said it
would be in the southeastern
part of the state who directly
whose water rights are these
going to benefit Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, do we know
So
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, State of
New Mexico.
Lives under the doctrine of
prior preparation of prior
appropriation. First in time,
first in line and so whoever
this waterfalls on whatever
watershed it falls in, it will
be appropriated, just like all
the other water in New Mexico.
In order that it was that person
put water to beneficial use.
On that stream system.
And in order.
Of seniority.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
that that is helpful. I suppose
that would make sense right
where it's raining, where
they're benefiting from it.
That's where it goes. So, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, on the first
page of your bill, it says the
purpose of the project is to
demonstrate demonstrate the
efficacy of cloud sitting
regarding mitigating drought and
climate change. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Do we have studies on this from
other states? Because I know
there's seven other states. Do
we have any states that show
that it is reducing climate
change and reducing or
alleviating drought conditions?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we have
evidence that it increases
rainfall and therefore helps
with drought.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen that that
does help me and I would love to
see some of those studies. You
know, this is really getting.
I'm really getting interested in
this bill. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, right as I'm reading
along with this, so, Mr Speaker,
gentleman, you know, I I get
that we're trying to get the
rainwater from cloud seeding
from different chemicals, Which
is good, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I'm just wondering, Do we have
any concerns regarding
Uh, potential.
Ill effects to individuals. And
if so, is there any kind of
provisions in the bill too?
To secure the state from
litigation. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Permitting for this project is
overseen by the Interstate
Stream Commission, and they have
a whole litany of rules,
regulations and
Things that you must abide by
before you can do this.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, you said the
Interstate Stream Stream
commission.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. So
interstate is a is a working
with other states as well Or is
that just in New Mexico? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the Interstates
Stream Commission negotiates all
the compact with Colorado.
With Texas.
And, uh,
He had to in the Arizona. It, uh
And they only license in New
Mexico, so they basically are in
control of all water flowing
into or out of our state.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. So I guess my
question would then be. Let's
just say you had a rocket fly
over and dump stuff into the
clouds.
And it rained and let's just say
the rocket hit. Let's just say a
My house. For example, Mr
Speaker. I hope that never
happens. But if it did, would I
sue the interstate stream
Commissioner, would I say the
state because they're the ones
that put this project forward
Who would be the individual that
would be liable, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen or entity, Mr Speaker.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, you
would see you would sue the
operator of the Cloud seeding
program for it in your house.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. And who
the individual be? Would they be
affiliated with the school?
Or someone else, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, it
might be the university and this
so conservation district. Okay,
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think it probably a
lawyer would answer that better
than a cowboy. So, uh, I think I
think
But that's a couple of
Entities that come to my mind.
Also, maybe the contractor that
did the work
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Yeah, I I'm not a
lawyer, either, so I will leave
it up to the lawyers to figure
that out. But, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I was just curious
about that. And then I guess
here on Page three. We talk
about the report annually.
That we're going to give out to
the appropriate interim
committee. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, do we have an idea of
which committee will be looking
at that? Mr Speaker? Gentlemen,
I would say that probably the
LFC because if they if there's
more funding requested, we don't
need to know if it was safe,
effective and worthwhile.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, and then I see on the
top of Page three. Here, it says
established forms and criteria
for reporting data and record
keeping. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
How long are we going to keep
these records and who will be
the records? Custodian? Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, for as
long as there is cloud seeding
activity, I would expect the X
Science center would be the
Coast custodian, but that has
not that will be established in
the
We got the custodian would be
New Mexico State University.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen. So I guess
if I wanted to put a request
forward, I would just go to the
New Mexico State University's
records custodian and hopefully
they wouldn't be able to provide
me with that information. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
I'm being told AG extension
would be the place to put that
upper request in because they
oversee the X Science Center.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, that is helpful for
me.
Just to understand where these
records are going and who's
who's looking at him. So and
then, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
says the final report goes to
the governor and Legislature
making recommendations for
improvements.
Two and the necessary necessity
of continuing the cloud seeding
project. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I believe we said that this
would go through 2026. Is that
what we establish Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, or is it going to be
2027 as the bill says.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we'll go
as long as we have money to go.
Good answer, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, so that that helps me
a lot. I think this is a really
interesting program and
You know, I don't sit on any
committees that heard this bill,
but I'm very interested in cloud
seeding now or nuclear tied or
whatever. Whatever. We're
calling it, Mr Speaker, So thank
you for the answers, and I will
support your bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
There is further to beat your
lady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with it.
Gentlemen, from Colfax, Um,
yield. Mr Speaker. You
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Um
I'd rather have enjoyed learning
a little bit more doing a little
little bit more research on the
matter of cloud sitting and
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
The first experiment took place
in 1946 in New York and
mountains up in New York.
Where they experimented with dry
eyes.
And found and concluded that
yes, this this technique
absolutely works.
And later through those
experiments, and that the cycle
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, they
found that
Um silver died was the best
molecule or best substance to
use for cloud seeding.
Mr. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Um
But these were experiments and
then later into the 19 sixties
and seventies.
They found that they used they
wanted to use the dry ice and
this technique to, um alleviate
hurricanes from devastating
coastal areas in the United
States.
Um
They
Again. All this is still very
experimental.
Um, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, what
part of the sort The cloud
seeding.
That we would engagement for our
state would still be
experimental. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
think we continue to learn.
You know, hopefully, each of us
is lifelong learners, and we as
a as a as people are lifelong
learners, and I I think that
mankind exists today.
Because of our ability to adapt
to the environment. There are
many other species that did not
have that ability to adapt and
they went extinct.
And the reason that we are still
here is because we have the
ability to adapt to our
environment. So one of the
things that we need to survive
as water.
One of the things that we need
to grow food is water.
So our ability to adapt
Is still alive and well, and
this is part of it, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. I agree with
you, I think through the through
science and technology and
experimenting and learning all
we can we make the best
decisions. We have to make those
adapt ations.
And continue to survive.
Um, but we are not the only ones
that share this planet and need
to survive and water is I would
agree with you and the most
precious
Um, of things that we need to
survive in and how we use it.
Um, will depend on some of the
things we're going to do, and
this is part of that discussion.
Um, but we as humans, Mr
Speaker.
Have been and are the main cause
for
The cause. For what? We know why
we're looking at this type of
technology, and that's the
climate crisis that we are
facing.
And the increase in numbers and
days in the temperature rising
of our earth. So I think that
yes, we are looking for
solutions. Yes, I commend us for
continuing those efforts.
And I just I would just like to
ask what what surrounding
states? Mr Speaker are
participating in cloud sitting
around New Mexico. What other
states around New Mexico because
this would be a regionalization
type of project.
If I'm not mistaken, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
this particular project only
would be in southeastern New
Mexico.
There are other states that we
just talked about Texas,
California, Uh, Colorado.
Utah Washington North North
Dakota, South Dakota.
Um, all the way West and
And all the way West except
Idaho.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. The dry
belt section of the US In other
words, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
Want water? Mr. Speaker? Yes, Mr
Speaker.
Yeah. You know, I feel like I
want to see what those results
are. Mr Speaker. I think that
this is
This would be experimental. If
I'm not mistaken and seeing how
this is going to work in our
climate specifically to our
state, is that correct? Mr
Speaker, speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady
Absolutely See how it works
here. They've done it in Texas
for 25 years. We've done it
twice before in New Mexico, But
I don't think the records were
Kept that well. And so nowadays
we use Doppler radar and many
other
Modern technologies that
We have adapted to
Yeah. So
Hopefully, that will help us get
a little stronger record of how
we affected.
That rainfall Thank you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. And when we
implement this experiment and
that part of our state, are we
going to notify those residents
and all those that would be, um
Affected by by this change in in
the cloud seeding that it would
cause first, it would it would
change the weather patterns or
the cloud. Um
The rainfall, the water the yes
it would cause change. How are
we going to notify those? Those
people that live in that part of
the state? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, I'm going to leave that up
to the salt Water Conservation
district That's conducting the
experiment. But there is a long
Um, licensing process. It has to
go through with the Interstate
Stream Commission. So not just
gonna wake up one morning and
have that have that program. Uh,
going on? It takes a little
while.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Well, there
will be public and interaction.
public comment, participation
and making this these decisions
in understanding what their what
to expect when this takes place,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Yes,
there will and they know, notify
all the public in those areas.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. I really do
appreciate that answer. I didn't
get to ask that in our committee
and I think it's really
important, really important part
of this in part of us looking
for types of solutions. But Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, how
effective or has this been and
others in the other states where
this is taking place, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
As far as like the measure of
Of the rainfall or precipitation
if you will.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady 15
to 20% more rainfall.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. And where is that
concentrated? Do they try to, um
really?
Have that, uh, that affect or
have the precipitation in
certain regions like mountainous
regions, so that then it has the
ability to move down and create
the water streams and another
person precipitation that's
needed, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, this
particular project will be on
the eastern Plains in New
Mexico. But many states do it in
the mountainous region because
instead of following his
rainfall and
It falls as snow and that
increases their snowpack, so it
gives them a bigger supply of
water for the rest of the year.
If you think about increasing
the snowpack in New Mexico by
20%, that makes a lot of
difference.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
El Nino has taken care of that
this year and grateful for all
the snow that we've been
receiving.
Um, one question I did come up
with as well or one thing that I
found through just reading
Scientific America, another
journals. Um, is it
The efficacy of this isn't
actually determined yet is that
Is that why we still need to to
see how it's going to work out
in the plains of New Mexico? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady Doppler
radar has increased the ability
to measure
And that's why we're doing it
through the Egg Science Center
so that we can
Understand better.
Mr Speaker, So those are better
measures through the Doppler
system.
The more accurate and to the red
the like, say, maybe the water
data that we are collecting are
want to contribute more to is
that actually going to help as
well? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. The
Doppler radar will help will
make more accurate measurements.
And what was the last part of
the question?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the water
data act that we have in place.
Is that going to help or they
can be able to participate in
taking measures as well. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. The
Water Data Act seeks to store
all the information that we have
about water across the state of
New Mexico, whether it be above
ground below ground or in the
sky into a single place
accessible at your home
computer.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. And thank you, Mr
Gentleman for all your work that
you do, and um, in the area of
waterworks and water data,
water, um, science and
Everything that you have
contributed to our state for us
to understand and to actually
get better information for our
resource that we so greatly
needs So
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, the
briefly spoke about the residue
that would be used. If we use
the, um I guess any of these
salt type substances
Can you
Can you comment or do you know
how those those residues will be
measured? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
They in all the states they've
tested. It's such an
insignificant amount that they
can't find it.
They can't detect it.
And by the way, potassium
Chloride.
Is a fertilizer, so it just
makes the grass even greener.
This is speaking gentlemen.
Thank you, Um
Okay?
Um, Mike, I think my concern is
with perhaps in making sure that
we're going to be taking
measures maybe from the species
that would be if other species,
animals and plants to have those
been measured. I would be
concerned about them as well
Because silver is a heavy metal.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
And
If that's the substances that
we're going to be using,
primarily because it has the
most efficacy, would we
Medium be taking those measures
of life, whether it be plant
life or animal life in those
areas where we're going to be
measured, measuring the cloud
sitting
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Um
As we just said it was. The
amount was so insignificant that
it was undetectable and all
those things already exist. I
mean, they're already and in the
soil and the water in the
They're all around us. And Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, understood
that they already they already
exist in
And the amount they do, but in
concentration, which I would
predict through this cloud
seeding would then change those
those amounts and they would,
there could be perhaps more
concentrations of those
substances.
And then there could be
You know, consequences to that,
and I'm just trying to
understand through this model
and through the these
experiments that were going to
be reducing the
We're maybe done in other
states. Did they take a an
account through those animals?
And plant life. Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
there has been no studies that
show any significant impact. The
concentration is so negligible.
It's barely detectable.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Thank
you, Um
Again. I commend you again for
looking towards doing something
like this, but I really want to
see what's going to come of
this and I'm glad that it's
isolated, and I'm glad that we
are going to be taking.
As measures and I'd be really
interested in and understanding
and knowing more about how we're
going to how they are accounting
or taking measures of these
residues in these substances
that they're going to be using
and how they could
Affect. Um, First of all the the
life of animals and plants and
others around in that area
before we
Conduct a full range and use
more of these substances that in
concentrations can cause
problems. Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
so look forward to catching up,
and I'm really glad that there's
going to be public inputs and
and, um I will probably have
some more discussion about this
with you. As as time goes on, as
this to me is still a
scientific, um
Experiment. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Lady. There's further debate.
Your lady from Chavez
representatives l
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Well, the gentleman from Colfax
Curry Harding. Quest San Miguel
and Union your please, Mr.
Speaker. I yield
Mr Speaker. In other questions
that have been asked to you said
that they often do the seating
over the mountains and whenever
In my particular area of the
state, which is
The mountains down there up in
this Sierra Blanca area. So
whenever the those clouds are
seated up there, they have tried
it up there. What the what
happens up there is this water
slowly seeps in and it helps
replenish the aquifer not just
up in the red dosa area, but all
the way down in the paint is
fairly
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Has this been successful in our
state because it has been tried
before.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady the
folks in the mountains want
this? I'll do my level best to
bring it to him to. As far as I
know most of the times Well, I
know it's been tried twice
before, and I believe both times
it was in the southeastern part
of the state. To my knowledge.
That's
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, You're
exactly right. It was it was
done in the southeastern part of
the state and Mr Speaker. I do
want to point out to the members
of the house that it does take a
special cloud to be seated to
Mr Speaker. I believe it's a
cuma Cumulus cloud. It's a young
thunderstorm.
That's all I had to say. Method.
Well, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, you
got it pretty damn close. It is
the thunderstorm cloud is what
it is accumulating them. I can't
say it either. But Mr Speaker,
it does take that type of cloud
to produce that affects that we
are looking to get out of what
your person for wanting to try
here. The state of New Mexico.
Mr Speaker. This has been going
on since the 19 forties, and
there's been lots of research
done by college Station, Texas.
A doctor Daniel Martin is one
that's done a lot of research on
this.
And it does increase our chances
for rain. Ladies and gentlemen,
by about
Uh, 20 to 25% and to me. You
know what that's pretty dang
good odds.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Mexicans like their chili.
And that chili does take take
water every three days.
To get a good, healthy chili.
Mr Speaker. I've seen it too
many times down in my particular
area. We are known for our green
chili to okay we do raise it.
Excellent Green Chili.
Which is shipped over the hatch,
by the way.
It is so and it also goes down
to Louisiana as well. And you
don't need to speak on this
representative.
Because our chili does go over
there.
I've seen it happen many times
whenever our drought has hit in
the middle of a crop season, and
we see our small grains wither.
We see our chili crop whether we
see the corn that absolutely
just
Goes like this and it dies.
And if we had the ability to go
in there and see the clouds to
save our crops to replenish our
aquifers to get our rivers
running again, potentially to be
able to grow grass out in the
past, you're not only for
livestock, but for a wildlife as
well. I see it nothing more than
just a benefit to the state as a
whole.
You. We were talking in the
Um, Egg Committee.
The type of aircraft that it
would take. And it is the crop
dusting plane. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is that correct?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Lady?
Yes.
And Mr Speaker. These crop
dusters. I always call him that
because that's basically what
they do, but they are able to
disperse the the silver iodide,
the calcium chloride sodium
chloride.
Where it is needed at a certain
time to get the effects that
we're needing. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes,
it is.
Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen in Mexico today.
We have more than 24,000 farms.
And we have 40 million acres of
land in our state.
And Mr Speaker.
We have been in a drought in our
area for way way too long.
And the benefits of this, But,
uh, whenever we get more than an
inter brain, Mr Speaker, it's a
million dollar rain.
And and it makes a difference
whenever there's a farmer or
rancher out there that is trying
to pay back a bank loan.
This can make them or break
them.
And that that is huge folks,
Because, like I've told you all
before we're all involved in
agriculture because we all eat
Mr Speaker.
I can see this as a possible
boon to our food supply chain.
Isn't that correct? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Absolutely Alfalfa,
pecans, Chili tomatoes, cabbage
lettuce. We grow a lots of food
in New Mexico. We have a lot of
wildlife. That depends on water.
We have lakes that people go
fishing and they recreate in
It will be a boon to our tourist
industry or farms or ranches in
all the citizens of New Mexico.
I am told by my expert that we
have a meteorologist on the
ground deciding when is the
perfect time to see that cloud.
Mr Speaker. That's what it's
going to take to be successful
in this endeavor that we're
going to try right here. And
like I said it has been tried
tight, tried in the state of New
Mexico. I know it was successful
One time over the Reduce area if
memory serves me, right.
Mr C as speaker. I know that
whenever there was a question
and answer period in the house
at committee, there was one
concern from one person.
But all of these agents that are
going to be used in the process
of seeding declares they're all
found. Naturally. Isn't that
correct? Mr Speaker? General
Lady that is true.
So some of the myths that are
out there are totally unfounded.
They are totally unfounded.
It will not harm animals. It
will not harm the vegetation in
our land, and it's nothing but a
benefit, but we have to make
sure that those conditions are
right to be able to get to
produce what we are needed
needing.
Our say.
To see the benefits from this,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
First mother question here.
Have other countries in the
world tried this before.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
Mr Speaker, I would go ahead and
name him. But before I ask that
question, I always know the
answer to it. So there's at
least five different countries
in the world that have done this
before, and it has changed their
weather pattern. They do see
more rain where it's needed, and
I think it can be nothing but a
bonus whenever we have the
states surrounding us that are
doing this, and they're getting
remarkable results from it.
I think it's time that we do go
to
Getting this done. Where?
We're all of our citizens of the
state can benefit because it
does fill up our rivers which go
to our lakes, which also helps
us be in compliance with the
state of Texas as well. We have
seen the Pecos River actually
dry up and we were at running at
risk because
The Endangered Species Act.
If we're able to replenish our
streams and our rivers through
this process, help are
If we're able to replenish our
streams and our rivers through
this process, help our pastor.
Let's help our forest that the
U. S. Forest Service have
decided they're going to burn
down.
It's nothing but a bonus to all
of us, right? As far as I'm
concerned, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, like I said, before,
all of these products that
That we are going to be using
for this experience are found
naturally. And to me, that's
very, very important. I don't
want chemicals in our water. I
don't want chemicals on our
ground.
But these are all natural
formed.
Which makes it didn't even
better.
Accomplishment, in my opinion,
so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I would like to know when this
is going to be done. I would
love to be able to go up to the
Roosevelt County area and and
see the results of what actually
takes place. So I appreciate you
bringing this bill forward.
It was
It's about a bonus for all of us
here. Thank you very much for
your responses.
Thank you, dear lady. There is
further debate generated from
earlier presented. Hochman be
healed. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Does the gentleman and my friend
from all those counties yield
Mr Speaker. I yield
Gentlemen, I just have one quick
question for you.
After the seating. Do the aliens
come? How long after the seating
to the aliens show up.
Mr Speaker. I think they ought
to give us at least three days.
Good to know general, gentlemen
and friends from many counties
three days is just enough time
to get ready for the invasion.
Thank you very much.
Just kidding. Signal further
debate. Gentlemen too close.
Mr Speaker.
This bill.
Just help me Mexico get a
A little more rain.
And would help our egg industry.
It would help all new Mexicans
have a little more water.
And with that I move that house
Bill.
130 do not pass that they were
going to say this bill is going
to make it rain.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 130 as amended.
30 seconds.
Vote clock.
Okay. The vote.
Is now closed. Everybody voted.
What is not closed by a vote of
61 in the affirmative, six of
the negative House Bill House,
Bill 130, as amended has really
passed this house.
Generated from burning Leo.
The Lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that the house concurrent Senate
amendments minute. We're not in
that order business yet.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
concurrence. Objection is
ordered.
Folks, we have a concurrence
calendar number one that has
been passed out. We are going to
go to that item next and then
after this, we'll continue with
our third reading calendar.
Let's go to the generator from
Santa Fair, Senator Romero on
concurrence. Thank you, Mr
Speaker of the House, Concurrent
Senate amendments to House Bill
129.
Gentle lady to explain the
amendments. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. The Senate made a few
amendments regarding the some
exceptions for the waiting
period, which include buyer who
holds a valid federal firearms
license. A valid concealed
handgun carry license, Um, law
enforcement agency is exempt
from the seven day waiting
period as well as two law
enforcement officers.
And of course, what was already
there immediate family members.
In addition, Mr Speaker, um
The firearm after seven days in
a background check has not come
back as verified, um, provides a
20 day waiting period before
that firearm may be handed over
to the buyer. Those are the
changes. Mr Speaker. Is there a
debate? There is debate as a
reminder to the body. We are
limiting our debate to the
amendments placed on by the
Senate.
First on the list is a generally
from Bernalillo and Torrance.
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, and I asked for a
roll call vote on this
concurrence,
Liz noted.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
for your mind. I will stick on
just the amendments from the
Senate side. Mr. Speaker Will
the general lady from
Santa Fe, Right, please yield
yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you. So I have a question
here on
Page two.
So we struck out if the required
federal instant background check
has been completed within 30
days, the seller may transfer
the farm to the buyer to if the
required federal instant
background check. It's not been
completed within 20 days, a
seller may transfer the firearm
to the buyer. What was the basis
for changing from 30 Days to 20
days, and why?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Ladies, So the 20 Day period
allows us to follow federal law
understanding that there is a
laudable time of 30 days with a
background check provided this
makes sure that after the seven
day period we fall into the 20
Day period, we're nowhere close.
We give ourselves three days to
reach 30 days in which case
we've we fall in line with
federal law.
And constitutional law as well.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Is
this anything based on science?
Because I know before we talked
about that we need certain
periods of time to make sense
with that scientific data that
we had presented the other
article. So this has nothing to
do with the sciences is just
Because we want to make sure
that that person and still get
the firearm within 20 days
because 30 days is too long. Is
that what I'm understanding Mr
Speaker and gentle lady Mr
Speaker, General Lady, this is
regarding the federal background
check process, so we have a
mandatory waiting period of
seven days. That's already um,
in the law that was passed by
this house with this provision
does is for those that have not
received a background check
verifiably by the next system,
They now fall into the second
tier, which is this 20 day
category.
If, after 20 days, they still
have not received word from the
next system.
That federal firearms dealer may
hand over that, um, firearm at
this time at that time, madam,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
right, Mr Speaker, and generally
that's called an open status
because when you go to buy a
farmer either instantaneous,
which I think 95% of them are
some are delayed for a little
bit of extra, which is 3 to 7
days afterwards, and then
there's open status.
So what you're talking about
cause I'm looking on the ATF
website. So the open status are
you aware Mr Speaker generally
did that There's no extra
checking on people during that
time period.
I'm aware of Madam Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Um
are we going to ask the state or
anybody since we're concerned
about making sure that firearms
have this cooling off period? We
don't give to people with mental
health.
Issues or mental health crisis
Will the state be doing a mental
health check? Or if not, why?
Mr Speaker, General lady, um,
there again, It's up to the
federal firearms dealer to hand
that firearm over after that 20
day period. Um, we don't have a
system with which that there is
a verifiable way to deem that
person could or could not have
passed the background check. I
am troubled to learn that, but
nevertheless, Mr Speaker
General lady. This gets us in
line with both constitutional
law and state law.
Mr Speaker in General lady,
There comes a rub, right?
Because if this whole thing was
based on science, and we're
saying that the science needs to
dictate how we make these dates
were doing it to make sure
within that 30 Day period
From what I know from hanging
out with people in the ATF
hanging, I'm sorry and FLS and
hanging out in their stores.
Um, you're now saying
To them.
Which I'm going to get to in a
minute. You're saying to them
that they can use their
discretion, but there's nothing
from what I'm understanding in
state law that says word because
it is not doing anything
further. It's just in a open
status and stay there forever.
And that's why I said in the
beginning, it was always the
ATF's issue in this. So what
you're saying is we're not going
to have a mental health check.
So somebody still mental health
crisis could get that firearm.
Is that what I'm understanding
Mr Speaker, and generally Mr
Speaker, General lady that just
regarding those who haven't who
cannot pass a background check
or have not received word back
if they are flagged as not being
able to pass that they will not
receive that firearm within the
seven or 20 Day period, they
follow into this third tier, and
they still have not received
back.
Word whether or not they are
passed or fail, then, yes.
current law and current federal
law provides that you are you
may hand over that firearm to
that person who may not be able
to pass that background check.
Mr Speaker. Generally, that was
kind of the point. I'm getting
too because from being there
Um
Like I said, Most of these are
instant boom. They get approved.
They do the background check.
They're approved. They can pick
up the firearms. So now we're
saying they have to wait seven
days first was 14 out seven.
Which I went through and read in
the article doesn't the science
based article does not say
As a matter of fact what it does
say if you look at the table in
that article, um
On the waiting periods. It
actually says Table three.
That
There is no reduction and
suicide.
It does talk about a slight
reduction.
But it doesn't talk that there's
any reduction suicide in that
actual table.
As a matter of fact. It also
says that any suicide that
happened are not prevented.
They're just
You wait through the period and
in certain states, there's
uptick because once they can get
the firearm, they will go ahead
and commit suicide. If that's
what I want to do, But
The table suggests that
If people are going to kill
themselves, and they can't get a
firearm, those numbers are
offset so the suicide is really
non applicable. Based on the
article that you brought up
earlier when I went, and that's
what I was busily reading
earlier and going through there.
So we have to kind of take the
suicide issue off there. And
then we look at people they're
doing homicides.
People to do the homicides
during the rand study says that
they're getting them illegally
on the black market.
So against goes back to the
science says
For Rand.
This is not helpful, including
this. The evidence that you gave
us
So, Mr Speaker, General lady, So
we went from a seven day to the
14th 14th sandwich. You can't
talk about that. But
What I'm concerned about.
Is that we're going from 30
days.
To 20 days.
With no scientific evidence or
any backing to justify the
original premise of this whole
thing, which is that people
won't commit murders and they
won't kill themselves. But then
when I go and look at the
research, it says there's no
effect on suicides and people
They're going to commit
homicides or getting them from
the black market.
So my problem is, we have a
number again pulled out that has
no scientific data.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, it says here, also on Page
two.
We struck out the farm shall
remain in the custody of the
seller during the entirety of
this waiting period, and the
farm shall remain in the custody
of the seller.
Or the federal firearms licensee
performing
The instant background check.
So to me, What I see is a
loophole.
If I wanted to do so, I'm
looking my notes if I wanted to
do a private sale
Technically, I could just go and
get the background check. They
passed instantly and selling the
parking lot. Isn't that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. That's
not correct. You are meant to
make sure that every single
person in new Mexico goes
through a background check. And
through this law, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, they would have to
wait a seven day period.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. My My
whole point is if I'm going to
sell a firearm
I go to the F F L
Firearms shall remain in the
custody of the seller, meaning
the private cellar correct.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. That's
correct. That was what was
already proposed by the house.
Okay, so then that means if the
loophole is if I want to sell my
firearm, I could go and pretend
like I'm being authentic. Do the
background check comes back
instant. Technically could
there's no nothing to really
stop me from selling it from
that person out in the parking
lot. Isn't that correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, not
unless you would want to break
the law if should this become
law?
Mr Speaker and young lady. What
would the violation of that be
if that seller went and sold
that to the person out in the
parking lot?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, they
would still be subject to the
laws of New Mexico.
Mr Speaker, Dental lady. What
I'm getting at is that it's a
huge loophole. Um, what I see in
this I see. I can go and sell
that. Get that f f l check and
technically selling the parking
lot. Nobody'd be the wiser
unless somebody turned you in.
But if two people are doing it
legal activity
I seriously doubt that those
people are going to turn each
other analysts maybe one was a
criminal and they got picked up.
But, um
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
My concern is on the 2020 days
with that 80 f. Nobody's doing
anything. There's no mental
checks.
We're going to still turn that
firearm over. Is there anything
in here? That
Uh, because we put
That they can surrender there
Anything in there about the
liability to the FLS if they
surrender in 20 days, and that
somebody does something with
that firearm? Is there anything
to warrant that the F F L s
won't be damaged civilly in
this Mr Speaker Gentilini, Mr
Speaker, General Lady again in
concordance with federal law
that F f L has 30 days to wait
to receive a background check.
That's why, with our waiting
period, the seven day period is
mandatory subject to New Mexico
law this now within the extended
period up to 20 days is now
ensuring that were in line with
federal law providing up to 30
days for that background check
to come back. And so this just
gets us all in accordance with
that There's no liability on the
Uh, um, Federal on the F F l. Um
nor would there be should they
decide not to have that over
either Mr Speaker down later.
Other other states that do this
or did the ATF have any input in
this 20 Day versus 30 Day?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I'm
not familiar with other states
and how they run through this
process this I'm just defining
for New Mexico's process. Mr
Speaker. Generally there again
is a problem because maybe
there's a specific reason that
the ATF put that 30 Day period
and we're making it 20 Day
period.
So Mr Speaker and led when we go
into page four, you removed
The inspection upon request of
law enforcement. Why was that
removed out on the Senate side?
Mr Speaker, General lady that
again. This is a Senate
provisions. They wanted to make
sure that there was no
exceptions and clarify that they
didn't want to have, um, that
request involved in the bill.
So if I remember quickly, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, That was,
um
An issue that we want to have
that that law enforcement could
go in to inspect those records,
So that's no longer anything
that's going to happen. Lawn
Force mint having any rights to
go in there and look at any kind
of logs and any type of
registry is that correct, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, General Lady. It's my
understanding that under current
law, law enforcement can still
um
Inspect records upon request
and, of course, upon having a
warrant.
Mr Speaker generally and so on
Page four.
It says the provisions of this
section do not apply to the sell
the farm between immediate
family members, and then I say
it was moved down there.
But I have a question about
that, because there's the
provisions of this section do
not apply the sale of the
firearm.
Between immediate family
members. So how do we know that
family member doesn't want to
kill themselves or kill someone
else?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, This
is just an exception. Um, we
talked about this on the House
chamber since we passed this
bill, Um, with that exception
already in there for the
convenience of those in between
family members or those making
transactions between family
members, that's why they were
exempted.
Mr Speaker. Gently. I'm talking
about in the Senate. They
removed that and it was
rewritten into there.
So this is a new section for the
Senate.
So why is it that we
Why would we want to sell or do
a transaction of a firearm?
To somebody who's in a family
member.
Who is maybe mentally unstable
should not have it. Why are they
exempt from the seven day
cooling off period? Mr Speaker,
General Lady. That's a great
question. You know we again this
is just for convenience between
family members. If someone is in
a crisis, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. We would recommend perhaps
just doing the right thing in
that situation and perhaps going
through the background check or
wrecking, recommending that
between family members is not
exempt from this. You would
still be able to
Potentially go in and have that
background check done if there
was a concern there, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, it doesn't
mandated. However, you would
still be able to do that. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I can't
imagine how horrifying that
would be. For someone who's a
survivor of domestic violence.
And I'm gonna tell you why.
I am a survivor. Domestic
violence and I've had people
laughing like Oh, how could you
get beat up? Well, he was a
world champion heavyweight
champion Kickboxer. So, yeah, he
was able to beat me up and also
hold me at knifepoint kidnapped.
And we also have Carol Bowen in
New Jersey, who was waiting to
get a farm and couldn't get one.
And I can't and she ended up
packed up to death. So I cannot
imagine this playing out well,
and here's why.
You have your son? You think
he's a great guy. You see this
wonderful side of him. He's
awesome.
The firearm goes to him, and he
goes out and kills his
girlfriend and wife. How do we
know?
Because there's no cooling off
period that that person is not
going to go and kill their
girlfriend or kill themselves
because they're exempt from the
seven day cooling off period.
How do those particular tribe of
people? Why are they exempt?
Because what you're saying is
that Mr Speaker, generally there
somehow exempt their magical
just because their family
members that they're good and
pure and they're not going to go
out and kill themselves or other
people. That's why I'm trying to
get out with this. Mr. Speaker
Delaney, Mr. Speaker, General,
Ladies. So again, there are
other laws on the books and
include
That we've discussed here with
emergency protection orders and
others where it comes to
firearms that may help between
immediate family members and
again if somebody's needing a
firearm in a in a situation with
which they could do harm to
themselves or others.
This does not prohibit them
from, um than being part of
this. They can still go in for a
background check, but in between
immediate family members,
they're exempt under the seven
day waiting period for a sale
transaction. Mr Speaker, General
Lady. We just had an incident. I
believe it's a real reaction
where men was under a red flag,
and he still had 10 firearms and
got into a shootout with law
enforcement and ended up I
believe, killing himself at the
end.
So I hate to tell you but
Um
I was going to use represent
block. We have a stalker that
wants to kill both of us. And if
you could red flag him all day
long, And if he's got 20 guns,
and he turns in one that does
absolutely no good if your
survivor domestic violence and
you do a red flag and get a
restraining order, Carol Bowen
was killed in New Jersey with a
restraint order. She was waiting
30 days to get her firearm and
he killed her.
Because she couldn't get away to
defend herself.
So this is hugely problematic
for me because
You know again, I go back to Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady. This is
your mild mannered uncle or son
or someone.
And you're saying that they are
exempt.
From the seven day cooling down
period.
But yet
Everybody else.
It applies to I can't wrap my
head around that logic, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
I'm gonna if I may fair
question, but also, you know, as
legislation moves through the
process, I think several
concessions and compromises are
made and this is one of them so
I would agree with you, but
that's what it is. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, And I think you
understand what I'm trying to
get at. If the whole point of
this
Is everyone is on a level
playing ground.
We want the goal for the goal
for the bill.
Is that we believe people
Everybody needs this seven day
cooling off period whether
you're needed or not.
The exception. Mr Speaker is
what I'm trying to say is it's
problematic because we're saying
that these people are not
Going to go out and do these
things with the firearm. So and
I pretty much hammered that
point, but that that's a
That's a big problem.
Mr Speaker generally because I
think anybody that votes for
this would feel horrible if that
ended up being transferred to
family and ended up killing
their entire family with that
weapon.
Fire. I'm sorry. Excuse me.
So, Mr Speaker and generally on
Page four
When you talk about, um
Hold on.
So if I'm understanding
correctly, I just have to go and
get an F F l and I don't have to
wait the seven days is that
correct? Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, one of
the exemptions number one is
those who hold a valid federal
firearms license, so they are
exempt from the seven day
waiting period. Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. It was that's
interesting because
Um, a lot of people I know are
trying to get their f F. L s And
when I did a mailer
There's like 789 F F L s in the
state. There's a tremendous
amount of f F l so we just made
all of them exempt.
So, Mr Speaker and General lady,
um, when you say
To a buyer that holds a valid
New Mexico concealed handgun
license.
So does that mean it's so
somebody?
Just moved here. I'm trying to
think of the other states of
reciprocity. I'm not Utah. I
think this might be one of them.
So if you come here and you get
your driver's licenses, New
Mexico But you're using a
Conceal carry that has
reciprocity to New Mexico.
Are you saying that they can't
buy the fire until they wait and
wait and wait and wait for
months to get into a concealed
carry class or is a reciprocity?
Uh, for people with a concealed
carry out of state.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
If there is verifiable
reciprocity, you are exempt from
the waiting period.
Mr Speaker generally didn't
that's also promised should have
been put in there because that
wording is not in there, it
says for a buyer who holds a
valid
Mexico concealed handgun license
pursuant to the kids, I would
have added the words reciprocity
because I had no idea reading
that that I could move here, Um
Get my license.
But then I don't have to wait.
It's it's it's not very clear.
On that. So, Mr Speaker, and
generally when you say
Um
The provisions of this section
do not apply to the sell the
firearm.
To law enforcement agencies, so
it's still
An individual lawn force. Mint
officer hold Olympic shares,
Okay, I'll let me go. The
segments between the second part
of that on fours between two and
law enforcement.
Officers.
Authorized security, a firearm.
Okay, so explain. Let's go to
that one between two and law
enforcement officers authorized
to carry a firearm.
And certified was so
Law enforcement officers can do
a private sales that when I'm
understanding, Mr Speaker and
generally
Yes, Mr Speaker General lady if
they are authorized to carry a
firearm, Okay, well, they're
certified pursuant to federal
law or the Law Enforcement
Training Act.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gently. You
have to walk me through this.
So
Two police officers.
Could do a private sale to go to
an F F L
But it individual law
enforcement with the same
Can't Is that what it says above
Because his law enforcement
agency but not an individual
loss and forced monsters so
They could sell to each other,
but they can't walk into the
store and buy one by themselves.
Is that what I'm getting?
That's correct, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, Lady, I
What was the reasoning for that?
Because if if they're both the
same right there, both
Law enforcement officers
authorized to carry a firearm.
They could do a private cell to
each other.
Why wouldn't it a lot? I don't
understand this change, but they
can go in
But they can't buy it from an F
F l by themselves. I can you
explain to me this logic, Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady Mr Speaker,
General Lady. There wasn't a lot
of explanation for this change.
to be fair, Mr Speaker, General
lady, Um, Nevertheless, I think
it's pretty plain language and
understanding how the
transaction would work I would
have to reverse engineer reason
as to why this over some of the
other reasons why we were a bit
smoother. About how what I think
the House proposed.
Nevertheless, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I think the plain
language answers how the
transaction would be exempt.
Mr Speaker generally understand
the plain language. I agree with
you. I just I can't wrap my head
around because it seems to me if
you're allowed to law
enforcement officers to do a
private sale, which technically
like I said earlier, but they
wouldn't do that because they'd
be upstanding citizens. They
wouldn't go selling the parking
lot, but we're saying there.
Katy's How do we charge other,
but not by from I just
That one. I'm going to have to
just
Take that for what it is because
it doesn't make any sense to me
whatsoever. Mr. Speaker in
general Lady, um
Do we have any other? Any stats
at all?
In New Mexico that show
Um and increase or decrease of
suicides or murders with this 20
day date that we have, and I
know you said you did for
constitutionality. But do we
have any research in that?
Mr Speaker, General Lady again.
The research was that we heard
talking about was that general
waiting period that cooling off
period and that time for us to
get a background check and
closing the Charleston loophole
that currently exists in New
Mexico. This second tranche of
20 days as I answered, Mr
Speaker, General Lady makes us
wait an additional 20 days
within 20 days.
To get a background check for
somebody who has not received a
response. It's not mandatory as
soon as they get that response
back that gives them a thumbs
up. They can get their firearm
within that 20 day period. If,
however, it goes past the 20
days subject to federal law,
they can still obtain that
firearm.
Well.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, so
I don't think the Senate did you
any favors with the changes they
made over there because
My other big issue, too, was
that when they were asked to
include
Survivors are domestic violence.
That's huge for me.
Because having been there
myself, I can't imagine would be
like to go in and have to wait
all that time to get a firearm
and I know
You can send your stats that
women are more likely to be
killed. Well, maybe in the
house, But not when you're by
yourself. I keep going back to
women who have been able to
protect themselves with a
firearm.
So then, excluding us survivors
of domestic violence is hugely
problematic for me when I read
the research article, everything
points to in the article that
you quoted in the first place
when the U use
And the
Statistic in their show. There's
really no effect on the suicide.
And it delays it. It doesn't
prevent it.
We have the issue of when this
is all going on. The ATF does
not do anything. There's no
extra checks. There's no mental
health check. There's nothing to
see if that person should have
that firearm at any time. Um
The RAND study where it shows
that it just delays instead of
stopping.
And the other question I have to
Madam chair and representative,
How does this So how is this
going to affect gun shows?
Because I talked to the people
who run gun shows. I don't know
if you guys been to gun shows.
When you go to a gun show,
there's some people who have
that we are the 785 people or so
with FLS, and some of them just
go to gun shows.
How does that work for them when
somebody comes in the gun show
they do the background check
they've passed.
So we're so I guess what I'm
saying. Do you see how this is
gonna be detrimental to gun
shows? Because where are they
going to keep these farms and
how are they going to log them?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady Mr
Speaker, General lady, Unless
they're exempt, they still are
subject to the seven day waiting
period.
Right, Mr Speaker. Generally,
the problem with that is that,
um
We told them that they just
needed universal background
checks and I would fix
everything. Now we're saying
there's a delay.
And I'm going to see are people
who are going to get hard hit
because those though I don't
know if you're aware those gun
shows are huge there.
2 to 3 times the size of these
buildings, so there's a lot of
people come from out of state. A
lot of people here trying to
sell different things. They all
do background checks because
I've been there and I know
there's sometimes delay, but now
we're talking seven days, so I
see that being being very hard
hitting.
For our gun shows as well.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
The research that I've been
looking at.
It is.
Less than 1% of firearms used in
a crime.
Our persist at a gun store.
They're just not they're bought
off the streets.
All of my friends have ended up
being law enforcement. Now I
hear all the time. There's guns
on the street. There's guns to
come over the border skins go
back and forth across the
border.
Um, we have an issue where if
this isn't reducing suicide, and
there's no suicide check, I just
don't understand how this
cooling off period is going to
make any difference. We also
have a bill that says
Okay? Yes.
You have to go through this
background check and wait the
seven days
With the exemption of family.
But then I kind of I don't know
why the Senate did this. It's
almost like an insult to law
enforcement like you can sell to
each other. But you can't go and
buy one exempt.
But the biggest one for me on
top of everything else. Mr.
Speaker in general lady was the
fact that they did not allow the
exemption of Survivor domestic
violence. I think if you come
in you have a restraining order.
You're scared for your life.
You're not living with this
person. You're afraid they're
going to kill you.
You don't have the opportunity
to bypass that. But yet
I can
Because I can go to my family
now and say I'm scared for my
life, So I guess I can still get
them.
But so can the person that wants
to kill me.
Because we're going to allow
family members to have that kind
of discretion.
So, Mr Speaker, Dylan, I don't
have any more questions. When
I'm trying to say is
There's no data. There's no
science and there's no research
in New Mexico to show that. Wow,
We did a task force study and
I'm coming to you,
Representative Lord to show Look
at how many we we dropped down.
In these cases.
The other problem in the
scientific research that you
presented originally was, I read
it and read it and read it and
read it.
There was nothing to show and
any correlation because they did
not. It's it's
The data is not good because
they did not include
Crime prevention.
Diversion.
Domestic violence awareness.
They did not include any of
those studies. They just said we
did this long study. We show a
slight reduction, but nothing in
suicide.
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
I think we totally missed the
mark on this. I don't think it's
going to do what you think it's
going to do and the fact that
they kind of slept, law
enforcement, the face and US
fibers of domestic violence. I
cannot support this bill. Now I
yield my time.
There is further debate The
gentleman from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker Does
General Lady from Santa Fe Yield
yield, Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Um, we went through the changes
that happened on on the Senate
side pretty quick. I think the
the previous discussion
clarified some of it for me, but
I would like
Two.
Get maybe some additional
clarification, But first Mr
Speaker in general lady during
the debate with the gentle lady,
the other generally do from
Well, is she all from burning
Leo now or she's from our
torrents as well.
Um
You had to professional
witnesses. Sit down. Could you
please introduce your witnesses,
Please? Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I
have with me Elizabeth Johnson
with the department of Public
Safety, their general counsel
and Benjamin Baker, Special
advisor to Governor Luan
Grisham.
Thank you very much. General
lady. Thank you very much.
Speaker.
With respect to that, Um
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
noticed when I look at the
original bill.
Um
I believe you were the first
signer of the document.
And I think I heard Mr Speaker
and General Lady that the
changes that came back over
didn't come with a whole lot of
description. And I'm
Kind of concerned that maybe you
don't understand the full depth
of the bill as it was changed
based off of
Your answer to my colleague from
Bernie Leo.
Decorum. Mr. Speaker, if you
have a question about the
changes made, I'd be happy to
answer happy to do that. I'm
just concerned about the answer
that I heard.
And so, um, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
With respect to one of the
changes. Do I understand
correctly that too long force
mint officers can exchange guns.
But along enforcement officer
cannot go to an F F L
And
Buy a gun without the waiting
period.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. One
gentleman. One of the exemptions
is between two law enforcement
officers who are authorized to
carry a firearm and certified
pursuant to federal law.
Or the federal or the Law
Enforcement Training Act may
transact between two people.
Yes, two law enforcement
officers. We also exempted law
enforcement agencies from a
seven day waiting period so
hopefully that clarifies who can
transact exempted from this
waiting period.
Mr Speaker in general lady it
made to the rest of the body. It
does not to me.
So along force Mint Agency is
the entire agencies, somebody as
as an organization as a whole.
Long force mint officer is an
individual. And so when I read
I don't four of page two of the
amendment.
Between two law enforcement
officers.
What? What I read in there and
please correct me. If I'm
reading it wrong is that
I can. If I'm a law enforcement
officer and somebody else's law
enforcement officer, we can
trade guns between each other.
But if I'm a law enforcement
officer on my own, and I go to
an F F l I go through the seven
day waiting period. Would that
be correct? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, this is about
transactions, so it has to be a
buying and selling. Um, that's
the only exemption that we have
between two law enforcement
officers who are authorized to
carry a firearm.
And certified pursuant to
federal law or the Law
Enforcement training Act, so
they have to have all of those
qualifications and then they can
conduct a sale between two
different law enforcement
officers. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
Trading is not involved in this
bill.
Mr Speaker in general lady.
Okay, let's bypass the trading
piece if I'm a law enforcement
officer
And I want to go buy a gun today
from an F F l Do I go through
the seventh? If this bill is
passed, do I have to go through
the seven day waiting? Period,
Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker and General Lady is
lead sponsor on this bill. Do
you agree with that?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Interesting. Okay, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, um
I have to concealed carry
permits. I have one that works.
Multistate.
That surround New Mexico and one
for New Mexico.
Mr Speaker in General Lady, Can
you tell me what states have
reciprocity with the state of
New Mexico?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, so this
is subject to rule, and it's
regularly updated on the
Department of Public Safety
website.
Mr Speaker. And generally that
doesn't get us through the night
right now, Um, you have to
experts behind you with the
department of Public Service.
Uh, safety so purely one of them
can pull up the answer on
Google. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think we'd prefer a few did that
Before we continue. We are going
to repost the concurrence
calendar. Um
Online.
And, um um
You guys can continue to be.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, and
generally so Mr Speaker and
General Lady for clarification
for the people that are
listening in
For the For the gun carriers of
the state of New Mexico for
those that don't like gun
carriers in the state of New
Mexico.
Are we suggesting that we don't
want to answer that question?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, there's a
list that is located on the
Department of Public Safety
website that's regularly updated
subject to rule. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
That's what I've heard from my
experts, and that's where I know
the list is located.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady for the last 27
days when questions have been
asked. The experts have been
able to supply the information.
At this point in time, Mr
Speaker and General Lady are
experts unable to supply that
information. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if it's uh, good use
of time for us to Google
something and bring it up. I'm
happy to read a list of the
website, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
But again, my expert continues
to verify that all of this is
listed on the DPS website.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
would propose that there are a
lot of people listening in
tonight that this would be a
great use of time.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Would you
like me to go through all 50
states? Is that a good use of
our time, Mr Speaker?
Sorry, Mr Speaker in General
Lady, Can you please repeat
that?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we start
with the state of Alabama. There
are two different exceptions.
New Mexico will accept a
concealed carry handgun license.
No will accept a concealer carry
handgun license, reciprocity
Arrest recognition. Yes, we can
go through the whole list. I
don't think we need to do that.
But I think the point is well
taken, Gentlemen.
You have the floor.
Okay. Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I'm going to refine that.
Is there a state close to New
Mexico?
That
Concealed carry goes back and
forth.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen from the
list, just pulling up states
that are immediately attached to
New Mexico. Colorado has
reciprocity. Uh, So does
Arizona.
I can go down to Texas also has
reciprocity.
Utah only has reciprocity as it
pertains to accepting a
concealed carry handgun license.
Um, that will accept they will
accept New Mexico's and well
except there's
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. You just convinced
me that I no longer have to pay
for two concealed carriers
because the other one that I
have covers three of those
states.
With respect to that Mr Speaker
and General Lady for the
audience, not for me.
Um, could you please read out
the U. R l that you're getting
that from?
It's a long one. Mr Speaker. DPS
dot mm dot gov will get you to
the homepage. But if you google
it, it'll actually take you
right to the concealed carry
page, which is the one I'm
reading off of currently.
Thank you so much for playing
along and helping me get some
information out, Mr Speaker and
General lady, So I understand
that as long as I have a valid
concealed carry handgun license
in the state of New Mexico, I
can walk in fill out a form.
Mr Speaker in General Lady and
and walk out with a handgun or
An ar 15 today, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes. If you are
exempt, and you already have a
concealed carry license in the
state of New Mexico, you do not
have to wait seven days.
Mr Speaker and General lady, But
I can't say about this amendment
as you just improved the number
of people
That will be getting a concealed
carry. If this bill does pass
Um, Mr Speaker in General,
ladies, so
As I understand the amendment
and item number five on Page
two.
I can turn any gun that I have
over two.
An immediate family member. And
if I understand the definition
of immediate family member
that's
Spouse.
Father, mother, grandparents,
kids, grandkids and
Aunts and uncles. Would that be
correct?
And cousins. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes, And it's not
about handing them over. It's
about a transaction. It's a cell
like spire seller transaction.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, can
you describe what that
transaction would look like?
Just to help me and to help once
again, Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I understand we're trying
to talk about the context of the
bill or the amendment. But with
respect to that, not everybody
listening.
Understands that and so
This is kind of playing along
and giving information to people
listening in as well. And I
think that would be
advantageous. It would be if we
stick to the amendment and the
gentle lady answers within the
context of said amendment. Did
you leave from Santa Fe? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, we had
already exempt exempted on the
House side sale transactions
between immediate family member.
We don't define what that cell
is, But if it's a dollar if it's
$5, that's that's the transfer.
In which case you'd have to
Checked the law. But if you're
an immediate family member, you
don't have to worry about
getting that background check or
waiting that seven days.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, so one more time
for the law enforcement people
standing around actually
guarding us right now. I just
want to verify
Hmm. One more time.
These people.
The state police that are
Around the roundhouse right now
if they went down to any gun
store tomorrow, and this bill
was in acted
In this language, they would
have to wait seven days.
Yes, Mr Speaker. Wow.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I think you've
answered all my questions. I
appreciate you your time to
debate on concurrence on the
amendments. The gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will the general lady from Santa
Fe yield yield
Speaker generally to, um,
looking on page
Line three section H.
Where
Our bliss. The Senate struck
A statement requirement that
records of firearms sales
Shall be made available by the
seller.
For inspection upon request.
Over a long enforcement agency.
Is that your understanding also
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So if I
understand your question, we
just exist. We just struck out.
um, that fire that these records
of firearm sales should be made
available. However, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, we understand that,
um law enforcement agencies have
certain abilities to obtain
records through the necessary
processes. Uh, yes, Mr Speaker.
And generally I believe I heard
you say
That that
Uh, strike out.
Could be circumnavigated with a
warrant. Is that accurate?
Correct, Mr Speaker. Okay, So,
Mr Speaker and General lady in
this
And circumstance.
Of a suicide.
How would the information
Developed to obtain a warrant.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
that's outside of how this um
What this exemption provided or
what? This, um strikeout or
strikethrough would be. I guess
I would have to understand how
that pertains to a waiting
period or the transaction that
we're talking about here in the
bill.
Mr Speaker and General Lady in
the circumstance of a suicide.
How would they information be
developed to obtain a warrant?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I I'm not
sure I understand your question.
Can you describe why that why
you would need a warrant in that
circumstance?
But Mr Speaker if that was
If there was some prosecution
contemplated as a consequence of
that.
Suicide.
How would we know where to go?
To find where
A
Person obtained their firearms.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so you
would have to have criminal
probable cause in order to
obtain a warrant to begin with,
in whatever circumstance that
you were talking about, that
would have to be established
before the warrant would be
provided in any circumstance. So
the same thing applies to this
should law enforcement need to
obtain a warrant?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady who
would be looking for
Sales slip.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
know if
Quite what you're asking again.
This language was stricken from
the bill.
Um, is there something that
you're asking regarding the
change? Uh, yes. Well, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it looks
to me like
Striking this provision that
They seller of the firearm is no
longer obligated to provide any
records.
Removes most of the teeth and
justification from the bill.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Did you
have a question?
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
Can you address for me that
concerned
Removing this provision.
Removes most of the teeth.
From the bill.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
know what we're referring to as
the teeth. However, Mr Speaker,
speaker, gentlemen, the brains
behind this bill is ensuring
that we want to have a seven day
waiting period for those who
could do harm to themselves or
others closes a critical
loophole on those who can't pass
a background check in our state.
And the impetus for all of this
is to ensure that that happens,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Okay?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
I don't say hell.
The bell can be effective.
With that provision removed.
Speaker in general Lady
With
Fish.
Bill normally be addressing
Laws abiding citizens.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, all laws.
we hope are addressing law
abiding citizens.
Mr Speaker. Uh,
Channel idea. I absolutely agree
with you.
And those folks, not law
abiding.
Or not likely.
To be
Waiting seven days to pick up
their firearms. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you, gentle
lady. Thank you. Gentlemen.
There is further debate on
concurrence on the Senate
amendments to house Bill 129.
The gentleman from Otero
representative Block.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind generality from Santa Fe,
please Yield. I yield Mr
Speaker.
Thank you so much, Mr Speaker
and General lady, So I am
directly on the amendment.
And so I see.
Mr Speaker. I'm just going to
start here.
I believe this is on the first
page, Mr Speaker, it says
On page three line 12 strike or
any firearm, muffler or firearms
silencer.
So, Mr Speaker, General lady,
I'm wondering, Uh, what's What's
the reason that we struck that
language? And how will that
change the bill? Mr Speaker,
Generating Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, this is a debate that
you brought up. Um, I believe
when we were debating this on
the house floor about whether or
not a firearm muffler firearm
silencer was considered a
firearm.
Under current law, the
definition is in fact that that
would be considered a firearm,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the
Senate, um, agreed with you that
this should no longer be
something that we'd have to wait
seven days for and took that out
of the bill.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally because I'm wondering
because I know currently with
federal law, it takes about nine
months to get a silencer.
Even approved for sale. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
With this. I guess we're just
taking off seven days plus nine
months. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker Generating Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, you just would be.
We're not subjecting the sale of
a firearm of flora Firearm
silencer to a seven day waiting
period. No
Great. Thank you so much, Mr
Speaker, General lady, so I will
continue on the amendment is
see, it says on Page two Strike
lines six and seven and in suit
Insert in Luther of the firearms
shall remain in custody of the
cellar or the federal firearms
licensee performing the federal
instant background check during
the entirety of the waiting
period. Mr Speaker generally,
how does this change from the
original version of the bill?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So again,
we just changed the fact that
the waiting period goes into two
separate tranches. The first is
that everyone, um, and unless
you're exempt from this bill
Have to wait a seven day waiting
period in order to get their
firearm.
If you haven't If you have
received a background checked
within that seven days, if you
still have not received a
background check within that
seven day period, you're now in
a 20 day waiting. Period, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and if at
any time you get a verified
background check that says
you're good to go, then you can
get that firearm.
You have to wait 20 days and
even if they have not yet
responded from the next system
That firearms seller may, um,
hand that firearm over after
that period.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and I
believe in the previous
conversation with the General
lady from Bern, Leo and
Torrance.
You mentioned certain state
Federal and then constitutional
provisions that we were trying
to be in compliance with Mr
Speaker Generality. Would you be
able to reference those for me
so I can look them up
independently.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So I'm
referring to our federal
constitution.
Um, I was referring to our state
Constitution and our state law.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I appreciate that I'm and
I know how to find the
Constitution. But I'm wondering
Mr Speaker General anywhere in
the Constitution. Can you give
me a section, please?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
you know that's pretty well by
now. It's the second Amendment.
Um both our state Constitution
and our federal constitution.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
lady, And then you also
mentioned and I agree with you.
Second Amendment. Absolutely.
Got you there, Mr Speaker,
General lady, but I'm also
wondering about state law is
this regarding?
Let's just say, concealed, Carry
act. Is that what we're talking
about? Mr Speaker, General Lady
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we're
actually we're just talking
about this. The Ark, our state
Constitution and our federal
constitution. That's that's how
we're talking about.
What are you doing in the
amendments? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, I don't
We're talking about the
amendments order in the house.
Gentlemen, you may proceed.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm
trying to compose myself here.
No, I appreciate that, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, so
Just the federal Constitution.
State Constitution. Got it. I
appreciate that. So, Mr Speaker,
General lady regarding
On Page three.
Well, this is the amendment says
on Page three Strike lines three
through seven and into insert in
lieu thereof. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to
the sale of a firearm. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. What?
What did that change? Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, the Senate
created a longer list beneath
that of exemptions that don't
apply to the sale of a firearm.
And then the list goes on and
then gets back to immediate
family members as we had passed
through the house, Okay. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So when they expanded that list
Do we know what they added to
that or subtracted? Mr Speaker?
General Lady? Yes, Mr Speaker.
It's numbered one through five,
And I think you're looking at it
in front of you.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I'm trying to I'm
trying to compare it to my bill
here.
So, it says to a buyer who holds
a valid federal firearms
license. I would suspect that
was currently in the bill. Mr
Speaker general idea, and that
was not new language.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen that was
added by the Senate.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General waiting. So then we
added to a buyer who holds a
valid New Mexico concealed
handgun license pursuant to the
concealed handgun Carry act. Did
we reference that in the bill at
all, Mr Speaker generality.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
you just read the reference
Mr Speaker. Generally, I read
the reference on the amendment,
but I'm wondering, Did we
reference that at all in the
actual bill, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, our drafters, um
Reference the concealed handgun
carry act right there in the
builds and the title.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, What
else? What other reference are
you talking about?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I'm just referencing
the second page of your of the
amendment that was done in
Senate judiciary.
There's a
Regarding concealed handgun
carry act. I'm just wondering if
anywhere in the bill itself. We
referenced that act at all.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we not
until the amendment do we
reference that and it's for the
exemption.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentle lady. That
helps me.
So can so talking about between
immediate family members. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady I know in
the bill we listed
A bunch of people and then in
the amendment, we just didn't
list who That would be. So, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, uh,
Is that the same people and
uncle cousin, brother,
grandmother, or is it a
different definition? Because I
know in some other bills that
you've carried. There have been
many different variations of
this, and I just wonder. Is this
trying to get it into compliance
with whatever we're trying to
streamline? Mr Speaker Speaker?
Gentlemen, we didn't strike the
definition of immediate family
members still in the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
lady. Okay, I will look at the
bill again very, very closely.
Right now.
All right, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, so
Regarding firearms that are
being transferred between
personnel who are who are law
enforcement. Mr Speaker, General
lady. I'm wondering, Let's just
say well, so currently in the in
the bill, I guess we're allowing
transfers between law enforcers
and agencies. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady with
the amendment.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, the
transaction can happen between
enforcement agency to law
enforcement officers authorized
to carry out firearm and
certified pursuant to federal
law or the law enforcement
training. And thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, So would
does it specify, though, if the
officers have to be on duty when
they're doing this, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Or could they be
doing this?
Off duty, transferring a firearm
and then they would not need to
wait seven days. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we don't contemplate
when that transactions taking
place.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So
another way to say that would be
No.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Our
amendments don't at all address
when time plays a manner of that
other than who is exempt from
the transaction.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. I just I'm trying to get
clarification for the law
enforcers in my area to know if
let's just say they want to
transfer a firearm between two
law enforcement officers and
they are off duty that they're
not breaking the law, so I just
wanted to make sure that they
are in compliance if they don't
wait that seven days, Mr
Speaker, General lady, So
hopefully that's it. That's a
no, they don't.
Hopefully
But as long as they're not
transferring guns on the job,
probably that's a good thing not
to do. But if they're off duty,
it sounds like they can.
And the seven days on a choir.
Perfect. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So what
if I'm a law enforcement officer
and I want to transfer a gun to
let's just say a cousin of mine.
But I don't want to. I don't
want to sell it to him. I want
to give him the firearms. So Mr
Speaker, General Lady is it's
still considered a transfer. If
I just give it to him, Not under
this law, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Hmm.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, So
It would not be considered a
transfer so I could literally
just give him the firearm and I
would not be waiting seven days
Correct. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
we don't talk about that in the
spill at all.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. I know we changed some
language regarding law
enforcement, So I wanted to be
crystal clear on that. So I
appreciate the answer there.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
So I have a question here. Let
me see.
So, Mr Speaker generally so
In the event that it's not
Gift.
And the law enforcement officer
wants to sell a firearm.
Would they then have to wait
seven days for that transfer to
be completed, then, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, it depends on who
they're selling it to.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker
generally, so if they were not
selling it to any of these
classes that are exempt here.
Then in that event, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, they would wait
seven days. Correct. Correct, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, so
Did this amendment in any way
change the prescribed penalties
for violating the provisions of
this sections, and how will they
reflect the severity of the
offense?
In this amendment, Mr Speaker?
Generally, Mr Speaker? No.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, and in any way did this
amendment changed? The the
The records that they would have
to take or keep on file. Mr
Speaker. General Lady Mr
Speaker.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
So also on the amendment. I'm
scrolling down here. It also
says a buyer who holds a valid
and federal firearms license.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady
with this pretty much closed
that that question that we had
previously about.
If I want to sell a gun to
another f F l I would not have
to wait the seven days. Is that
what that closes or can you? Can
you tell me a little more about
what That amendment does, And I
believe it's on page two of the
amendment that's at the top of
the page.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. All that
does is exempt Someone who holds
a valid federal firearms license
from no longer having to wait
seven days.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, and then I
know regarding this the
concealed handgun carry act.
There might be some kind of
provisions in there.
That has a grace, period if
let's just say, 30 days. I
believe it is that I do not
renew my license. I don't have
to take the course again. Mr
Speaker, General Lady would How
would that apply to this
amendment?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So this
just subjects any valid New
Mexico, Um, concealed handgun
carry license owner
To the same laws that are
already on the books. And as I
understand, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, there is no grace
period. You have heard deadlines
for when it is that you can
renew your license. Um and when
it's expired.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I did not know that.
And would that also apply and
other states that do have grace
periods. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
unless it's listed as a
reciprocity state and you have a
valid license at that time from
one of those other states, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, then you
would be allowed. However, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, you your
license would have to be valid
at the time that that
transaction took place.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady that
that does help me a lot
regarding that.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, generally
I see on the amendment says
looks like number four on the
amendment. This is on Page two
line 12 after the period strike
the remainder of the line and
struggling 13 up to the comma.
Mr. Speaker. Generally, I'm
looking at that. And it kind of
looks weird on my original bill.
Do we know what that struck?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm
looking at the amendments in
context. Um, can you refer to
where it is that you're reading
from?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I am I am reading
from
The actual amendment itself.
Let me go to the amendments in
context. Real quick, Mr Speaker.
Hmm.
All right, Mr Speaker, General,
Idiot says on the amendment on
page
Two line 12 after the period.
Strike the remainder of the
line.
And struggling 13 up to the
comma. So on the bill, Mr
Speaker
Gentle lady.
I'm on Page two.
Because there's not line numbers
on the on the actual bill. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, would it
Would it be? The firearm shall
remain in custody of the seller.
During the entire the entire
waiting period. Is that Is that
what that struck? Mr Speaker?
General Lady. I'm just trying to
figure out what that amendment
did.
Can you read from the amendments
in context? I'm trying to
understand where where you are,
But I believe Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, we're talking about
Um
I'm looking at page two trying
to find a comma and I'm looking
at
Essentially how we clarify, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, the waiting
periods from seven days to then,
20 days if you weren't able to
pass a background check.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally, okay, so that that's
what changes the 30 days to the
20 days if I'm understanding
correctly.
I believe so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Got it. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, And did we know what the
Senate said in regard to that
amendment, why they changed it
to to 20 days other than
State Constitution and federal
constitution because I don't
believe Mr Speaker generality.
The constitutions have a day
limit in there.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So the
current background check system
allows for a 30 Day period in
which they will return response
for a background check.
So what? This gets us in line
with Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, is
federal law currently within
that 30 Day waiting period.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. So this
So there's changes to 20 days,
not 30 days, or did it change it
to 30 Days? Not 20 days, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, we changed
it from 30 to 20 on the Senate
floor just to be in crystal
clear that there's there's no
rubbing up against that 30 Day
period and that folks have an
opportunity to hand over that
firearm without any, um, fear
that federal law would be, um
Prohibiting that
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So then, did we
With the 20 days is that
business days or is the calendar
days? Calendar days, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, and that does not exclude
holidays.
Or anything of that sort. Mr.
Speaker generally, is that
correct, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
that includes just following the
federal rules of civil
procedure, So if it's a holiday,
then it bumps into the next day
as a calendar day.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker in
general Lady.
That helps me a lot. And then Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I was
looking at the other states.
Where we have reciprocity.
Mr Speaker generality and I
think I might have found the
website that you guys were
referring to its
It says concealed carry licenses
at the top is that the same
Website that you guys were
looking at Mr Speaker.
Generally, just so I'm on the
same page.
On the behalf of the New Mexico
Department of Public Safety.
Yes, they have a page regarding
their concealed carry licenses.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So of these
licenses. Do we know how many
states are both fully?
Reciprocal with the state of New
Mexico, where they will accept
And the New Mexico will accept,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes. You
can read the list. We decided
not to read it out fully on the
floor, but I believe it's right
in front of you.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, According to what?
I'm just counting it looks like
23 states.
Mr Speaker Generality, and then
it looks like Texas is yes.
Utah. It doesn't look like New
Mexico will accept.
They're concealed. Carry handgun
license. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
I'm reading the same list. You
are, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen.
Looks like you're correct.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally, I just want to make
sure we were both on the same
page regarding that because
That chart is a little hard to
follow.
But it's good to know that
Some of the states are
compliant and some are not. Mr
Speaker. Generally do We know
why Some of these are not
Allowed to have handgun carry
licenses in New Mexico with
reciprocity.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That
means that our laws are stricter
than other state laws. In which
case Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
only allow those that have
actual state law reciprocity or
above in order to be able to
allow that license in our state.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Generally, I just
thought I heard something
differently with the
conversation with the gentleman
from Lee.
I thought maybe the there was
opposite so
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generality that helps me
regarding the reciprocity
portion of that.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Let me
just make sure that I have all
my questions answered here.
All right. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. General Lady. I did
have a question. Does this
amendment in any way change the
different types of firearms for
purposes of like antique
firearms or power actuated tools
or any other specified devices
other than the mufflers that I
believe we talked about? And
then the silencers that we
stripped out anything else that
we stripped out are included
regarding the firearm. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally I appreciate that Nice
answer.
All right, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I think those are my
questions for this bills.
Amendments, which I tried to
stay on. And I hope I did. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I still
have huge concerns regarding the
bill, especially regarding the
lack of an exemption for
Domestic violence, survivors and
people in crises. And Mr
Speaker, General Lady. I think
that the
We tried to brand this ability
as something of a
Of an evidence based approach.
Mr Speaker, General lady, But
according to the amendments, and
the things that we struck the
things that we add Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I just don't see
how that can be realized. What
this legislation So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I appreciate the
kind and
Humble answers and I will yield
back, gentlemen. And I
appreciate folks trying to stay
within the confines of the
amendment really, truly
appreciate that.
Next We go to the gentleman from
Chavez, and everybody's
wondering how long have you been
in Kansas City Chiefs Fan four
is it says yesterday or 20 years
ago or a year ago? They thank
you, Mr Speaker since the ST
Louis football cardinals moved
to Arizona in about 1985 86. I
had to find a new team.
Fair enough. Very cool.
Congratulations.
Thank you, sir.
Gentlemen from Chavez. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yield yield to my neighbor
from judiciary? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady, um
As I understand, uh
Uh, what has happened? Um
We have added
Or not we but there was added a
M on Page two, line five after
the period we're saying so. If
the background check has not
been completed.
Within now, 20 days.
Then the seller may transfer the
firearm to the buyer. Correct,
Correct, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. So then
down in Section C beginning Page
two line eight, the unlawful
sale of a firearm.
Before the end of the waiting
period.
Or
Before the completion of the
federal instant background
check.
That is an unlawful sale, should
there not be an exception for
the 20 Day period in subsection
C as well.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So again
reading these in tandem, Um
The firearm shall remain in the
custody After that, Um
After the background check takes
place and then you have a seven
day waiting period. And then if
you continue to read down, um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you have
the 20 Day is the entirety of
the of the 20 Day period and
that start how the bill starts.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, but
It's says
It's unlawful to transfer it.
Before the completion of the
required federal instrument
background check.
But yet we have an exception.
That says you may transfer it.
If within 20 days, that
background check is not
completed. Those seem to be in
conflict, are they not?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So the if
we read it in tandem
The if you're looking at Page
two item B.
Is that where you're reading
from Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. No, I
am not. I'm reading from
Um, I am starting in section a
Right where we have now at the
end of line five, we added.
Or it was added, Uh, if the
required federal incident
background check has not been
completed.
Within 20 days, the seller may
transfer the firearm to the
buyer. Then in subsection C. I'm
not talking about be at all.
Subsection C says it is the
unlawful sale of a firearm.
If you do it before the
completion of the federal
incident, background track, But
in a we have allowed the
transfer.
Without the completion of the
background check because if it's
not completed
Within 20 days.
They may transfer it, but then
Section C says that's unlawful.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So what
This does from a to B to C
Um, And if I'm hearing you
correctly, the transfer of the
Firearm only takes place after a
background check has
Occurred within the 20 Day
period. However, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, the transfer of the
ownership possession or physical
control can may be able to go to
that person have if they have
not received a background check.
I'm trying to find where it is
that you're reading. That's
different from what I'm reading.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I mean,
I'm I'm reading down and see.
All it says, is that it's it's
unlawful if you transfer it
before the 14 Day or sorry,
seven day waiting period or if
we are required before the
completion of the required
federal instant background
check. It doesn't say in that
section.
Anything about the 20 Day
period.
And so those two sections seem
to have a huge conflict, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so that
language about the before the
completion of the reflect
required federal instant
background check was strict
stricken out.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. We
Do not have that language in the
bill any longer.
Where? Okay?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, can
you
Direct me to that. Please, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, in Section
C of in the section one of the
bill, part C.
We struck out the language
stating both the 14 Day period.
We change that to the seven date
calendar days in the house and
then in Senate judiciary, we
struck out all of the language
about the if or if required
before the completion of the
required federal instant
background check. All of that
language was stricken and Senate
judiciary.
So is is that
Mr Speaker, General Lady from
Okay?
So I think I see where you're
saying that that has online.
What used to be lined 12 and 13
on page two of the original
bill, is that correct? I believe
so. Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay. Thank you very much. Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. I was
concerned about that. And I must
have missed that. Thank you.
Okay. There is free to debate.
the gentleman from Chavez, Eddie
and LeAnn concurrence on house
Bill 129. The amendments from
the Senate represented Mason.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
Gentle lady. Do you yield to be
pleased, Mr Speaker? Thank you,
Gentle lady. Thank you.
I'm having a little trouble with
one section of this
It's on page for. I believe it
says the provisions of this
section do not apply to the cell
of a firearm.
To a buyer who holds a holder
Valid federal firearms license,
which I understand
Ultimate Mexico concealed.
Handgun license percent to the
concealed handgun carry act.
Does that mean that with that it
does not even require
A federal background check for
sale to these individuals.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. No,
there's still subject to a
background check. Um this just
is requires that there does not
require them to wait the 47 Day
waiting period is general lady.
Uh, Mr Speaker who is going to
do a background check on a valid
F FL dealer.
Mm hmm. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
we have universal background
checks. Um, To my knowledge,
everyone who's purchasing a
firearm has to go through a
background check except for
those who are exempted, and I
don't have that law in front of
me. Um, but I know, um, There
are a few exemptions there, but
I don't believe, um
Federal, uh, licensed dealer is
exempt. I will have to check on
that General Lady. Mr Speaker.
Yes, you need to because we have
never
Why buy firearms to sell? If I
have to do a background check on
everyone I buy from the supplier
and say, Georgia, Arizona or by
1215 at the time.
We don't, uh,
the main thing, though, is you
come into my store to sell a
firearm.
To me, a registered F FL dealer.
We have never been required to
do a background check on
ourselves in order to purchase a
firearm.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
for the question. So you're both
exempt from a seven day waiting
period and background check
That's correct. Current law.
Thank you. Matt Just wanted to
clear that up a little.
Already one place in the
analysis, and it said, I had to
do a background check on myself.
And then we have never had to
before. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
for the debate on concurrence on
the amendments. Gentlemen from
Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
yield. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady.
Have been a lot of debate
tonight.
And I'm going to try to pull
this all around and I'm gonna
give you a little break and I'm
gonna let you give me some yes
or no's.
But I want to paint a picture
for the body.
So
As a citizen of New Mexico.
And I know this is kind of
subjective but as a model
systems citizen of New Mexico.
I think of done a pretty good
job at at being a pillar of my
community.
Not breaking the law.
And, um, as as a gun guy. You
know, I make my living with guns
from September to February.
And um, also involved in and
shooting sports with the youth.
And what? What I keep trying to
get through my mind is, um as a
law abiding citizen.
That's done a pretty good job of
not getting in trouble.
Now I'm going to go through a
seven day waiting period.
And
You can. You can actually ask
the chair of health. I'm I'm
pretty reasonable. I try to keep
my patients don't I mail I try
to keep my patients and I don't
really need a cooling off
period.
However, I'm going to move on.
If I'm a gun dealer.
And say, I'm retired, and I do I
do gun shows on the weekends.
This seven day waiting period
has pretty much run my business.
I don't get to do that anymore.
And in my community, and I know
as in other communities, they
have really big gun shows, and a
lot of these people are retired
military and law enforcement
officers.
Go and buy, sell and trade guns.
So most of these people were all
model citizens in New Mexico.
And then from what I heard
tonight.
Is and I'm really trying hard to
understand this and I think I do
understand, and I think it's I
don't I don't like it at all.
But if it won't
I'm a fireman. So I'm gonna act
like I'm a police officer, and
that's I don't ever do that. So
say I'm a state police officer.
And
I make a transaction with my
partner at work.
And
I sell him a gun.
For a dollar.
Because he's my good friend.
Well now
I need to go replace that
weapon.
And I protect the people of New
Mexico.
And I sell my my partner. This
gun.
And then I go down to an F F l
dealer to the gun store to
replace that weapon.
And now I have to wait seven
days.
I'm not asking for an answer.
I'm just asking for the body to
think that through.
Because no matter how you spin
it
It makes zero sense.
How I can
I can sell my weapon to a law
enforcement officer, and I'm a
law enforcement officer and I go
down and I cannot
Replace my weapon within seven
days.
And then finally
If I'm an F f l dealer
Had I'm used to people coming in
and and frequenting my store.
And buying.
A weapon. They come in. They
look, they see that there's a
really nice firearm. I'm I'm
this guy that I'm explaining. I
come in. I see this super sexy
firearm and I'm like, Well, I
usually call my wife and I'm
like I found me one. I really
like this. You think it'd be a
good idea?
And I either get a yes or no.
And I want it right then.
And it would almost be and I
don't want an answer. I just
want everybody to think this
through if we went down to a
closed door.
And we wouldn't tried on a bunch
of clothes and we had to leave
those clothes for seven days.
Are we going to go back and get
them?
I don't know if we're going to
But
But what I want to say is, we
are literally
Killing the gun shows.
Small business.
Our F FL dealers.
My local gun dealers.
I know they're going to suffer
for this.
And at the end of the day when
I'm trying to get my mind
wrapped around is none of the
criminals.
Are going to be affected over
this zero.
And the only thing that you're
doing is you're hurting new
Mexicans.
They have the right to protect
themselves and they should be
able to do it.
The day they go into to get the
weapon, whether they're whether
they're, um
What are they going in there to
buy a weapon like I do or
whether they're going in there
to buy a weapon to protect
themselves. They should have the
right to do that.
I told you I was going to give
you a break, General lady, and
you didn't even have to answer a
question. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
We are on emotion.
To concur with senator
amendments to house Bill 129.
How's your Judiciary Committee?
Some Super Hospital 129 is three
Times Amendment. We have a roll
call
concurred with Senate
amendments.
I would have known
And we wouldn't have
30 seconds.
Boat clock.
The vote.
No running in the chambers.
The vote.
But it's about to close.
The board is enclosed by one of
36 in the affirmative 32 in the
negative. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 129 as
three times amended.
The Lady from Valeo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business. Are you
changing?
Report committee reports Mistake
Committee report Seeing
objection disordered
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Judiciary
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill six as amended has had it
under consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted. Christine Chandler
chair Mr Speaker and move
adoption adoption of a federal
committee report on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Centerville six as amended.
All those embarrassing and I
As opposed to me.
The eyes have it Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 15, as amended has had it
under consideration reports in
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr
Speaker. Move Adoption adoption
of a Federal committee report on
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee substitute for
Centerville 15 as amended. All
those in papers probably saying
I
Suppose name.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Bill 127, as
amended has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair, Mr Speaker Move,
Adoption Adoption Committee
report on sentiment 127 as
amended all those in favor
written about by saying, I
suppose May, the Sabot Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Bill 142 has
had it under consideration
reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair, Mr Speaker. Move
Adoption adoption of favorable
Committee Report on Senate Bill
142, although in favors
I was supposed to name the ice
continue to have it. Committee
report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 175, as amended has
had another consideration
reports with recommendations
that it do pass respectfully.
Smitty. Christine Chandler
chair, Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Adoption of favorable Committee
report on Senate Bill 175 as
amended, all those in favor
signify by saying, Aye.
Suppose, nay.
The eyes. Have it. Committee
report adopted them. Mr Speaker,
Your Judiciary Committee tomb
has been referred. Senate Bill
241 has added under
consideration, reports saying
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
Speaker. Move Adoption Adoption
about Federal Committee Report
on Senate Bill 241. All those in
favor signify was saying I
Supposed name.
The eyes have it Can we report
adopted?
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to has been referred.
Senate Rules Committee.
Substitute for Senate Joint
Resolution one as amended has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate Rules
Committee Substitute for Senate
Joint Resolution one as amended
all those in favor say Aye.
I was supposed to say, Yeah,
let's have a committee report
adopted.
Generally from Santa Fe.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to the
next order of business. Third
reading of legislation
Objection. It is so ordered.
Alright members. We're going to
continue with the third reading
calendar.
And
Next on the nest. Is that your
lady from Berlin, Leo?
And item 21, which is House Bill
182.
And she is on her way in soil
for just hold off for 30
seconds.
The generator will be here.
Time to get some amendments
drafted.
Don't get any ideas. Gentlemen
from Moto.
Generated from early Oh, are you
ready on item number 21?
Mr Speaker, I will be
momentarily. I have some
witnesses who are going to join
me.
Great. Let the record reflect
that all action necessary for
place in House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
Bill 182.
With an emergency class has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
The gentle lady.
To explain.
That Bill. Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker. This bill, um was
that we heard it in the state
government and then we really
worked it over in judiciary.
and
I think we've come up with a
clear version to protect
Anyone who's running from
election for election. Excuse
me.
To, um
Running from election. I was
that a Friday and slip Mr
Speaker. Er, um, to be assured
that if artificial intelligence
is used to create fast
information about the candidate
that the public will know
So this is to protect everyone
and to protect our elections.
And, um
What
Uh, we have done here. Let me
introduce Introduce my experts.
We have Lindsey Bachmann from
the Secretary of State's office.
We have Dr. Um
Melanie Moses, who is a
professor at U. N. M of computer
technology. My chief of staff,
Elissa Lower, who's been
participating in a, UM, a group
that was formed at NCSL on
various states trying to do some
legislation regarding artificial
intelligence.
So what this bill does is that
it?
Will require
That
If someone uses artificial
intelligence in an ad
About his or her opponent.
Then there has to be a
disclosure with the ad.
In the same format as he had so
if it's a printed material, it
has to be a printed disclaimer
saying I we used artificial
intelligence. If it's a TV ad,
it has to be visible on the
screen. If it's a radio ad, it
has to be, um
Unintelligible speech,
explaining that the ad was used
in this way. So that, um
There cannot be any false
portrayal of any of us who are
running for election in New
Mexico. Without this disclaimer,
the one of the things that was
suggested in judiciary is so we
make sure the disclaimers in the
same language as the the ad
itself. If it's in Spanish, or
if it's it had just time it has
to be in Spanish.
Ah, if it's in Navajo and radio
station, the disclaimer has to
be in Navajo. So this is to
protect all of us, and, um
I think we got this bill in to
fill the good shape in
judiciary and we were on 0.8 of
the committee SUBS and so
One of the what the concern is
we want we have defined
materially deceptive media. It
means an image video or audio
that depicts an individual
engaged in conduct or speech in
which the depicted individual
did not engage.
It was published, disseminated,
distributed or displayed to the
public without the consent of
the depicted in it.
Individual and was produced in
whole or in part by using
artificial intelligence. So I
think that gives you a pretty
good, um, brief summary of what
this bill isn't is intended to
do and without all stand for
questions.
There is the beat gentlemen from
Sandoval, representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
sorry. I have the peanut gallery
back here. Um,
Madam from Bernie. Leo, would
will you yield Mr Speaker I
yield
Okay. I just have a couple of
questions. Um, they paid for
will start with some definitions
Page six. Line six. The
distribution platform to
definition.
Does this refer to platforms
like Facebook Google Trade desk
any other ones that we run ads
on throughout our campaign?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Great. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Um would this also encompass
things like TV stations, radio
stations and stuff like that? So
I'm just trying to get this is
everywhere that we could run an
ad in a newspaper. Or is it
digital? Only
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it's
adding place. It's not just
digital.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Thank
you for that, Um
Another kind of definition
question on Page seven line 20.
Is the material materially
deceptive media definition.
And the definition totally makes
sense. I get that you are trying
to stop things like Deepfakes
and that kind of things I want
to know if there is something
that is
That gets reported as deepfakes
something that one of us finds
to be to that level, but
Is there someone else Ethics
commission? Somebody to that
extent that would
Be able to make a determination
on that if there is not if I
find it offensive or wrong or
something to that effect, But
maybe the person who put it out
or somebody
Else doesn't find it the same
way is there Is there somewhere
that we go to challenge that?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
whether or not you would find it
offensive is not part of the
equation. It's a matter of
If you use artificial
intelligence
In portraying something you
simply need to say so.
Okay. Mr Speaker and
Gentle lady. So
Does the material needs to be
something that is untrue? Or is
it just if I make an artificial
intelligence or AI photo of you?
And post it, then it's covered
by this.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
actually is something that
depicts an event. That's not
true. You didn't do it. It
didn't happen. Let me just give
you one quick example in the New
Hampshire primary.
There was a radio ad.
Oh, I'm sorry. It was a
robocall.
So robocall went out with the
voice of President Biden telling
people not to bother to vote
White teller general election
So but it sounded like President
Biden. I mean his voice you
could
You know, get that off a I can
generate that. So that's the
kind of thing if that, were you,
then you might have a complaint
against this.
This individual. Got it. Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. Thank
you for that. Answer that that
makes a lot of sense. I didn't
know people still used
robocalls. Um
Okay, So okay, So one of the
things that I'm gonna go off of
my giant list of questions one
of the things in here that
Okay, As someone who uses AI in
my daily life. I do digital
marketing as most of the people
in this body now, um, you know,
and it has become an invaluable
tool for certain things haven't
really played with it in the
election space but can see where
a lot of these things would
benefit it.
Um, So my one of my biggest
things in reading this bill is
that it does not.
Clearly define if the content
creator
Or the what? We call it the the
distribution platform.
Is the one who is responsible
for adding the disclaimer to it.
So if I may create a video
Do I have to put the disclaimer
or if I upload that to Facebook
Google Trade desk too?
Two.
Advertise on their platform are
they required to ask me and then
add the disclaimer because
that's a huge difference on
whether or not I have to do it,
or they have to do it.
Um
Yeah, well, I think I have a
follow up question to whatever
your answer is going to be, but
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I was
saying, I want to get this right
because that's a really good
question. The
The distributor. If you will,
some whoever's putting this
together professionally just has
to have a policy that reflects
our law.
Letting its customers know that,
um
This is not allowed.
And then it's the individual
who's the violator.
The one who
Violates, if if the individual
doesn't follow the the policy
that the platform has adopted.
Then it's the individual who's
liable.
If they don't follow the law.
Okay, let me make sure Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. Make
sure let me make sure I got this
right. Okay, so it's not on the
content creator. The person
who's creating the piece of
content. It is on the platform
that it gets uploaded to whether
that's a digital platform TV
radio. Whatever the it's on the
platform to make sure that they
can verify that that
Piece of content was made with a
I and that the display than they
are required to put the
disclaimer on it.
Just a minute, Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, This is what
I thought The platform is
required. If it's a station or
Whatever or the or the digital
platform, tell the
Their customer.
This is our policy, and their
policy has to be consistent with
this law.
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentle lady
totally makes sense. Um
So digital platforms like Meta
started January 1. Google
started sometime since then, Um
In
Having a policy. They have a
policy, which is very close, if
not pretty close to this, minus
the
The disclaimer requirement.
There's has a tag that says this
was made with a I
Um, that is probably not as big
or may not be as long as these
specifics. Um and you as a
political advertiser have to
click that it you know was made
with a I. And even at that
point, the Meda one in
particular
Um, there's something I've
already faced in my regular life
in my non. Not in this building
life. Um
That even if you upload
something that was made with mid
journey or in video or one of
the
Big AI systems that it actually
puts your put your piece of
content through a
A I detector, I guess for the
lack of a better word. Um
And we'll actually come back to
you. If you don't click that ai
button and says we're pretty
sure this was made with mid
journey or we're pretty sure
that this was made with this or
Um so
With that already in, you know
it doesn't hit exactly your
disclaimers discriminate
requirements, But this system is
already for those like in
process like in use today.
And for the TV stations and
radio stations. I'm not sure
that
I mean, maybe somebody big like
where we live in a way, T k O b,
you know 770 or 90, whatever
their FM call is now might be
able to do that. But in a whole
lot of these rural towns, I'm
pretty sure that their sales
people and their engineers have
no idea what a I is.
And so I'm not sure
I just don't like the fact that
they would be the ones getting
in trouble.
For
I mean, and that's that's my
follow up. Question of this
actually is what is the penalty
or how do we enforce the fact
that
Somebody doesn't you know,
doesn't put a disclaimer on
something that is
That is, um
That has a eye on it.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
would be up to the candidate to
follow the law.
So, um, and the only thing
really required of those big
companies like the The platforms
you mentioned is that they would
know what our policy is, and
just be clear in letting their
customers know about it. But if
there's a radio station with
some, you know in a rural area
And if it really be up to the
candidate and the candidate
would be the one who would be
the violator of the law?
Okay. The radio station, Mr
Speaker, speaker and gentle
lady. But you had a couple of
questions ago said that the
platform is the one that is
required to
Make sure that the disclaimer is
on
If I if I got that wrong, please
let me know. I'm sorry. I'm Ron,
If if that's what I said. That's
not what I meant. The platform
has to have the policy that's
consistent with our law. And it
sounds like the ones you were
describing.
Of which I have no knowledge. Um
Have something like that because
they're already
Putting the tag line that AI was
used, so they would just need to
say, Listen, if you're doing
this in New Mexico, you have to
have this kind of has to be the
same size print in the same
language and so forth.
Oh, and and this is important to
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Sandoval.
It's not up to the platform to
monitor it. They're not the
policemen here. It has to be the
the
Injured party who brings it to
the attention of the secretary
of state. This gets enforced
through the campaign reporting
act.
And the the secretary of state,
although they would not be the
enforcement agency, they would
take the complaints and refer
them either. Did the State
Ethics Commission or the
Attorney general.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you for that. Answer. Um
Totally off of my line of
questioning, but I want to make
sure of of an answer of
something. So if I
Create. Not that I see myself
doing this or but you never know
if I create something using AI
using my own likeness and use it
myself. That is not subject to
any of this, right?
Because if I come up with the
awesomest campaign photo ever,
and I want to use it somewhere,
I want to make sure that that
doesn't apply to this.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, look
at the very bottom line.
Line 25 Unpaid seven.
It says it was published. Semin
aided, distributed or displayed
to the public without the
consent of the depicted
individual.
So
You would. Assuming unless
you're schizophrenic. You be
consenting to the use of your
own image.
Okay. Uh, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. Thank you for that. Um, I
must have skipped over that when
I was reading this.
Um
Okay, So just two questions
left. Um
I'm not. I mean, I'm not sure
how
Legislation in New Mexico.
Or really any other single
state, for that matter is going
to
I don't know how a company
that's not based here.
Someone like Google Meta that is
a worldwide company. I mean,
I've run ads in 70 or 80
countries. Now, at this point,
using matter, so it really is
everywhere. I don't know how
legislation that's passed in New
Mexico is going to be like that
We are going to make sure that
our exact definitions of what we
want
Are going to be enforced for a
company like Meta that is
worldwide.
And why, why and how they would
change it.
For users that are just in New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, this
is only for the New Mexico
Campaign reporting act so
It doesn't affect any other
Use whatsoever if someone's
running a political campaign
here than the individual running
the campaign.
Adds to comply with the law.
Mr Speaker, speaker and gentle
lady. That's I mean, I get that
part of it.
You have a few questions ago.
You had said that you wanted
Ah!
What was the word platforms like
Meta to say that this is the
there?
That this legislation is there.
Is there? Um
What is the word policy?
Thank you, Um
And so I don't know how we get.
I don't know how we enforce that
any of these companies say that
this is their policy for the
A couple 100 of us in a state
that this applied
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think it would be much like the
fact that that those big
Companies.
Already follow state laws. They
charged sales tax per state and
so forth, and they would just
advise their purchasers that
what they what their constraints
are.
And that way. Still, it's on the
person who's placing the ad.
It's not on the platform.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I'm
glad that it's not on them
because I don't know how they
police this in any way shape
form with as much content as
gets uploaded every day to their
platforms. Um, so I'm hopeful
that we can You know that If
this passes it gets in there as
a Hey, you're from New Mexico.
Um, not hopeful, but
You know, it could happen. Um
and then I guess my last
question is, um in here. There's
an exception for satire parody
news broadcasts. Um
What? Who gets to make the
determination and of what class
clarify or is classified as side
to hire parody.
Um rather than deceptive and
hits the definition of
materially discrimination. To
me, That's a very fun line.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Can you
tell me what vine and
Page. We're on.
Give me one more second where I
thought it was. It is actually
not. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, is
an on page 12 lines 22 through
25.
That is the one
Mr Speaker, speaker and gentle
lady that worked reasonably
constitute, or the two words
reasonably constitutes is
Where I can see it's getting
into trouble because what's
reason what reasonably
constitutes satire to me?
And what and the definition to
you or what? What? You would see
that as
Could be tremendously different,
and I'm just afraid that
complaints.
Like this could be something
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So what?
This
The computer.
Expert told me that once
welcomed to create a satire, but
If it's in a campaign ad, it
would have to have a disclaimer.
Okay, Mr Speaker and madam,
gentle lady.
Um okay, so if you go back to
the very bottom
I just want to make sure I got
this right if you go back to lie
or sorry page 11 line 25, it
says it is not a violation of
this section.
And then we go to pay under that
number three page 12 line. 22 is
the portion about the satire
parody, so it still it still
requires a
Disclaimer, but it is not a
violation.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That's
right. If they have the
disclaimer, it's fine.
Not a violation.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I'll
take your word for it. That
doesn't make any sense to me
were saying it's not a violation
for it to be there, which to me
would say that it
It is.
That it doesn't need a
disclaimer, but I could just be
reading that completely wrong.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I I don't
It's not a violation.
When you have those three
things.
If you have a disclaimer.
Okay?
Uh, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that's all I got. Thank you.
There is for the debate that
gentleman from San Juan
representative Lane.
Mr Speaker. The generated from
Berlin to yield Mr Speaker. I
yield
Mr Speaker. I sound like a chain
smoker. All of a sudden.
I'm not sure what happened. Mr
Speaker generated from burning
Leo. I wanted to ask just a
couple of clarifying questions
because how I understood the
opening presentation in some of
the debate was
Different than how I read the
bill. So Mr Speaker generated
from burning Leo, as I
understood, sort of the original
concept.
Before the House judiciary
substitute
It was enough in and of itself
just to use artificial
intelligence.
And that required a disclaimer.
But Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker,
generally from Burnley. Oh, now
as I understand it
The current iteration is it has
to also be a materially
deceptive.
Communication on top of using AI
Is that correct? No, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, that was always
part of the bill. I think that
in our first committee, we
realized there was a lot more
clarification that needed to
occur. Which is why we were on a
0.7. By the time we got to
judiciary, and then we went to a
0.8.
And then it was pretty well
accepted.
So, Mr Speaker generally from
Berlioz's, but just I just want
to make sure I understand.
Really? What I'm trying to drive
out is
It has to be not just a I, but I
I plus materially deceptive
communication Correct.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and also
part of a political ad.
Mr Speaker, Julie from burning
also fair enough So because I do
think you could use a I in a non
deceptive manner, And in that
case, you wouldn't be required
to put a disclaimer Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Correct.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Generally for
clarifications.
There is for the debate the
German from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um
The general lady. Yield. Mr
Speaker. I yield
Um
Mr Speaker.
And general Lady. I
I
Thankfully, I'm not any longer
in judiciary, so I didn't have
to listen to this and judiciary
this year, but
My my issue. I mean, I I I think
I understand what you're trying
to do.
Wouldn't it have been easier
just to eliminate the use of AI
on political ads.
And stop this, Um
Gray area of whether
I think it's deceptive or not. I
mean, that seems awfully
Lucy to me. I mean,
Who makes that determination, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
I think your version
I would
Draw an immediate First
Amendment challenge.
No.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. I'm
not for sure Yours won't either.
And and my issue. I believe it
has too many categories. You're
saying that if it's a I
And it's deceptive.
And it's in the political ad.
So
Is that a paid political ad?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I most
of them are but I don't think
that that's a requirement here.
It's not one of the
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand from our expert from
the secretary of State's office,
that advertisement is defined in
the campaign Reporting act and
we're talking about an
advertisement and we're not
saying you can't say it. We're
just saying if you lose a I
To see it.
Anise materially deceptive.
Have to have a disclaimer.
So we're not saying you can't
say it, so that's why this
doesn't draw the First Amendment
challenge.
Mr Speaker in General 80.
May I add to that Because I've
been corrected my definition
here. It's it's not just saying
it. It's depicting somebody
doing something.
That is not true.
So, Mr Speaker in general lady,
if if a
Facebook Post or Twitter post.
Is boosted.
And you pay for that to be
boosted.
Is that covered?
If it's political
Um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
not unless it meets the
definition of advertisement on
the in the campaign Reporting
act, and the bill does happen to
contain definitions from the
campaign Reporting act. So on
page one lines 23.
Through 25.
And then on to Page two lines
one through four.
And then with, um, exceptions,
That's the definition of
advertising. So
That's all spelled out for you.
So, Mr Speaker. Sorry. One more
thing. I'm being Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. If it wasn't clear, I
was saying that's already in the
act. We're not changing
anything here. We just it's
included as part of our
amendment to the act.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
It's It's
It's troubling to me as I read
the bill, and it's been a couple
of days.
I'm looking through some
Some notes. It just seems like
We're
We are. We're setting a very
slippery slope.
For anyone.
Who uses information that they
may gather off of the
Web.
That seems real at the time that
they
They picked it up and started
using it.
How are they to ascertain
whether AI was used? Are they
not even use anything that's out
there on the Web, or they just
supposed to create anything and
everything that they use in a in
a political ad that meets that
definition, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I don't think I
understand your question.
Well.
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
If there is, if there is, um,
information that you if there is
a picture
That you want to use in a
political ad.
About
Um
Someone support of some
initiative.
And this
This picture is created by
With a I
And you don't know that it's
created by a. I
It just seems like to me that
it's that What we're doing is is
very slippery. That
That it's going to cause a lot
of problems and most of the
things that will be
Accused of being wrong.
The election will be long gone
and over and the damage will be
done before this is ever
decided. I mean, you may get a
judgment against somebody, but
the race is over with.
Wouldn't it be easier just to
eliminate the use of it?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you know
One of the things that I'm
always arguing about. Is that in
creating a new crime or a new
penalty doesn't really deter
someone who is
Um high on drugs or
Um
You know, desperate
And so forth.
But what we do know about
deterrence is that for white
collar crime
It works.
To set penalties.
For
Behavior That's not good for the
community. So
This.
Kind of
Election conduct.
It's something that has to be
planned and thought out.
So there will be penalties for
that kind of conduct. As you say
it, maybe after the election,
But if there is a follow up in
the legal system
Then people will begin to
respect the rules and remember,
we're not talking about the use
of AI and that being outlawed,
that's not it at all. It's that
It's portraying something
depicting something that didn't
happen and using AI and the
person who's wronged.
Then complains about it.
Speaker and generally what
states have passed similar
legislation.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, right
now, um, over half the states
are considering it. But and
there are bills similar to this
and many state legislatures. We
don't Michigan did. Just did
they just pass it? Mhm. This
poem Michigan has this
A version of this. I'm not
saying it's exactly like ours.
Mr. Speaker in general Lady is
the answer to my question one
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, At least
four have passed something like
this, and there are other states
that are addressing deepfakes
differently.
But I don't know how
Mr. Speaker in general lady have
just
Informing this piece of
legislation.
Were
These big platforms.
Google, you know, etcetera where
they consulted and where they at
the table.
Making sure that this was
something that they could
Um, they would
They could support in their
within their rules and
regulations.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
have talked now this wasn't at
the table for the model
legislation. But we have talked
to Google and we had changed the
bill in judiciary from
The the company having to
Disseminate their policy that
mirrored ours to every one of
its
clients from New Mexico to just
the purchaser of an ad and
gentle lady was this, Um
Was this.
Proposed legislation vetted
through the interim.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, this
started in, um
Ah, at Ennis DSL, and, um, then
there's been a workgroup going
On that, but it wasn't taken
too.
In the Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
wasn't able to go to all of the
science and technology meetings,
but we did address a I issues at
least twice.
And did talk about the deep
fakes.
And Mr Speaker also, um and
gentlemen, when, um we had our
meeting in Albuquerque, The
courts, Corrections and Justice
Office spent a whole day on
artificial intelligence.
And this was part of the
discussion.
Mr Speaker in general Lady, I I
think it, um
It's a tough issue. We all
We all recognize that
I think
It might behoove us to
Reconsidered this through the
interim, with with interim
committees and make sure that we
have those big companies at the
table.
And that they have
We listen to them.
We? We listen to the way in the
successes and failures of other
states. I mean, if there's only
four other states that have
passed similar legislation,
maybe we could learn something
from him. But
This seems pretty
It's troubling that that there's
it's just seems like it's not
concise to me. And there have
been many questions about who's
responsible for the
For big Knowledge mints and the
postings and
It's It's troubling to me, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, and so
it doesn't appear something I
can support, but I will continue
to listen to your
The debate presentation. Thank
you, ma'am. There is for the
debate the German from what did
over representative block.
Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. What the
kind generated from burning Lou.
Please healed.
Mr Speaker. I yield. Thank you
so much, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
So very interesting debate that
we've had so far. Mr Speaker. I
had a few questions. First of
all, Mr Speaker generality.
Did you say the secretary of
state's office would be the one
that is enforcing this?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen know the
secretary of State's office
would be the one to whom they
aggrieved individual would
report the violation and then
the secretary of state would
refer that to the
Ethics Commission or the
attorney general.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally did we did we add that
language in the new version of
the bill because then the
previous version, Mr Speaker, I
think it just says Attorney
General D A or depicted
individual.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm not
sure that's correct. But the
ethics commission has
jurisdiction over the campaign
Reporting act generally, so I've
just learned and I didn't
realize that they can bring
their own.
Cause against, um, an
individual.
Under the campaign Reporting
act, Okay, Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generality That helps
me a little bit to figure out,
you know, Let's just say if
someone makes a deep fake about
me and Lord knows they hope they
don't
Mr Speaker generality on Oh, how
to how to proceed. So, Mr
Speaker, generally, I believe we
said there's three different
things that this needs to fit
into. It needs to be materially
deceptive. It needs to be
political, and it needs to be
about a candidate and it needs
to be
Untrue. I guess so. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. Let's just say if
someone says the horrific things
about me and an AI generated ad
And they say, John Block hates
kittens or something. Or
whatever horrible thing, Mr
Speaker. Generally, that's not
true.
As long as they put a
disclaimer would they still be
allowed to run the ad?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it
This is I think it's hard to
imagine this, but it's not there
saying that about you. It's
their artificially depicting
using that about yourself.
Got it. Okay, Mr Speaker
generally. So let's just say
they had an AI video of me where
they took footage of me on the
floor and they put it in a a I
and they made it sound like me
and then they and then it said,
Well, I hate kittens and dogs
are terrible. And if I said
something like that, Mr Speaker
generally, I guess they don't
need to. Because I just said it,
Mr Speaker.
But let's just say if they
If they wanted to generate it
Right, Mr Speaker, General Lady
if they wanted to do that.
And they put it disclaimer then
that would still be allowed
correct.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. Do
you want to pick something more
like
That would
Really not be you.
Like I want to raise taxes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I know you want to raise
taxes. No, Just kidding. I'm
just kidding.
No fair, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. That's
a That's a very good example.
And so
By the way, I love cats. I love
dogs for anyone listening. So,
Mr Speaker, generally I'm
wondering so.
I I don't know, necessarily if
this fits into it, but if I ask
a question to let's just say
Siri
On my iPhone, and it gives me an
answer. And then I copy paste
that answer about my opponent in
an ad
Is that an artificial
intelligence? Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it's
not materially deceptive.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Generating, But let's just say
it got an incorrect answer.
Maybe it pulled up like a blog
post from someone who doesn't
like my opponent or doesn't like
me.
And it says something materially
deceptive.
Since it was generated with a I
would that be
Would that fall into this? Or
would it not because it was a
blog post, written by an actual
human being.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen on page
seven lines 22 through 25.
Um, pardon me.
22 and 23 depicts an individual
engaged in conduct or speech in
which the depicted individual
did not engage.
And all of this has to be in a
campaign advertisement. It can't
just be
What you do for entertainment.
Got it. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentility That does
help me.
You know, I I get it. We don't
want to make people
Saying things they didn't say
right, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
although I have some regretful
moments from this evening, so,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um I
know the media market in my
County in my area. We're in like
the El Paso.
Media market. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, if I wanted to
run, let's just say and add in
my entire media market on TV and
I just want to know how How do
we regulate that Since it's
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it really
doesn't matter what the media
market is, if they are a
candidate under the campaign
reporting act, they have to
follow the law. All right. Thank
you, Mr Speaker Gentility, So if
you if it would even hit in a
new Mexico market at all.
It would need to be
In compliance with this act, if
if put forward is that kind of
what? I'm understanding, Mr
Speaker.
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
remember, it has to be
Some used against you materially
deceptive in a campaign ad.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady, and then
I believe we had a definition
for materiality deceptive.
I will I I found it. I believe
it's at the beginning of the
document. Mr Speaker, General
Lady
I don't believe we change this
in the committee substitute is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, we
did because we did not have use
without consent in the original
version.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, so I know. I asked
this question in
Government Affairs Committee,
But I don't know we can't refer
to what we asked in committee.
So I'm wondering Mr Speaker,
General Lady if they used
someone who sounds like
I know. I gave the example of
Trump. He has like a lot of
Impersonators who sound like
him, and they used this in an ad
and it was deceptive. But it was
not a I. It was just his voice
and let's just say a radio ad.
Mr Speaker, General Lady with
that not fall into this if it
was not used in parity and
actually was used in a malicious
way.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen and page a
lines two and three. It has to
be produced in whole or in part
by using artificial
intelligence. And so just
hearing someone's voice in using
the voice that that wouldn't
qualify.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Generality and then
another question I had regarding
this
I know that people can use like
photo shop to skew images and
make people look like they're
doing something. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I'm not sure if if
Photoshop uses AI currently, but
Mr Speaker, General Lady, uh
Could that fall into the under
this as well?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we have
to go back to the definition of
a I
And
Sound Page three lines three
through seven
Means a machine based or
computer based system that
through hardware or software
uses input data to emulate the
structure and characteristics of
input data in order to generate
synthetic content, including
images, video or audio. There
were disputes Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it would be further
fact finder.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally that that
helps me with that definition
and
Yeah, I'm not sure what uses Ai
and what doesn't use a I
Semester Speaker. General Lady,
Is there some
Portion of this bill that says
you have to knowingly
Be using it in a deceptive
manner that is political. That's
not using a disclaimer.
Yes, Mr Speaker Page 15 lines
10.
Through 12, a person found to
have willfully and knowingly
Violated the prohibition.
Is guilty of a crime as follows.
And so yes, the willfully and
knowingly is required.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Generally. I'm glad
that we added that language and
then also Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
It would be a misdemeanor. I
believe for the
First conviction on this is that
correct? Mr Speaker, General
Lady? Yes, that's correct.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker
generally, and then it
Second would be 1/4 degree
felony correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen for second
conviction, not just second
charge, but conviction. Got it.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady, and
then a couple other questions
that I just had just in closing.
Does this also apply to packs
like political action committees
and then 501 c four
organizations.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, they're
considered persons.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, So
The since they're a person.
I thought this was only about
the person they're attacking,
though.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
If I was to run something
through a pack.
And we have a board like an
executive director and everybody
from the pack.
If we were responsible for
materially deceptive media
With a sue the entity itself.
Since it's a person or how would
they? How would they get damages
from that? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. This um
this particular bill
If enacted, isn't about damages.
It's about other remedies under
the law to stop the practice.
It's there. It doesn't affect
any other remedies. I mean, you
could seek damages under some
other kind of claim.
I mean, you can
Go to libel or
Something like that.
And I'm page the very last page
16 lines five through seven.
Nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude a claim
pursuant to any other section of
law or any civil action for
damages.
Okay, so this is just stopped
the practice under the campaign
Reporting act, and it's pretty
narrow, actually.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. Yeah, that does help me to
see
If I wanted to sue them
personally or whatever. I would
have that option. So, Mr
Speaker, generally the last
question regarding the
disclaimers? Ah,
Would. I also need a paid for by
as well as the AI general. It
was area generated by AI with it
also be included, because I know
that's probably part of the
campaign reporting Act. Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker. Gentleman,
Yes, if it's required by the
campaign reporting act, that's a
separate requirement. Each of us
has to abide by that now.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generating and then one other
question about the size of the
font. So if I if I like, use a I
to generate letters of what the
person may have said that could
be materially deceptive. I
believe the version I saw in
government committees that it
had to be the same size as the
actual
Add Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Did we keep that language in the
new committee Substitute?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
revised it a little, it says now
on page 14 lines 21 through 23
for visual media. That is an
image. The text of the
disclaimer shall appear in a
size that is easily readable.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker
Generality that
That helps me a lot.
And then Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
I believe that's all I had. But
I did believe I had a question
about like closed captioning
using AI.
Mr Speaker, General Lady would
with that in any way fall into
this this provision in this
bill.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, the
requirement that it be in the
same language would take care of
closed captioning.
Perfect. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you. Thank you
for this great conversation, And
I appreciate the bill. Thank you
for the debate. The German from
Lee representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker Will the
general lady from Borloo Yield
Mr Speaker, I yield
Miss Baker Generating. Could you
show me in the bill, please?
Where
Says.
Platforms on which this content
is created.
Where they can offer.
Policy position.
That
That prohibits set activity
which absolves them from the
liability. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it's on page 13
lines one through eight.
A distribution platform that
published posted or distributed
advertisement or pre recorded
phone message.
Well, you may not want me to
read this whole thing.
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
I'm satisfied with that.
Could I
Most to
But, um, bit concerned with
fresh beach implications with
this piece of legislation.
So for an example.
I use artificial intelligence.
Two.
Scope through my opponents.
Statements.
In his committee meetings and
here on the floor.
And parse out a few sentences.
That I then users.
Completely out of context.
Is that guilty?
Of
Put in the ground on this
legislation.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
only if
Your result that you know, then
published
Conveyed something that your
opponent really did not say or
do.
But Mr Speaker and General Lady
that certainly is going to be in
the eye of the beholder.
Because those words were spoken.
They were not spoken, perhaps in
the context that they are
assembled in that ad.
But
That certainly lives.
A significant amount of running
for
Interpretation as to what is
much materially inaccurate,
which you agree.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, let me
see if I can get a good answer
for you.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Here's
what I'm told.
If you
Say about your opponent, my
opponent, said X y Z.
That's not
Prohibited here.
But
If you show your opponent
Use a I to show your opponent
uttering the words.
That would be something that
would require you to put a
disclaimer.
And you could say it.
So you're free speech is not
being
Compromised, but you have to
have a disclaimer.
But Mr Speaker and General Lady
That disclaimer.
I would possibly completely
negate the objective.
In front of the head and my
opponent did in fact.
And either on this floor
Or perhaps
In committee said exactly the
words in exactly how they are
depicted out of context.
That is deceptive.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I'm told
that taking something out of
context is not deceptive, You
know, Um, the gentleman from
Otero and I were having a an
example exchange and
His comments and mine were both
out of context.
So if we went on, and I quoted
him as saying what he said. He
quoted me as saying. What I
said.
It wouldn't fall under this law,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, I
still feel that
Is subject to some very
significant interpretation. Move
over to
Something that is obviously
Mhm satiric or a parody.
For example, I
I used the likeness of my
opponent.
And use a I to put horns on him
or something to that effect is
does that run aground on this
legislation? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um
On page 12 lines 22 through 25
an advertisement that reasonably
constitutes satire or parody.
If the advertisement includes a
disclaimer consistent with
requirements.
Provided in this section, then
you're fine.
So even an obvious
Satiric ad advertisement.
Or parody would require a
disclaimer is that accurate?
If it's materially deceptive.
Mr Speaker, General lady putting
horns on my opponent is
materially deceptive, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, maybe not. I
mean, how far fetched is that?
Nobody's going to think that
your opponent actually has them.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
certainly hope not. But
Where do we draw the line at
reasonable?
Is reasonable, elongating facial
expressions or making the ears
larger or
I mean, there I could I could
come up with a whole host of
circumstances which folks would
look at and go well, that
Nonsense.
And yet required to put a
disclaimer on that that
It was materially deceptive.
That seems problematic to me.
Would you not agree, Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, I don't because
you're not engaging in contact
or speech, which in which the
depicted individual did not
engage.
Okay. Ah!
That's all the questions I had.
Mr Speaker in General, ladies.
Thank you for answering them.
See one more of the gentleman
from Levi representative
pedigree. Thank you. Mr Speaker
Does the General lady in Madame
Four leader from Berna? Leo?
Yeah. Mr Speaker, I yield Mr
Speaker and General Lady, I have
one simple question.
Is there anything inside of your
bill?
That holds the media accountable
for quoting us correctly, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, that
would be a real trick.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
Thank you saying no further
paint the general ladies
clothes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ladies
and gentlemen, I really
appreciate I had some great
questions tonight, and I think
it helped clarify this this bill
and explain how the perhaps how
the 0.8 version we finally got
it. All I do want to say,
though, that there were there
was no testimony in opposition
from any of the providers like
the big platforms.
So with that, Mr Speaker, I move
that house Tradition
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for hospital 182 with
the emergency cause do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
joint, Uh, House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
but 182 with the emergency
clause.
The vote is now open.
Yes. The vote is now closed by a
vote of 30 in the affirmative 20
in the negative 38 in the in the
positive in 28 and in the
negative
House House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one of
the two with an emergency clause
has passed the House.
Mr Speaker.
Okay. Substitute House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 182.
Has duly passed the house
Your lady from Dona Ana Sierra's
Emilio, Are you ready? And Adam
36? I am Mr. Speaker. Could you
get me to that point record
reflect that all actions surfer
place in Centerville 159, as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, The General Aidid
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 159 relating to higher
education creates the higher
Education Trust fund and the
Higher Education Program Fund
providing an annual distribution
from the trust fund to the
program fund making a transfer
from the tax Stabilization
Reserve to the trust fund. There
is debate gentlemen from Otero,
or Luck.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
kind gentle lady from
Donnie anise, Sierra and Sakura,
please yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Otero.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Lady, Can you tell
me what the amount is that we're
putting into this trust fund?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, the
it establishes a $959 Million
trust fund. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. General Lady can so
$959 Million trust fund exactly,
but I understood
Yes, gentlemen from Otero.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generality. Are these
funds being transferred from
somewhere? Or are these just
directly coming from the General
fund?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, they are
transferring from the
Tax Stabilization reserve.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, And
then do we know if we have an
annual drawing from these funds?
Do we know how much that would
be?
Currently Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, there is 3.1 billion
now annually.
There are no draws on that.
This is a reserve.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. So since this is a
reserve, do we have any
intention of tapping this at any
time?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Otero. We can tap these reserves
after
The operating reserve and the
tax Stabilization Reserve are
depleted. All right. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So the
current reserves being depleted.
From my understanding are being
put into this. This fund.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Is it currently going to fund
higher education in any way?
Mr Speaker. The investment fund
will, um
Which is about 47 million will
fund higher education
scholarships.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, So there's 47 million
zipping.
Currently
Added to the
Opportunity, Scholarship or
Where? Where does this go? Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General,
because I know I've seen
previous budgets that have line
items for amounts that we're
going to allocate for the
The specific opportunity
Scholarship. Mr Speaker, General
Lady, are we intending for this
to be like a stopgap if we no
longer can be adding funds from
the General Fund for that? Is
that kind of what? I'm
understanding
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this is
to make this whole from 2020 25
forward.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady, And
then I'm guessing that this is
going to be invested. Is this
what the state investment
counsel or who's going to look
this through? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen? Yes, you are correct.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady that that helps me
a lot regarding who is looking
over the funds.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
Will this be similarly invested,
such as other other funds? That
the s I see looks over
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes,
similar to other permanent
funds.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady and then
with this fund allowed gifts,
grants and other donations, Or
would it merely just be from
these funds that were tapping
for this newly created fund, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes.
Gibson grants are included.
I see. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. So I
mean, because what I understand
with the trust fund is
Over a certain amount of time We
take out money like 5% or
something. I think we've had
this argument on the floor
before Mr Speaker. Generally do
we have a percentage allocation
of what is going to be taken out
annually after 2025.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, 5% will
be taken out annually.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady that
Helps me so it is just 5%. We're
not adding more or less. It's
just 5% correct.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. Great. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, So
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Does
this have anything to do with
like determination of
scholarship eligibility and,
well, we need to reevaluate the
fund. Mr Speaker, General Lady
if we have more individuals who
want to go on the opportunity
scholarships mixed with other
scholarships that we have in the
state. Mr. Speaker General 80,
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen to your
first question. Um, this does
not define eligibility.
Ah, your second question. Could
you repeat that for me, please?
Of course, Mr Speaker
Generality. So if let's just say
we have a huge
Massive increase in enrollment
in our education institutions.
Mr Speaker, General Lady and we
are using and they the
individuals are using the
opportunity scholarship and it's
exceeds the amount that would be
5% tapped from this fund. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, would we
have any mechanism to
Change the allocation amount, or
would we just
No longer give that scholarship.
That's kind of what I'm under
trying to get Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if we do
not have the funds to fund this,
then the Legislature would have
to appropriate those funds
passed the 5%.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Generally, so this
would require legislative
action.
To change any of the amounts of
being drawn from from the fund.
Is that what I'm understanding
Mr Speaker? Gentlemen? Yes, you
are correct.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General lady that that is
helpful.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
Have a few more questions that I
wrote down somewhere and I lost
my sheet.
Mr Speaker. It is Mr Speaker.
General Lady regarding
conditions under Let's just say
a financial
Hardship of the state where Mr
Speaker generally we have to
claw back funds to just fund the
general budget of the state. Mr.
Speaker generally would we in
any way touch this fund in that
event?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. If,
um, if need be and the tax
stabilization fund needed
Is depleted, then. Yes, we could
do that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. Is there any limit on
that? Could we take the entirety
of the fund or are we only
allowed to take certain sections
Mr. Speaker? Generally I see you
shaking your head, so I'm
guessing no
It is Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It
is all subject to legislation.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
That is helpful regarding that.
And then Mr Speaker, General
Lady, uh
I believe there are certain
funds that we talked about that
are adding into this this fund,
Mr Speaker, General lady of
those are depleted or those
funds no longer can put money
into the new fund that we're
creating.
Is there any other backlog of
funds that we have somewhere
that can
Fill that gap, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, This is a
one time appropriation from the
TSR. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, General Lady. This
helps me a lot regarding that.
So do we expect any other
appropriations to come down the
pipeline regarding this?
Because, after all, Mr Speaker,
it is
A large fund, and I'm sure that
we will need a lot more funds
for the future with the
opportunity scholarships, which
I believe is ranging around $200
million in the current budget,
Mr Speaker generality.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
Your to your question. Are we
putting in more funds into this?
Not with this bill?
All right. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General lady, So I'm
guessing so my understanding of
this legislation is this kind of
consolidating the current funds
that we're spending now and
we're having a more generalized
pool of money.
To draw from
For opportunity Scholarship,
etcetera. So is that is that
merely the main point of this or
is there any other point that
I'm missing regarding this newly
created fund?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
that you are correct. However,
we are reinvesting These funds,
um at 6% return
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, So it's a 6% return. We're
getting currently or what we
will be getting in the new fund.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, what We
anticipate we will be receiving
when this is created.
All right. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, and so 6% is a
pretty study amount.
Do we know what we're investing
in? Particularly is it
certificates of deposit bonds?
What is the makeup of this
portfolio? Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It will
be invested, according to the
S I C investment policy.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
generating
I appreciate that. The that
cleared up a lot of my
questions. I do have an
amendment for your bill. Mr
Speaker, and I will have it
messenger.
To you immediately, Mr Speaker.
Alright, It's going to make its
Gentlemen, the amendment will be
passed out and take a few
minutes.
At that point, we'll have you
Do you remember Montero? The
amendments being passed out?
What is it? 2 to 8 number? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. The 2 to 8
numbers 228381.1, and I would
like to request a roll call
vote, please.
123456 17. Okay, We got it.
Gentlemen, you explain the
amendment. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. I hope this
amendment finds you friendly. I
hope to be friendly.
The amendment was essentially
just strike out the Senate
Education Committee's amendment
and that amendment would allow
the tapping from this fund on
July 1st of 2024 and Mr Speaker
General Lady that concern with
this is if we tap it in 2024. It
will not have that time to
accrue the $47.9 million in
interest that we're seeking to
draw from it. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, this would merely
moved the effective date.
For the tapping of the fund
digital life, first of 2025 to
give it time to accrue interest.
Let's go to the bill's sponsor.
Is this a friendly amendment?
This is not a friendly
amendment.
Alright. Is there a debate on
the amendment?
Gentlemen from Dona Ana
Representative Small. Thank you.
Mr Speaker with the gentleman
from Ontario. Yield, please.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gladly
ill to my friend from Dona Ana
County. Great. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Are you
aware that we've budgeted some
money from this fund for our
opportunity scholarship and
support our higher education
this year?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Yes, It's my
understanding that the budget
currently has that in
consideration. Excellent. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Uh, gentlemen, Mr
Speaker. That's my understanding
as well, Um, that we that this
fund is fulfilling its purpose.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, utilizing
this fund.
We were able to avoid using
additional general fund for
higher education even as we see
more new Mexicans enrolling in
higher education more draw down
on these resources. Would you
agree, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
that this fund is sort of
serving its purpose already?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm sure that case
could be made, but I believe the
original lfc recommendation was
contrary to the amendment in the
bill, and it did not take into
consideration that amendment it
was merely for the fund itself,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady or
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
that the key point at this late
juncture in our legislative
budget session
Is that these resources for this
upcoming fiscal year are
budgeted to support New Mexicans
going into higher education. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I appreciate
very much your amendment and
what you're doing if we adopt
the amendment, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, we would be removing
that money. I fear we don't have
enough time.
Nor the ability perhaps to
replace it with General fund, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so it leads
me to conclude that adopting
this amendment would mean that
there could be some new Mexicans
who expect higher education
support who are counting on
that, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and
if we adopt this amendment will
not be able to access that So
that's why I can't support it.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
On the amendment. Is there any
more debate?
Generally from Borloo, Mr
Speaker, I moved to table the
amendment motion to table the
amendment. The gentleman has
asked for roll call vote.
Yes, in the amendment would have
been tabled.
He would have known were back in
the amendment.
32nd roll call.
The vote.
Is now.
Open.
What about the clothes?
The vote is now closed. I would
have 37 in the affirmative 24 in
the negative.
House floor amendment number 12
Senate Bill 159 is amended has
been tabled.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor. Thank you so much, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, you know
I my concern regarding this and
that's why I put forward the
amendment was because Mr
Speaker, General Lady, the Tax
Stabilization Reserve was never
intended to fund the opportunity
Scholarship. And so, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I I like to be
very deliberate, especially with
legislation and ensuring that
funds that we create
Do indeed go to the places where
we believe they should go. So,
Mr Speaker. Generally that is
one of the big concerns. I have,
because in my opinion, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I don't
think that
The opportunity Scholarship
should be drawing from this
fund, and I just felt that that
would be
A compromise that we could allow
it to have at least a year to
accrue some interest so we would
have a little more
stabilization. So, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I appreciate the
answers today. And although the
amendment wasn't friendly, I
guess, uh I hope our debate was
so Thank you so much, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
There is for the debate,
Gentlemen from south one
representative Montoya. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does a gentle
lady from
Dona Ana.
Yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, um
I'm actually
Concerned as well about creating
a fund and then immediately
drawing money out of it.
Um, not going to rehash the last
debate on the on the amendment,
but But Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, um
I am concerned that we created a
fund of
$959 million and then
immediately
Remove 47 million this year.
Speaker and generally concern I
have about that is
Um, we're
Presenting
To the public A budget
That is an increase of almost
7%.
And in reality, if this money
had not come out of this fund if
we had not taken money from the
Tax Stabilization reserve
And we
Then added 47 million to the
budget.
We would be over seven.
Percent increase.
In this year's budget.
And that's uh
That's concerning. We were
trying to
Um, present ourselves as being
fiscally responsible this year,
but
Taking money from a reserve
fund, the tax State Tax
Stabilization Reserve fund.
And then
Immediately.
And by the way, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady, not the only
tapping of this fund. We're
taking money out of this fund,
and then we've got another.
Fund that we've created that
will start intercepting the
money on the front end of that
Text Stabilization fund.
Going forward.
Um
And and Mr Speaker and generally
just concerned that
That with all of the
All of the extra money that came
in this year through oil and gas
revenue.
And then we're still
Taking from savings.
And redeploying it.
So, um, I don't have a problem
with the concept of how do we
pay for a program that the
governor started.
Last year or the year before the
opportunity scholarship.
But
I just think it's imprudent for
us to continue to spend on
credit cards is what it feels
like.
Um, I appreciate this is not
your
Not your bill, and you're
presenting it on this side.
But I do have concerns with
that.
Um
Mr Speaker and General idea. The
question I have is
That Tax Stabilization reserve
What is it? What dollar amount
is that reserve at
And
The
I want to know what the corpus
is, If we know what that is, and
then obviously
Um, what that can will be able
to grow to grow to, um
In future years. You have an
expert there. Maybe you can help
you with that, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the balance is
Ah 3.1 billion
And it grew this year at an
amount about 700,700 million.
Sorry.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady, um
In the future. That fund will
continue to grow, but I believe
we do not have
Inputs that will be coming into
that anymore. I believe we
hijacked
That those dollars will be going
Somewhere else, but this amount
of money
Will that 47 million cover all
of the opportunity scholarship
costs this year or what
percentage
Of the opportunity scholarship.
Will the 47 million that were
taking out of their cover.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
believe that there is a need of
25 million annually at the end
of the year than that This fund
will revert back into the trust
fund.
This money.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so we're so the 47
million is more than is needed.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. This year it is
speaker and gentle lady.
What? Uh
What else is the money being
spent for besides the
Besides the opportunity
scholarship
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. This this
funding is only for tuition and
fees.
So, Mr Speaker, and generally if
the need is about 25 million,
why are we taking 47 million
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it is to
stay consistent with this
statute. So this is 5% per year.
Um, and this is the initial
years. So this is 5% of that?
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um
I've been just told that the
Opportunity Scholarship fund
costs over 100 Million and is
that correct?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. 146
million. Okay, so we're so we're
covering about 99.
Million from General fund this
year. Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No,
that is the General fund amount
for this year. This cover this
covers this year and
Corrupt overall 140.
And a growth over 146.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally it's late in my math
is not working in my head very
well. So I'll just move away
from that so it But this is not
covering the entire
Lottery scholarship. This is
just covering a
A portion and going forward. It
will only cover a portion as
well.
Um as um, since we're pulling
out 5%
Of this fund every year. What
would that look like? Next year
at
Uh,
Give me a round numbers would be
great.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. 47.3
million
So thank you for that, Mr
Speaker, and generally so we're
trying to pull the same amount
approximately out every year and
then
Hopefully, we'll get a better
rate of return than the 5% that
we're pulling out.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that is
the hope.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, um, have a question here
on Page five.
And once again it's late, so I'm
not
As clear as I would like to be,
Um
There's a
Online 16.
On page on Page five.
Item, BS says If the governor
declares that there that the
expenditure is necessary for the
public peace, health and safety
Essentially that item one
basically says that we can
appropriate money out of there.
if the governor declares that
it's needed for the
For the public peace, health and
safety.
Um, what is the difference?
Between that.
And the provision that says that
we can
Pull the money out of this if we
need it to balance
The books. What's the difference
between that?
And that the that we can do this
with the governor declares an
expenditure is necessary for the
public peace, health and safety.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Can you
clarify
Page three.
Line eight. It says that money
can be distributed out of this
fund.
To avoid an unconstitutional
deficit.
The Legislature may appropriate
from the trust fund to the
General fund, only in the amount
necessary to meet the General
fund appropriations for that
fiscal year and only if the
Legislature has authorized
transfers from the appropriation
can contingency fund. I'm
looking at that and then on Page
five
It says that money can be
appropriated by a two thirds
majority vote of both houses of
the legislature.
But under section B. The
qualifier is if the governor
declares that the expenditure is
necessary for the public peace,
health and safety.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So that
provision relates to the General
So, Mr Speaker, your first and
gentlemen, your first question
relates to the higher
educational trust fund.
Correct? Yes, ma'am. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, your
second question is referring to
the text stabilization.
Reserve fund.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, and
generally this is existing law.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, correct.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
lady. Okay, That helps me with
this a little bit more. I was
trying to figure out why there
were two different reasons.
To pull out of this new
Fund and so I I did not read
that being the text.
Uh,
Stabilization Reserve Fund.
Mr Speaker in General Lady. I am
concerned this I think the Tax
Stabilization Reserve fund was
doing what it was supposed to
do.
And I'm concerned.
That what we have done this?
Session is, uh, one go after the
corpus of that fund.
And what we're doing here.
And secondly, we've gone and
Intercepted.
The stream of revenue flowing to
that fund. Their the rainy I
believe we called it The Larry
Larry Nyaga Rainy day fund.
Um and now
What we're doing is just too
Um
Continue spending as if the
money will never end where we're
doing it again. And I think that
Possibility of rough times
around the corner and
That's not being able to
To save is just concerning to
me.
But I appreciate you bringing
this forward. I realize it's not
your legislation and hard to
stand there sometimes and and
answer for someone else. But I
I'm gonna have a hard time
supporting this. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Senior for the debate. Oh, there
is for it to be gentlemen from
levers in Scotland.
Thank you, Mr Speaker will the
generator yield
I yield to the gentleman from
Li Li
Thank you, Mr Speaker
Generating. I'm looking at, uh,
a significant issues section.
Of the financial impact report.
Third paragraph.
No.
They say that the
That the
Mexico State funding for
financial aid.
Has risen at a rate of 276%.
More than the funding for core
instruction.
And general operations, which is
only
Money 7%.
Do you have this speaker?
Generated. Do we have any
explanation?
As to why this
Level of support has
In Christ so dramatically.
Over the last couple of years
because
It is my understanding that the
student population and higher ad
In the state has actually
declined.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we
created the opportunity
Scholarship, which paid for
everybody to be able to have an
opportunity to attend higher
education.
Hmm. Mr Speaker and General
Lady. We weren't doing that.
Last year.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if I read
this correctly, their figures
are from fy 19.
Uh, Mr Speaker generated that's
a 276% increase from F 119.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes. From
fy 19 to 2024.
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
Every time the state increases
its
Support levels for these
activities.
Can you describe for the body?
What the tuition and fees rates
at
These various universities are
doing
Kind of in concert with
The increase in student
supports.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we're
finding that information for
you.
Take your time, gentle lady.
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So
in 2022, we had a 1.3% increase
in 2023. We had a 10.3%
increase.
In fiscal year 24. We had a 1%
increase, but on average over
the last 10 years, we have had a
47.8% increase.
Ms Speaker Generating there you
have.
Mhm. Exactly. My concern is that
we are
And a continuous cycle of
increasing the sport levels,
followed by increases in
tuition followed by increases in
support levels and on and on,
And it's that some point
We need to take a look at
Whether or not
It increases on both sides of
that circle, or in fact
justified. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you, General
Lady debate related to close
Mr Speaker. I move that Senate
Bill 150 Month. 59 as amended.
Do now pass. We are on final
passage of Senate Bill 159 as
amended.
The vote.
Is now.
Oh, open.
The vote is not closed by the
board of 43 in the affirmative
18 in the negative set about 159
is amended as passed his house
Gentle lady from River rivers in
the world. Santa Fe in towels.
Are you ready?
On item number 34. Mr. Speaker,
Will you get me to that point at
the record of flag that all
action is surfer places sent
about 137, as amended on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate
amendment their substitution
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
is really about transparency,
transparency at the local school
board level. Um what I think
this body should understand is
this was a unanimous bipartisan
vote in the House Education
Committee with everybody's
supporting this. This bill
includes mandatory training for
local school boards covering
topics.
Such as laws, finance,
governance practices and student
achievement. This, uh, this
mandatory training is also we're
also requiring that school board
members report on their
dashboards, whether or not they
have attended this training.
Each goal must provide a
dashboard offering information
on indicators designations,
demographics and opportunities
to learn standards. Ah, the
legislation also mandates
webcasting and archiving of
local school board meetings,
making them accessible to the
public through school websites.
The bill expands the range of
campaign finance reporting.
Right now. It's about $500.
Um, it raises the level of
reporting from $500 to $1000,
meaning that if you spend more
than $1000, you have to file
campaign reports much like
members of this house. Do, um
The bill, um and introduces a
new section that limits the
termination of local
superintendents without cause
between the date of the election
and 60 days after the first
convening of the newly elected
school board.
And with that, Mr Speaker, all
Stanford question. There is a
bit gentlemen from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
generated from Rio Arriba yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
So, um, reading through the bill
and reading through
Uh, the amendment. There's a
there's a couple of key
provisions.
Um
The main one that I want to look
at is provisions of the bill
required to adopt roles.
Or update existing rules to
ensure compliance with the
requirements.
Over the bill, For example, the
department will need to update
rules related to school
districts governing board
members training.
And to ensure compliance.
Um Miss Speaker and gentle lady.
I appreciate that. I think
that's uh
Good provision where we're
Looking to our school boards and
we are wanting them to comply.
With everything that we say they
need to comply with.
Ms Speaker and gentle lady.
There has been a bit of a debate
this year throughout
appropriation process.
This debate went
Previous year and through the
interim of the previous year.
And then this.
Interim before this session.
About
Whether or not
Ah, the school board or the ped.
Can
In essence, overrule
The will of the Legislature and
statutes that we've passed.
Um so ms Speaker and gentle
lady, I'm gonna be introducing
an amendment. I'm just going to
get right straight to it and the
amendment.
Will ensure that the department
Uh,
Enacts rules in compliance with
laws that we have passed.
Ms Speaker and gentle lady.
In particular.
We've been very clear. Um el es
We've been very clear. L E S C.
L F C
Appropriations Senate finance.
We've all been very clear.
That
We
Are not wanting to mess with
what's working in many of our
rural areas With 100 with the,
uh, school scheduling
Ms Speaker. And generally would
you agree that
Um, many of our smaller school
districts.
Who are on a four day school
week or actually doing much
better.
Then maybe some of the largest
school districts that are on a
On a five day a week schedule.
Mr Speaker and kind General. I
totally agree with you. I
represent a real district and I
think you saw the house totally
agreed with that concept. When
it came when it came before a
vote here in this chamber.
Well, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, I'm gonna if I could have
you take that.
Um, I'm going to be introducing
an amendment here that states
That, um, the department can
only enact rules consistent with
statutes approved by this body
and enacted by the governor
through
A signed legislation.
The amendment changes language
in section 22 dash to dash one
to ensure peds authority over
public schools mirrors that
Authority. This body has given
the department this will ensure
the department cannot require
things contrary to what this
body and the governor have
enacted.
The amendment will ensure peace
can only issue rolls consistent
with your authority issued to
that department by law.
So
I believe it's been delivered.
Gentlemen. The amendment has
been delivered to the clerk and
it will be passed out. Why don't
we pause and then we'll get back
to you to explain the amendment.
And gave the 2 to 8 number.
Gentlemen from San Juan. We have
the amendment. What is the 2 to
8 number? Yes, Mr Speaker. The
two to number is 228359.1. It's
been passed out. Gentlemen, you
started explaining the
amendment, but would you mind?
Explaining it a little bit more.
Yes, Mr Speaker.
Uh, this amendment essentially
will
Not allow ped.
To go against what's been acted
enacted by law by this body and
signed into law by the governor.
Um in particular, Mr Speaker?
Uh, if you look on page 11
Line six. Basically, it takes
away some
Discretion that says matters
deemed relevant by the
department. It takes that out on
page
11.
That's the Second Amendment.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I moved
ahead just a bit.
Sorry I will back up. It's it is
late, but I figured we can take
this all the way till two
o'clock or less. So
Uh, Mr Speaker. This amendment
basically ensures that the
department can only enact rules
consistent with statutes
approved by this body.
That is what the amendment does.
And
What we are.
What? What we hope to do with
this amendment is for us to
claim the authority that we
have.
And for us who have in two years
in a row have made it very clear
what our will is. But the
department has continues to try
and push forward with something
else.
And I believe all of our
districts have spoken. Believe
all of our parents have spoken.
All of the teachers have spoken,
and this is an opportunity for
us as the Legislature to speak
as well.
Um So, uh,
Mr Speaker is with appropriate
to move the amendment.
Uh um. Go ahead and move it,
then go to the sponsor to see if
it's friendly.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would
like to move floor Amendment
number 12 Senate Bill 137 as
amended, and I'd like to have a
roll call vote.
You have a roll call, Gentle
lady. Is this a friendly
amendment? Mr Speaker? Well, I
understand the intent of this
amendment. I don't think it
really has anything to do with
this particular legislation. I
mean, we're really talking about
something else. I know what
you're talking about. Uh, so so,
Mr Speaker. I am kind gentleman.
No, this is not a friendly
amendment.
Crazy debate on the amendment
Gentlemen from Eddie Chavez in
Otero, Representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker for the
gentleman yield.
Yes, I I yield to my friend from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero.
Uh, gentlemen.
It. I listened to the response
on whether it was friendly or
not, and
It cost me a little bit of
concern, mainly.
Because of the
The body.
What? You're what you're asking.
Um, is to be inserted in this in
this proposal.
That the rules that this body
sets forth
That P e d would follow. Is that
correct?
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that is exactly it. We've
We have spoken two years in a
row.
And and ped needs to follow.
Our direction if it's spelled
out like this in statute
One of the things that kind of
caught my eye.
That I think Mr Speaker, the
body.
Should be aware of is
Um
The original bill prohibits
The firing of a superintendent
without cause during the 60 Day
Grace period.
After a school board election.
Is that that's no material,
isn't it?
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that's new material.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
We've had
Ped secretaries that hadn't
lasted 60 days, haven't we?
Mr Speaker. I and gentlemen, I
think we've had a whole slew of
them who have not lasted more
than 60 days.
It seems a little disingenuous.
Um, um, that we would have a
bill.
That we would impose on our
local school boards elected by
Duly elected and the and that we
had the audacity to let the
executive
Go through.
PD secretaries.
About as fast as you can
imagine.
But we want to prohibit
This occurred. I mean,
It's just unbelievable to me. I
mean, why would we do that?
Do you have any idea?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I do
not have any idea why why? That
would be something that we would
require school boards.
Now.
Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen.
You.
Offered amendment that says
That P d has to follow the
rules.
And I think that's
I think every member of this
body ought to take great.
Concern.
That that is an unfriendly
amendment.
That is just
Astounding to me.
On top of that.
Everybody in this building that
I have talked to
In one shape form or another
supports driving decision making
back to the local left. We've
all said that was in education
is best interest, but now we're
gonna limited
So, Mr Speaker, I can't wait to
get on the bill.
I was ready to sit down and take
a nap while ago but
I think now I'm ready so
I can't wait to get on the bill.
This is, um This is just too
much. I will gladly support your
amendment.
And I would request that the
journal Lady Reconsider.
Whether it's friendly or not
into, And quite frankly, Mr
Speaker.
Uh um.
I just I'm really astounded that
something
That when this body asked one of
our departments to follow the
law.
That we pass and that's
unfriendly.
Gives me great concern. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Debate gentlemen from Sandoval
and Santa Favorite center.
McQueen. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, Gentlemen. Does the
gentleman yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I have a couple of
questions on the amendment.
My first question, maybe not on
the amendment.
Then we already added Amendment
hospital to addressing this
issue.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Kind
of in house Bill two. We entered
language. Mr Speaker That said
that
None of the funds.
That were in house Bill two
could be used to enforce 100 and
80 Day.
Schedule across the board, so
not exactly this goes a little
bit further further in just
states.
Not just on this, but any future
legislation that
If this body
If if this chamber and the
Senate chamber
Vote to pass.
Ah!
Um, statute.
That concerning public education
that PD has to follow that so
this goes a little bit further
and just says
If the if the Legislature
Speaks on an issue and then that
that is signed into law that
then they have to to follow.
Um
Okay, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you.
So my next questions are
They're sort of mirror images of
each other. The first would be
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. If this
amendment does what you say it
does if you described it.
Just the whole deal. Get veto,
And wouldn't you be taking down
an otherwise good bill dealing
with training of school board
members?
And like we would lose that
significant advance.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe there's already uh
There's already training that
takes place and there's already
funding that goes into that
training.
So I'm not even
Necessarily sure that this bill
is required to make that happen.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
So I have some familiar with
this bill and went through
judiciary. I believe
Um
It seems like a good deal to me.
And it seems like it greatly
expands the training. It seems
like it, you know, it adds, uh
at school board members to the
campaign finance reporting
system, which I think is a good
thing. I mean, there's a lot. I
think there's a lot of good
stuff in this bill, and I don't
think
The bill itself is
controversial.
But I do think that if this
amendment does what you say
But like we lose the bill, so,
so that's a concern, so that
might be a reason why it's
unfriendly.
But my other question is, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
I wonder if you could explain to
me how this this one little
change in the amendment.
Does what you say, because it's
kind of, um
So, the current statute says,
except as otherwise provided by
law, and we're changing it to as
provided by law.
But it seems to me if there's
Elsewhere in statutes it is you
can do extra. You can do y
It's It's also in statutes. It
still says you can do extra. You
can do I so it's unclear to me
how
Your amendment achieves your
stated goal.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I believe it reaches a stated
goal.
Um
Let me back up just a bit.
Currently I believe that ped is
going rogue.
Currently
I think it it's already clear in
law.
Current law.
That if there is a difference
between
Statute.
And rule.
That statute.
Is what will be followed.
Unfortunately, ped has a pretty
big stick and that stick is and
we've seen it in the past.
Uh, removing money.
From schools. Not fully, uh,
providing, Um, um the, um funds
needed for the schools and then
other than that, we've seen ped
in the past. Remove
superintendents and remove board
members, which is funny because
the underlying bill here states
that school boards couldn't do
that.
Within a certain period, so
I? What we're trying to do here
is
Put in place to say here. The
guardrails stay within the
guardrails. This allows ped to
do everything they can
Within statute.
But not to go beyond statute.
So, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um
You know, I know the controversy
in particular over the longer
school years or the more school
days and
I understand your your intent
with the amendment.
Um
I would suggest that if PD is
going rogue, as you suggest, and
I probably wouldn't describe it
that way. But I You know I
respect the characterization.
Um
This amendment doesn't actually
change that.
I mean, there would still be
going rogue.
And Mr Speaker, gentlemen, if
they actually have that
authority vested elsewhere in
law
Again. This amendment doesn't
actually change that because
we've only changed the amendment
with only change.
Blah, blah, blah, except as
provided by law to as provided
by law.
And and they're really sort of,
say the same thing because it
just refers to another law.
So, Miss Speaker and and
gentlemen, I guess this is
I believe I cannot. Um, former
representative that served just
as I He retired just as I was
coming in.
And I freaking forgetting his
name right now. His he would say
this is a we really mean it
provisions.
Um, that we've said it and we've
said it.
But now we're saying we really,
really mean it.
Um, unfortunately, we're being
ignored.
Were being ignored.
And
Um
School districts who have come
to myself and to others have
asked
What do we do?
Do we do we take the do we take
it to court.
And I've told him you know what
Mr Speaker and gentlemen I've
told him
You know, all of you. Corporate
Lee need to just ignore ped.
And force ped to take you to
court. They can't remove every
school school superintendent.
They can't remove every school
board member. They can't
withhold funds from everybody if
you all stick together.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
what I'm trying to do here is
stop that from happening where
we're headed towards, Uh, a
amazing impasse here.
Where school districts that are
doing very, very well.
Are going to be told to do
something else at great cost to
the school district at cost to
the parents at cost of the
teachers who do not live near
the schools, So Miss Speaker and
gentlemen
Uh, this is
A vehicle.
To once again.
Let the governor and ped no.
That we really, really mean it.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, so I'll
just I won't belabor it, but I
think
You know, I understand the
complaint. I really do. Um, I
don't think this is to use your
term the right vehicle.
It may be a vehicle, but I think
it endangers and otherwise good
bill, But beyond that, I don't
think it actually accomplishes
your goal. So I think you have
clearly stated your goal in
tent. I don't think this
language change this little tiny
language change.
I don't think it gets there. So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
There is for debate from
Valencia representative Baca.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from San Juan Yield?
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from
Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. This bill came
before us in the House Education
Committee, and I support this
bill. I think with the training,
there's a lot of it.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, this this
amendment kind of intrigues me a
little bit.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, are you
who would oversee and select the
criteria or courses for the
training to your understanding?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think by reading this, I think
ped controls it.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So is it Could
it also be your concern that PD
may add other required courses
without ever coming back to this
body?
For approval of that content. Is
that your concern? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen? Yes, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, as I was reading here
on page
Uh, page 11.
And Page 13.
That other matters.
Deemed relevant.
Can be implemented.
That is a that is a broad broad
spectrum.
That just has to be deemed
relevant by ped.
And then it can be done. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I think I
think to some degree this bill
is a Trojan horse.
To give away all of our
authority as the Legislature.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen on the
amendment, is it also? Uh, you
understanding? Does this limit a
school board's ability to add
additional courses to the
criteria?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. No, it
does not.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
I, too, um, with the
With the need in the, um clear.
As far as legislative intent.
I support additional training.
My fear is Mr Speaker and
gentlemen was actually we would
no longer be able to control the
content and that additional
contents and at some point
Where would it stop? So
Um gentlemen, do you, Mr
Speaker? Generally, you want to
comment to that?
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the phrase in here on item A.
that, says the secretary.
Um
The secretary is a governing
authority and shall have control
management and discretion of all
public schools, as provided by
law.
That section that that little
three words as per or forwards,
as provided by lie almost pulled
the four those four words, as
provided by law means PD, um,
has to have express a authority
to act.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen, as
far as with that authority, the
input to actually the content
for the amendment. So is there
Is it PD that slowly makes the
criteria for this thing You're
trying to limit with this
amendment, or there are other
groups that would be
Providing input for content.
I believe Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that PD would have
sole authority here.
Enacting mandatory training for
local school boards and
governing bodies. It's in the
title and thank you, Mr Speaker,
and thank you, gentlemen. And as
I say I was close with us.
I support and see the need for
additional training for school
boards.
I do also see that the need to
make sure that
We as a legislators can control
and make sure that we limit what
is added to this training and
there has to be a process that
must be followed, and that
process also should be governed
by this body and also by local
control. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. On the
amendments for the debate,
gentlemen from Chavez, or
Percent of Hembree. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield
Yes, I yield to the gentleman
from Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, as I see what you're
trying to do with your amendment
the way the statute is worded,
now seems, uh, permissive right
that the secretary has the
authority of all public schools
except as otherwise provided by
law.
So what it is saying is that
The the ped can do what it
wants. So long as we're not
prohibiting it is that correct
Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
exactly. And thank you and Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. So you're
amendment would change that from
essentially from being
permissive to being prohibitive
and saying it can only do what
we authorize it to do Correct
Speaker and gentlemen, it would
say within the guardrails that
we've already set.
There's a lot of purview that PD
already has. What we're saying
is stay within that range. Quit
quit going with outside the
lines. Quit coloring outside the
lines. Quit, Uh over. Ah, quit
stretching beyond the authority
that you have.
And quit, frankly.
Threatening and controlling our
school boards from it from Santa
Fe.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Do you leave Rooms. Burnley
representative chasing
Mr Speaker. I move to table, the
amendment tabled a motion for
House floor Amendment number 12
Senate Bill 137 and amended
there has been a roll call.
Uh um, Board of yes, the
amendments have been tabled,
have nowhere back in the
amendment.
32nd vote clock. The vote is now
open.
Boards about to close.
What is that close by one of 37
in the affirmative, 22 and the
negatives House Four. Remember
number 12 Senate Bill 137, as
amended has been tabled.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um
I'm
I am disappointed that we were
unable to move that forward. A
I see.
In some of this language in
Senate Bill 137 US giving up
A little more authority to ped
in this
Um, it seems like, uh, it sounds
good. This, uh, this bill sounds
good training training for our
school board members and
training for our
superintendents. This sounds
Good.
But the language that is in here
Bothers me. The language that is
in here makes it appear as if
we're we're giving away the farm
and
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, I'm going to be introducing
another amendment here. Maybe
this one can get support.
This would
Limit PDS ability.
To, um
To go too far down that road as
far as requiring
As to what would be required of
school boards, not what could be
offered, but what would be
required.
And so, um, if I could have
The amendment is going to be
passed out. We're going to have
to wait for a few minutes is
that gets passed out and then
we'll come back to you to
explain the amendment.
Give it appears the amendments
being passed. So, gentlemen, can
you please read the 2 to 8
number?
Yes, Mr Speaker. It's 228357.1.
That's what we have a gentleman
to explain The amendment. Miss
speaker at this amendment just
strikes one phrase on three
different pages.
Or in four different pages.
That this is about training that
could be required by ped, it
says, and other matters deemed
relevant by the department. So
Miss Speaker and, uh, body what
this amendment does is it says
that PD can't require
Whatever they want to require.
That's basically it they can
offer.
But
Uh, just not on anything they
deem relevant. Miss speaker
body. This would
Attempt to limit
Forcing more requirements on
schools.
The Lady from Doriva Santa Fe in
Since some violent ours is a
friendly amendment.
Um, Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman. I want to tell you
that
This is already current law.
What we're trying to do in this
school board training is is is
really explain exactly what they
need to do in school board
training and how many hours
should be devoted to it in the
past, Really, the the ped is
kind of relegated this to the
New Mexico Association of School
boards. I mean, they have just
done that. And what we're saying
is we want ped.
To really focus on school board
training that they need. Like
what should the laws What? What
is the law? What are the open
meetings Act? What are you know
all the laws that pertain to to
governmental bodies. We need to
have them trained in these
things and we and that's what
this legislation really does. It
spells out exactly what the
training should be. And
And that's what I'm proposing.
Therefore, I think we're adding
to current law so that it it
spells it out. Specifically, uh
and and you should know that all
the
All educational agencies in this
state have backed this proposal
because they think it is very
loose right now. You're right.
You know, it doesn't. It doesn't
specify what kind of training
they have. How many hours should
be and whether or not we're
looking at this, so because of
those reasons, that's what we're
trying to do with this
legislation and Mr Speaker and
kind, gentlemen.
I would therefore say this is
not a friendly amendment.
Right. Is there a debate on the
amendment came in from Liber.
Senator Pettigrew. Mr. Speaker
Does the gentleman from San Juan
yelled Speaker? I haven't moved
the amendment yet. You're
correct to move the amendment.
Yes, Mr Speaker At this time,
I'd like to move. House Floor
Amendment number 22 Senate Bill
137 as amended, and I'd like to
have a roll call vote.
Very well.
Gentlemen from Lee and debate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you gentlemen. Does the
gentleman from San Juan Yield?
Yes, I yield to the gentleman
from Lee.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, are
you aware of this book?
Yes, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
have become very familiar with
that book. Aren't they fun?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Is that go through a list.
Would you please tell me in your
opinion? Um
What our school board has to do
with this.
Reading proficiency at fourth
grade.
Deserve school board have any
Okay, so in that
Ms Speaker and gentlemen, No.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Math
proficiency, Fourth grade.
No, Mr Speaker. They did not
have any say so in that Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, for sake
of time under public school
support.
Um
Or school board on Page 99.
Volume one
Has no impact on any of those
metrics.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen on page
100.
Additional metrics. Students in
K five plus and extended
learning time programs, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen to our
school boards get to make that
choice.
No, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that's all prescriptive.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
there's several other ones on
here. Matter of fact, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Out of 20 measurements.
In this book that we pay people
to put together.
Four.
Are in the yellow 16 or in the
red.
That's it.
We got no green whatsoever.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think it's time that we stop
letting PD make choices.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
support your amendment.
In all other matters, matters
deemed relevant by the
department.
Pretty sure
We just proven and I can go back
three different volumes of these
books.
Improve.
Once again.
They're not meeting their
metrics.
Let's get rid of it. Let's let
let's stop letting them Dean
wants relative relevant because
Mr Speaker and gentlemen
They're obviously not getting
it.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen.
The reality is where
Where the schools have had the
color within the
Within the lines.
Some of our schools have done
better than others.
And for whatever reason, Ped has
decided that the results don't
matter in those schools.
We're going to force something
else.
As far as I'm concerned, PD has
zero credibility.
As far as I'm concerned, the
longer that we in this body, let
ped continue to make all the
decisions. We're going to
continue to be 50th or 51st.
In the nation.
And I do not know why we want to
destroy.
The small school districts where
they're doing well, even with
all of the constraints, Miss
Speaker and gentlemen that you
just read out of that book, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen were on
the exact same page because
nothing I just said, should be
related to the school districts.
Every bit of this should be
related.
To Santa Fe.
Right here.
And what's going on.
There's a reason Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that we've gone
through so many departments,
secretaries
We're not going to say what that
is. But at the end of the day
Taking away their ability to
deem what's relevant.
When they've proven Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Over the last three series of
these books that they can't get
it right.
It's not a bad thing.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I know
that there was a concern on your
previous amendment with respect
to. Well, this is going to mess
with the budget.
So
Let it
We all have the ability to come
back here and get it right.
There is nothing that says,
we've already funded the
Legislature.
Right?
We can get through this. We can
go through another special.
There's no reason why we can't
stop and get it right.
All it takes.
His determination. Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I think we need
to get it right. We're spending
Our biggest budget item.
Is this budget item?
And
When we continue to get ignored,
even though we're funding it.
Is just infuriating,
infuriating.
Um
We
Get to return home.
Talk to the folks who sent us
here.
And on a few of these questions,
just over and over and over and
over a year after year after
year
Is on. Why can we not educate
our Children properly?
Why can we not?
Do what's necessary to right?
The ship and the reality, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, is we've
given up all authority as to
whether or not we want to right
this ship.
And unfortunately what I see
here is more of the same.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree. And is we vote on this?
Amendment of yours.
I think it will prove
Whether or not we want to, right
the ship if we want to keep
Well, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
if we want to keep going towards
the iceberg
Because
That's where we're going with
respect to this, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I contend that is my
administration and my school
districts didn't have to spend
so much time every week on phone
calls with Santa Fe.
They might be doing a little bit
better job.
Once again. I think my school
districts are amazing.
I think with the constraints
that they're given
The things that they have to do
from an administrative
standpoint.
The fact that our teachers don't
have time to actually put
together the full reports on
each of their Children.
Because they don't have enough
free period time to get that
done.
I think it's time that we revoke
the ability for the for PD to
deem what is relevant.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General. Gentlemen and lady
from Burleigh represented Casey.
Mr Speaker. I moved to table.
the amendment tabled a motion of
House floor Amendment number 22
Senate Bill 137 as amended A
vote of yes.
And we would have tabled the
amendment that would have
nowhere back in the amendment
and into the twilight zone. So
It's not going there.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is that closed by would
have 36 in the affirmative, 23
and the negative House floor
member number two has been
tabled. You see on the floor?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. I do appreciate
That we're trying to provide
more training.
I'm not sure.
That
I trust
PD.
And deeming what training is
necessary?
Ms Speaker and and gentle lady
and body.
Um, I hope
We come back in a year.
If results are the same.
Um I would hope to see us take
it a little bit more serious.
Take things back into our own
hands.
And take care of our folks back
home.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There's a
gentleman from Chavez said
representative Townsend.
Back on the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Generally
years Mr Speaker, I yield to the
kind gentleman.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um
I want to just go through a
couple of things first and
foremost.
You began the debate, saying
that this was unanimous in the
house education. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that is correct.
But General lady, it was not
unanimous.
In the Senate. Either on the
floor or in committee. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman that
a script
And general ladies. There have
been two amendments of
Proposed tonight, Mr Speaker in
general Lady.
I think this is okay to ask
puncher. The speaker will tell
me if I'm wrong or not.
Did you decide that those were
unfriendly on your own accord?
Or is that the P the person next
to you that
That made that decision.
Well, before we answer that. I
mean, I think that you make the
decision on your own, obviously,
with consultation with your
experts and
I would steer us away.
From
You know, subscribing any type
of motive too many of our
decisions so generally we go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and I
neglected to introduce my
speaker and I I mean, my expert
witness, and this is John Cena
from the L. E. S. C.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady, but
Are you? You didn't answer my
question. Are you not going to?
I'm just I just want to know.
Uh, Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman. I can make my own
decisions and I do.
Get. That's what I'd like to
hear.
Um
General lady as I looked through
the bill.
Ah, and I think you talked about
it a little bit.
Part of your bill will cause
the, um
Candidates.
Running for school board to be
subject to the campaign rules
and regulations. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Kind gentleman that
is correct. And Mr Speaker in
General Lady, Can you explain to
me how that will help education
and local in local communities,
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman?
Yes. I think it is incumbent
upon
Our our citizenry to understand
who backs people in different
campaigns and at the local
level, this gets these school
board elections, especially in
small rural communities, But I
think it's the same in a in a
large school district. People
pay attention to it, but they
ought to know who supports them.
And who
Who is working for them, and we
we tried to make it very, very
fair. I think it's just a matter
of public disclosure.
Most most small school board
members and rural communities
Don't spend a lot of money. I'm
just going to say people know
each other, and somebody will
put up a couple of signs. But
people are to know if they're
spending more than $1000. They
ought to. They ought to disclose
who they get that those
contributions from. I think
people need to know who's
backing them, And that's true in
any election, and that's it used
to be, Um
We raised that limit. It used to
be 500. We raised it to 1000 and
and before it was only the large
school districts just districts
with more than 12,000 people who
had to do any campaign
reporting, so it's really the
four largest school districts.
We think this ought to be, ah,
part of the practice of all
school boards throughout
The state because again, it's
it's transparency, and it's
knowing who's bringing these
people to the office.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady,
would it be correct? To
paraphrase your answer?
That it doesn't do anything for
education, but it does
politicized the school boards.
Well, Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman. I don't think that I
don't. I don't agree with that,
or I wouldn't have put it in. I
mean, I I think it's important
that people understand who
elects them. I think it's
important that they understand
who will excess in this body.
We have to do this campaign
reporting and I think it's fair
for all elected officials to be
held to the same standard.
So, Mr Speaker in general Lady.
You are.
Maybe I missed this but are
Are you one of the authors and
sponsors of this bill?
Uh, I am on that. Yes, I'm on
the top five sponsors of this
bill.
Okay. Thank you, gentle lady.
Um, but my question and I want
to delve into a little bit.
Yes.
You know local school boards, we
hope
Are those people that are
closest to the classroom.
That are
Closest to the administrators
and the teachers.
And we want to empower them to
be
Helpful to the education
process.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady.
That's my desire, and I think
it's probably your desire.
My point is putting them within
the political system doesn't do
much the classroom. It does
something for the political side
of it, but it doesn't do
anything for the classroom.
And that's troublesome to me.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
I think New Mexico is blessed
with some wonderful teachers.
And administrators. Would you
agree? Mr Speaker? Kind.
Gentlemen. I couldn't agree
more.
Mr Speaker in General Lady, our
metrics and education.
Are as my friend from San Juan
mentioned.
Pretty poor.
If we have great teachers and
great administrators
What would you suspect The
problem might be.
Well, Mr Speaker and kind,
Gentlemen, I'm glad you asked
that question. Because in this
training, here's what we said.
We want. Ah, ah local school
boards role in evaluating and
improving student academic
achievement and using data to
set individual school goals for
his student academic achievement
in each of the school districts,
public schools. So what you have
now what you have now and you
know this. I mean, I think
everybody in this body
understands this.
These school boards get elected
and the heart you know you're
talking about
Million, you know?
Hundreds of million dollars in
budgets, You know? Yes,
sometimes 34 million. I mean,
it's a big budget to understand,
you know that and your brand new
school board member you're
coming in. And all of a sudden
you're faced with all this
information and and you have to
start sorting it out. So so the
purpose of this is so that
They can start understanding
within the first three months.
Exactly how the law's impact
their decision making and how
What their what Their role is in
determining how they're going to
get the student's achievement
levels where they want them to
be lots of times in budgets, Mr
Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
You know, they just people just
vote on things because they've
always done it before they
haven't been trained to ask
questions like so if we do this
what? How does that contribute
to the student achievement
outcomes that we would like to
get at, you know? Are we just
doing this program because we've
done it for the last
10 years and nobody's even
looked at it. How much does it
cost? How much are we getting
out of that? So that's what this
training hopefully is set up to
provide so that people can tie
Money to achievement. That's
really what we want to do and
train them on how to do that, at
the local level.
So, Mr Speaker, and generally
let me paraphrase your answer
again.
The problem now that you have
decided
Is the local school boards have
made all that's the problem with
education in the Mexico is we
have terrible school boards. Is
that correct?
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
I never said that. I actually
think most of our school boards
Are pretty great people. Are
there problems? Yes, And let's
not pretend that we don't have
some huge problems.
In in school board elections
throughout throughout the state.
I'm just saying
I don't care who people elect
that's fine. That's their
choice. That's their
prerogative, and that's what
people should do. But I think we
need to as a body. Make sure
that they have the training they
need to understand how we reach
Those those achievement levels
that we want to get. That's all
I'm saying. In this legislation,
Mr Speaker, Speaker and General
Lady, I'm just
You're
The more I read this bill.
The more I disliked it.
Mr Speaker in General 80.
You have answered the question,
and I appreciate your answer,
and I respect your answer.
But every answer that you have
given causes me concern because
you said, if we trained the
school boards
That's gonna be the real step to
get things going.
But Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
I can give you dozens.
Dozens.
Of examples where schools in
rural New Mexico
Who who operate very close to
the the their administrators and
their teachers.
Perform at the highest levels.
They don't have any of this
training. They don't need any of
this trainer.
They stay close now. Will the
training help them? I'm not
going to argue that point
training helps us all.
But to say that the school
boards training is going to make
a difference in our education. I
take great exception to
Our problem has been in the
administration with ped and
everybody in this body that is
being honest about our metrics
would tell you that New Mexico's
metrics have been horrible.
But we have local school boards.
They're doing wonderful.
Now.
General lady, I think
I think it
I don't think having training
the school boards is bad thing.
I don't but our Children have
been
I said not long ago, and some
group that our kids were being
treated like a patient.
Where the doctor could not find.
what was the element, so we do
exploratory surgery every time
we get a new PD secretary
And our kids are getting jerked
from one extreme to the other.
And that bothers me a lot.
And and this bill that I think
because is more
Politics at the local level.
I don't think it's going to be
beneficial to the education in
the classroom. Let's go on.
Um, Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Is there any science Metrix?
That support these changes that
That, um
Would cause this body to believe
that
Giving more.
Um
More or less oversight from this
body to any school board is a
good thing before you answer
that question. I'm not sure I
understand it. I don't think
that there's any science perhaps
maybe.
Um, so as to the best of your
ability, but I want to get back
on the bill generally from all
those counties
Mr Speaker. I'm not being
argumentative about it. That's
what you understand where I'm
coming from.
In the first two pages of this
bill.
It causes changes within the
local school boards.
And we've been talking about
school board metrics and
Children's performance metrics.
What I My question was, are any
of these changes?
On these pages.
Has L. E s C or any of
Um ped.
Are there. Is there a reason for
me to believe that taking
School boards into
The politics.
Dr some kind of achievements
within the student population.
Well, I'm I'm just gonna read
something from you about the
National School Board
Association. What they say about
training, Okay, Because I do
want the body, Mr Speaker, and I
want you to understand this.
Yes, There's a lot of people
look at this stuff. It's it's
It's not only our problem. This
is a problem across the country,
so everybody is trying to do a
better job at figuring out how
we're going to bring
Educational achievement to our
kids. Really? So here's what
they say. The National School
Board Association finds
effective school boards focus on
eight practices.
Related to setting and
monitoring Gal's data driven
decision making and faster in
collaborative relations between
the board and the superintendent
and the community When boards
frequently engage in these
practices, there is evidence
that district show higher
student performance. So yes,
we're all looking at this. We're
all trying to do this. I mean,
I guess the alternative is just
to step back and say
We're not going to do anything.
I mean, this is trying Mr
Speaker and kind gentleman that
this really is trying to follow
best practices, Best studies and
and see what we can implement
here in New Mexico.
I appreciate that, and I do. I
do appreciate that, Mr Speaker
and generally
Is, um, is it
Common within school boards
across the nation to have this
type of reporting within their
school board members. I don't
know. I'm just asking
Um
Mr Speaker in kind, gentlemen. A
lot of states require this. Um
and a lot of states do a lot
more than we're doing right now.
But so this is kind of this kind
of first step we've taken in and
trying to codify what school
board members should
understanding and and know, And
what you should also know, Mr
Speaker and kind gentleman is
is, you know, we have a good
organization called the New
Mexico School Board Association.
This is just the beginning of
the training. This is these four
items are just the beginning of
the training. Afterwards, they
can convene meanings within a
New Mexico School Board
Association to dive deeper into
the subjects that they really
don't understand.
And Mr Speaker in general. I
appreciate that, Um, question
are all of the requirements
within this bill funded. I mean,
are we putting unfunded
mandates on small rural schools
when we talk about
Requires recording archiving
Webcasts, etcetera.
Do Are we funding that, Uh, Mr
Speaker and Kind gentleman,
Really. The schools were set up
during Covid. They had pretty
Pretty active, uh, webcasting
sites, and, um and I'm pretty
active Internet sites, uh, much
better than the rest of the
rural communities, so most of
them have access to that if they
if they need help. I mean, I
think they can get it now
through
Through the through the Internet
connections with the schools
that were set up during during
Covid. We didn't really have
that before we'll all of us had
to learn. We all had to learn
how to zoom. We all had to learn
how to do Internet training. I
mean, it was something none of
us knew the schools were kind of
at the forefront of that
movement.
And Mr Speaker, engine lady.
Will these new requirements be
imposed on
Private schools are any school
that takes public funding, I
guess is the key.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman?
No, not in private schools.
Charter schools? Yes, but not on
private skills.
I appreciate that. Speaking
generally, um
I
I think, um
To me. It was pretty telling.
And unfortunate.
And
And not conducive to
This legislature.
When we
Allow any
Department, Whether it's
transportation or
Tax and Reb.
P. E. D
I think this body has to be
Have some responsibility and
giving up all of our
responsibility.
And not requiring any of those
groups and the departments to
come back to this legislature.
For the follow the rules and the
laws of the statute.
That we go through tons of
trouble to pass.
And spend up. Stay up here till
one o'clock in the morning.
And and just say that
Uh, they don't have to pass
them.
Um, and abide by them is very
troubling to me. That in itself
is the reason I'm not going to
support this. I support the kids
I support education.
But I do not believe this
process.
Does one thing that's going to
increase our third grade.
Or fourth grade statistics.
Um and I think it's going to be
something that local school
boards will push back on.
They're going to be unhappy with
us for and they'll be unhappy
because we don't fund the
mandates that we put upon them.
So Mr Speaker and General Lady,
with all due respect, it's not
something I'm support.
There's supposed to be gentleman
from leaving. Sarah Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
General 80 yield
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
is.
As I listened to the debate with
my colleague from Chavez, Eddie
and Otero.
I believe I heard
From one of the bill's sponsors
that from the bill's sponsor
that
One of the things that that
You felt was Mr Speaker in
general lady Very important was
training for our school board
members. Did I hear that
correctly? Speaker Kind
gentleman you did.
Thank you very much. Mr Speaker
and General Lady, I'm not sure
you're how long
You've been in the legislative
body and I apologize for not
taking the time to look that up.
Mr Speaker and General Lady when
When you took office. Can you
tell me how many hours of
training you were required to go
through? Mr Speaker? Kind.
Gentlemen, we We worked for one
week. It was six years ago. We
were we were in training every
day. We started seven or eight
in the morning.
And we went to 10 o'clock at
night. So it was. It was six
days of training and you're
right. It still wasn't enough.
But it's certainly It's
certainly in introduced me to
what I know knew and what I
didn't know. And I have to tell
you what I didn't know was a lot
more than what I knew. So so can
we all use all the training? We
can get them. I still getting
training. Yes.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, you
came in at the time different
than me. Um, I came in at a time
where we had two requirements,
Ethics and harassment, both of
them. Mr Speaker and gentle lady
was somewhere between an hour to
two hours class.
Mr Speaker and General Lady with
respect to that.
We make laws.
For 2.1 million people.
Our laws impact.
Decisions.
That
Hmm.
Let's face it. Boards have no
control over education to begin
with. They get to hire and fire
superintendent
That's ultimately what they're
able to do.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
They have some other obligations
that they can do. But at the end
of the day, that's there.
That's what it is. They get to
sit and listen. They get to talk
through things.
They have some
Capability.
But Mr Speaker and gentle lady
is the book that I went through.
They have no control.
Whatsoever over any of the
metrics inside a volume one.
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
As we go through this
Training and in their first term
10 hours of mandatory training.
At least two hours covering
laws.
Department policies procedures
affecting local school boards.
public schools, including ethics
and school personnel.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
I contend that as lawmakers, we
don't go through that.
Mr. Speaker in General Lady, at
least two hours covering
covering public school finance,
budgeting, fiduciary
responsibilities, local school
boards.
I can guarantee you, Mr Speaker
and General Lady that is
lawmakers. We don't have any
class like that with respect to
lawmaking.
Our fiscal policies.
Anything like that.
Mr Speaker and General 82 hours
covering legal concepts
pertaining to local school
boards.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady once
again as lawmakers. We don't go
through a two hour training.
On
Legal concepts.
Related to the state of New
Mexico.
We don't get that.
No requirement for that
whatsoever, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
We don't even go through a
criminal background check.
And I sit here and I could
continue to go through this, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
We write laws.
For 2.1 million people.
Some of the school boards.
How many students were in their
classrooms.
You go from K through 12.
What we do.
Impacts millions.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. Now
we want to write a law.
For school boards that Mr
Speaker and General Lady
actually have no control over
what happens in fourth grade.
Mr Speaker and General Lady had
had love to hear an answer on
Why we think this is important
again.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And can
gentlemen I would beg to differ
with you, and you would only
have to go to the Carlsbad
community and see what not only
the Carlsbad School board, but
they're surrounding schools to
have done to improve academic
achievement for all of their
students. It's remarkable.
The LSC. When we go around the
state we look we look for we
look for examples where school
boards have made tremendous
differences for their
communities. And those are the
kind of examples we follow. We
look at schools that have really
A scores high above what other
schools are able to do. And we
asked those leaders and those
school board members. How did
you do this? How did you
accomplishment? How did you put
the money together to do it? How
did you and that's what we look
at? And so I can point to
several school boards in this
state? They just don't go there
to hire and fire superintendent.
They go there to make a
difference in Children's lives.
I think that's why every school
board member runs for office and
I respect that.
So to say that they do nothing
but hire and fire that
Superintendent. A good
superintendent knows how to
utilize school board members. We
all come with different skills
to this body. School board
members come with different
skills to their school boards.
Good Superintendent knows how to
how to how to highlight those,
um, skills.
And how to bring them together
into policy making decisions
that impact student achievement.
That's what would be my answer
to you, Mr Speaker and General
Lady. I love your response.
With respect to that because we
have amazing school districts
out there.
We have school.
Boards that get involved despite
Santa Fe, M. P. E. D
Not because of Santa Fe, M. P.
E. D
They do that in spite of what
happens, Mr Speaker and General
Lady
How does two hours of covering
laws and department policies
procedures?
And ethics.
Help improve fourth grade
reading level for a school
board.
Um, Mr Speaker.
I think it introduces them to
introduces school board members
to just kind of the first stage
of what their responsibilities
are. If they understand that
they can tie that they know
where they can get more
training, and they can tie that
to how they get student
achievement. But yes, you know,
we have to know. We have to know
here. We
I go to trainings all the time.
I listen to people in sometimes
I just go visit and talk to
people who may have the answers
I need and I do that frequently,
and I think school board and
active school board member will
do that, too. But first they
have to understand the laws that
govern school boards. Mr.
Speaker in General 80 Once again
I love your response.
Help me understand, Mr Speaker
and General Lady. How
A group of 112 people.
Let's set laws for 2.1 million
people.
Went through any of that gave
any of that understanding and
I'm trying to build a
correlation to understand the
requirements in here, Mr Speaker
and Kind gentleman. That's not
what my bills about. I didn't
write a bill on training for the
Legislature. I could do that. I
could do that. I don't know if
that would pass, but I could do
it.
I'm
I'm I'm looking at school boards
now because a lot of people have
come to us and said, you know,
It's not working as well as we'd
like it to work.
And and so that's our answer.
This isn't this is one answer is
that the total answer. Will this
change in the future? I hope so.
I hope it will. I hope it will
gain steam. I hope it works. And
I hope I hope that we work with
our superintendents as well as
our school boards to say. So,
What about this work? What
doesn't work?
And and and that's what I'm
telling you. I can't
I'm not bringing legislation to
train the Legislature.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
understand that That's not what
your bill does. I was trying to
build the correlations so we
could
We could put things in
perspective.
With respect to this
I'm not opposed to potentially
having very specific training on
goal setting and how to deal
with fourth graders.
Or eighth graders and how to
deal with those different types
of goals.
Mr Speaker and General Lady my
whole goal today in this
conversation was to put it in
context.
To build a big picture.
And Mr Speaker in general Lady.
When
We want to hold the school board
accountable.
But Mr Speaker and General Lady
The governing body. We don't
Makes no sense to me whatsoever.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady,
please help me understand where
inside this bill, which we're
trying to make make it all
better.
We deal with this.
Well, gentlemen, I think we're
going to get back to the bill. I
appreciate the connection you're
trying to. Um, you are
attempting to make two student
outcomes fair.
But let's get back to the bill.
We're talking about school board
training.
Speaker. I love the statement of
attempting to make is that I
didn't get there. And I do
appreciate that. So, Mr Speaker
and General Lady
With respect to that. I can't
support this. When we look at
this from an overall standpoint.
What's the fix the top?
Before we try and fix the
bottom.
Which is the people that are
doing the work all day long
every day.
That actually show up to work.
Every day.
That actually answer their
phones when the parents have a
problem.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Maybe next year. We can work on
something that fixes Santa Fe
and P E. D.
And doesn't mess
With things that are already
working. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General leading gentlemen,
it's enough for debate generated
close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 137 as amended.
Do now pass final passage of
Senate Bill 137 as amended. The
vote is now open.
What about clothes?
What is now closed by a vote of
42 in the affirmative 17 in the
negative.
137 is amended as passed his
house
Do you live from Santa Fe? Are
you ready and item? 32. Mr.
Speaker, Will you give me to
that place? The record flecked
that all action is sorry for
placing house Bill 303 on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution related to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. House Bill three or
three as amended, will create a
pilot program through HDD, which
will provide monetary stipends.
Individuals seeking integrated
educational training. These
statements are intended to cover
their living expenses to those
who are taking this
These courses from across the
state, and they have to be
enrolled in short term programs
to upscale and increase their
wages and be ready to be part of
our larger workforce. Mr.
Speaker, I do have an amendment.
Um, for this bill, Have you
brought it up to the restroom?
Okay, There is an amendment. It
should come up to the rostrum
and it should be signed.
In blue or black ink only
please.
The original plus three.
No yawning on the floor from
very well in towns.
Alright, We're gonna wait to get
the amendment passed out which
practical little little while
couple of minutes.
Bathroom break and Mr Speaker in
that time if I could introduce
my experts with me right now,
they're Amber Gallop with the
higher Ed department in Marcela
Chile from Santa Fe. The
amendment passed out when you
kindly read the 2 to 8 number on
the bottom left.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. The 2 to
2 to number is 0.228399 0.1 to
explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and
conversations and HFC. We were
discussed well being on the
opposite shore, so the First
Amendment clarifies a section
that's still referred to the
tannin funding the temporary
assistance for needy families.
This no longer utilizes that
funding. It goes through funding
that is already touched their
department so we removed that
language no longer applies.
And then after that, it
clarifies that, um it provides a
monetary stipend that shall not
Very well. Is there a debate on
the amendment Gentlemen from San
Juan Representative Montoya?
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does a
general lady from Santa Fe
Yield? Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. I appreciate this
amendment.
Um, the underlying bill.
Had
Really? No.
No top amount that could have
been paid or no limit on the
length of duration.
So, um, ms Speaker and generally
the way I'm reading. This is
Uh, a limit of
$1000
Per month.
And then one year limit as well.
Is that is that correct? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally I'm not going to
belabor the point. I appreciate
this. And just a quick question
as to how did you come up with
those?
Those restrictions. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So in terms of how
long it goes on, we wanted to
give flexibility of someone
completed one course. And then
it went into another one to get
their certification. Think of
some of its maybe getting
anxious second language and then
in terms of the amount we wanted
it to be flexible and places
like Santa Fe, For example, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, where it is
more expensive to live versus
other areas as well.
So, Mr Speaker, and generally
the 1000 is not
A guaranteed amount. It's the
It's up to. Yes, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And generally I support
this amendment.
Deserve for the debate on the
amendment. Gentlemen from Otero,
representative block. Thank you,
Mr Speaker with the kind general
lady from Santa Fe, please
Yield. Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman from Otero
County. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General Lady. Just one question
regarding the bill. So
With your amendment. Are you
taking out the 10? If funds from
the bill, Mr Speaker? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So those were removed
in an earlier in our amendment
and HFC
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Generally, I just have a problem
with this like it's a procedural
problem because according to the
rules
A bill.
Needs to reflect its title. And
if there is no tenant funds in
the bill, Mr Speaker
Then.
I mean, it goes against the very
purpose and title of the bill
itself. So that's my concern, Mr
Speaker, and that's House rules
11-2 to 11-4.
Okay. So for the debate on the
amendment
Objection to adopting the
amendment.
Okay?
Um so we'll go ahead and do a
roll call vote.
We have
Do you have a debate on the
amendment?
Generated from Santa Fe. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Will the
Gentle lady. Yield. Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker.
I do. Um and looking at the
original title of the bill, I
think we We need a lot. Maybe
not on this cement. Obviously,
this is your amendment, You
have. But
I would say now with this
amendment that you have put
forward it doesn't match the
intention of or the title of the
bill. So I think you're going to
need a second Amendment on that
as
Discussed with the gentleman.
So I just wanted to say that. So
how remember remedy that Mr
Speaker, But I would concur with
that.
Mr Speaker. Thank you. Very
well. We're in a motion to adopt
the amendment. A vote of yes,
and would have adopted the
amendment of vote of knowing
we're back in the amendment.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is enclosed by border 45 in
the affirmative, sick eight.
In the negative House floor
Amendment number one to House
Bill 303, as amended has been
adopted.
Gentle lady. We're back to you
as a sponsor. Are you ready for
debate? Yes, Mr Speaker. There
is debate. Gentlemen from Colfax
create hard inquiries and
beginning union representative
Chatfield.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Colfax Quay,
Harding. Quick, Harding Core
curry, San Miguel in Union.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Ah, I was course in the in the
committee. We had a great
discussion over these over this
bill.
And I voted for it.
Since then.
Reddit studied it.
And I have a few questions about
it.
Ah, the first part that I read
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady was
workforce training.
It would be on
Page two.
Lines five through 12.
Ah talks about
Page two lines.
Uh, 3 to 12.
Talks about CTE. Basically, they
the
Participant will earn
certificates of license or
credentials and will have
acquired specialist
qualification or skills
recognized within an industry or
a field as appropriate to
attain.
Employment.
No, I'm all about that.
You know?
Give someone a fish. You feed
him for a day. Teach him to fish
Feed him for a lifetime, right?
I believe that strongly.
You know, I'm gone down the page
a little bit.
Demonstrate that the state can
measurably
Increase access to living wage
job.
Mr Speaker.
General lady. I've had a job
since I was in the fourth grade.
And I usually had to have two of
them to make a living wage. Uh,
sometimes my wife had one. I had
one or two. Whatever we could
come up with to make a living
wage. It's It's a kind of a
tough environment out there so
So I'm
You don't have to answer me. I'm
just
Posing the question. You know
what a living wage I think that
that's really hard to find.
Because depends on
How were you want to live?
Right?
So
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
You solved one of my problems.
Which was the the ongoing
monetary stipend, which was a
living wage, and I it really
messed up my questions. Mr
Speaker, because I was gonna ask
you Are we talking about a dorm
room or or a big house?
Are we talking about a bus
ticket or Cadillac? You know.
So I think that was a really
good amendment that you put on
there.
Ah!
What did disappoint me.
Was that you?
Removed.
That it came from Tana funds,
which are
Federal funds.
For temporary assistance for
needy families.
And so the whole little
Saying that I said about about
the fish. I'd rather teach
somebody to fish than just give
them a free fish, right?
Rather teach him a job skills so
they can so they can earn a
living. Make a living. Whatever.
So I was very disappointed.
Ah!
Whenever it uh
No longer used 10 of funds and
instead it it relies on the
state to appropriate.
Funds for it.
Ah!
And I was looking at some of the
Career technical education.
You know, some of them might
take a little little while to to
complete aerospace.
Might take a while to get a
degree, get a certificate and
aerospace and
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Ah probably had to daydream just
a little bit and the
Micro in the bioscience.
I thought, well, I could study
nuclear nation which
Here's the creation is that
cloud seeding, sir?
Yeah, yeah, Back in club sitting
nuclear nation is the creation
of a crystal out of a vapor.
So I could study that.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
As a as I went on down.
I came to Page five.
Line.
10 and 11.
It says no later than October,
the first
2024
That they should there is they
should determine
And recommend to the legislative
Education Steady committee.
Um
Participant eligibility.
Requirements and appropriate
dollar amount.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady, I
would think that
Oversight.
For a dollar amounts and that
sort of thing.
Would be more appropriate to the
Legislative Finance Committee.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
I looked it up.
2 10 2 Days 10. That's three.
Duties of the Legislative
Education Committee.
And it says
Mr Speaker didn't let them will
have to put my glasses on for
this one.
Ah!
Conducted continue the
Legislative Education Study
Committee should
Kentucky. They continuing study
of all education in New Mexico.
The laws governing such
education and the policies and
cost of the New Mexico
educational system.
Provided that such studies
Shall not duplicate studies
conducted by the Board of
Education, Finance, Nor shall
such studies.
Related to higher education deal
with any subject other than the
training.
Of certified teaching.
Personnel.
In postsecondary institution.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
In order to rectify that
situation.
I have an amendment.
All right. Do we have the
amendment up here? Come on down.
We are going to wait for the
amendment to be passed out.
And then we will have you
explained it.
It will go back to the sponsor,
too.
Determine if it is friendly or
unfriendly.
It appears that the amendments
and passed out, gentlemen, would
you please read the 2 to 8
number and explain the
amendment.
So, Mr Speaker.
The number is 0.228.
368.1
Very well the gentleman to
explain it.
Ah, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady.
What This amendment does
Is, uh
Direct Education Committee and
makes it the finance Committee
that is reported to
Um
And it adds by December 1st,
2025 and by city Simmer the
first of each subsequent
calendar year.
And then consultation with the
Healthcare Authority Department
in any other appropriate
State Agency provide a report to
the Legislative Finance
Committee assessing the impact
and outcomes of the pilot
program.
And providing
Department recommendations.
Congratulating. Is this a
friendly amendment? It is Mr
Speaker. It is a friendly
amendment. All right. Is there a
debate on the amendment?
Round of applause. Alright.
Is there objection to adopting
the amendment.
Two has built 303 s twice
amended has been adopted.
Gentlemen, from all those
counties you see on the floor.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Thank
you.
That's all.
Your job here is done.
There is further debate
Gentlemen from Chavez, Arian
Otero, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker of the
general idea of Mr Speaker. I
yield to the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero
counties. Thank you to the lady.
Uh,
A couple of
Things.
Have we quantified, But the
expenditure is within this bill.
Do we know how much money we're
spending and if so, how much is
it? Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. It's a million
dollars over three years, which
is included in the budget.
Well.
That kind of surprised me of
Lady. I thought we probably
we're going to try to help a
larger
Population than a million
dollars.
Wedding handle.
Is that
Am I missing something? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Census is a pilot
project. We wanted to start here
and then see what the results
were and grow from there.
General lady, um
A couple other questions and
I'll be quick to be a
Um, to be adopted or to be
Approved. What are the criteria
for that person?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, so a
participant is defined as a New
Mexico resident and the pilot
program is New Mexico Workforce
training programs in the state,
and it also clarifies that those
Individuals have to be enrolled
in a state accredited
institution of higher learning.
Um through the I E T program at
high higher ed, so that in and
of itself is a smaller
population, and it really is the
focus that we were looking at is
up Skilling as much as possible,
helping people improve their
wages when they might not have
gotten their high school
diploma.
And things like that.
So how? How many people? Do you
think that
You realistically can have in
the program the first year.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That's a great
question. Um, so one of the
amendments that came out of the
house appropriations in
consultation with higher Ed
department was that they
requested that they be allowed
to develop the program until
April 2025 and we wanted to give
them that time to be able to put
together you know all of the
additional guardrails to make
sure that it was the proper way
to work because it would be
starting
Half about a quarter of the way
through a third of the way
through of 2025. The expectation
is that there's probably going
to be a lower use of this
program and that first year and
then over time, we would go up
from there, but we felt that
again. A lot of this is going to
be told, right. You know, I'll
give you the maximum in a minute
of how many it could be, who
used the maximum amount
But for the most part we're
anticipating folks in six weeks
to three month programs. Those
are pretty common for this kind
of certification. Speaker
General Lady is, um
These new Mexico residents are
they citizens of the of the
state? Or is that a requirement
as well? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. It is not
required. It is not a
requirement.
And do we have any breakdown on
That
Um
Population of people that were
going to be helping
It, does it. Is it a larger
sector?
Just a larger body of
Citizens versus non citizens
that mean I'm just
What are we trying to do? Is
what I'm trying to find out.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So in this
program, it is required that
they be new Mexico residents and
the real impetus for me. I'll be
Frank was my folks. My residents
who live in various places, and
they want to up skill, so
they're looking at three D
printing as an industry that
could make sense in the
Southeast, you know, looking at
different, um, possibilities
there as a gentleman earlier
mentioned the different
industries.
You know, even in aerospace you
have. You know, you may have a
millionaire that's running it,
but all the way down. There are
different jobs that people
people in New Mexico should be
filling, so I don't have a
breakdown of how that will
happen. But I do believe that
we'll see a healthy mix of New
Mexico residents trying to get
better jobs and pay better for
their families.
I appreciate your answers.
General Lady, Mr Speaker. Thank
you.
There is a debate Gentlemen from
Dona Ana representative Lada.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady yield Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Gentle lady and
I was thinking about the
conversation that we had earlier
about this bill, so I had some
concerns about it.
Not for the reasons Ah
That many may think you know, I
don't oppose it.
But I was looking out for my
folks back home. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
So one of the questions that I
had is Mr Speaker and general
Lady.
Is who
Who are we targeting? With this
with this bill, are we
targeting?
Single moms are we targeting?
Uh, people who don't have a high
school education? Who are we
targeting? With this?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I mean, you
cited a few folks right for a
single mom to get a better job.
they have to get but they have
to up skill. And when you take
these courses at a community
college or otherwise, oftentimes
thereafter, the daycares have
closed up there was after that
happens so these funds would
ensure they could have childcare
at that same time.
Well, we're looking at is folks
that especially in the I eat
programs at higher ed it maybe
people that haven't finished
high school and maybe people
that definitive that did finish
high school, but they just need
to improve their skill set for
the for the market that we're
attracting in New Mexico.
Thank you, young lady and Mr
Speaker and General ladies so
Are we just is just the idea of
this program is that just to
create a workforce or maybe
maybe we can inspire some folks
to start their own businesses
doing this kind of things. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Absolutely. I mean,
we're looking at home grown New
Mexico Industries and doing what
we do. Well, we we identified
the specific industries because
they were part of the economic
strategic plan that was laid out
and there are places where we
have seen some growth.
So absolutely thank you for that
gentle lady and Mr Speaker.
So one of the one of the
concerns that I had with this is
I was wondering if the stipend
would be considerable Taxable
income by the I R. S and I was
worried that many of our some of
my folks would be wouldn't be
able to take advantage of
something like this because they
would get this increase in
income. That's what I call it. I
may be wrong.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, is
that a concern? Is that
something that that that I
should be concerned with? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. It was a conversation
point and what we refer to as
the Cliff effect right that you
You don't have enough income. So
you have these benefits, but
then you suddenly have more and
you lose all these benefits, And
the more that you make up isn't
actually worth all about much.
Um, what we have done in New
Mexico is these are considered
HST now. HCIA, the healthcare
authority considers these gifts
and that's under federal statute
as well. And we are one of the
few states that takes advantage
of that consideration, and so as
a result, federal benefits snap
benefits 10 of benefits
Individuals would still be
eligible for those and this
would not be counted against
their income.
Thank you, gentle lady. Mr
Speaker. That was like I
mentioned that was one of my
concerns, and that was and and
thank you for laying those
concerns. So then I can safely
say that my constituents who
participate in this program
General Lady and Mr Speaker will
not re receiving an 1099 at the
end of the year.
I'm sorry, Mr Mr Speaker. Dylan,
could you repeat the question? I
Mr. General Lady, Mr Speaker. I
had mentioned that I can assure
by my constituents back home
that they wish to participate in
this that they won't be
receiving that 1099 from the I R
s Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. That is correct.
They are not. This is not
taxable income.
Thank you for that. I really
appreciate that. Mr Speaker,
General lady, So, uh, can you is
there a real world example that
you can give me of someone who's
participated in this type of
program before that can that you
can illustrate how if it was
successful or not, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So this is
actually
This is actually partially
developed out of what we've seen
in Santa Fe County in Santa Fe
Community College, so they had a
similar stipend program, and
they recently graduated a class
of 20.
A cohort. Sorry, I should say a
cohort of Ciena's out of that
class, all of which were parents
and all of which were able to
complete that course and enter
the workforce serving in our
healthcare field because of the
stipends they received from
there, So we saw that as a
success and we thought, Let's
see how it would work in the
rest of New Mexico.
Thank you for that young lady
and Mr Speaker, so I I'm really
glad to hear that because we do
have living proof that this
works and that our families are
able to succeed and go on to
bigger and better things that
said, General Lady and Mr
Speaker, So, um
Is. How is this going to be
advertised as this? Is this
going to be? How is this going
to be disseminated statewide?
You know where where the
population is going to be chosen
from? I'm curious as to that,
just to make sure General Lady
and Mr Speaker that I make sure
that I get my folks who are
interested in it to participate
in this program. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So it is part of the adult
education programming throughout
the state, and so it'll be
advertised with other adult
education programming.
And so as they identified
programs that might offer this
that information would be
included that they might be
eligible for this statement.
Thank you, General lady and Mr
Speaker. So then, uh, so then my
local community colleges that
Dona Ana community College would
be able to advertise this and
recruit families. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
You know they're going to be
looking specifically at programs
that are credited by state
institutions of higher and
higher learning. And the
programs I know that are at at
Dona Ana are really incredible
and really are moving people to
the workforce and it would not
shock me if that was one of the
programs that was selected and
that they would be able to
advertise that as well. Yes,
Yes. Thank you for that young
lady and Mr Speaker, they do
great work at Dr Torres is
really great.
Work at Diana Committee College,
and I think there will be
Very good at getting the
information out to the community
General Lady and Mr Speaker. So,
uh,
Is there any besides the
stipend? Is there any other type
of support that goes along with
that? You know it do do they pay
does that pay for their tuition
is their book books or materials
that are paid for out of this?
How? How does How does that
aspect work? General Lady Mr
Speaker?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. Tuition books.
Those aspects are covered
through other programming. Other
funding that that's already gone
through a appropriations
committee. So that's all kind of
included in this I e T programs
and learning.
Thank you gentle lady for that
general Lady, Mr Speaker.
Another question. So are these
are these individuals eligible
for the opportunity Scholarship?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So these are
more towards non credited
programs. So this is a separate
program than that.
Thank you for that, John lady. I
appreciate the answer. Um, I
think I think this is a great
program and I and I I think we
should support it. I believe
that giving those people that
chance to learn and to grow and
to develop will not only benefit
them in the long run, but will
also benefit their Children and
their families. Because Mr
Speaker and General Lady
It will set the example.
And it's gonna It's gonna really
going to lift a lot of our
families up.
And really make them productive
Members of our society. I
support this bill fully. Thank
you. Thank you, John. Lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady from
Santa Fe Yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Lee. Ms. Speaker,
General Lady, what would you
Estimate there with your expert,
The administrative overhead of
this program would be
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So they're
anticipating around 80 or
$90,000 a year, Um, just for it
to complete the work that's
outlined in here by one of their
employees and over three years
that would be you know, was that
24,000 Wait, No 240,000, or 9200
and 70,000 for the full three
year program.
Okay, which leaves $330,000.
For the
The program itself.
What did I do the math
correctly, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, it would leave around
700,000 for the program itself
over those three years.
The administrative overhead
would be
Okay. 700,000, or poor available
for program 700,000.
So
Over a three year period.
About $233,000 a year.
And if we were
And I divide that by
Say $500 a month which would be
half of the maximum
That's another at $6000.
So it looks to me like Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
We're not helping very many
people here.
Is that the intent? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So as I mentioned
earlier, most of these programs
that we're looking at are
something like six weeks. Two
more like 12 weeks. We gave the
flexibility of up to 12 months
in case someone was taking
English as a second language, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, as well as
another course as well. But
You know it, I think, And this
is why the reporting will be
very fascinating to see how the
people held individuals take
utilize this funding because if
people are taking both if they
do need to get that extra amount
of education, and this supports
both of those certifications,
you know, how does that shift
the workforce? So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I think you know to
be fair.
Um, if we're looking at around
700,000 divided by 500 per
month.
And then that's about 1400
months, there would be
available, right and so, um,
they're just kind of considering
it from that perspective again.
A lot of that's going to object
to, um, um shift just depending
on what regions take advantage
of this program where we're
seeing that that get used.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
this is not intended to get any
of these people.
Any kind of a degree.
It's much, much shorter term
than that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, that's
correct. As we know, we have
some heist, a lot of high school
graduates and a lot of PhDs
because of our national labs,
black folks that have those
longer term degrees, And as I
think a lot of us have seen in
our communities for an
individual to take off four
years or two years to get a long
term, you know, credited degree
that is a long investment that
people can't afford, However.
There are programs that are much
shorter that can earn people 66
figures. After six weeks of
working on this, we've seen
these types of programs and at
Central New Mexico Community
College. We've seen it in Dona
Ana. We see it in Santa Fe and
so across the state, there are
different programs that will
enable people in a very short
amount of time to really
multiply with what they're
earning potential is okay,
Mr Speaker, General Lady. What's
the estimate?
Ah, total expenditures per
participant.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. We wanted to put
the higher end limits on there
for you know, the the the more
expensive counties. Um, you
know, in previous programs that
we've seen some of the minutes
$600 a month for short periods,
it's really going to come down
to how they looking at each
county looking at those programs
looking at what's offered and
what fits into the economic
development.
Um, industries that we've
outlined on pages three and
four.
Okay? $600 a month and four
months to die here that
correctly.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Um, uh, gentlemen, about
four months? Yes.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
This still
I suppose it could be qualified
as a pilot program.
But I don't think
A million dollars with 300 grand
Heating up.
And overhead.
Is going to leave enough money
to make any material difference.
To a great many people.
Hmm. And
Uh, question.
The long term benefits.
Of helping maybe 100 125 folks.
With
Four months of full stipends to
get
Some sort of credential that
Is represented as
Improving their lives, but
I'll be interested in listening
to the rest of the debate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
Generating gentlemen, there is a
debate that generally from
Bernalillo, your representative
about a horn.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the General Lady from south
from Virgilio.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and dental
lady. I am in favor of this bill
because as a young person I've
experienced what it means to
forego your income to achieve
education when I went and did a
one year master's, and I knew
that as I was entering it, I
would have to make the decision
between
Am I gonna, You know, support
myself, or am I going to have to
take out a loan to go to
complete that one year Master's?
Luckily, I was able to get a
full ride tuition scholarship
for that that covered my living
expenses as well. And that's
what made it possible for me to
actually to actually get my
masters in economics and
business.
And for some of these technical
programs, I am well aware the
way that they have changed the
lives of some of my friends who
have gone into welding, for
instance, and learned how much
in demand those those employment
are.
Um, I have a few questions about
the, um about the way that we're
going to study the Ah, this this
pilot Ah,
The timeline right now to
implement it would start on
July. 1st 2024 is that correct?
Mr Speaker? Gentle lady. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. General Lady?
Yes.
Would so would that be enough
Time for, um for HDD to be able
to put together a plan to set up
this pilot given the haven't
done one before?
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady, So just to be
clear they would be able to
access the funds for this.
Starting on July 1st, and then
they'd have all the way until
April 1st 2025 to actually begin
to implemented. That extra time
was requested by the department
and we believe that they should
be able to to accomplish that in
that time period.
Mr Speaker, Dental lady would
would the program be rolled out
through, uh, for all families,
Or would there be an incremental
amount of families that are
phased into the program? Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. Yeah, that's
going to be figured out in that,
you know, year ish amount of
time that we're looking at here
really? To see where we can get
the most impact with the
funding. We have.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady and I
saw that it was amended from
five years to three years. What
was the reasoning behind that
switch? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. The
idea is that some of the
concerns that our colleagues had
just that You wanted to get the
most bang for your buck to be
really crass and wanted to make
sure as much of the money was
getting to the community as
possible.
Great. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady and, um, and then,
finally, what sort of metrics
will be used to study the
success of the program? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General. Ladies, So some of the
things we've identified that,
um, that will be reported back
to lfc. No. Which is a good
thing is the impacts and
outcomes of the pilot program
and, um, let's see and then
Give me one moment as well.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Also
the impacts to preventing
income, housing and food
security is another aspect of
this. We wanted to see as well,
Um you know the hypothesis that
we have seen a lot of studies
back up is that when people have
economic security, Mr Speaker,
General lady, um they do better
in school, and there's a lot of
evidence to that. Um, but to
your point, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. Those funds are often
times available for those
reaching a four year degree or
something larger. We really want
to see this in the community. Mr
Speaker, General Lady for those
individuals
The filling in the workforce
that we need to tell businesses.
Hey, come on out. New Mexico is
ready for you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady and just based on my
calculations for Albuquerque,
the average rent there right now
is 1000 $200 If I'm going to
spend $100 on groceries and in
another $70 on utilities, um,
you know, bringing my living
cost about 1000 400,500.
Adding this extra $1000 as a
little stipend in order to get
me to the point of achieving
really big change of really huge
differential in pay, I think
will be really worth it for our
new Mexico population. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Next unless we have the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
County representatives.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General lady from Santa Fe yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman from Lincoln
and Otero counties. Thank you,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
I just had a few questions and
I'm going to try real hard not
to be redone and I walked out a
couple of times. So on the
funding side of it.
Um, we're talking about a
million dollars. Is that
correct? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. Yes,
but gentlemen, yes. Sorry.
It's okay. It's okay.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in General
lady. So is that a million every
year that will be appropriated
for five years. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So the amendment we had in HFC
shorten the program to three
years and it would be a million
for the entire term of that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
So, um, as far as the long term
side of it.
Ha ha. Well, that million
dollars. Is it going to last for
the three years? Is there any Is
it a fund? Or is it just the
pilot project? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
This is specifically a pilot
program to see what the results
are and to see if this is
something that would be worth
expanding. What is the return on
investment We're getting from
helping these individuals in
this way.
Okay. Thank you.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
So
One thing that I want you to
entertain if it since it is a
pilot project is
I have seen the SETI program.
I'm a big fan of it.
But I've seen more failed the
program. Then finish it. They
start out real aggressive, and
they don't finish very strong
and Mr Speaker and General Lady
from Santa Fe
Um, I have back home.
Uh, benefactor and what he does
with these, um
The people that get into the CTE
program is instead of paying
them up front.
And they don't finished and they
get the money.
Is he pays him on the back end
and he pays them for their
success.
I would like to see. I know it
can happen right now, and I just
want to bring it up Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
He offers them on a two year
degree when they graduate
$30,000.
And that $30,000 usually is
really beneficial to them at the
end, because, um, well, it's
kind of like the carrot, you
know, they get something for
their hard work, and there's a
lot of access.
But there's not a whole lot of
outcome.
And I see a lot of money being
wasted. And the other thing I
was wanting to know is and I
heard it earlier, but
It's not going to take care of
very many people, and whenever
you get into selecting the
folks, how does that look? Mr
Speaker?
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. So in less we
mentioned we want to work
directly with HDD to ensure that
a lot of we're getting the most
bang for the buck. Right. We're
making the most impact for
folks. Um and so for this, Um
uh, so as mentioned, you know
the correct I'm sorry. I'm going
to go back for a second. It is
late, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
You were. Can you repeat your
question? I apologize.
So whenever you whenever you get
ready to select the people that
are going to get into the
program, What does that look
like? Do you does the HDD select
the people? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Yes, These are integrated
education training students
there, so there are already a
subset of who's who This is
accessible to. So yes, they're
selected by HD.
But they have to be in Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen in one of
those pro and one of those
programs. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General Lady. So would this
also applied to maybe a dual
credit program and the HD
working with high schools to put
kiddos into this? The SETI
program? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
No. This is focused on adults
and this adult education.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
There is a debate Your lady from
Chavez representative is l
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
lady from Santa Fe Yield,
please? Yes, Mr Slowly. Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the general
lady from Chavez.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
very much. General lady.
I understand the intent that you
want to do here. I truly get it.
But a million dollars spread
over three years by high Haven't
And I'm I'm assuming that higher
Ed is going to have to hire
somebody to work on this
project.
And that's spreading that money
awfully thin.
You are listing here on Page
four of your build Some of the
Training programs that you're
going to have available Natural
resources management, renewable
energy, broadband expansion,
First responders, construction
industry, aerospace,
Biosciences, cybersecurity, and
the list goes on and on and on.
But and this is where I like to
go where I like to brag on my
area, okay?
Eastern New Mexico, Roswell.
And the the other school that's
out there. The alternative
school out there is already
doing this.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady served
many years ago. Over 25. Years
ago, there was a
State representative named Avon
Wilson.
She started a program called
Basic Adult Education.
And I'm sure that all of you all
have are the ladies sitting
behind you have heard of this
and it was a huge success, and
it still is.
And this gives people the
opportunity to be able to speak
English as a second language to
get their foot into some of
these businesses that you've
already listed here that we
already have going down there.
And therefore I just I'm really
bothered that we are trying to
reinvent the wheel. Madam Chair.
CNN doesn't excellent job as
well.
But whenever we're trying to do
this on a shoestring budget that
is not really going to make, in
my opinion going to make that
much of a difference.
There's a problem.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. Where
is this supposed to take place?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
But
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generally, yes. Across the
state.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
House is going to be
administered through higher Ed.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. It's going to
be administered by the adult
education programs in higher Ed.
Is there a specific element that
you're wondering about the
administrative process? Mr
Speaker? You say that you're
asking for a million dollars for
three years, and this program is
going to be administered
throughout the whole state of
New Mexico.
And boy, I'm just I just don't
see that happening. I hate to be
of a nice you're here. I wish
you know everybody.
Would be able to participate in
this, but that's that's kind of
putting the jelly on a little
bit thin on the piece of toast
we're having for breakfast.
Is higher Ed going to have to
hire more staff to implement
this program.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. General Lady already
higher EDS. Adult education
programs serve 700 individuals
throughout the state of New
Mexico. And so this would again
be a fairly large fraction of
that number that wouldn't be
increased to serve that they
anticipate adding a full time
staff member. But but one
specifically
I'm sorry. I didn't quite
understand what you said there
at the end, Mr Speaker.
generally they would be hiring
one full time staff member.
Okay?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Is is want these programs to
last between six and 12 weeks
there you want these people that
are attended these classes or
programs to get a small stipend.
In the meantime, are they living
at home or they going someplace
else to study this? I don't
understand what you're trying to
get accomplished there. Can you
feel me in? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. We're trying to ensure
that the folks have the means to
attend these program.
Grams.
To get better jobs that are in
key industries that we want to
attract more businesses in
businesses that they may even
decide to start themselves. And
so these months, these monies
would be used by those
individuals to fill in the gaps
so that they're not worried
about losing their home or
losing, you know, daycare or
childcare that they might need.
In addition, because oftentimes
these courses are not 9 to 5
when Daycares might be open, so
this is really ensuring they
have what they need to complete
these courses in effect.
Particularly these courses.
Mr Speaker. I do understand that
that sometimes trying to get
everything to fit in trying to
maintain a family trying to hold
down a job to make in seat meat
does get kind of overwhelming,
but it is possible.
And if you want it bad enough,
you will go for it.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
follow. I admire what you're
trying to do here.
I don't think
That what you are proposing here
in this particular bill is going
to get the job done.
Mr Speaker.
Like I said, I do like to brag
and everything that you have
listed here on Page four of your
bill.
That's offered down at Eastern
New Mexico University, Roswell.
They also offered offer a lot of
the same things that the rid Oh,
so branch of it. A lot of our
community College office offers
programs like this.
Alternative school down there.
They offer carpentry, a MP
electrical auto mechanics,
nursing cosmetology, oilfield
training cinematography. The
list goes on and on and on.
But these students
Whether they are adults or young
people that haven't reached the
age of 25.
They get the training.
But they fit those programs
around the work schedule of
those people, the older people
I'm going to say over 21.
That are trying to get the job
done, and it works for them
because they are flexible in
these programs. Mr Speaker after
pointing that out, I was
noticing another thing on your
bill, and it's kind of I needed
clarification here, Mr Speaker.
Unpaid three of your Bill line
10 and I'm Page four of your
bill line 24.
You're saying that eligibility
criteria shall not restrict
participants based on
immigration studies. Can you
explain that for me, please?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generating any new Mexico
resident can qualify this once.
Um, the fire department. Come,
you know, promulgates the rules
surrounding this and talking too
fast again. You need to slow
down. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General lady. Uh,
yeah. So it as long as their new
Mexico residents they can
participate in this
Okay, but I don't get what
you're trying to stay here.
Explain what you mean by
immigration status. Mr. Speaker.
I want to clarification there.
Mr Speaker, General lady,
regardless of their immigration
status if they are New Mexico
residents and enrolled in these
programs they will be able
eligible for these programs.
Mr Speaker. That's fine.
But these people that do have a
problem with the immigration
status.
Do you? Do You know what the
laws are regarding?
The Border Patrol and what is in
place as far as anybody any
employee or out there being able
to hire somebody that doesn't
have legal status in the United
States?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. We know that
immigrants of all backgrounds
when their documentation may
vary, we know that they are part
of our workforce and that they
are working in southeast New
Mexico in Santa Fe, Albuquerque
across the state, And so we
already know that they're doing
this work and we want to
encourage our workforce to be
ready for the industries that we
want to attraction in Mexico.
Well, Mr Speaker along with what
you're trying to do to get help
everybody get higher paying
jobs Living way to all of this
type of stuff. Do you have a
program in place to help these
people that might have a problem
with their immigration status to
become legal residents or
citizens?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. This
program is through higher Ed
department and so for this bill
that now that is not a part of
this, however, can allow
individuals to gain the skills
that they will find useful in
our communities.
Mr Speaker. I do know that there
is a penalty for anybody that is
hiring illegal immigrants, and
it's a big fine. It's not just a
$10 fine or something like that.
It's a huge, fine, so
Are we
Your intent is for everybody to
be able to participate that
wants to participate in. I don't
have a problem with that.
But are we going to be paying
for a workforce that is not
going to be eligible to work
legally in the state of New
Mexico?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady so they can
become They can change their
status. As we know, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. They can also
start their own businesses. If
there as well And as we know
from I eat programs already in
place. The majority of them are
U. S citizens.
Mr Speaker. I didn't understand
the last part you were. You went
away from your microphone, so I
couldn't hear what you were
saying. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, Um, the folks in the I eat
programs right now, that would
that would be impacted by this.
There's 700 of them and the
majority of them are U. S
citizens and Mr Speaker. I
appreciate that.
And I also understand that there
are jobs out there that we have
lazy Americans that don't want
to do.
And so we do have to work on
work rely on the workforce that
might have some immigration
issues there. I get that.
It's very prevalent in the
agricultural industry.
It is. I'm not. I'm not
disputing that at all.
That Mr Speaker, General Lady.
We have to be very careful going
down that that road right there
because it is going to be a very
bumpy road. I'm afraid whenever
we're seeing anybody, and
everybody can come to this
Mr Speaker, General Lady. My
concern with this is let me turn
the page over here. I've got
another one mark somewhere. Now
I can't seem to find him.
Um
You have changed this program to
where it's a
A three year program.
You're not thought I had marked
a spot where
Maybe I didn't.
Okay, because that has been
stricken. So that has been taken
care, But I can't find it right
now. My eyes are killing me.
But Mr Speaker
General lady Whenever we are
talking about getting our
citizens of the state of New
Mexico out there in the
workforce to make a living,
weight, it does take some
sacrifice on the part of the
applicant whenever they want to
strive for higher rewards in
their life to be able to up
their family have a bigger a
better life.
And it all. I don't mind a hand
up. Mr Speaker. I don't mind the
hand up at all. I'm just tired
of the handout from back to the
people that do pay the taxes in
our state.
If they want to hand up. I'm
willing to help.
To hand out all the time is
getting old. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen from San
Juan.
Rep prison and it is
Monsanto.
Thank you. Mr Speaker Does
General Lady yield Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
So, um, Ms Speaker, General
Lady.
So these dollars can be used for
for for a stipend.
For living expenses they can be
used for.
Costs such as childcare that it
can be used for.
For tuition.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Technically,
they can use it for tuition,
although there are other funds
that are more direct directly
related to tuition.
So thanks for that, Um
Mr Chair and representative in
committee when we were talking
about this bill
Um
There was some discussion as to
whether or not
Ah, the folks who would be
receiving
This help would qualify for some
of that other
Um some of those other funds.
Um, summer speaker and gentle
lady.
It didn't appear as if the folks
if they qualified for this
program would also qualify for
The lottery scholarship or the
opportunity scholarship. Is that
correct?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So the lottery
scholarship is for accredited,
longer term programming. Um,
that is degree seeking based.
This is I eat programming that
is much more tailored to help
helping individuals upscale, And
so you know, this would not be
able to stack on top of the
opportunity Scholarship. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
However, it does fill the needs
that we have in the community.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. Um what other
Um, assistance could folks who
apply for this
Um, funding. What other
assistance could they be on? At
the same time? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Um, they could be on
tan if they could be on the
temporary assistance for needy
families. They could be on the
10 of fund. They could be on
snap. There could be a variety
of different funding they may
receive to help them make ends
meet.
So thank you for bringing up 10
if Miss Speaker and General Lady
Why was the funding for this
initially? 10 if funding
But now it's uh, state.
State tax dollars. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So there were two concerns with
10. If
It was difficult for well one. A
lot of those funds were already
encumbered.
Two. There was a bit of a
concern on the distribution from
the federal side that it would
get here in a timely manner. So
for those reasons, we felt it
would be better to implement a
pilot program that which is for
such a smart, small amount of
time with funds that were
reliable and that we're not
already used somewhere else.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady
going forward.
Are we looking to once again?
Look at 10 if funding as a long
term source of funding, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, this is a
pilot program at this point, and
if we see great success, you
know, I want to see where else
we could, you know, potentially
find that funding, but it
depends on the results of what
comes out of this and what the
recommendations are of the
department and what they bring
back to lfc.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
It. This is so wide open.
It appears as if we don't
Know completely what to expect.
Out of higher, ed. It, um
I'm
I guess if there's a portion of
this that I just that I don't
like is it's that wide open.
Um, whenever we're talking about
Assistance.
First for a stipend.
Plus that assistance could also
be for
The tuition or the courses.
That are whatever the costs
associated with the courses.
Or even if it's just for
Remedial classes such as English
as a second language.
Or potentially, I guess, uh,
Trying to get a GED. I guess
that would could that be part of
this as well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes.
Speaker and generally that it
just seems like the it's so
broad.
As to not in in the in the money
is so little
I'm not exactly sure what to
expect.
Out of the programming.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So I e t the
specific program that this would
be working with is a nationally
recognized comprehensive program
model. Um, that brings in a lot
of different elements as well.
As I mentioned there are about
700 participants in the state
that participate in I eat
throughout New Mexico. And we
believe that this pilot program
would be a
A considerable fraction of that
to increase upon that.
Summer speaker and gentle lady
So since that's already in
place, this would be
In addition to that, or to take
A portion of that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It could be new
people that join to join an I e
T program because they found out
about this and this makes it
possible. It could also be for
those who are already involved
involved or enrolled in an I E T
program seeking another because
it makes it more bearable for
them to actually, not more
affordable. I should say, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen to be able to
pursue their their certificates.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady after
A certificate has been achieved.
Is there the ability to reapply
Again for the following year to
go after a different
certificate. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen know that it is then
the program is completed at that
point.
So miss speaker in general idea
at at the beginning, and once
again this is not in place yet.
But you're envisioning, I guess
is the best way to put it that
They choose a path of education.
An individual choose a path for
education.
Or
Or a certificate or whatever,
and once that's achieved.
They They're that individual
could not
Then.
Continuing the program.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So the
intention here is that they get
to a certificate that gets the
most working job if they take
the courses to get their high
school equivalency along the
way, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, that
is that can that's allowed, but
really, because of what we're
doing here, and we're how we're
participating with our community
colleges that are so tied to our
local industries.
A lot of those paths are going
to be set by the courses that
are available near these folks
and and the and the markets that
are growing in those areas, So
you know it's it's it's unlikely
they're going to jump from
program to program. It really is
that this is a market that's
growing. Uh, Santa Fe. We do
very well. We change nurses
pretty well. That's the market
that's growing there, and we're
going to see more of that. You
know, if you go out to take them
carry, you're going to see more
people involved in renewables,
right? It's just gonna be going
to be dependent on those local
Markets, but the that is the
expectation that they do one
certificate and the coursework
to get through. That is
included.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally so the expectation
would be
That each community's needs
would dictate what the program
would be.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That is
how most of these are set up
because already because of
that's how, um community
colleges work with our local
business communities.
So thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, if an individual were to
Go after a G E. D
And get that general
equivalency.
Um, diploma.
Would they would that individual
then be able to apply for
Um, lottery scholarship or
Um
Opportunity scholarship.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, they would
be able to go into a different
Program.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally it is just
As I'm
As I've had a chance to to to
ponder this a little bit more,
and then listening to the debate
here.
Um, I guess one of the things
that I don't like is it's just
There's not enough details for
me.
Um, I do like
I like what we're trying to get
accomplished.
I wish it were a little bit more
well defined. It seems like
But we're we're going to define
that along the way.
I saw several of the programs
that could potentially be part
of this.
But I mean, some of them seem
Fairly technical.
Ah and and without
Getting a G E D without having
that general equivalency. I'm
not sure some of these are
attainable.
Um
Others are more skill related.
Seems to me like Mr Mr Speaker,
and gentle lady, that, uh
Carpentry certificate. A welding
certificate a CDL license.
Uh, those seem to be something
that could be more attained
without
Taking further educational
courses if it's a nursing
degree.
There's obviously going to have
to be a series of
Of other classes.
Um, that would be required and
then a much further commitment
and likely
As you're going down that road
would then likely qualify at
some point.
For opportunity, Scholarship or
As long as that's I'm not sure
about the opportunity
Opportunity scholarship if
that's available to adult
learners.
Um, but I believe it is.
Um
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, it
is the speaker. And generally I
guess what I'm saying is
This is a big idea.
With a small amount of money.
And
Without any real clear
direction. More of a
A
Like going East instead of
Going east to San Diego or going
east to to Ohio, east of San
Diego would be tough. That'd be
a long trip. Um, but it just
seems like it's it's really
wide. We're going that way.
And so I am concerned about
that. It does seem like it's a
really big
Task very undefined.
And with very little money, so
Ah, I wish you luck on this. I'm
just I'm just not sure.
I'd be more comfortable with
with more
Specifics, So thank you, Mr
Chair, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
there is no further there is
generated from earlier Abrego.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um, I'm
still going east to San Diego is
representative Oy that woke me
up.
Um, So will the general lady.
Yield. Mr Speaker, I yield to
the General Lady for Bernie Leo.
Thank you, General Lady from
Santa Fe. A lot of comments. Um
You know when I when I think
about this, Um my question is
with the tan if program is a
nationwide program, is it not?
Hmm. Yes, Mr Speaker, General
Lady. However, the Tana funds
have been are no longer tied to
this program longer tied to this
program, but sort of the intent
is there because I read the
mission of tan, if and it really
promotes, um this sort of
opportunity for
People who don't have
Maybe that opportunity? Yes, Mr
Speaker, General Lady that's
correct. And, um, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, I guess one of the
questions that I have is that
this is truly a pilot program.
Is it not? That's correct, Mr.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady,
so
Just take my glasses off, But,
um, when I google what a pilot
program is it, says a pilot
experiment. Pilot Study, pilot
test or pilot project is a small
scale preliminary study
conducted to evaluate
feasibility, duration costs
adverse effects.
And improve upon the study
design prior to performance of
the school's full scale research
project.
Is that in fact, uh, General
Lady your intent with this is
that this is truly a pilot
program. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Generally. Yes, it
is.
And, um, you know,
Thinking about this pilot
program and you know my friends
to the right and no pen intended
basically talked about the small
amount of money that and I and I
agree with them. Actually, Mr
Speaker and General lady is that
it is truly a small amount of
money.
Um, but
Of highlight program would
indicate to me
Um, having done tremendous
amount of research in my time,
um, that you will be monitoring
this program and in fact
studying the results of the
program, is that not correct?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady, that is
correct. And, as noted by my
expert and I in the
conversation, the I e T programs
are very specific already on
what they're able to fund and
what they're able to do, so we
already know.
You know, it's not thousands of
students that are in. I eat as
as we currently are. There's 700
for the state, so we already
know that's pretty narrowly
defined. But as you mentioned Mr
Speaker, General Lady, this is a
pilot program and we want to try
this sum of money at this point
to invest in these students and
see where they go. So, Mr
Speaker and General Lady
Um, given that sort of scenario
scenario you do, in fact have
parameters that you will be
working on. It's not just an
open ended program that you're
going to
Throw a million dollars at and
see where it lands.
Mr Speaker. Generally? Yes,
that's correct.
Um
Mr Speaker in General lady. It
sounds to me and having read
sort of the Tana for, uh,
origination.
Um, there are actually
requirements for the people who
apply, including B being a
citizen of New Mexico. Is that
not so, Mr Speaker, General lady
as we as we worked with the
department and others, we found
that if we could work with H C,
a, the health care authority and
we specifically included in our
amendment, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, um, that they will develop
this program and get technical
assistance from the Healthcare
authority.
The reason for that Mr Speaker
General lady is that will assist
them in getting more details
about the students and ensuring
that they're serving the
populations they want to. We'll
also, um you know, helping them
understand the results a little
better since this is no longer
10 if money is not limited to
only citizens, but this is as
outlined in the bill for New
Mexico residents. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
So it is. In fact, New Mexico
residents, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, and, um,
basically, I mean, the way that
I see it as these are
individuals that
Probably are looking for some
opportunity, and they're looking
for
Possibly some education that
will help them and in your
title, it talks about workforce
and so will help them eventually
enter into Mexico's workforce.
Is that not
Um, am I thinking this through
properly, Mr. Speaker?
Generally. Yes, you are. That's
right.
Okay. And so I I don't see this,
Mr Speaker and General Lady as a
handout. I see this as a hand up
literally. I mean, because this
this gives population sort of
the opportunity to, you know,
either join the workforce with
some sort of a certification or
move forward into maybe some
higher
Education program eventually,
and a university or a
certificate or or whatever they
choose at that point, I guess Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes,
that's correct. Um, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, I really think
that this is great. And you know
the way that I would envision
it, Mr Speaker and General lady
and you can tell me if I'm
wrong.
But, um, a million dollars is
really just start and over three
years maybe you would be coming
back to the Legislature asking
for additional funding based on
the results of your study. Is
that not so, Mr Speaker?
Generally, that's correct.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Appreciate the time and thank
you, General Lady.
There's pretty debate from
Chavez ready and leave
representative Mason, Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady, will you
yield Mr Speaker? Gentlemen, I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from Chavez, Eddy and Lea. Thank
you. Thank you, Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I'll have one
quick question and sitting here
listening to the debate.
That caused me a little
apprehension, I would say was
the legal status.
Are we do in order to to
participate in this program? I
know you said residents in New
Mexico. But do they have to have
legal status in the United
States? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
No, they do not.
The divide. I couldn't hear you
know they do not. How am I as an
employer?
To hire one of them when they
finished this if they're not
legal if they have no legal
status in the United States, I
cannot by federal law higher.
Somebody that doesn't have some
sort of legal status without
myself getting a fine
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, these
folks can start new businesses
again in these industries that
they have been trained up in as
well as be seeking their legal
status. Well, once there once
they've completed these programs
as well.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr
Speaker.
As an employer, though I know
for a fact I have you today. I
have seven days from the day I
hire YouTube.
But to send in
Your documentation picture of
the documentation of status in
the United States or I'm in
trouble.
Conversation.
Unless I tell you cash, and I'm
not gonna do that.
Is there any thing that you can
tell me? That makes me feel
More than fuzzy about that, or
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, if they
are building toys that might
make you feel warm and fuzzy,
But I will say, um, again, they
might be seeking their legal
status through the process of
attaining their certificate, and
that might be a path as well. Or
again. They might be starting
their own business in New Mexico
as well.
Thank you, General lady. I don't
know that I got my answer, but
thank you and I'll
I'll end the debate there. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you
know, further debate generated
to close Mr Speaker. I move that
house Bill 303 as thrice
amended. Do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 303
s three times amended. The vote
is now open.
Was about to close.
The vote is not closed by vote
of 41 the affirmative 13 in the
negative house, Bill 203 as
three times amended as really
past his house.
Gentle lady from Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business disordered.
Good morning members.
Happy Tuesday.
Their announcements generated
from Burnley. Oh, Mr Speaker. I
want to remind folks that
Valentine's Day is pink out. So
if you don't have your pink out
tomorrow is your last day to go
get it and then wear it on
Wednesday.
They tomorrow? Whatever.
Whatever day that is. Remember
saying no gentlemen from San
Juan Reserve, Duncan, Mr
Speaker. Point of privilege.
What is the purpose of your
point? Mr Speaker? Um, it has
come to my attention during this
session that some of the voice
of votes we've taken
I think have been a little
suspect.
In the spirit of cooperation and
wanting to help you out
purchased you a meter.
And Mr Speaker I purchased to
protest flags as well. We could
give them to the minority and
the majority house and we've
created your own protect protest
booth you could go into and look
to see exactly who did it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Fair
enough, gentlemen.
I like that. That's super cool.
I'm gonna use it the next three
days for sure.
Do you need from Travis?
Mr Speaker. I do realize that
Valentine's Day is Wednesday.
But it's also s Wednesday. Is
there going to be dispensation
about us here at the Capitol?
Yes, ma'am. There will be. I
don't know the details, but
there will be and I will fill
you in other details tomorrow.
Thank you very much later today,
I should say
Hold on. Let me check on that
again.
Yes, there will be details to
follow.
The lady from
Nyala. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Your Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow
afternoon 10 minutes after floor
session ends and we were just
hearing one bill.
Members take note.
Any other announcements
generated from towels. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Your house rule
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee will
be meeting at nine AM in 317
room change because judiciary
decided to take the room that we
usually
Take
That refers Take note. Fight,
Fight, fight fighting.
The lady from
Brenna, Leo. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Just reminder that your
house transportation, public
Works and Capital improvements
Committee will meet at nine AM
today. Room 305. I'm sorry.
Members take note.
Lady from Chavez. I have an
update The Archbishop Archer
Richard Wester will be in room
326 at 7:30 A.m..
Then the Senate chaplain will
come in at about 10 A.m..
Senate chaplain location to be
determined
Any other announcements.
Right, folks. Oh, I'm sorry.
Generator from Santa Fe. Mr
Speaker. The chairwoman is
called House Judiciary Committee
meeting for 830 in the morning.
In room 309 is I understand
ours.
So we've heard Mr Speaker.
I'll see you at 1030 any other
announcements.
The Lady from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move the house
stand in recess until 1030 this
morning.
We'll see you all a little bit
later today.
