We have a.
Please rise for today's
implication.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero
implications.
Our heads.
On this day we ask.
For hurts to be open for mines.
To be sharp.
For our wits and our levity to
be in tax.
We ask all of this.
From our higher powers.
Thank god from creator.
From whoever it is that we deem.
In our heart and into the
universe.
We just for clear minds clear
thoughts and for the love one
another thank you.
Standing for the pledge
allegiance Representative brown.
Chavis for the pledge The New
Mexico flag.
Salute the flag.
Teachers and catchers reported
on Tuesday for anyone keeping
track.
Deleted from Santa Fe.
Good morning Mr speaker I move
we go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objection it is
so ordered.
The gentle lady from.
Torrance and Bernalillo
Representative Lord thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house one
forty six PM from the speakers
table made the next order of
business sanitation is so
ordered.
The record reflect that
elections are for placing House
memorial forty six on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
for substitution the generated
to explain the memorial thank
you Mr speaker so today is Santa
Fe Scottish Rite masonic center
day and the Santa Fe Scottish
Rite temple built in nineteen
twelve as a historic landmark
and home of the ancient accepted
Scottish Rite of freemasonry in
New Mexico the building
including its jewel box theater
with its original scenery
collection as artifacts
represent a time capsule of
masonic culture and theatrical
history the ancient accepted
Scottish Rite of freemasonry
commonly known as a Scottish
Rite as one of the several
groups that are part of the
worldwide fraternity known as
freemasonry the Scottish Rite is
a largest and most widely
practice may sonic rate in the
world employs a large system
well there's no masonic degree
more important and that of the
master Mason there's a long
tradition almost as long as
remains three of high degrees
said expand upon the elaborate
and elaborate the teachings and
lessons of the first three
degrees the Scottish Rite
degrees to just series of moral
lessons are coming into the
thirty second degree master of
the world's Act and the Scottish
Rite continues in masters made a
master masons Education many
ways with that Mr speaker I
would like to introduce my
guests that are on the floor
today.
First of all we have Wesley
Clark.
Wesley Thorton as sovereign
grand inspector general of New
Mexico was a leader of the
Scottish Rite masons in New
Mexico he's one of thirty three
active members of the supreme
council which is the governing
body for the Scottish right in
the southern jurisdiction the
United States is a fifth person
from New Mexico to hold this
distinction he is a practicing
certified public account of a
cookie with over thirty seven
years of experience in also one
of my constituents thank you for
being here.
And next to him as a very lovely
robin Thornton this is the wife
of was a thorn for forty seven
years congratulations and is
very supportive the Scottish
Rite in this programs and its
official hostess of the Scottish
for the New Mexico she and
was they have an active and
leading to Moulay my saying
that.
DeMolay international and
masonic youth organizations well
thank you for being here today.
I also have John Adams.
John Adams is a thirty three day
visit to grant my saying that
exactly correct thirty three
okay Mason and the general
secretary of Santa Fe thank you
for being here.
The bold now missing you
correctly.
The close thank you and he is a
thirty three thirty three degree
Mason and personal
representative of the SCA Gee of
New Mexico thank you for being
here.
We have Gary Scott thirty second
green knight commander of the
court of honor of the venerable
master of the Santa Fe lauds
could not be heard today is
doing a civic duty of jury duty
so we appreciate it I wanted to
committee could be today Mexico
James Irish.
Thirty three degree Mason and
the prior of the.
Mexico concentrate thank you for
being here today.
We have Justin Cummings thank
you at thirty second green the
wise master of the hello I'm not
gonna say this right as long.
Okay you raise close enough
great chapter of the Miller I
got a code to get rid of the
Rose court okay got it thank you
thank you for being here.
We have Scott Purvis thirty
second main center second degree
Mason and the commander of the
Coronado council of.
Cadish could devotion on so
sorry thank you for being here.
We have a familiar face here we
have James lamb thirty second
grade night commander in the
court of honor.
Thank you for being here is also
be playing backpacks first day.
And we have answers Thorton
thirty second degree Mason thank
you guys for being here today.
I also have people in the
gallery that also part of this
group could you guys rise and
say hello to everybody his rise
from the gallery thank you for
coming.
Thank you buddy and since its
foundation members of the Santa
Fe Scottish Rite has included
many important influence on
historic members from across the
state such as Thomas be
capturing an ongoing US senator
for the state of New Mexico what
you're Henry Hanna pioneering
Attorney established assumption
native American land and water
rights across the southwest
Ashland early UNM professor and
long serving state budget
director Elliot Barker long
serving state game warden
establish state game commission
foster father of Smokey the bear
cub I know that's ranching
Clinton Anderson a US senator
for New Mexico sponsored
national chair wilderness Act
legislation John Iraq former GOP
state minority with for ten
years.
And don trip former speaker of
the New Mexico house
representatives and as we
continue to celebrate black
history month I found a
noteworthy that former United
States representative a civil
rights activist John Lewis was
also a thirty thirty third
degree Mason quite the
accomplishment to all that we
have honor to recognize today.
And I had the unique privilege
of torrenting building just a
few blocks from here and we're
encouraging all members of this
body to take some time bring
your family and ask one of these
fine gentlemen ladies work
toward the building experience
first hand is historic and
architectural jewel in the
backyard on your desk you also
find the document with
information on how to schedule a
tour.
With that Mr speaker with us at
the chief clerk please read the
memorial click to read.
House memorial forty six
introduced Representative Lord
and the Morial declaring
February seventeenth two
thousand twenty three Santa Fe
Scottish Rite masonic center day
and house of New Rev
representatives.
Whereas the Scottish Rite of
freemasonry in New Mexico first
met in Santa Fe in eighteen
eighty two and where as the
Scottish Rite and Santa Fe was
incorporated in November
nineteen oh eight and began to
plan for the construction of the
present day site at Washington
Avenue and facility Peralta
using Moorish revival style
architecture the cornerstone for
which was laid on August twenty
fourth nineteen eleven and
whereas this Santa Fe Scottish
Rite masonic center completed in
nineteen twelve is how stork
landmark and the home of the
ancient and accepted Scottish
Rite of freemasonry in New
Mexico and whereas the building
including its toolbox theater.
With original scenery collection
and its artifacts represents a
time capsule of masonic culture
and theatrical history and
whereas Santa Fe Scottish Rite
masons have contributed to the
development of New Mexico from
territorial days to the state
constitutional convention and
continuing on to the present day
with leaders and civic religious
and business services and
whereas the Santa Fe Scottish
Rite masonic center has been in
continuous use for more than one
hundred ten years providing
education from a sonic leaders
allocation for growing number of
movie productions and a venue
for plays concerts lectures
weddings and memorial services
and especially for youth and
education programs now therefore
be it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that February
seventeenth two thousand twenty
three be designated Santa Fe
Scottish Rite masonic center day
in the house of representatives
and be it further resolved that
the residents of New Mexico be
asked to join the Scottish Rite.
Maisons.
Scottish Rite masons in
observing organizations one
hundred ten years of service and
the outstanding contributions
Scottish Rite masons have made
to the United States and be it
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
the sovereign grand inspector
general of the grand supreme
council in New Mexico and the
sovereign grand commander of the
ancient and accepted Scottish
Rite southern jurisdiction.
Mr speaker confirm continue we
have a brief performance by
James lamb on bagpipes thank you
to leveraging it thank you
performers.
Something about those back I
just think that the heartstrings
in lead I I absolutely agree it
gets me every single time I
don't know what it is Mr speaker
but it does and I apologize I
hopefully did everything in
correct order if anybody has me
thinking they asked questions
are we moving to move it now at
this point is there debate on
house memorial forty six Mr
speaker.
The lady from Santa Fe
Representative to hunt thank you
Mr speaker as a representative
here from Santa Fe growing up
here we just called the P.
church.
And when giving direction to
anybody especially.
those visiting our beautiful
city we just referenced the P.
church and everybody knew for
that P. church was and where
they were going because it's a
this is the alt which is our
around about type of circular
street so I want to thank our.
What we don't ask for yielding
at this point Mr speaker
correction is it deleted thank
you with depleted yield.
Yes absolutely I yield I
apologize thank you gentlelady
for bringing this forward and I
just wanted to stand in support
and thank you for bringing this
forward this is been a place of
Of history for us here I have
family members that are our
current members there at the
Scottish Rite temple as masons
we've had many of vents there is
it's a very welcoming and open
Place for the public and
community and I would tell
anybody who is interested in how
some time who's visiting
visiting here and Santa Fe to go
and and go to the
the church and they have a cedar
there Mr speaker this is one of
the most beautiful theaters and
New Mexico it's well preserved
and they have many shows there
today
and I just wanted to to honor
somebody that could be here
today his name is Patrick Vetere
who
He's a current treasurer at the
Montezuma
charter and he wanted me to let
everybody know that this is a
this was the first large from
the Saint Louis charter New
Mexico and one of the notable
members was kit Carson's so a
little bit of history there and
I just want to say thank thank
you again gentle lady for
bringing this forward and I
really support this and bringing
a light to this this place in
our our beautiful city thank you
Mr speaker usually there is for
the visually different styles
Representative what this thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from towards Bernalillo
please you absolutely.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for bringing this
thirty two years ago if you can
believe this I was going to
college and I had a big gap in
what I was awarded to go to
college and what what the.
What was required for me to pay
that gap was somewhere around
seven thousand dollars each
year.
And the Scottish Rite temple of
Oakland stepped in and paid that
gap.
Each year for four years I had
some troubles in my junior year
and I didn't quite meet their
grade point average and I I
called my sponsor from the
Scottish Rite temple explain
what was happening to me and he
said Christina don't worry we
got you.
So I am so grateful for
discussed right temples all
around the country I've not been
to this one in Santa Fe and I
cannot wait for the tour but
please know that discussion I
temples all around the country
and here in Santa Fe supports
students and they help this
little girl gets at one of our
girls will still little older
girl get to college so thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlelady.
These are for the debate on
house memorial forty six seeing
none the gentle lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house memorial forty six do
now pass and I now ask for
unanimous consent of the house
of the record show that the role
has been called and all members
present voted in the affirmative
emotion show all members of the
house present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
Well final passage of house
memorial forty six the vote is
now open.
Was on my moto seven in the
affirmative zero negative house
memorial forty six has duly
passed this house.
Julie from Santa Fe you've got
guests in the chamber.
Thank you Mr speaker and I have
some great news because this
weekend is girl scout cookie
weekend.
And we have some girl scouts
with us today to celebrate from
our largest troop in Santa Fe
troop one zero seven four eight
who hosts over forty five girls
aged five to thirteen and they
include.
Kindergarten all the way up to
eighth grade daisies brownies
juniors and cadets and this trip
is doing a lot of great work
around Santa Fe they have
adopted frenchies field park if
you may be familiar with that
to clean up the park pick up
trash plant flowers they've been
camping this year hosted a fun
run they have learned about
careers in public service and
emergency response services and
done a whole host of other
wonderful community activities
were so appreciative of our girl
scouts at the even made some
handmade blankets and donated
them to the children's hospital
in Albuquerque as well as the
Santa Fe animal shelter so to
celebrate with us today growth
if you would please stand when I
call your name on the rostrum we
have Callie Buckley troop
leader.
We have Karina army ho who is a
brownie.
We have Caitlyn Adcock who's a
junior.
And we have willow Murphy who is
a cadet.
So members please look out for
the girl scout cookies please
support the girl scout troop in
Mister speaker we have the rest
of the trip up in the gallery if
you would help me welcome them
to the house.
Welcome to the house Santa Fe
girl scout troop one oh seven
four eight.
Thank you for coming.
Gentlelady shameless plug in but
they take credit cards.
So if you don't have any cash.
Don't worry.
They take credit cards thank you
for joining us.
Gentleman from.
Please Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you thank you very much
and before I give my Nelson I do
want to take a moment to thank
all of the members and then you
specifically Mr speaker for
opening up our our time line
last night so that we could all
attend Act yes is very well
attended the sponsors of the of
that the.
People there were just so happy
to see everybody and just spend
some time in fellowship and talk
about what their their issues
are and just get to know our our
house members in our Senate
members as well and it's just a
huge thank you from New Mexico
formalized bureau
life cell you're just saying
thank you for making that
available thank you for that Mr
speaker and with that.
Mr speaker I do have some guests
on the on the rostrum today I'm
very proud to be able to
announce the leadership part of
the leadership of my hometown
Lovington New Mexico so Mr
speaker if you allow me the
opportunity of the mayor
probably Roberts.
Mr speaker and and and the.
members of the the body many of
you may may know Robbie through
his mother early in Roberts
which served many years here in
the house and Robbie continues
that the line with respect to
just serving.
All the time and I'm very
thankful for him and for what
he's doing and at the City
Lovington sitting next to him
was instrument of speaker is
Scott again E..
Trying to look over there I
think sitting next to him chief
of police David Maranda.
Next I think if I'm looking
right mambo's are working mayor
pro tem David Trujillo.
To his left all right with the
of the doll Martinez which we
have placed on from Las Vegas
Ambrose.
And last but not least reserves
white.
For more funding Mr speaker and
and house.
I can't express enough.
The fight these this these
people of that defy over the
last several years we all stress
and have problems within our our
local government from time to
time it's been a huge fight for
them the fact that they're all
sitting together and not.
Right now from time to time over
the last couple years has been a
really hard time with respect to
figure it out our budget or we
go they've done a great job
their leadership is pull that
back together and I'm just so
proud to be part of that
community thank you very much
for being here today and thank
you Mr speaker for the
opportunity to have them on the
rostrum thank you gentlemen and
welcome to the house thank you.
Some guests of representable
Rachel in the gallery we have
guest of global gave a book
Silva Sylvia man's here
capacitor our state it is in LA
entry so welcome to the house.
Mr speaker.
The lady from Bernalillo the or
percent of Mr speaker thank you
for acknowledging my guests and
I just wanted to mention that
everybody has a book from global
global give a book on their
at their desk and if anybody's
interested they are requesting
some junior money they also are
nonprofit that give books away
to underprivileged kids in
several of our counties and so I
appreciate you Mr speaker thank
you thank you delay the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
point of personal privilege
state your point.
Mr speaker this is a rebuttable
presumption update yesterday we
saw were five different schools
across the state had a shooting
threat in house bill sixty eight
last year we made that a
misdemeanor.
It is a felony to go ahead and
call in a bomb threat and so
basically you get the same
response whether it's a bomb
threat or shooting threat.
And Mister speaker I know you'll
find this hard to believe but I
actually have the language
drafted and sent money door
right here if it is the will of
this body to go ahead and make
that a felony I have that
language and would be happy to
give it to whoever thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
LOL Spence the gentleman from.
We have other guests in the
gallery that I like to introduce
guests of Representative kids
we've got local for twelve hours
and five fingers females in the
trades council leadership please
rest we recognized leadership of
local for twelve apprenticeship
councils and local for twelve
instructors in training
coordinators welcome to the
house of representatives.
Gentlelady from Chavis
representatives L..
Mr speaker I rise on a point of
personal privilege please state
your point.
Mr speaker ladies and gentleman
of the house the other day us to
I had a very and impassioned
talk regarding what the United
States Forest Service was
planning on doing to the strays
that were over there the heat of
Force this body alone
suggest it was suggested Barry
Representative Chasey that this
body draft a letter and Mr
speaker we need to get on the
state can get it done yesterday
during House announcements I was
notified of a call that'd come
in from Washington DC from.
The public relations officer for
the United States Forest Service
agency bear bear Mary Beth I'm
not sure if I'm saying this
right.
Peacoat.
She said Mr speaker and ladies
and gentleman that beginning
Monday February the twentieth
the United States Forest Service
has given ordered through to
wildlife services working with a
fence.
To start moving cattle closer to
the healer river by using
helicopters.
And whenever they have completed
that aspect of it in a couple of
days.
They will begin the aerial
slaughter of over a hundred and
fifty head of the strays that is
the property of the state of New
Mexico to the New Mexico
livestock board.
Mr speaker my conversation with
Mr the coat the code I think
that's a state.
I strongly.
Suggested that maybe the United
States Forest Service needs to
read the laws of the state of
New Mexico.
Because they will be violating
the statute.
Mr speaker the ways to that we
will see one more time after
what happened last year whenever
all of those carcasses were left
so what on the floor of the
force is sickening and we do
have photographs of that.
This makes Mississippi code also
tell me that a focus.
Is planning on using the lethal
and nonlethal measures I
inquired to what the non lethal
measures for and she said we
have no explanation at this time
there is no rule under the
wildlife Services.
Mr speaker ladies and gentleman
of the house.
Couple weeks ago I got hold of
Secretary syrup Propst.
With the.
Energy minerals and natural
resources department she came to
my office and we had a really
good thirty minute talk.
And I said do you see the
concern that we as citizens of
the state of New Mexico have in
regard to the aerial slaughter
these cattle.
In the rock that is going on
there the depredation by the
predators on these now Debbie
gifts they'll either starve to
death or they will be by the
predators.
Mr speaker it might not.
Have come as a.
Right.
Point of our conversation
together but I was kind of
heartened by what.
She put on our do this today.
In on the very back of this
handout that everybody has
received this is that the forest
conservation act will narrowly
defined the mission of the
forest to read to bid Division
as suppressing forest fires and
regulating timber harvests on
private land.
The amendment will modernize the
force division's mission to
include forest management for
the purpose of conserving
forests and forest resources and
providing technical assistance
to mitigate and adapt to
changing climate conditions.
Mr Chairman Mr speaker.
The day whenever.
I reiterated what we experienced
last summer whenever this United
States Forest Service tried to
destroy our whole state by
burning it down.
Now they are killing our cattle
and Mr speaker this is Nolan
forced where there are as
strays.
Lots of other forces force
throughout our state do have
strays on it.
There's also feral horses in
these forests.
Mr speaker.
But the US Forest Service is
planning on doing starting next
week.
Makes me angry.
It makes me sick.
And it really gives me no faith
in our federal government Mr
speaker.
But we
are going to be experiencing and
I will keep you updated on what
they're planning on doing if
they are pushing all these.
Strays over to the river and
then they're going to get him
down.
Mr speaker you can bet your
bottom dollar that a lot of
these cattle just to help.
Try to ease the pain that's been
inflicted on him by the guns
that are going go off because
they are scared of the
helicopters that are version of
they will end up in that river.
Mr speaker it's time that we.
Get this message to Washington
because.
A lot of this was funded by one
of our delegation from the state
of New Mexico.
And I'm appalled by that Mr
speaker thank you very much for
allowing me this time thank you
gently the generally the
gentleman from Kettering occur
at the that were present at the
less us thank you Mr speaker
thank you very much I do want to
just reiterate what my colleague
in the state.
Here just said but I I just I
think Mr speaker I want to just
I want to repeat what you said
but what I do want to say is Mr
speaker we know what the
weather's been like the last
week or so these these cattle
are up in the mountains and it
snowed up there and they're not
giving in my opinion Mr speaker
you know if time for those
producers those ranchers that
are surrounding that area those
ranchers an opportunity to
remove their cattle that may be
mixed into that into that her
head could be in that area
enough time to clear that out
especially with the weather that
we're dealing with imagine if
you're a rancher and they the on
February sixteenth to get this
order and and I'm gonna read
what it says here the clothes
are covering these operations
will go into effect Monday
February twentieth thank you
four days Mr speaker with this
type of weather and and it says
that
the aerial shooting will
commence from Thursday February
twenty third through Sunday
February twenty sixth not enough
time Mr speaker to clear out
their own cattle and there is
the the for services not planned
compensating any of those
animals that are branded that
may be in that area and and
unfortunately Mr speaker due to
the weather and the lack of real
timing and most of all not
allowing those directors Mr
speaker that were given by the
by the livestock board in order
to humanely remove them.
Not even giving them a chance to
to properly remove them so one
last request Mr speaker I know
that you had said that we were
going to have a letter that is
is going out from this body and
and all of us were in the
courage to sign a long and I'd
like to see you well when we can
get that letter out immediately
and with all our signatures Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
leader Chasey is working on that
and I think the feelings
expressed are shared by all of
us and whatnot so we'll let that
take place and that whenever
it's ready whenever we can
whenever we see if we can
distributed of thank you.
The gentle lady from gentle lady
from Katrin supporters General
insert percent of Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker sorry I I'm
a little bit late they're
juggling like all of us I just
wanted to recognize the soil and
wants water conservation
districts here in the state of
New Mexico there in the rotunda
several of a more and just
wanted to let people know that
may not have a soil and water
conservation district in their
community that they've
effectively reached out to
communities to teach the value
of natural resources and
encourage conservation efforts
each year soil and water
conservation districts worked
with eight leisure and
agricultural agriculture
environment education and other
industries to drive voluntary
incentive driven programs that
benefit benefit everyone
Mr speaker I have several in
different districts and while I
salute them and hope that
everyone else would show their
appreciation thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
Related from Santa Fe
representative of Spence.
Mr speaker I move we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation junction
it is so ordered members will be
taken up some of bills this
morning and then we'll break for
committees and take other bills
this evening those bills have
been
shown.
collaborated on bibles
leadership offices everybody
knows what's coming so that is
going to item number three on
the third reading calendar Jenna
from Santa Fe and Santa Fe
you're ready on that item.
Mr speaker ready will you give
me to the point.
Representative election server
placing house bill one ninety
five as amended has been taking
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman's explained the bill.
Mr speaker house bill one ninety
five a P. it's in modernizes the
existing forest conservation act
there is the information sheet
to on your desk about what it
does Mr speaker I have a house
floor amendment.
Gentlemen it is being passed
out.
Can you move the amendment and
then read the two to five number
Mr speaker I move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one ninety five to two to
five numbers two two five one
one two point two all right
we'll wait for that to be passed
out it is on its way.
Well it gets passed out is going
to be a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker the the yes I believe
it's friendly we could confirm
with the neighbor if he was
present.
Never miss to be an actress.
Mr speaker if I may I'd like to
introduce my witness.
Please do so Mr speaker I'm
joined today by Mr Dillon future
the general counsel of energy
minerals naturists Services
Department thank you gentlemen.
But I have the amendment.
Mr speaker at limits and being
passed out
explained the amendment.
I'm sure it's on the website.
It's on the website and passed
out gentleman to explain the
amendment
I'm not sure if the amendment is
the bill or the suspenders but
it makes it clear that the the
forestry division does not go
onto private land for
conservation work.
Prevention work without the
consent of the landowner.
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
you'll.
Mr chairman I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I apologize for not being in the
room earlier but this is
certainly an amendment that Mr
speaker the gentleman I have to
have worked on not only together
but but with the affected agency
and I'll just point out to the
the body that we've been
particularly sensitive to the
issue of private property rights
and then the State Land Office
requested that we clarify that
they too would like to have that
understanding before those types
of actions are taken up on
public trust lands so that's
what this ammendment does and I
appreciate the gentleman
bringing four thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman is
are for the debate and
amendment.
Your objection to adopting the
amendment.
I see none the house floor
remember one for house bill one
ninety five has been adopted.
Thank you Mr speaker I stand for
questions on the bill there is a
bit generated from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman yield Mister
speaker gentle lady I yield.
Mr speaker the gentleman thank
you very much and
Appreciate your expert witness
stand here today I think it's
very advantageous whenever we do
get this and I pointed to it
earlier whenever I was talking
about strays over there in the
heat of this coming go from
Serra cultural props the
secretary of energy minerals
natural resources department
pointing out some of the.
New mandates that are going to
take place through the call for
us conservation act Mr speaker
and gentleman diss said of what
she is supposed to do your honor
paper is it does it fall in line
with what your bill is striving
to do.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
And Mr speaker of whenever we're
talking about are forced.
My concern is.
Unfortunately the for services
greatly understaffed will you
agree with that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
disagree with that I would just
point out we're talking about
our state forestry division not
the US for service Mr speaker I
do understand that.
Gentleman that.
One more time we are.
We want these to be healthy
forests.
In the way that you have a
healthy forest is through.
Think of the forests of keeping
under press underbrush at a
minimum and the.
There are lots of people
throughout our state Mr speaker
and gentleman that to rely on
firewood to.
Keep their homes they do have
force lease whether it's state
or federal force least and they
have those leases some of of for
over a hundred years Mr speaker
and gentleman I just want to
insure that through the help of
the citizens through our state
that are force will be healthy
if allowed the right to do so so
Mister speaker and gentleman.
And your bill does that include
in the anywhere in there.
The.
Locally there will be provisions
where people can go out and
harvest.
Would the timber we know what is
happening up there the rudos so
where are you right now Mister
speaker we're whenever it does
so Lincoln County was being
burned up.
A lot of those trees do need to
come down because right now they
are a hazard.
We have seen the.
Horrific fires that took place
last year some of the would I
don't know if any of that is if
it's strictly US force that
burned I don't think it is I
think some of it is state but we
do need the opportunity to
replenish our force that does
take some common sense Mr
speaker would you agree with
that gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady a yes I
would if I may would see we use
of the the collected are forced
four hundred plus years as a
result they are overcome
treating the amount of force
that we have in New Mexico is a
substantial undertaking the
forestry division itself is not
a significant landowners they do
have a roll full of the in
conservation in which is largely
intended only to to keep that
force healthy but to prevent
fires.
And what this bill does is also
clarifies their role after a
fire to work with landowners on
standing but the timber steps
slope stabilization and things
like that.
Mr speaker gentleman I do
appreciate the response greatly
because of we have seen in down
in my part of the world it down
and.
To have a skinny Lincoln County
area after the fire we are
experiencing right now are
extremely high winds and some of
those trees are snapping of
their.
It's it's unbelievable Fund all
can go on after a major force
fire in the wind as back to the.
To speaker and gentleman.
Also I thought it was.
In sync with what we're
discussing here today we
received a pamphlet on I can not
supposed to name names that
thank the.
Also the biogenic carbon cycle.
Using ruminants and Mr speaker
and gentleman from Santa Fe and
let me see what else Santa.
They're different room and it's
a great is different forages
throughout our force whether
it's the US Forest Service state
forest as well Mr speaker and
gentleman the benefits from
having gracing whether it's a
cow goat sheep elk or deer or
antelope is beneficial.
To a healthy forest floor as
well would you agree with that.
Mr delay I believe it can be you
know there's management issues
and and caring passing and
things like that but the speaker
generally with over that the the
one of ways are are forcibly
come through unhealthy is the
the growth of small diameter
timber the the dense understorey
which leads if it does burn
leads to a crown fire we would
like to
More open force with with better
grasses shrubs smaller
understorey which is good for
both cattle and wildlife.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I'm
glad to hear you say that
because other states are using
goats to help clear out some of
the forms that are out there
that nothing else fully she can
also do the same thing cattle
grows grades a different way as
well as our wildlife does that
each one is specific on keep in
our forest floors healthy that
does sustain grasses that are
good for the wildlife and
livestock is will it does help
keep down the overgrowth of the
smaller trees Mr speaker so we
don't have catastrophic fires
whenever there is an event and
we've seen that happen way too
many times in our state's
history Mr speaker and gentleman
to be quite honest with you I
was surprised whenever I read
that you and representative
Nibert with sponsors of this
bill.
But it is good to see that we
can reach across the aisle to
work together to get things done
This means
that we might be able to show
the US Forest Service what a
healthy forest looks like that
can sustain some of our
endangered species such as the
spotted owl that's evident for
the Mescalero tribe is right now
and their work on their floors.
That they do have a healthy and
sustainable deer herd and L.
population.
And we should be all over this
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you very much there's further
debate the gentleman from lever
Senator federal.
Thank you Mr speaker and does
the gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Fe County of Mr speaker
chairman I yield.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
feeding off of a little from the
representative from Travis
county's comments.
What I see in this bill is
something that I I believe needs
to happen and if I understand.
The basic intent is to allow
access to fee simple land would
that be correct.
I'm sorry Mr speaker gentleman
could you repeat the question I
didn't quite catch it.
If I understand the basis of the
bill Mr speaker and gentleman
this is to allow state forestry
personnel unrestricted access to
the fee simple land.
Mr speaker chairman I would have
say no to that question we call
your attention in for example to
the amendment that we just
adopted that makes it very clear
and the the the first division
does not go on to private land
without the consent of the
landowner that has been the
practice that was the intent but
there was some concerns with the
existing language in the bill so
we added this additional
safeguard so I would not say the
purpose of the bill is
unrestricted access to feeling.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
apologize for the way I've
stated that question I'm it
during with respect to
suppression of fires and stuff
like that Mr speaker and
gentleman that that is correct
and that's an important
distinction between of the fire
force conservation workforce
health work those fires
stabilization those all require
the consent of the landowner
fire suppression activities fall
under the state's police power
when the fire breaks out it is
urgent to address it as quickly
as possible and the forestry
division in cooperation with the
the fire agencies or the federal
government does have the right
to actively suppress fires
without having to track down the
particularly in that are.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate that and in your your
response actually believes in
into to two of the things that I
wanted to talk about one was a
proactive side of this Mr
speaker and gentleman of I'm
curious have you have you
visited the the force land on
the Mescalero tribes.
Mr speaker Germans for years but
yes.
Well in this if you were to
drive through Lincoln County and
you were to.
Drive through state National
Forest land and then drive
continue on then to the molest
Mescalero tribal land.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
you would see is a complete
different forced.
The tribe has done an excellent
job of maintaining their
endorsed over the years they
separated it they've they've cut
down the trees and they've
they've protected themselves
from potential.
Expanding fires with respect to
taking care of their tree and
the ground cover and that's
something Mr speaker and
gentleman that we have not done
at the state and the federal
level with respect to land so we
have everywhere else Mr speaker
and gentleman while I believe
that this bill is something that
we need to do we need to have
that access to fee simple land
when it comes time for fire
suppression Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I feel like so many times in
this body we are reactive
instead of proactive Mr speaker
and gentleman what I would I
would prefer to see and unison
with this bill would be a bill
that would allow us access and
start
taking care of our force
allowing timber companies to
come back and allowing for that
for profit for the state to the
point to where we get to and
able to maintain force to the
point where we can actually
control force fires in the
future with respect to that and
I think that.
Elaboration with some muscular
of tribes would be a great place
to start because they've done an
excellent job at it Mr speaker
gentleman thank you.
Close.
Mr speaker I move the house bill
one ninety five as far as
amended do now pass.
Passage of house bill one ninety
five assessment of the vote is
now open.
The votes about to close.
Was.
Of sixty six in the affirmative
during the negative house bill
one and I just was amended as we
passes house.
Is a gentleman from Bernalillo
ready on item number twelve
speaker which given to that
point the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
Bill to sixteen on final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution judgment is going
to thank you Mr speaker this
bill would allow our legislative
education study committee to
study issues of early childhood
and higher education this is a
bill that was passed out of the
house unanimously two years ago
passed out of the Senate
unanimously two years ago but
vetoed by the governor but with
that Mr speaker I do have a
floor amendment that I believe
it's been passed out.
Gentleman the amendment is being
passed out.
It will be online in the second
gentleman let's hold off for a
few seconds while the amendment
is passed out turn if I may
Mister speaker I would like to
introduce my expert witness says
Dr Gwen Perea Warniment director
of the legislative education
study committee thank you
gentlemen and can you read the
two to five number to make sure
we've got the right one.
If I get a copy of that would be
awesome so that I could do it
make sure the speaker it's point
two two five four three three
point one thank you gentlemen.
Mr speaker I move house floor
amendment one to house bill two
sixteen.
Thank you gentlemen you can
explain it as soon as is passed
out.
Gentleman I believe it's a
passed out two minutes when the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
so the amendment is a delayed
implementation date of July
first two thousand twenty four
we've had several discussions
with the secretary of higher
education as well as the
secretary of the early childhood
and Care Department to come up
with the delayed implementation
date in order to get the
staffing in order and and
reporting requirements in order
for the departments but with
that Mr speaker stand for
questions to debate on the
amendment.
Is your objection to adopting
the amendment there is debate no
no objection to the Amendment
house for member one to house
bill to sixteen has been
adopted.
Back in the bill.
Speaker all stand for questions
there is a the gentleman from
Chavis any note that
Representative Townsend thank
you Mr speaker Gilman can you go
into a little bit more detail
why you're bringing this forward
what the budget what the
stresses of it will be on
education Sir speaker I yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you very much for doing
that of course I'll also answer
your question Mr speaker and
gentleman
for the impotence doing this is
to make sure that we're aligning
our our not only are pre K.
system but early childhood from
birth and pre birth
alignment with higher education
so that we can start working on
tracking the effects all through
our public education system not
just K. through twelve system.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Do you believe that the laying.
Will enhance.
the process going forward is
that the purpose.
Mr speaker gentlemen yes I think
it gives the department's time
to start one of the issues that
was raised in the veto message
from two years ago was the fact
that the departments would
essentially the argument was
that they would have to be doing
double duty in presenting to
LESC as well as L. E. S. C. with
the delayed implementation it
was allowing the departments at
their request to be able to to
get their staffing in order in
order to start reporting both to
the L. E. S. C. and the LESC as
well as
working on the same issues
within the legislative education
study committee ensuring
staffing is in place to work on
these issues for.
The LFC.
Mr speaker and gentleman is that
actually the staff that should
that is I mean it's not a
significant staffing issues
isn't it more process of value
eighteen that will be more
beneficial.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes but
we would also need the staff in
order to do the deep dive into
the research and early childhood
as well as higher education so
this is the issue with the
potentially the delayed
implementation date to get that
in order and if FTEs are
required to be able to come to
the legislature next year in
order to make that request of us
as a body.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman thanks again for
yielding.
This gentleman as a
representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker room the
gentleman from Bernalillo deal
please speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
actually this bill I think is it
does it monitors a unnecessary
gap as a legislative study
committee has gone around one of
the of the areas or the
disconnects between K. twelve
and higher education so Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo business build valid
give oversight to the L. U. C.
regarding higher ed speaker
gentleman it definitely does.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
this is far as the the time
lines that were reference what
would you see as far as the
timelines for this
And will this be something Mr
speaker and gentleman that will
be addressing in this interim
session.
Mr speaker gentlemen with the
delayed implementation date for
this session or for the next
interim I should say
we would still be under the
provision with the effective
date later on of the old bill
but moving forward we would
definitely be able to jump into
these issues but our work that
we are permitted to do under the
colleges of education as
currentlypermitted would
definitely continue.
And thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman from Bernalillo I
think that's important about is
with the way I I think that
there's some issues that that if
we can start to address on the
interim and start to begin to
talk about these and and and
kind of figure out how that fits
into the K. twelve education I'm
satisfied and I think that this
is a good bill is something that
I do believe is a good bill for
the legislative study committee
to address and I I support the
bill thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman from Bernalillo
you know for the debate
gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker sets off on
that board is glitching but it's
like correct so it's catching my
eye sorry about that is speaking
with that I move that hospital
to sixteen as amended do now
pass passage of house bill to
sixteen as amended the vote is
now open.
Was about to close.
Those close level significant
informative house bill two
sixteen as amended has duly
passed this house is the
gentleman from Santa Fe and sun
Quan and ready for item number
fifteen yes Mr speaker would
come to that point please that
the record reflect that election
is server please now the one
ninety eight final passage has
been taking and taking and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker New Mexico has the
responsibility to ensure that
all of its native American
students have equal access to
programs and services necessary
to make them college and career
ready for the last four years an
average of about three point
nine million dollars per year
have been allocated to eighty
seven local educational agencies
for career and technical
education programs under the
career technical education
statute of the state the state
statute however does not allow
for secondary schools in New
Mexico that are funded by the
bureau of Indian education to
apply for or be funded by these
career and technical education
dollars and so what house bill
one ninety eight would do would
make technical changes to that
career technical education pilot
project statute also known as
next generation CD projects so
that nine secondary schools in
New Mexico funded by the bureau
of Indian education are eligible
to apply for and to participate
in this project and this would
in in the essence fix
inconsistencies between our
state law and the federal Carl
D. Perkins career and technical
education act two thousand six
which is the reason why we get
these funds in the first place
that being said Mr speaker
that's what this act does or
that to this house bill will do
and if I may introduce my
experts for this morning's
conversation it will be a former
governor Alvin Warren and former
governor we just pay goes the
public prodigies from up north
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Close thank you speaker I now
move that house bill one ninety
eight do not pass.
Passage of house bill one ninety
eight the vote is now open.
It's about.
To close.
We moved to sixty four in the
affirmative there in the
negative house bill one ninety
eight has duly passed this
house.
Members of director tension to
supplemental calendar number one
on your desks is the.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
ready on item number one on
submitted calendar number one
yes speaker can get to that
point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill ninety
five has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
This is a straightforward bill
it would formally establish an
office of renewable energy at
the State Land Office the only
thing that is.
The difference in the committee
substitute it.
It does as compared to the
original bill is to move the
office to a new section of law
as opposed to amending a an
existing statute.
The court taxed is exactly the
same.
And the legislation heard
the same legislation that was
heard in the respective
committees to our Mr speaker are
commissioner Garcia Richard
established a renewable energy
office at the land office back
in twenty nineteen this is
resulted in a fourteen hundred
percent increase in renewable
and earnings and a tripling of
renewable energy under lease
this effort has been key to
advancing the state's clean
energy goals this bill would
help ensure this commitments to
renewable energy remains
regardless of who is land
commissioner and urge my
colleagues to support this
legislation thank you lady would
you mind introducing your
expertise thank you today my
expert is generally Stewart who
is a the W..
Of a land commission.
The lady there is debate the
gentleman from Chavis and you
know the Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker will delay
the LFC.
Yes Mr speaker I yield.
gentlelady can you explain to
the body how many other.
Of sources
whether it be.
Active cultural grazing timber
falling gas which which other
entities have a office within
the state lands commission.
Mr speaker gentleman there are a
number of offices there
including oil and gas another
commercial offices.
So gentlelady is injured.
Is it your answer that there is
a codified office specifically
for those other entities like
this that you're proposing.
In section nineteen.
Mr speaker and gentleman no but
there are.
They do exist.
In late isn't it true that
the.
The interests of those exist I
would argue that.
But we have not gone out of our
way as the Legislature to
identify a specific.
Office within the land office is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman oil and
gas is codified in statute if
that is if that answers your
question.
Jan lady that's one of the
duties of the commissioner but
what there is an office codified
in mind is that has that in
there.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
The lady
when you in your opening
statement you said that.
Revenues had doubled or tripled
can you quantify that how much
that number is.
Mr speaker gentleman I said that
as a result to this existing
office at forty has resulted in
fourteen hundred percent
increase in renewable energy
earnings and a tripling of
renewable energy under lease.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
fourteen hundred percent equals
how much money.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
a twelve million dollars.
Twelve million dollars annually
is that correct Mr speaker and
gentleman currently yes and
we're looking to grow those
numbers.
And it is gentle lady do you
believe that the formation of
this office is going to enhance
the growth.
Mr speaker and gentleman
absolutely.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What is the target growth rate.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
there's not an exact target but
as we continue to grow and move
these projects forward those
increases are going to occur.
Image speaker gentle lady is
does any of the renewable energy
that the the State Land Office.
Has benefited from in leasing
property.
Does it bring in the other
revenues to the state general
fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman on the
tax side yes.
That is correct.
He said the only on the tax side
was that your answer Mr speaker
gentle and that is correct.
So gentle lady.
Twelve million dollars is not an
insignificant amount
Currently do you have any idea
what the.
Exemptions the tax exemptions
are for that industry
There are no exemptions at this
time.
The lady.
Mr speaker industrial revenue
bonds for just
Authorize for use within the.
Renewable industry do you not
consider that a subsidy or an
exemption Mr speaker John no.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
We have a disagreement.
I think is is without a doubt.
That when a company utilizes an
industrial revenue bond to their
benefit to the tune of.
Forty to sixty million dollars.
They're not delivering any of
that power to the New Mexico.
And it's being subsidized by New
Mexico taxpayers.
I don't care what you call it a
subsidy and exemption but it
sure going that negates the
twelve million dollar income
level that you described as
being significant enough to be
worthy of an office.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
note that its oil and gas and
others have.
Budget from creek tax credits as
well.
I would argue with that.
at all Mr speaker and gentle
lady but I tell you the income
stream coming from all and gas
of reaches twelve million
dollars almost every minute not
on an annual basis and so much.
I am not necessarily opposed
more speaker and gentle lady to
an office within the State Land
Office.
I I believe that your amendment
to to
agreed to.
on this bill to get it through.
Taxed revenue was a good
amendment.
I would just
it still causes me a little burn
to be real honest that we.
Began to identify.
an office within the a state
agency.
That has sent some money New.
Impact.
To the state coffers currently.
And it still bothers me that we
have companies coming in and
using industrial revenue bonds
that take millions of dollars
out of the state coffers.
Only.
Those.
Counties where that.
Facility is built really benefit
to the tune of a few.
Million dollars.
But the and negate that none of
that are a lot of that the power
doesn't serve any of the people
of New Mexico and the people in
New Mexico real need to realize.
That we are standing.
Much more than we're receiving.
That the industry is not the.
There's no of severance tax for
the generation of that power on
the Mexico land there's no
there's none of that that occurs
and so that's that's
troublesome.
And I just think it's it's where
the the the body understand that
the people of New Mexico
understand that I appreciated Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yes I will.
A really good conversation about
this priest legislation you
know.
Energy just a couple of
questions.
Is is is this bill mandates.
For this commissioners court any
future commissioner the size of
the office for this.
How.
Many resources need to be
devoted to this activity.
Mr speaker gentle no does not.
Speaker gentle lady I was hoping
that would be the answer to the
question so for example future
commissioners could staff it was
zero people or one person or a
staff of twenty depending on
health commissioner viewed
renewable energy as a source of
revenue for the state is that
accurate Mr speaker gentle and I
would hope that we would incur
that but I would hope that the
future of land commissioners
would look to their budget and
working with the LFC and house
appropriations committees to
determine those needs.
And the last question Mister
speaker July two what is the
prime direct.
Of the state land commissioner.
Mr speaker German to make money.
Mr speaker gentle lady another
great answer and I appreciate
all of the answers to your
questions thank you Mr speaker
there's further debate the
gentleman from of the
representative block.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Santa Fe please yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady my question is it
regarding revenue do you know
how much revenue wind energy
which makes about thirty percent
of a the energy production the
state do you know how much money
annually we make an.
Wind energy Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The entirety is unclear but from
the land office positions about
ten million.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that ten million
dollars how does that stack of
verses oil and gas revenue Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman
well gas brings in about two
point two billion.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady so I guess you're saying
right now that this office which
would cost is twelve million
dollars a year would be losing
and at two million dollars is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker German there's no
cost to the office.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so
You said it's about ten million
that wind energy makes annually
for the state in any revenues
whatsoever Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman ten million
from the land commission.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating why just a I see that
number ten million versus two
billion and it's a it's a huge
disconnect and I I know right
now we have about thirty percent
of our energy produced by wind
but it's only ten million that
the State Land Office makes so I
just think maybe we would want
to re visit that but I will I
will move on Mr speaker gentle
lady.
So this is a new and renewable
or I guess it's current
renewable Land Office with this
include nuclear energy Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady is there any plans
in the Land Office to include
nuclear into this office or any
other office in the land office
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman of this
time at with this a land
commission office at the time.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady LA I guess a I would
just advocate for may be
encouraging more investments and
time into this great renewable
resource and also I would just
look at those numbers Mr speaker
gentle lady and just see what's
making us money in the state
it's oil and gas and I think
that that's going to be for a
very long time I hope because we
certainly rely on this is a
great resource in our state to
fund our schools to fund our our
health care systems to fund our
government that we're doing
right now today Mr speaker
gentle lady so I I would just
urge this office to see these
great renewable resources such
as natural gas I would say and
oil which are renewable and
they're they're very clean
energies and I would certainly
want to encourage investment in
these great great resources that
we all benefit from so thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlelady.
The gentleman.
There's been debate gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Sarinana.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
do you yield Mister speaker I
gladly yield to my co sponsor
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you gentle lady is the
commissioner of the State Land
Office believe we need this.
Mr speaker.
In late absolutely.
Thank you is it Mr speaker isn't
part of the reason it is needed
is because these this agency has
increased renewable energy clean
energy revenue by fourteen
hundred percent Mr speaker
generally to yes that's correct
thank you kindly Mr speaker has
more than hasn't more than
triple the number of active
leases this year are recently Mr
speaker gentle and yes it has
and grow the megawatts
gentlelady under at least I
about two and a fifty percent.
Speaker gentle dental yes thank
you Mr speaker and aren't there
currently thirty nine active
long term leases twenty seven
wind and twelve solar.
Mr speaker generally yes and
increasing thank you Mr speaker
gently
They're currently thirty three
least applications wind solar
and others and there's so much
to do and having this office of
renewable energy will help in
efforts to advance our renewable
energy is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady yes
absolutely thank you Mr speaker
in New Mexico as a state prime
for renewable energy isn't that
correct Mr speaker gentle leader
we are leading in renewable
energy.
And don't we need this for the
Energy transistor Act Mr speaker
generally absolutely yes and Mr
speaker gentle lady again the
commission of the State Land
Office believes this is needed
and those are just some of the
reasons why is that correct.
Mr speaker generally yes
absolutely thank you thank you
thank.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Santa Fe yield Mister
speaker yes I do you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as my
first question.
Would be a clarifying question
with respect to Representative
Townsend.
line of questioning Mr speaker
gentle lady did I understand
that we do actually have a
codified.
Office within the state land
office for oil and gas.
Mr speaker determines the the
functions are codified.
Sorry Mr speaker gentle lady I
did not hear that answer Mr
speaker and gentleman the
functions are codified in law.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
that be the same as.
The legislation that you are
proposing it and Committee
substitute for house bill ninety
five would be those the the
exact definition of each other
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr speaker and gentle lady do we
have a codified office within
the state land office for
agriculture Mr speaker German
no.
Gentlelady.
How much money.
The.
The culture bring New Mexico
just in the last year without a
codified office Mr speaker
German eight million dollars.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman from the Land Office
eight million dollars.
Thank you very much.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Further in the debate I think
the name is Representative
octave brought up the NASA
question with how much money.
And gas brought to the.
To the table
Mr speaker and gentle lady do
you recall.
One of our first meetings and
House Appropriations where we
were discussing a potential
surplus or an actual surplus of
in excess of three point five
billion dollars.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
so.
Mr.
Also recalled the testimony from
legislative finance that eighty
percent of that money or two
point eight billion came from
all and gas.
Mr speaker German yes.
This.
With with out a codified office.
Oil and gas is been producing in
New Mexico for almost all for
over a hundred years.
Cementos we've been able to do
that without a codified office
what's the purpose of the
codified office for something
that is growing in leaps and
bounds according to the
testimony of fourteen hundred
percent without.
The fight office Mr speaker
gentleman I I would say again
that those the those functions
for oil and gas are codified
into law.
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
not codified into law within the
State Land Office the same
principle.
Would you not agree.
Mr speaker German the leasing a
portion of our statute is caught
it that's a codification of of
our law for oil and gas
the only M..
The.
Seem to be going back and forth
I get it that there's pieces of
this is codified what's not
codified is the actual office
and we've been very successful
in feeding New Mexico mouse for.
Decades without having another
office within an office within
an office.
So my question is is is as we
continue to do this Mr speaker
and gentle lady was or anything
and and house bill two.
From the State Land Office that
put funded vacancy put a funded
vacancy rate for the State Land
Office under the new and
renewable energy office.
Mr speaker that the current
budget for the land commission
office currently funds the for
FTEs.
For this office.
The lady so what we're saying is
we have funding for people.
Are those people already engaged
in employment within the state
of New Mexico in the state land
office Mr speaker John yes.
Mr speaker and gentle gentle
lady is there already employed
already have a job.
We're successful at this.
Growing of fourteen hundred
percent why create the office
was for figure gentlelady.
Mr.
Speaker generals to maintain
this office for the future.
The lady but we don't have that
office for act we don't have
that office for oil and gas we
don't have that office for the
other revenue generating sources
for State Land Office once again
I go back to what's the intent
with respect to this if we're
able to do it we already have
the funded positions there
already employed thirty doing
their job.
Mr speaker gentleman again to
assure that this the
functionality of this this
office remains in place for the
future.
The lady so what we would be
suggesting from that is that we
are not interested in seeing the
functionality of agriculture
continuing in New Mexico Mr
speaker John no that's not true.
Mr speaker and the lady if if
it's important to do it for
renewables force legislation for
ag.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that functionalities already
codified.
So we actually have an office
within the state land office for
agriculture the defined that way
what would be the name of the
initials of that office.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
the agricultural leasing bureau.
We have agriculture leasing
bureau is that correct speaker
John yes.
What would be the difference in
the verbiage for this besides
the technology piece of it that
would be different in the
functionality of the office of
renewable or the renewable
energy office verses the
agriculture leasing your.
Mr speaker gentleman it's just
the name.
The lady so we're saying that
the if if I was to compare the
statute for the agriculture
leasing girl taken away
agriculture adding in renewable
support in all the right places
the statue will read exactly the
same.
Mr speaker gentleman it's it's
not it's not the name it's the
functionality that is already.
Codified it's it's already
there.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
not sure that answered my
question.
Gentleman I'm I'm interested
here real quick I think that
with the gentle lady is seen as
of those functions already there
under a offices that may not be
named the same as this proposed
office but I believe she has
answered the question.
The only thing I appreciate it
That response in think of
receive my answers I think my
constituents of receive the
answers that they need to hear
and I appreciate that thank you
thank you gentlemen there's a
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker.
No.
I now move that House Energy
Environment and natural
resource committee substitute
for H. B. ninety five do now
pass.
Final passage for House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill ninety five the
vote is now open.
It's about to close.
Was able to forty eight in the
affirmative nineteen and they
give me give House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
bill ninety five has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from some the fate.
Mr speaker I move we go to the
next order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker agriculture the state
gives the water resources
committee to is been referred
house bill three ninety eight
has had it under consideration
point state with recommendation
that do pass and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted submitted
Susan K. and a chair Mr speaker
move adoption run option of the
federal Department house with
three ninety eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was me the as of a committee
report up to.
Mr speaker your agriculture the
state gives the water resources
committee to miss been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
it to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and at a chair.
Mr speaker move adoption printed
option available going to put on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Yes I have a committee report up
to two.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill
two fifty seven has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation but it do
possible as amended in answer
for the purpose of the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Eliseo Lee Alcon chair this is
opportunity for the job should
have a favorite committee report
on house bill two fifty seven of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Couples may be as of the
committee board.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill two
seventy seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the
government collections in in
fares Committee respectfully
submitted a list of conscience.
Without for the report reduction
of federal committee report on
house bill two seventy seven all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose maybe we just have it to
report up to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to miss
been referred house bill one
forty one has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation but it do not
pass the house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee
substitute for house bill one
forty one to pass immense
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair.
Remove the option reduction
we're no federal committee
report on house bill one forty
one but a favorable committee
report on house transportation
public works and government
prevents committee substantive
house bill one forty one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me just have a good report
opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house bill two forty has had it
under consideration report
saying with a clinician that'd
do pass as amended and the
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair the speaker move adoption
for that option with federal
committee report on house bill
two forty all those in favor
signify by saying aye opposed
may yes I have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to impose been
referred house bill two eighty
six has had it under
consideration point saying with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Hochman Vigil chair
speaker move adoption front
option of a federal committee
report on house bill two eighty
six of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Couples may yes I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
house bill two eighty seven has
had it under consideration point
it was recommendation that it do
not pass the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty seven to pass an answer
for to the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
an Hochman Vigil chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are on
adoption of an unfavorable
Committee bore for House Bill
two eighty seven but a favorable
committee report on house
transportation both public works
and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty seven all those
in
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill three
sixty has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
as amended finance referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair
speaker move adoption we are in
adoption of the federal
committer port on house bill
three sixty all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose in a the eyes of a
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill seventy
three has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for house bill
seventy three passed
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair fifty job.
We are not option of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill seventy three but a
favorable committee report on
house consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill seventy three all those in
favor signify by saying aye aye
opposed may be as have a
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to ms been
referred house bill three
fourteen has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass.
As amended and it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair for Dobson.
In adoption of a federal
committee report on house bill
three fourteen all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those names the as of a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker consumer Public
Affairs Committee too it's been
referred house bill three twenty
eight has had it under
consideration point singles
recommendation that I do not
passed the house but that house
consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill through twenty eight to
pass in this refer to the
transportation public works
capital improvements committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair food production we
are in adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill three twenty eight
but a favorable committee report
on house consumer Public Affairs
please substitute for house bill
three twenty eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those may be as of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to miss been referred house bill
one fifty six has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation but it do not
pass but that house Education
Committee substitute for house
bill one fifty six to pass and
is referred to the health and
Human Services Committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we're on adoption an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one fifty six but a favorable
committee report on house
Education Committee substitute
for house bill one fifty six all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Opposing the S. have a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tumescent for House Bill to
eighty has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendations to pass and then
just refer to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee report
granted option with federal
committee report on house bill
two eighty all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Apple's name yes have a commuter
for about.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to miss been referred house bill
three forty two has had it under
consideration alright so with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report for an adoption
of a favorite committee report
on house bill three forty two
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose maybe.
The representative it cleared
for adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee
too is been referred house bill
two zero four has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are not optional
Federal Committee port and house
bill two zero four all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the eyes of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee tomb
is been referred house bill two
eighty nine has had it under
consideration point and with
recommendations to pass sentence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption reduction
of federal committee for in
house bill two eighty nine of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Opposing the as of a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
three thirty six has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that it to
pass sentence refer to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson share Mr speaker move
adoption we're not optional
Federal commuter portent house
bill three thirty six of those
embarrassing about this and I.
Was me is of a committee report
about Mr speaker and rolling in
and grossing Committee to room
has been referred house memorial
seventeen House memorial twenty
seven House memorial thirty
House memorial thirty two House
memorial thirty eight House
memorial forty two has had them
under consideration reports that
same have been duly enrolled in
a gross preparatory to signing
by the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Eleanor
Chavez chair.
Mr speaker move to adopt we are
not option of federal committee
reports on house memorial
seventeen twenty seven thirty
thirty two thirty eight and
forty two.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Will post may.
The as having committed for
adopted.
The record reflect that the duly
enrolled in engrossed copies of
house memorials seventeen twenty
seven thirty thirty two thirty
eight and forty two for signed
by the officers of the house in
open session.
Gentlelady from some the fate.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
In addition is ordered click to
read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute Senate bill forty one
and act relating to to cut
the telecommunications amending
sections of the New Mexico
telecommunications act requiring
that incumbent local exchange
carriers that serve fifty
thousand or more access lines be
regulated in the same manner as
incumbent rural
telecommunications carriers in
most cases establishing that
effective cover petition exists
when a wire center serving in
their area when voice services
are provided to the area by two
or more alternate providers
providing definitions requiring
the public regulation commission
to report the steps taken to
achieve regulatory parity among
carriers amending and repealing
sections of the NM es a nineteen
seventy eight Senate judiciary
committee's substitute for
Senate bill forty one Senate
Judiciary Committee sums up to
percent of bill forty one have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house commerce Economic
Development Committee then so
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill forty four
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to elections
prohibiting the carrying of a
firearm within one hundred feet
of a polling place during an
election with an exception for
peace officers providing a
penalty Senate bill forty four
introduced by senator Wirth
Senate bill forty four have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee this
the house Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four an act relating to
criminal justice limiting
incarceration for technical
violations of probation and
parole off of the ties in
definitions Senate judiciary
committees of the two for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
consumer and public affairs
committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one oh two
introduced by senator Munoz an
act relating to motor vehicles
regulating lane travel providing
penalties Senate bill one oh two
introduced by senator Munoz
Senate bill one or two minutes
was by title is a printer for to
the house transportation.
Is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
transportation public works
given prevents committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two nineteen Senator
used by senators Moores my Estes
Representative Baca and senator
o'neill an act relating to
athletics removing the
prohibition on post secondary
educational institutions ranging
compensation for the use of a
student athletes name image
likeness or athletic reputation
allowing entities and
individuals who represented a
post secondary educational
institution in the past four
years to represent a student
athlete who is attending that
post secondary educational
institution Senate bill two
nineteen introduced by
representative Senators Moores
my SS Representative Baca and
senator o'neill Senate Bill to
nineteen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee has a house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill twenty six as
amended introduced by Senator
Gonzales an act relating to
finance providing for the
distribution of certain excess
oil and gas tax revenues and
federal mineral leasing act
payments to the severance tax
permanent fund Senate bill
twenty six as amended introduced
by Senator Gonzales.
Senator twenty six as amended
amendment twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
events how succession and
Revenue committee
Senate bill forty three
introduced by Senator Duhigg and
act relating to elections
amending the crime of
intimidation to include acts
against election officials and
employees and agents of the
secretary of state county clerks
and municipal clerks Senate bill
forty three introduced by
Senator Duhigg Senate bill forty
three amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee then state house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one twenty as
amended introduced by Senator
pope an act relating to public
education allowing for open
enrollment flexibility for
children of military families
Senate bill one twenty as
amended introduced by Senator
pope Senate bill one twenty.
As amended have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee then is the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
House joint memorial seven
introduced by representatives
Garrett and Chandler a Joint
Memorial requesting the public
school capital outlay oversight
task force to study public
school heating ventilation and
air conditioning systems and
recommend sustainable funding
mechanism for heating
ventilation and air conditioning
assessments repairs adjustments
and replacements house joint
memorial seven introduced the
representatives Garrett and
Chandler said house joint
memorial seven have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee.
House joint resolution fifteen
introduced by representatives
Montoya block lord Alan Martinez
and Vincent a joint resolution
proposing to amend articles for
nine and twelve of the
constitution of New Mexico with
the approval of Congress to
allow for the distribution of
public school funding to parents
or legal guardians of school age
children for home school or
private school including private
school virtual private virtual
schools.
House joint resolution fifteen
introduced by representatives
block Montoya lord Alan Martinez
and Vincent.
House joint resolution fifteen
having been read twice by title
is that are printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then so House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House memorial fifty introduced
Representative Hernandez Harper
Allen Martinez Kate's and Lente
and the Morial declaring
February twenty first two
thousand twenty three Sandoval
County one hundred twentieth
anniversary day in the house of
representatives house memorial
fifty introduced the
representatives Hernandez Harper
Allen Martinez Kate's and Lynde.
House moral fifty have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed in place on the speakers
table.
House memorial fifty one
introduced by Representative
Herrera Sarinana Garrett
Trujillo and G. Andrés Romero a
memorial requesting the
legislative education study
committee in collaboration with
the legislative finance
committee the department of
finance and administration the
public education department the
public school capital outlay
council and other
representatives of stakeholder
groups to appoint a subcommittee
to study the public education
funding formula and assess
whether the funding formula is
meeting the current requirements
of article twelve section one of
the constitution of New Mexico
and to provide recommend
limitations to the fifty eight
legislature first session house
memorial fifty one introduced
Representative Herrera Sariñana
Garrett Trujillo and G. Andrés
Romero house memorial fifty one
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
House memorial fifty two
introduced by Representative
Lord a memorial requesting the
secretary of health to convene a
task force to study the
prevalence effects and lifetime
fiscal impacts of prenatal
substance exposure and adverse
neonatal outcomes requesting
that the final results of the
study be reported to the
legislature house memorial fifty
two introduced by Representative
Lord.
House memorial fifty two have
been met twice by title is our
printer defected to the house
health and Human Services
Committee.
House memorial fifty three
introduced by representatives
Harry Garcia Sanchez al cone
Sariñana and Alan Martinez a
memorial declaring February
twentieth two thousand twenty
three military and veterans day
in the house of representatives
house memorial fifty three
introduced by representatives
Harry Garcia Sanchez L. com
Sariñana and Allen Martinez
house memorial fifty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
House memorial fifty four
introduced by representatives
Montoya says more about million
Zamora and block.
A memorial requesting the public
education department and the
higher education department to
restrict the term.
Latino acts and similar terms
and public schools and post
postsecondary educational
institutions as in all income
passing term and reference to
people of Hispanic descent.
House memorial fifty four
introduce the representatives
Montoya todos us more about
Maria Zamora and block.
Because more of fifty four have
been there twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
House memorial fifty five
introduced by Representative
Chasey have your Martinez Lara
and the Penske and Morial
supporting Ukraine against
Russian aggression house
memorial fifty five interviews
Representative Chasey have your
Martinez Lara and the pesky.
I I.
Because.
House were approved I have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed in front of house
government elections and then
Affairs Committee.
House memorial fifty six
introduced Representative
Garrett a memorial requesting
the legislative education study
committee to study the high
school start times and make
recommendations on statutory
high school start time house
memorial fifty six entities by
Representative Garrett has moved
to six minutes went by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
House memorial fifty eight.
Okay.
The
house memorial fifty seven and
it is Representative Brown Jones
Vincent Reid and Montorio
immoral recognizing the
importance of the differences
between biological males and
females and supporting the
requirement that schools
prohibit biological male
participation on female athletic
teams house memorial fifty seven
introduced the representatives
brown Jones Vincent Lee and Rod
Montoya as more of its seven
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
objection it is so ordered.
The announcements the gentleman
from Santa Fe Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment that's resources
committee will meet tomorrow
morning.
we will not here at nine thirty
Thanks for it nine o'clock from
three seventy I will not hear
house bill for twenty two or
house bill four twenty six thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you chairman members
signal generated from the
Indiana Representative Gallegos
thank you Mr speaker your house
commerce will meet twenty
minutes after the floor session
ends today thank you.
In rural.
Three seventeen thank you thank
you Julie the lady from Los
Alamos Santa Fe is really by
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will meet
fifteen minutes after the
conclusion of the floor session
in room three oh nine they were
sticking to the lady from
McKinley is on one reserve
Johnson Mr speaker house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow one PM in room three
zero five thank you for sticking
out the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman B. thank you Mr speaker
the house transportation
committee will meet at twelve PM
and room three oh five tomorrow
members taking notes.
Members will come back on the
floor this evening at five PM to
take up a number of bills a
joint committee thank you for a
productive morning the gentle
lady from going on a.
Apologies from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until five PM
today.
Susan reasons until five PM this
evening.
