That's what the substitute.
So with that in mind everything
else is being discussed in week
us.
These guys.
For the motion to assist us so
substitute motion to accept a
substitute.
Thank.
I think okay the
This is that most.
We have a front for both the
second and we have a substitute
for us I think the everything
else that you need is that.
I think we can go forward this
bill this is that.
No Mr chair my.
So I will believe that this
statement is with all the.
We discussed this still
many times I will go ahead and
ask for a motion on the floor.
I thank you in the mood impasse
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty five seconds Mr
chair I wanted to close my
management all yes head on and
I'm sorry I think those
professional history.
Okay let me just explain what
would best serve the.
At this stage of the game and
that is what expert with steps
are okay one didn't get filed a
matter twenty four hours.
Thanks for the wedding said
that.
Number two it is the end of the
LFC and not on the substance.
Okay so I explain explained that
if you want to live in the
substitute you got a amended in
the next committee.
That that that you get in the we
open with a posted through but
you can judiciary Mr come right
that includes commerce and
economic development at that
that you can proposed amendments
to the committee okay so and
that's where it'll go we can
discuss the additional needs to
get in for.
Thank you for okay so we have a
problem solution them from
second a new okay so at this
time I will call the roll of.
The certificate of the movie.
Senator House Bill Clinton I
okay Representative Jarvis yes.
Representative Figueroa yes
Representative Garcia
Representative yes
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative market no.
Representative read no.
Representative Dennis Eckersley
my vote.
Representative of into the.
Representative right off of I.
vice chair yeah.
And to share of course yes.
Representative the last couple
of minutes to figure out sure
thank you Mr chair I just it
although I I I Mr chair
representative as much as I want
to see our Mexicans prosper I
still virtual with our small
businesses and how there's
struggling to.
Maintain what for that right now
coming out of COVID and I feel
that this is the with all the
requirements they have at this
time Mr chair I believe that.
So we're not ready for that.
To give our small businesses
opportunity to.
I did talk to the children
farmers and they were very very
concerned about this uninsured
people of the are are unable to
have no employees for at this
time and so they're losing their
ability to harvest crops that
have those crops and so for that
reason.
Due to my maybe one more thing
faster chair.
I think this will just increase
the costs to a minimum wage this
using our our build up.
Are are people that are fixed
income I am very very worried
about that have been affected
especially with the information
that they're dealing with thank
you for we do not.
get another eight point seven
five percent financial security
the fear we also.
This story teller for a little
head in the clouds and be
allowed okay.
Of wood it was the would you
like to receive them.
The and social security people
got a three percent the call.
Every issue that bush sent the
letter to everybody that receive
this call out hello how do you
think they should be to the
president for getting this call.
I don't remember which one it
was.
How long ago but I do remember
reading that letter and I was
thinking about fixing the
related to this condition one
seven five this is the letter of
the letter I've never seen in my
lifetime.
With that in mind
Representative good looking
published.
thank you very much Mr chair
Senator over the bills on the
of the facts we're not just
because of their from the
federal.
The
state.
Really does make sure that we
got.
The.
Thank you.
Okay well that that case no we
are ready for a house bill sixty
four.
Representative right.
Stability of that off of the new
one.
Right supposed to be better
because of that building use.
Mr Chairman.
The bills are reputed to read
just yet.
Was just a thought we called it
almost yeah the new dig through.
Also call.
That was only the.
The first one is news is a yes.
You're invited to making the
county dinner.
Last.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
house for two hours.
Regional to all the.
Thank you Sir.
Still the minutes new walking up
the stairs thank you for the
money.
Of the everyone yeah let's do it
let's just keep
the bill right away
this is here right.
Thank you all the details.
This is already.
This is
part.
I was.
Right.
You can certainly say that we.
These can.
The problem.
We are going to vote on madam
chair.
During.
That's sort of next we are going
to of house bill one of five
presented by Mr chair.
Are you ready Mr chairman.
Okay right right.
Thank you madam chair.
We have before us House Bill by.
Pretty basically at the relates
to real road safety and and is
that through this us the two
persons are of the.
Is your right the operation of a
crude in the state of New Mexico
there would be a two person crew
about that.
So with that I agree
with that that would selves.
Right and.
You may go ahead good afternoon
madam chair dollars day goes
Representative conductors
engineers switchman ticket
agents of US firms in Farmington
for union Pacific BNSF railway
Amtrak red apple in Farmington.
I'm retired navy chief with
twenty one years I'm also
disabled veteran
and I'm of the national safety
team as the investigator for the
NTSB so investigate road
accidents.
When it comes to safety some of
our counterparts some of our
companies are going to come out
and tell you that they've had
the best safety record in
history this last year.
They had some good safety
advances but you Pacific last
year three deaths within the
last six months we're concerned
you can look that up on it yes
the of the website one of them I
cannot talk about those the best
year on so please look it up
BNSF railway has had several
derailments in New Mexico and I
do have some photos some of you
were provided with these photos
that stopped freight on the
Transcon for three or four dates
Commerce stop for three or four
days because of these
developments one was in the
village New Mexico which is part
of a good level and they had to
evacuate the village that's not
a very good safety record now
did happen last year but it
happened before some of the
other derailments happened right
in the middle of requests that a
photograph or there's a train
derailed right next to the auto
so.
This did not have any serious
implications or danger to the
public but it could have in the
future with all the equipment
and all the hazardous materials
we run we need to have that
second person named crew to help
out the case in a of an event or
an incident or an accident.
The heart of H. B. one oh five
is rooted in smart
transportations constant
remained.
Cystic raiment has been was
negotiated back in nineteen
eighty five.
Class one railroads wanted us or
one of forces to negotiate they
have and they help our our
national contract of you know we
almost went on strike because
they were trying to forces the
crew costs the state very
true because this agreement is
the one that said they were
doing reducing the crews from
five to do because of technology
they had the in the train device
we did you compose anymore so
we've reduced the crew to
engineers and conductors only.
The conductors on the train
still have a job to do and they
were not replaced in with the
positive train control of
brother clinical explained
positive train control to you
just a minute the contest
agreement what hangs up on it is
a.
You.
Or there will be a time when the
the parties to this agreement
shall not serve nor progress
prior to the attrition of all
protected employees any knows a
proposal proposal for change
change provisions of this
agreement governing perpetration
protected employees part
parliament's friendly special
loans reduced crew members and
employee productivity funds so
what happened was.
They were counting on these guys
to be retired by now I work with
one and in the land our
president of our local is a
protected employee I can only
find find ten but when he when I
asked him about it we still have
thirty protected employees and
close symbol in New Mexico.
So they're not really allowed to
negotiate this contract of
course they can go to court get
it changed enough for
negotiating today.
But they would not negotiate our
regular contract for three years
for three years that's why we
didn't get any raises that's why
we get anywhere section six
submitted was because this
creating concepts to very had
this bill passed of several
years ago on the national level
in the state level we would be
having that discussion with our
contracts this alone held us up
this is what prevented us almost
caused the nation to shut down
it callers.
The only talk about.
There is no study about single
Cruz.
What are single prison this
country in Indiana that engineer
only Cruz.
And it is allowed because the
train is under certainly the
train only goes forty nine miles
an hour and more may not go more
than thirty miles we have we had
the same crew up trade in New
Mexico but it was not on the
main line it was on the sideline
in and page New Mexico go from
PED's up till seven the full
line of the Cole Freeman called
out to the power plant and
ending with back up they have a
conductor but he drove a truck
on the road when a light switch
for the train letter through
landed behind all the dispatch
all this stuff it worked great
for them.
You specific in the last couple
of months and put out a video
about conductor chill the
expedited he does not right on
the trade.
It was an interesting video
because conductor Jos on three
thousand three hundred foot
train.
If you look on the trans
anywhere there are now three
thousand three hundred foot
trains for all longer than forty
five thousand feet.
Sect conductor joke takes forty
five minutes to walk from the
head in to the rear of the train
if it takes forty five minutes
he needs to see the doctor it
should take you forty five
minutes these dieters will come
up in a truck and try to make
repairs but in New Mexico not on
the track the tracks are
sensible next to a highway
effective I would estimate that
eighty percent there's no
access.
There is no access so with
Cruz going to a to a single
person the problem is if if
there's going to be an accident
and incident our situation with
the train you're gonna have to
wait for a while before the
expedited to get there we don't
need to study for that we know
that in New Mexico that it takes
a while to get this expedited
for their we do have expedited
that help us out with things
that the conductor cannot fix
and it may take an hour two
hours to get there.
Point being is.
It's a good idea but.
The automation is nowhere where
it should be and
at this time especially in New
Mexico we don't have access to
these trained by the highway of
the roads
Filter number two let me I have
a little bit more here currently
the FRA is trying to
Of make a regulation they opened
up for public comment back in
December we had over thirteen
thousand submissions given
examples of why we cannot have a
single person on a train.
Seven states in the in in the U.
S. have lost have already passed
laws eight states including New
Mexico or introducing loss to
states are governor vetoed the
bill our governor such people
supported she signed on two
person crew Bill which he was in
the house of representatives
already.
and one state I think Illinois
was blocked by the Attorney
General.
Don't have a two person prove
your conductor engineer that can
discuss rules apply our rule
book is probably well we have
about four rule books that we
have to discuss about speeds
might for the training weight
training has a material has Mr
placement in the training.
And what I can't do it because
you're always going to miss
something that conduct will pick
it up say wait a minute they
should be I back from the
locomotive so it's just the two
guys put their heads together
make it safer for Frank
compliance observation of
dangers in front of you.
Trespasser some traffic passes
are not always right on crossing
that come out of no where and
we've had several decis last
year which never make the news
if it's Amtrak if it's real
runner it's in the news for a
week.
Yes after you P. hit somebody
you never hear about go to the
newspaper Gallup find out of the
police they'll tell you how many
deaths through their employer
you have just if you would
believe it.
Inspections should we have a
problem on the train will get a
message from our dispatcher
saying you have a hot William
pop right full back of hundred
thirty four axles go check it
out can do if you're over with
the doctor it's going to take
awhile for that X. but I'd
feedback there.
Right yes when I do it right yes
it said corpo non active set
release the conductor has to be
at the end of the training make
sure the brakes actually sat and
actually really happy to see
can't do that.
The T. let's all face it you get
on a trainer there for eight
hours ten hours twelve hours you
go to the hotel yet call right
now or you might even worse you
might not get called at all.
You're there for you you went to
sleep he slept for eight hours
to get out you're up ten twelve
fourteen fifteen hours you get
called.
Normally when you go back to
bed.
Conductor will keep you awake
with the stupidest story you've
ever heard in your life but they
keep you away he serves a
purpose.
Medical emergencies between the
conductor and engineer they can
relate to the dispatcher and get
that train for crossing for we
can get up for Murphy Services.
Dangers and complications of
dark territory this is a
territory have signals you have
that weren't worried.
Permission slip images back to
go down the need those extra ice
because those signals protect
you from transit broken rounds.
Anything else that might be
going on ahead of the now as far
as broken rails it'd be years
that I've been on a train never
saw one because my conductor at
also cited when I first found my
first broken route but it's very
difficult to keep that training
thank you train at ten miles an
hour you're trying to look at
the track though you can't
really to that the conductor
looks for and how often does
that happen we have four broken
rails last.
Four on the Gallup subdivision I
can't speak for the apostles of
the gap close up because I work
on the gallops up in number four
one nine so it's common we need
people on the train to look out
for these dangers.
One thing that.
In the U. P. video or in some of
their evidence date they say
that one of the things that
happen to sabotage.
We had decided because of the
apostles of body or half ago it
was that a lot of.
Committee real to train.
Luckily the conductor I don't
think you need your order the
conductor saw what happened
before they hit it it was just
one of railroad ties in the
middle of the tracks it was
picked up just a little bit and
wedged into the switch and pick
that locomotive catapulted turn
it over first and second unit on
the side and they didn't know
what happened but the conductor
to tell them all together was of
time middle of the of the
tracks.
C. expedited the investigation
with the FBI Department Pam of
homeland security now this is
just the things that make the
news sometimes these guys will
find its senior devices when
they're expecting their trains
sometimes they put razor blades
or something that'll cut the
conductor's hands when he's
trying to separator type train
down.
Only the rest of this of
presentation to clam with that
the only he can explain to our
positive train control.
Three
quarters.
Of our working members of the
brotherhood of locomotive
engineers and trainmen in New
Mexico as a matter as it relates
to matters of safety welfare and
social legislation like to talk
to you a little bit about what
positive train control it really
is.
the rowers love is to try to
convince you that positive train
control otherwise known as PTC
is designed to take the place of
a properly trained crew member
on board trains these lobbyists
of more than likely never
operated for interviews positive
train control real world there
using talking points provided by
their clients these clients are
most interested in their bottom
line and reported many many
years of record profits even as
supply chain issues that
threaten the nation's economy.
Positive train control is
mounted on the control expanding
the view a locomotive engineer
is required to the crew log into
positive train control and
verify the information in the
system there is concern that the
federal railroad administration
is expressed about ensuring that
this information is input
correctly I train dispatcher is
that information is not correct
positive train control is not
able to account for this and and
is unable to properly slow or
stop trains the redundancy to
members of the crew can find as
a system of checks and balances
one there's incorrect
information it's input into the
system.
Additionally hoppy DC can only
look in the direction the train
is moving.
Why is this important positive
train control is not integrated
to function with other forms of
technology that are able to
detect rolling the facts such as
driving requirement for
detectors that are along the
right away if there's a failure
journal of our they're in a real
cars will turn positive train
control as no way of knowing
this and stopping the train.
Positive train control does not
have the ability to account for
weather conditions but merely
functions at with said
algorithms to see certain
parameters are met to make sure
the engineer slowing trained
appropriately to transfer of a
restriction.
And I will a little bit on the
technical side of this
regulations found in forty nine
CFR for up to thirty six one one
item the states following each
railroad may prescribe
additional or more stringent
rules and other special
instructions that are not
inconsistent with this so far
simply put railroads are
obligated by federal law to
follow the rule listed above the
minimum standard.
Additionally this federal
regulations are goes on to state
and and two thirty six.
Ten forty seven includes a
provision to allow for full
automation as a relative long
look at appropriations such as
Rio Tinto in the Australian
outback this is their ideal
operation the striking
difference in the Australian
outback in the state of New
Mexico simple the area that Rio
Tinto operates is is in fast
nine and have it out back New
Mexico has very strong unities
that are driving along the
Burlington northern Santa Fe and
the union Pacific routes that
see all commodity shipments of
hazardous materials make no
doubt about the class one
railroads led by CSX they've
already requested rep waivers to
operate the program K. to little
names like zero zero this is
nothing more than a code name
for not Torrez operation.
Meaning that there will be no
crew members on board the train
if they can have their way
additionally been assessed as
requested update their positive
train control initiatives to the
F. R. I. I trying to write
second person out of cap
already.
On June twenty second two
thousand twenty two significant
very significant thunderstorm
accrued system locomotive
engineer and conductor operated
a unified conventionally powered
trains just locomotives at the
head and forty seven loaded cars
and six empty cars was nine
thousand two hundred four feet
in length and weighed seven
thousand three hundred ninety
two times the engineer stopped
the train on a downhill grade of
approximately one percent of the
signal governing the train's
movement said the trains are
breaks if proximally twelve
pounds and fully set the brakes
on the locomotives after being
stopped for approximately three
hours the engineer and conductor
located in the lead locomotive
serve the train rolled towards
the interlocking signal in front
of this displaying stop
indication while other trains
going through the interlocking
and from.
This locomotive sconces prices
the locomotive Crisis state
fully implied and the subsequent
investigation they found due to
the grade tonnage and and the
the white rel from the
thunderstorms that positive
train control can't take into
account that was not sufficient
to solely hold the train with
with train brakes ply.
Other true the contact the
dispatcher rover management to
report the unintended break
relation the conductor said a
sufficient number hand breaks
all the parameters right after
the train displace emergency by
the humans in the cap.
Therefore is investigation of
the rolling through the federal
border positive train control
system and engine datalog to be
able to positive train for the
PTC system and operating
properly and what of initiated
numbers and emergency brake
application upon reaching the
sable however the crew was able
to do it well in advance of the
lead locomotive crosses and
instead they operated German
that approximately three hours
your bridge said the pressure
slowly bled off some of trains
cars which caused localized
outbreak releases in the
training of the initiation
Emergency Brinkley's what
enabled xcelerated really
Sanchez is technical stuff I
won't bore you with
due to potential for brake
system weeks effort right it's
on and on it unattended train
from depending solely on air
brakes folder where all
affirmation rolling training was
attended it was never the less
engaged in unintended movement
it's not difficult to imagine
what could happen in the string
up and properly staffed and sold
payments was left off the DC to
bring this trying to stop how do
you think this would turn out of
PTC I was not properly
functioning on the way
locomotive.
The relative spoke calmly tell
members and freight positive
train control is not working go.
Ask yourself these questions do
you want to talk on this train
operations in the community of
communities of New Mexico have
you considered all the bullshit
hazardous materials are shipped
by rail because it's not
practical to move them on the
highways have you considered
that the endgame of the
references to have autonomous
operations and if you consider
the safety of the communities of
New Mexico where those railroads
operate.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Chairman we will stand for
questions thank you Mr chair.
So
What we'll do and I think the
chair but through all this
before but there'd be three
minutes allow for those in
opposition and three minutes a
lot for those in favor and so
right now.
I will ask for those in
opposition just raise your hand.
Okay there's two there anybody
online but that is an opposition
would you raise your hand
please.
Okay and see anybody there and
we had to two hands I think I
saw so go ahead an opposition
please thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jay going ten are the largest
reading Pacific Grove in New
Mexico for about six or seven
years.
I hope someday guys we get to
you need sometimes out of this
committee and on time you don't
have a lot of respect for you
personally and what we feel the
same way likewise I want to let
you know I'm not you see there's
no doubt I'm not.
Spouting any kind of company
messages speculative.
I think now in on this issue you
know opposing this bill on
behalf of union Pacific Grove
for seven.
Seven years at least it's been
for the legislature many many
times and it's never passed
because it ultimately comes down
to two big issues.
Is it appropriate to circumvent
the collective bargaining
process is that just interested
labor is that the best interests
of the company ultimately the
Cision in the past has been no
that's probably not the right
thing to do.
The other thing that this issue
is always what that there was a
the lands of safety is this
really true safety issues are
not well let's talk about those
things so.
In New Mexico I don't think
anyone in this room can point to
an incident where there has been
a train accident because it's
been less than two people in the
group that.
Because you disinfect as always
have a policy there's always two
people welcome on the.
That's the policy now and I can
assure you from union Pacific's
perspective they're never going
to change that policy unless
they sit down at the table with
labor and labor and union
Pacific agreed to a new policy
that danger of putting a
statutory provision in place
where you're locked in to where
you have to have two conductors
members.
Is that because we do have to
acknowledge Jeez we do have we
do have other changes coming
down the road that affect
scheduling freight operations I
think everyone knows union
Pacific as one of its most
complicated complex
sophisticated of rail hubs in
the country it's right here in
Senator us in New Mexico you
know there's a lot of things to
look at it's one thing when a
train is going you know straight
across Kansas and never stopping
it's quite another thing when
you've got to stop in New Mexico
and deal with the the logistics
of a really really complicated
health so it's not appropriate
to circumvent the the collective
bargaining process the rental
company would like to sit down
and continue to have a
discussion about this but the
last point I want to make is
about safety no one is talking
about going to autonomous trains
but the reason trucks Thomas the
reason cars are going on to
lotus is because the number one
factor that causes accidents
human error if you can take the
human error element out of it do
you have a safe or
appropriations so we want to
keep two people in the gross to
prove Representative have to
also have the opportunity to
continue discussed at the table
point four thank you madam chair
right on time thank you.
This is the work placement size
which we have a timer so
are for keeping every year ready
to go to here in opposition yes
Representative Romero vision
lobbyist Venus approach to the
TPM G. David made some very good
points on a safety and you
contracts within the two I would
like to say is right now.
This issue they're very
validating it and the state's
comes down to the.
Two two and two of the way to go
then it would be like that every
state not just state by state
and if it is coming from Texas
to New Mexico to stop of the
state line add a person to the
crew well it is a they can get
up we just think they should be
done at the federal level not at
the state level I think
continuing coverage of the funds
thank you very much is there any
other opposition.
For more campaign online any
other opposition online.
All right seeing and then those
that are here in favor of the
bill right hand please.
Okay so what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna start on to my left over
here however had their hand up
first in the front row began.
On some great with the National
Weather like workers that we
stand in support of this
legislation.
Thank you.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members
doing the job that you for the
New Mexico federation of labor
we stand strong but if you have
for numerous years that brought
up you understand that this is
being tackled hole on the
federal level.
You know as we all know here we
have to wait on the federal
government to pass laws would be
a much different for all
you know for we are obviously
here for I honestly we do this
is a safety issue it really is
hi all you know if we are if we
had hired are playing stated
that they needed another person
in those cabins eight injured
our planes flew safely I don't
think we would hesitate twice to
give those pilots what they need
this is you know these are the
people who were working our
train to city this is what they
need to make sure that our
communities are safer people are
safe the transit.
Our party with why on earth we
are deprived of seeds the last
thing we want to see if that
accident happened because he did
not have the necessary creating
arbitrate something so the the
facts Ezzell I'm glad that yes
that is taking the policy is
every two people on the crew all
of the ever were to change the
things that make people less
safe the committee is less so
for those reasons the job thank
the sponsor for supporting our
for sponsoring this and actually
all support before you sit down
for the record could you repeat
your name and what you represent
their lives use and it's The New
Mexico federation of labor.
Thank you anyone else on my left
all right so that will go to my
right and anyone who raised
again in support of high rate
all right go head Sir or ma'am
not for.
I couldn't tell thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Gerald the oil number
believers in us off our local
sixteen.
Would stand in support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience.
Yes Sir chair Harrison Mexico to
DOT transit route Division are
you ready here to troll the
troll position on the bill just
it's usually opposition or
support.
I don't know Mr chair have we
ever had a situation where we
had heard neutral.
The.
like I said Dave Harris.
Representative vision we stand
we have a neutral position on
this bill.
Doesn't affect Mexico Roadrunner
express they were waiting
finalization and creation of the
FRA elected to provide
uniformity.
Thank you thank you.
So then we have
One person online.
Quartey I first of all have you
are allowed in now you may
speak.
I I don't know why it says
Courtney I course that is my
boss my name is Joan Baker for
the record
I'm with United association
summers and pipefitters local
you for twelve we stand in
strong support of this measure
I heard the gentleman state you
know maybe they should be with
the federal government but I
think a lot of us know we can
push the federal government a
little faster once twenty three
states have adopted a similar
law and I think that this is so
important to safety in our state
and to give the federal
government the sign that this is
best practice in that this needs
to be federal law
I see New Mexico as a leader and
we can lead on this so I ask for
a yes vote on this bill thank
you.
Thank you anyone else online in
support.
Okay so now we're gonna go to
committee and I'm gonna start
the list who would like to
speak.
Question.
Everybody.
We'll go to no kidding.
Mekaniske of
Madam chair representative on
one as of couple of quick
questions to kind of clarify
things in mind my head
First of all.
From morning sitting this seems
to be a bill.
This being debated the union
against the industry.
We heard.
On.
Montoya this gentleman for
lobbyists for real.
When we were from pipe fitters
and.
The labor unions and and.
So it seems to be a quick fight
between industry and the unions
why is this not being decided at
the table with the collective
bargaining agreement.
Yes.
The the.
Presenter sponsor of the bill
will direct the discussion thank
you Mr chairman thank you a lot
of the they would this year yes
and to that.
I got maybe only self but I
think he's got a bit of.
Madam chair like I stated before
because the streams not supposed
to be negotiated until the last
protected employee was has died
retired or tried it and they
forced their will to the courts.
In lieu of negotiating our
contract and so that we would
negotiate it but we they're not
allowing us the proper time.
If not allowed is the proper
time to do that they want to do
it now and not when last
protected employee dies retires
so that's one issue the second
issue is.
Since we have other entities
thank you FOR a of making his
decision on this so it is
uniform throughout the state.
The problem is if we decide now
with our current F. R. A. head
is the right thing to do.
Unfortunately every time we have
another election though real
point the head of the F. R..
The previous administrator
eliminated or again waivers to
the class one railroads to do
pre conceptions was that the
right thing to do.
We get the next guy and he says
on a we're gonna start doing
these break inspections again so
if we do that with the two
person crew without a law some
law backing it up.
That will be back and forth to
person single person to person
until until the time that we can
get a law nationally to say this
is thing to do.
That your question.
Sort of we have I mean.
let me ask just one Madam chair
clarifying question on your
answer what exactly you said.
The crew was supposed to go on
until the last protected
employee so when you negotiate a
contract.
All state on I just got the job
on twenty one years old.
You don't renegotiate until I'm
dead.
Not doing this go ahead if we
can get on.
This is just chair madam chair
this is particularly to accrue
costs a staggering that is this
is not our CPA this this is not
our CPA this is ridiculous we
can you for those that aren't
aware can you define CPA that's
our our current contract between
thank you for and and the and
the railroads it's on a national
basis the crew because this is a
separate agreement so they're
they're they're not the same
thing and that's why it says
because this group has different
agreements they are allowed to
claim different things for jobs
they do which New York
negotiated Office degree so when
we do get a new call for
concepts agreement it'll affect
those that are currently working
on the contract is that
particular contract is signed so
there two eight two different
issues I realize that the rebels
a little bit different because
we follow in the railway labor
act we're not like every other
you so that that creates a
little bit confusion.
Madam chair representative so
there's two separate things that
the crew com cystic Raymond and
the collective bargaining
agreement.
So which is the one that lasts
until I died.
Well what we're discussing.
Madam chair over discussing is
the true cost of staggering and
and just a specific group of
employees.
And normally the career of a
guy's about thirty years.
Return thirty years for sixty
years older both for you know.
Madam one last question.
Madam chair representative of
corn and the experts.
How long has this been.
Run in the legislature.
Madam chair of and
representative Iran this build
up for the first time probably
six years ago I had zero
experience first time I read the
have any committee which is kind
of like I don't know what I was
doing the second time I ran it
of the committee chair wouldn't
wouldn't run the bill the third
time I think I had a day off in
the field and this committee can
edit to get if you pass so it's
basically my experience in this
world I'm not professional this
double a locomotive engineer so
I'm kind of going on on thank
can do people and explain to
them our lifestyle is and and
you know from the outset I am
not a professional this so
that's the reason that this is
going on for such a long time.
Madam chair.
So the bill that we're hearing
thousand.
The last last year or two.
Last you madam chair
representative market is this is
the same bill that we heard last
year or two years ago yes does
that we've actually this
committee and said to.
Four seven sure thank you
Representative dot com.
Next on the list as
Representative dental office
thank you madam chair
Representative
so real quick
I think I I have some.
I have some up.
Problems and and and with with
this because I'm reading I'm old
railroad.
Engineer we DO not stop my
profession so I just I go off of
R. F. by ours what I what the
fiscal impact reports are.
From the D. O. T. SO forth and
so I remember you know basically
for for their face value.
And one of those things madam
chair representative is my
understanding is that there was
already a of published notice of
proposed rulemaking.
Just been July twenty eighth of
last year.
And
And so then it is supposed to
be.
I think you kind of mentioned
this but I think going.
Use of the data.
But the chair representative
committee
means a lot and it tells me that
something is coming and I've
portion of your works but
My question is Madam chair of.
Representative.
Is this this can be overruled.
By the way I read this by the F.
R. A. which is the federal
railroad administration is that
right Madam chair
representative.
The plan Madam chair
representative
what there for eight years away
if you the previous
administrator pull all this off
the table and services numbers
out of this we don't want to
miss this not permanent
straighter because it is very
familiar topic in government
these days there there the
previous
person in that in that office
audio into their lives and so
we're gonna do this back and
forth the dollar alluded to this
in is in this discussion what
they give they're gonna take a
while and so to get this settled
with the state or is unable to
region at the state level in the
state you can't have that.
So Madam chair representative
the way I'm reading is it does
supersede any state losses what
I'm reading here and so my
question is you have already of
published yell published I'm
just reading what from the DOT
published of notice and you've
got it this is here that F. R.
F. R. a rural
will supersede basically.
Any of state statues what what
I'm reading and so that that
tells me what it meant we we
have already
Madam chair representative we've
already have this in motion on
the federal level.
And I think what what worries me
is sometimes we.
It was just thinking of I'm
gonna miss you know if I was
traveling in a car or truck or
whatever fifty five to go and if
I'm going because of that and so
we're sitting next to the train
go through them and stuff and
thank you
and I think it got mentioned
that the government should from
state to state to state and just
think of our little area down
there with a little
A little later what are your
thoughts coming down I just a
three states and I don't know
how many not very many miles
thank you you know we go to
people that one person and my
other question is almost
thirties to because that because
of the other day I was up hungry
Madam chair representative and
today you guys are so.
So.
Yes my
child.
So madam chair representative
how many times of the flip
flopped on your on your crew
requirement you so the replay
flip flop of things under group
requirement if it's up flopping
back and forth.
Madam chair representative
others been multiple occasions
and in the last a ten or twelve
years where this is gone back
and forth depending on on the
head of the minute there for a
that'd been straighter is what
their position is on the top.
When was
that done that.
But I I'm trying to explain I
think what the Representative do
the
we need to understand is in
government the state.
That's a look at best
legislation that strengthens the
federal requirements they get
not fast legislation that we can
still federal requirements in
other words it and that works
now the government in other
words in the state of New Mexico
classes a law that says the
speed limit is seventy miles per
hour New Mexico should what
county cannot pass the bill that
says Cibola County the speed
limit is a.
Okay so there for us they could
not we can the higher the.
Government's position but they
can they can strengthen it.
Madam chair representative thank
you thank you Representative
Madam chair representative is
there a current contract right
now the culture to man to man
crew.
Of the yes that is a group
consisting agreement.
Madam yeah it's it's the up the
creek crosses the green
initially addressed five people
on the train.
And then it went to three and
that is creating contest is now
it to us so that's our current
K. amount confuse madam chair
representative so.
You have a of you have a current
contract for five years to have
a two person crew what I'm
understanding
and we have Madam chair
representative we've got
the statement here by the R. F.
R. A. on July twentieth that
says I'm going to give this.
That is really what I have just
I'm sorry to disappoint and so
it's just
I I I just I have conflicting
for me I just don't understand
that or keep this the committee
here all day I think it's just
my my only issues with that are
very expanding contract Madam
chair representative and I this
area where I was elected to with
that little blue and they passed
through three different states
and our our files and but and so
I don't know how that would work
because it would be like
checkerboard.
And Madam chair representative I
just worry that if there is if
this is a is implemented and
that I was going to chair
representative what I was gonna
say is it's employment is going
to cause any delays on shipments
but then I read the third
contract already existing
contract for the next five years
so I think we already have that
for the next five years and
we're hope waiting Madam chair
representative for the F..
Our ages
With the final judges I that I
just that's what what I'm
reading Madam chair
representative thank you very
much Mr chair representative Lee
if it's okay with you your
expert witness wanted to clarify
no two thousand fourteen chair
the with the state
and you want to raise members
madam chair I'd be glad to make
it a question well if that if
that would help the the
Are there are a.
The question of which would
raise the time meditech yeah
it's
hello.
I just yeah just keep in mind
that how we keep the flow of
things one Representative is
by you're welcome to make an
opening statement for the way we
get things going is with
questions that we we have a a
question and answer in order to
clarify thank you thank you.
Okay Representative in.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm trying to get my mind
wrapped around the safety aspect
to this.
So my statement is as as an ex
firefighter.
We were always mandated never
feel ever.
And.
We if we went into a burning
building there was if there was
to members inside there was two
members outside.
And it was for safety and
accountability Madam chair
representative is.
And.
One of my questions is why.
If if you if.
Why do you not have an
additional person on there.
With the trying.
That may.
And you only want to operate
that huge turning that's a mile
long or maybe longer maybe two
miles long.
That's a one person operation
could you explain that to me
please.
Madam chair representative are
trying to get up to three point
three miles all three mile long
trains.
And we want those two people on
there to observe as you said for
each other accountable going to
one person greatly increases the
risk and the danger of what's
going on I can give you one
example but I get on a train I
will be on for minimum.
To twelve hours so the twelve
are.
If I find myself I'm here to
honor I'm gonna use restroom.
Which means I have to leave the
control stand I have to get up
go down to the restaurant.
With a single person I would
have to stop that train.
Hi down restaurant that will
impede commerce in this country.
Stop being like that just for
the restaurant there's no nobody
on training can go more than
eight hours without going to a
restaurant currently if you have
a conductor I can get up get in
get out because you can stop
that train.
And so the radio whatever needs
to be done such a very good
question.
We can't operate that training
with one person for that
specific reason.
Thank Madam chair
Representative is.
So I have friends and family
that work for the railroad.
I'm I'm actually from Clovis
where.
You know Representative reads
that and that's a big station
there.
And I'm thinking of my friends
and family.
That somebody is in the training
and they're operating a three
mile training.
I don't think that means the
bathroom.
I'm thinking about.
As I've been watchin on the news
here lately.
And I've been watching people.
Young people falling over
Diana's heart heart attacks.
And I thought that one of my
family members or friends was it
a train operating something that
big that heavy.
I had a medical emergency.
If that did happen.
Have the who's notified how is
that how are they going to be
notified.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair if you're by
yourself there's no way there's
no way to to call for help if
you're by yourself.
The train would eventually stop
the order would go off in a
train would go in emergency.
And that's about the only thing
they would now that the
dispatcher would be calling they
don't answer the radio is right
away would take a while before
they knew the train stopped.
In the following following
calling that it's another at
passing training go around it to
stop it down and see what's
going on.
Two quick.
Madam chair I would give chair.
Madam chair representative
additionally.
yes when you see these two or
three model offerings and you
see multiple concerts of
locomotives and trains that's
all control for one for the the
one of our engineering cap in
order to control those
locomotives that requires you to
take their eye sight off what's
coming ahead what that industry
make adjustments on the straight
and continue to look at.
Madam chair representative so.
Our.
Are they currently using one
person right now today.
Go ahead.
Madam chair representative.
If you were aware or not seek up
to see the surface
transportation board hearings
examples they were using was a
trans in Indiana media they have
the short trades don't go that
far that fast and that's really
the only place that has been
doing it eight they reported
zero incidents or accidents both
we've already approved the roads
are not exactly accurate on
those things now the training
goes from out of state to also
the no money for the coal mine
north of Milan grants that has a
single person but there's a
guide pickup truck came with.
In the you gotta be good into
her on that run it's pretty
pretty steep and I've on the the
big trains all there with
multiple units with with the
distributed power on it and you
have to concentrate on that.
That short line of one person in
an he's just got three
locomotives and it's a little
bit easier that I take a seventy
thousand tonne trade out of
their.
The challenge most engineers of
for you that cold pool they
avoided kind of like to.
Thank you madam chair
representative is.
So we have a three mile train.
Going through I want to pay my
district.
We have a three mile train.
Going through corona.
We have a three mile train that
goes through cares also.
And.
I know that they're carrying
hazardous materials and no they
are.
Can you tell me what the
procedure is if there was one
person on the train.
And they have a development.
What what is that what is that
one person to do.
Madam chair representative.
The.
Chair representative currently
of roller issues all all of us
are for rules.
Distraction why there needs to
be a second person up there
because if you have a roll
question you have to stop by
rural rural requirement to look
up that role and additionally
contained on that are usually
behind the lock screen is all of
the hazardous material paperwork
and go with that that are
required to go with that
shipment along with the hazmat
books that you would be familiar
with that firefighters and if
that locomotive engineer wonder
single crewmember is injured a
pass
kids.
During one of these developments
all the rules can very easily
cover up what was being shipped
because of the placards on the
cars burn of there's no way to
tell what was there and if they
have that if they do have all
the control that information
electronically.
They more may not sure that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
All I'm just going to I'm gonna
speculate that you could.
We hired eighteen year old
person.
To go through training.
And become a conductor or an
engineer.
And I'm just thinking of some of
the eighteen to twenty one year
old people that I know even even
some of the some of those old
guys how.
You can get so complacent and so
many different things.
That.
Everybody needs a little bit of
accountability.
With a partner on something like
that Madam chair representative.
Where is the accountability now.
Madam chair there is no
accountability with the single
person that.
That party ten year old people
become conductors by taking over
for the company engineer but if
you're by yourself there's no
accountability right even if you
have any to could your
conductors gonna ask enough
questions to keep you alert and
he's pretty good at that I can
do to look in rules of replacing
gaskets and if he doesn't know
if right to it without in the
blind your blind it's with the
same role in a two person crew I
was a firefighter those repairs
offer leader and you said two
guys in there there were two
guys out there and I can't
imagine that divide themselves
to me it's it's beyond
imagination so I agree with you
Sir.
My last statement madam chair
Representative is.
It bothers me that.
We have to.
Regulate because I'm not a big
regulation or mandate the
person.
and just for the record I'm not
even working with you people
this is just this is just doing
what was right.
And if I thought.
That my employees were safe.
And they asked me for one more
person because it wasn't safe I
would be it seems like I would
be willing to do something like
that Madam chair representative
you.
Thank you are there any other
questions from the committee.
Before the vote I would like to
just that I live in the building
to move on.
Both right through a bank Act
industry my front yard.
You don't know how many millions
and millions of dollars of
product flows through liability.
The scary we use
that for the the trade that is
the miles loans as welcome to
the new under well how can that
the oil all the way from.
California to it's going.
This is.
It this these guys are my
backyard all the time.
With that in terribly.
The us that thank you before we
move on from for the motion I
have Representative on but I do
have I did notice a couple
things and maybe.
Something for later do we still
use telegraphs.
Not madam chair no there are
radio system is still pretty old
just became digital a few years
ago and is a repeater system
from New Mexico that we can
actually thank you for probably
at some point need to revise the
current thank you.
To happen and digital and then
the other thing on page five
it's the same kind of question I
would ask is material to the
left.
Under.
Page five where it Hey.
And where it lists all of the at
some point when we update the.
The effective date usually what
I call the.
Question when the counties.
It's neither here nor there at
this point that I think at some
point we need to update.
Current statutes and then the
final thing I I did want to say.
And I hate to to have to say it
again because it's a little bit
heart wrenching for me and the
reason why I'm supporting
This piece of legislation point
because.
As I mentioned on the record
before for those that have been
on this committee and not I had
a pandemic person a family
member very close immediate
family member.
Work for the row of brick
railroad had mentioned the
company.
Who died in a very tragic.
Accident.
In fact we didn't know that he
actually had been hit.
And dying until part of the body
were found along the railroad
and he did not respond to is
radio system that was trying to
communicate with him he was one
of these I think interlocking
system thanks and back in the
day when they would be down and
have to go when.
Of physically.
And
For years and years and years.
The safety.
Rules and statutes were not
changed even though for years
and years and years.
The you and the family.
I went to propose changes over
and over and over again and a
half.
So it wasn't until things that
modern.
That those safety precautions
were put in place but the reason
why.
He was it was because of the
situation one of the experts
described whereby there were
only one person.
And the notice from the there
were two trains on two tracks
one was coming on the screen
one.
And there was a mis
communication between the one.
To the other and he was caught
in the middle.
So this is this is the reason
why.
I would say statutory change the
state that's a step up take
action.
and.
Send a strong message and joined
the twenty three other states.
That have taken action
because this was one incident
but since then there's been
several others so
It's it's it's very difficult to
talk about because of the
situation but anyway I just
wanted to
Make those observations in terms
of the language in the statute
and then to offer why it is that
I think this is such an
important to consider and all
know of Representative
Representative Chavis etcetera
Handel in the past.
Representative chose makes a
motion to passcode motion is
their second by second I'd like
to explain it but.
The second yes.
Here here are are you seconding
the millions okay.
And Representative Johnson is
the second to the motion.
And madam secretary all.
Please okay Representative this
yes.
Representative it'll yes.
Garcia.
Since.
Of Representative Roland yes.
Representative Johnson yes and
I'd like to explain my both.
A representative of Martinez.
Can I.
Pass.
Representative read.
Representative Terrazas known as
expendable.
Representative Vincent yes.
Representative or vice chair
rental car coverage yes.
Program secretary of the public.
Yeah.
Thank you all right and
Representative are chair on yes.
Okay before we go ahead.
Yes Representative.
Seven
And up to two minutes so we have
seven yes to no and
Representative Johnson would
like to from the thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
for bringing this bill forward
like my neighbor Representative
al cone I live in Gallup and I
understand that on the.
A given day every day eighty
eight trains ran through Gallup
going east and again eighty
eight trains read through Gallup
going west so I think this is a
very good deal that addresses
and the safety of of training I
myself have enjoyed riding the
metro in Washington DC I have
also written that I cilia from
Washington DC to New York and
then I ride the train from
Gallup to Albuquerque.
For meetings so this is an
important bill to thank you.
Thank you so fun of vote of
seven to to house bill one of
I'm sorry Representative also
focus thank you both I I just
wanted to share that you know
are you.
So this is some of these my
understanding is they're already
doing the two person thing madam
chair and and because of the it
because they've already as the
things that I stated earlier but
they're already in the motion of
the federal government doing
that
I just I want to pause basically
to allow that to happen and and
that was my intensive early have
a five year contract I just
wanted the you and then to work
that out thank you madam chair
thank you David thank you
Representative on a vote is to
House Bill one of five deaths.
This is because.
That.
The U. S..
Representative.
This process orders.
This.
Less.
Four years long.
For.
Yes.
And so
what
you're going to go ahead.
Follow the action.
Whenever you're.
The reason.
Is here.
The.
Is to go.
I like these white was was.
Is here but the thing.
So.
Located.
We have a separate action.
Built on but
She's not.
Right.
In the.
I think we're up Mr chair or
would.
I want to do.
This was the right one.
There's house bill sixty four
how do this year's whenever
you're ready okay thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee
One of those should be coming
around to the.
And try to put this in
perspective do you want to wait
for some of the state backed or.
Legally then as they go along
like if we have enough for a
quarter of the size of the
vehicle.
So of the first.
The.
One.
Other hands that we just passed
a one page.
Six point six those are active
well look at this whole.
Again and they should be all and
it out now so sixty six
correct.
Thank you.
For sixty six.
What
the right spot.
Thank you Sir.
This is the six on well that's
for that one.
For house bill six six the rest
of the day and.
Beyond the rest of them deal
with the other two bills.
Well I got the.
One of the sixty six there
yeah the sixty six over the side
okay.
All right okay Mr chairman of
will start off with one is in
order to avoid that was in the
Albuquerque journal.
When you say that this article
was December twenty first and in
that first paragraph it's
talking about the department of
health and the in the in the TV
ology Division they have a
hundred sixty five employees.
Fifty one Fund fill positions.
For rough already eight percent
vacancy rate.
That's that is important and we
get to why am seen everybody
should return to work.
The next one and we we talk for
a moment about to committee that
I've attended
the first one in twenty twenty
one was a council of state
governments and CSG has meetings
for legislators and the and from
and see if she have a
demographer ended of honor for
described that a population
growth needs to be if you will a
perfect Christmas tree so that
you have a young at the bottom
and over the top.
In the United States we've had a
population growth of one point
seven
children per couple I would and
I can't remember if it was two
point four two point seven is
the ideal number so our
Christmas trees it gets towards
the center starts going down or
in the words and isn't perfect.
Last year I attended the NCSL
meeting.
And at the NCSL beatings one of
the presenters were was talking
about looking at all city county
state and federal job openings
and the looking at those the
they were being filled at thirty
to forty percent and one saying
that it's highlighting the we
don't have the words at the
bottom to support the upper
portion.
And that's what we're really
working on here the next.
Item that I'd like to talk about
is this letter from PED R.
eight.
And if you'll notice in the
splattered what I did is I ask
you already what are the current
return to work police officers
this is under a twenty ten
bills.
What are they contributing to
the fund would be no future
benefit that so they have
returned to work.
Making contributions into the
fund as so there are a new
employee but they are not going
to increase their retirement.
That group if you go over to the
last pages contributed thirty
two million dollars in the pair
of with no future the.
The next page that I'd like to
show you is this page here and
again I ask because your rate
for this this is an actual we're
the study of.
For for.
Her the pair I initial noted in
this it does not hurt the
parasites.
And that was there funding.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
and I are members of the pension
oversight committee and if we go
through the school budget we
work on page two.
And
We'll see the third item down
return to work for educational
retirees and we know that it is
having a positive effect and
that.
These are returning to the
teaching physician and so that
is healthy or workforce.
This argument here just shows
what APD is paying and we don't
need to discuss now I'd like to
get to our FY are still sixty
five.
And if we go to page two
significant issues.
We noticed that the state has
five thousand open positions as
of January one.
We have a serious problem about.
Right services.
To our.
Constituents.
One of the ways that we
discussed was let's have
returned to work.
So they will.
Receive.
They will return to work.
They will make contributions
into the fund is so there in
forty.
And they cannot get those
contributions back at the end of
their term whatever they decide
to quit there's also in this
legislation our our reporting
component on this sex at the end
of with the three year
Windows this can occur so that
doesn't work out we're not going
to renew it if it works out then
we can come back in the news
that.
The other thing that I saw on
the FIR.
The next bill I'm sorry in the
next.
Of.
The gentleman with the ago in
stand for questions.
It
was the FY are through all the
years that you didn't expect us
to be a.
Mr Chairman so this bill allows
all right.
Early appointees as of December
thirty first twenty twenty two.
To have an option to be
separated for a minimum time of
ninety days ninety days is a
federal requirement under the
tax code.
And then they can return to
work.
So the return to work of hearing
was selected for ninety days in
a recent has if you return and
folks such a person to
department of transportation
there are certain jobs in their
that their certifications are
only valid for a year.
Of for the law enforcement their
certification is only valid for
two years if if they keep for
current educational requirements
and that's why we have that
short window of ninety days.
Are they will make contributions
into the fund is so there are a
new employee.
They're gonna come in a ground
level or entry position.
And then remain at that
positions per whatever contract
is with their agency.
Of.
Anyway that money that they
contributed to the fund they
cannot get that and the
employer is making their
contribution as well so that's
why it's positive to the fund is
because there's no future
increase in our budget.
This does not change the law
that allows them to select to
use the retirement.
Return to work.
It makes the contributions and
increase their there are
percentage of retirement when
they select to retire later so
that's still here.
And Mr chairman with that'll
stand for questions.
At this time of the audience and
news in support of this bill.
That number to go to offices in
the office in the.
Okay I will
start at the very back of the
net.
Revenues.
On top of the international
brotherhood of the.
We are this legislative.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the job that she is with the New
Mexico federation of labor
you're going to hear from some
of our public sector
Representative walk working
Representative center if you
care about why I think you
issues with this legislation
all of the state I mean we
certainly slide the the sponsor
for what he's trying to
accomplish with this legislation
we definitely recognize that
there are shortages in person
that there are shortages of law
for that that is a problem that
needs to be addressed we just
want to medically differ on how
to address.
Honestly we hero are
unfortunately this measure
alternatively hurt.
The efforts to recruit new board
the decision to retain that and
that's what we should all be
working for the night I did we
understand if you don't even if
you want to do this crisis mode
you'll need something like this
will lead to an even larger
crisis down the road we want to
build a sustainable work for law
enforcement for public sector we
have to look at other options
I'm here to get from my
colleagues will get into those I
again totally I understand what
the Representative is trying to
fix we agree with the problem
just a different difference of
opinion on how to fix it who's
next
right right Mr chair Richard we
got seven levels of this with
the fire really kind of our
garments we stand against this
legislation about my colleague
John was going to go into detail
but I'm.
New Mexico some same things that
he says
is though we understand this the
Sanchez intense
I I was off four hundred dealing
with recruitment issues of the
workforce it is very difficult
and sage we go through this was
enough intention into the
sustainability and.
We don't want to be a permanent
if if there's going to be a
return to work with these
efforts we want to do this
because account the state to
invest in the work force I thank
you.
Next.
Go ahead Sir.
Mr Chairman calls on but this
all association I had to work
all of this have stated as well
I just want to add to see
Association it is that.
We are recruiting okay we have
usually creating but we have
also John Allen professional law
enforcement officers that are
trying to pursue a career in law
enforcement right now and when
you try to do a short term fix
by bringing the talkies and that
only gonna be there for two or
three years the this it's very
difficult for a young police
officers are trying to go in the
ranks to stay there so now you
don't have a record of
involvement was presented by I
always have also a retention
problem that happens right there
it might without recruiting para
is a great use that to actually.
So long term things the solvency
of bear that's what is the
question so.
This sponsor
innovative ideas and mediation
step one to get it from you know
actually I did and faced out the
issue on chairman also retention
have gained Sanchez bringing
that up again before the meeting
but as mentioned as of all the
long term and we ask the
community hold on this for now
we will not.
Thank you.
This service Mr chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson of
us translate teen one of our
state sponsor for focusing on.
All stations hello.
We also believe this is the
right tool to fix it actually
think it makes a significant
worsening short term long term I
know in the bill of talks about
the level of decision I'm not
really sure there is an issue
after that means something
different to everyone else I
also know that as soon as
someone to get promoted there is
a promotion even come in and
they will get.
That this is going to take this
this also is a of suppression
mechanism.
If management is relying on
pension fund to pay salaries
there is zero incentive to be
competitive.
Painting and recruiting our I I
urge you they are going to be
paying salaries but you.
To do it and then also it's
right reviews
I have been in the two thousand
with this opened up and I don't
think anyone.
All of us to thousands when this
opened up we saw the floodgate
bowl retiring the first eligible
going right back to the same
positions were into a management
position collect tyrant and the
pension only take a few years
for a lot of the state both of
supported to to basically from.
Two thousand nine percent over
to a representative are you sure
that built off the.
One of.
Get out of control but if you
try to build in safeguards to
think on also find ways to take
advantage of this.
The sponsor on some of the
changes you made but you had
mentioned a little bit ago
there's a chance he'll be coming
to the three years to actually
expand this and we know that's
going to he will not be on this
so I urge you all to look at
some of the investments you made
in the lawful fashion Fund a
special.
On the side Mr chairman of the
bill and even Representative
also look at ways to incentivize
workers to work longer by
increasing the fare calculations
I hope we can look at finding a
way to participate as salaries
and courage to stay longer than
looking at us that that that
that this will make the problem
worse in the long run thank you
Mr.
The body of months.
Thank you Mr.
My name is Gerald G. O. L. with
the years International Union of
North America local sixteen all
the reasons previous previously
stated stand in opposition of
the thank you anyone in a
position.
Anybody here in opposition on
the board.
On the so.
The bigger.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is John
Baker I'm with the United
association of plumbers and
pipefitters local for twelve
for all the reasons stated in
the room the plumbers and
pipefitters stand in opposition
of this bill thank you.
Mr will be.
Hello Sir Sean will be with the
Albuquerque police officers
association been a police
officer in Albuquerque for going
on twenty years I remember the
days of double dipping and how
it devastated morale and
separated our ranks I remember
the days when double dipping
because stagnation it movement
through the police officer
because I was the union
president when we got sued by
double dippers because see these
folks have no whip interest to
coming back to double dip to do
entry level positions I think it
would be wise to define it.
Chins but at the end of the day
they don't want to put a uniform
on to go out to take calls for
service which is where we need
the assistance what they want to
do is go right inside to work
behind the desk and be there for
ever they want to occupy that
death causing stagnation of
opportunities for younger
officers to grow and become the
detectives that they would like
to be this legislation is a
problem this is the of like the
state that I feel like it's
groundhog day it's been a decade
that we've been opposed to this
legislation just begging to have
a seat at the table to think at
innovative ways to advertise
that this state is open for
public sector first responders
to advertise that this is a
great place to work and all we
are stuck with this double
dipping every year I think it's
time to sit outside the box I
appreciate Representative ring
for bringing forward this
legislation again but this is
bad for public safety this is
bad for police this is bad for
the state of New Mexico I thank
you for the opportunity the AP
away and the cops that I
represent not the management my
do not management you're going
to be surrounded by management
think that this is a great idea
but the people that are working
in responding to your calls for
service they're against it and I
hope that you stand with them
thank you very much have a good
day.
That's it.
There.
Then we'll go to those in are
you in opposition.
No Mr chairman all right little
bit of those who supported the
legislature to raise your hands
go ahead ma'am.
Members of the committee Cynthia
took over the administrative
office of the courts as most of
you are probably aware security
of the Backstreet courts part of
our unified budgets we stand and
strong support of we would like
to have the ability to hire
retired retired law enforcement
to protect the staff judges and
public winter courthouses do we
I ate.
I look at this committee and and
even here the wayward opposition
I don't I don't have to convince
anyone that wants need secured
the courts have to be safe for
that for the staff of judging
people.
With the courts can do right now
is create a security force from
the ground up.
What we do have in every corner
of this state in every single
county is a retired law
enforcement community who has
the specific skills to help us
secure our courthouses those
killed included
Understanding that the court
houses belong to the people.
Who will encourage public access
while per while keeping us safe
wonder how to screen and trends
do escalate danger and are
comfortable in a courthouse
Environment.
Right I I I understand from the
opposition that I've heard to
date there's a lot of discussion
that needs to be half of what I
would like for the committee to
do is help us figure out how to
protect our.
We've got to get there been with
AOC for fifteen years now for
fifteen years we've come talk
about the importance of securing
courthouses I know you all think
it's important we think it's
important I'm asking all of you
thank you for it we just have to
figure out how to get there if
there is anything that we can do
to move us closer to our goal
participate in any of the
discussions and I appreciate the
committee's time on this thank
you so much.
Months yes Sir.
Comments with our heads bowed.
Mr chair representative my name
is PJ one point I am then
retired out police officer and I
was with the Bernalillo county
sheriff's department for ten
years that worked at second
judicial district courthouse
I've been in and out of those
four houses during high profile
cases and now with the state in
New Mexico I'm in charge of
protecting my district four
houses and I'll say this right
now I have Kerio protection of
my magistrates court house
there's nobody else to call
recruit for bringing in because
of the paralyzing health I don't
have anybody to help us protect
the sports I've had to try to do
everything from the facility
side to try to build up our
point and stop people from
coming in order to even stop any
type of an attack that could
come
and that's what I have to do
every day is figure out how to
protect our point for staff and
the public
so to have somebody that too
tired is a huge help to us
because I have extreme it will
cost me less money and then to
be able to teach somebody from
the ground up how to protect
something is tougher when
somebody who knows what they're
doing and the public had even
put a set of handcuffs on
somebody when the judge decides
to read back because right now
even if the judge decides to
being that I have nobody to take
that person because they're
asked to sit down side has to
wait for the officer to get
there and any point they can get
up and run what that point it's
a little scary for us because I
have stock project.
Students so I have the retired.
Want to work don't mind it
because they they're not always
wanted to be out in the field
and answer calls for service
they can sit at the courthouse
And health they want to continue
to start so I'm to say that I'm
in support of this bill this is
an understatement I understand
but some of the officers here
coming from I get that but I
need help in protecting the
point and right now I have not.
Thank you for.
The management and Valory Vega
I'm also advocating
administrative office of the and
I founded with my colleagues I
also want to mention I come from
that that's where I started we
have those this will secure our
courthouse so I I I grew what
they've said the magic words
particularly need the help they
need that experience that
knowledge and mentorship from
the retired law enforcement for
incoming security officers thank
you.
yes Mr chair representative
medical most of the city city
manager and now we do stand in
support of of this bill as a.
With B. R. A. since nineteen
ninety one of the great
understanding of her on the
edges and flows of feral and
then contributions in this the
analysis city manager the return
on the investment of those
employees and their training I
think they're Representative Mr
chair representative mentioned
talked about to the requirements
of the June two at which is a no
show a requirement federal law
requires that we have to comply
so I look at more of the fact of
the the return to work as a
safety issue for all the
officers were setting off the
entry level positions also
served as chairman it is the
city manager with the city halls
almost enough point twenty five
percent vacancy rate.
On this.
We'll go to the higher and and
obviously the history today
imposed by Representative as in
this bill that that analysis and
the ability to evacuate the
return to work as submitted
after the sixty four that we.
Get back in the communicate with
management to get the right
field because of points are made
by the labor.
Are to be I agree I've been at
the as a firefighter ingenious
issues and understand the
frustration.
Not having that would be the
for spots with commercial.
Situation so thank you and we
stand and support.
Okay screen actors of course Mr
chairman of the.
Oh oh sorry Sir.
Mr chairman and go stream for
stuff Representative Trujillo
with our report it's not to this
extent on this of this bill yeah
as long as as a positive impact
which it does and I'll be
available to answer any
questions districts the.
Okay.
They will go back to the.
Hello Kitty and races so
session the we'll go to the
committee Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Thank you.
Representative for for this
legislation.
We all have our districts are
perspective districts of of how
this affects us and and so.
I'm gonna give you some of of of
my districts issues chair for
the rest of the committee.
In my district my district
attorney ask for this.
But every every single city
manager and more from early
Baird sober secretary of.
All I ask for this my chair was
a newly elected sheriff has just
released the pressure of to that
ask for this
Everyone in our in our town
although I here's the people in
opposition it seems like it
comes from the union of and Dr
Kieran.
For us Mr chair representative.
In rural New Mexico I have some
of our people that are elderly
or who have not had an officer
there's no officers in their
event no officers in her early
four year there's been officer
sometimes impaired not very few
the very little coverage early
might might I rented the the off
the chair of Mr chair
representative the other day to
gas stations just newly elected
just walked in the room all my
gosh I said how many short.
He says a Sicko it is a big
portion of it I can't remember
the percentage goes on said that
it was close to a third.
We read this this article that
Mr chair with the this shows
there's a hundred and
Fifty one until positions.
And so we hear all the crime we
don't have any we say that what
we're doing is to recruit young
officers yes we we look all
around we have none.
And and this is a major major
thing for us this bill Mr chair
Representative I know is a
positive to para para just you
know stated that these officers
will be able to return to work
my understanding is they would
be contributing to para but
would not be able to double dip
a second retirement.
Is that true Representative.
Mr chair representative.
Mr Chairman representative
trousers you were correct the
use doubled to in a.
In a correct way in my mind
The opposition talks about
these return to work officers
being advanced I've had a
discussion with Mr will be and
his complaint is that they are
out in the industry as a entry
level for five years and then
they can test for sergeant and
they're actually doing better
than the five year sergeant.
Well I would hope that are
twenty five year experienced
officer what yes better than the
five year officer.
I didn't get the this but I
thought we might end up with it
so let's look at.
This handout.
The question.
Yes it is well if you want to
amend it for pay off all go and
talk about the good the question
you're answering the question
are you going to the house.
Well.
Representative what I'll do is
I'll ask you this question for
you that's okay Mister chair
representative so might might I
heard some some testimony that
this is going to create a crisis
we are in a crisis Mr chair
representative we're crisis
we're hearing from our point
from all our constituents in our
area and the police officers
when we gave a raise Mr chair
representative to the state
police.
It created even more vacancies
from the from the these other
departments because it went to
the state police and the left or
the left our our a lot of our
small communities
vacated without officers.
Mr Representative this is a this
is a matter of perspective.
Perspective is of.
How you see a return to work
officer for me.
I see it as an experienced
person that gets to come back Mr
chair representative and she's
well it that here she's willing
to come back and serve again and
mentor a younger officer.
In the last my first chairman Mr
chair representative we heard a
lot of discussion of how.
Rights and all these things can
be affected in our in our in our
state.
And Mr chair representative of
some of these older more
experienced officers can can
create a good positive of in my
opinion a good positive
Mentorship in helping in helping
mentor these younger officers
that maybe when they're young
would make a mistake that they
one that working along with the
older officer of.
The owner of a retired officer
Mr chair representative would
get the it would get the input
that that maybe they need not
from the state.
And so in my in my.
District as just to surround me
where are that our rural banking
for for legislation like this I
can assure you that this is not
going to affect this not gonna
make it insolvent this is only
going to imagine Mr chair
representative were you get to
you already got your I retire
I'm already out I get to come
back in and I pay and to pair up
but I can't take any more out
whether I stay in or out I only
get whatever retired with Mr
chair representative and I only
remove I only take out I I can't
take anything more out of it I
can only contribute if I come
back to work.
Mr chair reserves
did you by putting some.
I guess some parameters it is my
understanding Mr chair
representative you're pretty
proud mothers so we don't make
the same mistakes that we did in
Albuquerque where they actually
according to my research did you
put any parameters Mr chair
representative so that a person
that we trust workers in the
just ended up at the top of in
the same position that they were
previously.
Mr Chairman representative draws
is yes.
Entry level.
They have to come in and injury
level and you are correct what
we saw previously was they
retired they came back and all
of a sudden the had a high
position in the department well
entry level to a V. D. means on
patrol and that's what entry
level means that all the other
law enforcement I understand
this bill looks at the totality
of the state and its problem is
that we have the individual or
we have job openings as a FIR
says they've got five thousand
of we're talking about whatever
department you want to see CYFD
you know
guys so if we are one agency was
talking to the one this Medicine
validate that they needed the
kill us for their sewage plant.
To come back they don't have
anyone to go ahead and do that
and so we've got across the
board needs and that's what this
bill address we will have
another bill that's directed
only at public safety but we
have a need across the state in
all different positions and
that's what we're address.
Chair representative I I.
It sounds to me that the
opposition that I heard
Came from the Albuquerque area
it seemed like that was schools
advocated against this all get
the rest of us that mean is that
excuse me that that city doesn't
want this.
Mr chair representative would
you be open to amending the
bills and carving Albuquerque
out.
Mr chairman and Representative
throws a science no problem
carving out the City of
Albuquerque where the city
police officers are all making
six figures and I can explain
that to you if you want.
Mr chair representative
Do they have any vacancies there
in the office in Albuquerque.
Mr chairman and Representative
trousers yes the ideal of level
is twelve hundred officers mayor
Keller's been trying to hire a
hundred a year and the stock
meeting they have in our current
workforce is under eight
hundred.
Mr chair representative I I
think that you know they're
lobbying against Albuquerque's
lobbying against this bill
I I would consider if you would
be friendly to amend.
Albuquerque out of this and and
and and yield to those those
individuals for this against
that area for that to happen so
that the rest of us school
absolutely needed and are in
crisis and have are not.
They are not responding but for
hours hours later for to provide
an officer so when there's just
just just to explain something
Mr chair representative well in
this building as a politician
will have to officers the yield
to the sheriff's office the
sheriff's offices and having of
officers so they can go over my
account so that we have it's so
hard to get even out sometimes a
a police escort for a funeral
to respond to two things I've
been I've been in the middle
they just have to take off
because they they they are the
lack of health Mr chair
representative for you just to
explain the systems of the game.
And and.
So if we look at this example
and we will hear the senior off
the state thirty four to an
hour.
Well for the work here is twenty
eighty hours when you multiply
twenty come up with seventy two
thousand eight hundred dollars.
There if you go through all the
pages behind it you're gonna see
incentive pay.
All these days.
Nine cents per hour.
So when you just tap the
incentive pays on the seventy
two thousand.
Of you now are up to six
figures.
Not including the over time that
you work.
And this is the Albuquerque
police department for four hours
PED.
Twenty dollars an hour.
What is so fast so the forty
five thousand a year the issue
is not a.
The real issue and Albuquerque's
DOJ.
No one wants to work there that
some real issue.
But if they don't need any extra
officers.
We need to carbon now.
Mr chair representative so would
that we conservative them to
carve them out.
Yes Sir Mr chairman and
representing for rouses I think
you part of the City of
Albuquerque out we heard from
the fire department they don't
need a new one so we can do
that.
Think of.
We were just talking to law
enforcement but there's a lot of
the actually Mr chair
representative had a wonderful
conversation.
Our governor the firm rectus
yesterday I believe it was and
nice conversation with her and
we both.
had.
Recognize and should I would
think we were both knew that we
need to return to work and we
had a great conversation with
our bishops with our with our
archbishop American or in my
case up and and the the US is a
Los crucis and I.
Then governor governmental
governor I intend on helping
you raise this I know this is
something that was very
important for us time of Mr
chair representative to pass
this thirty day it was if it
didn't happen and we left our
our services all across New
Mexico without the officers and
and other.
opens I I I've been at
respectfully ask this committee
Mr chair representative to
support this it just give it the
chance to go to the next
committee and if we're we're I
think we're all I I know I'm
open as it is a co sponsor Mr
chair representative to to
working out maybe some small
king so that we can so K. so
that we can get this done for
New Mexico with the governor and
so with that.
Possible.
The roof Mr chair Representative
right I appreciate a lot of what
my colleague said.
Because I live in rural New
Mexico also in our police
departments are half staff this
is a problem for rural New
Mexico and I think I also agree
with Representative process on
the idea that reunion at a more
qualified seasoned officer as a
prosecutor for twenty five years
I see these offices are fresh on
the street and they can use that
guidance from another officer on
the street on domestic violence
calls and how to deal with
search issues that pop up and so
I see this is only positive and
I think that it's a great thing
it's definitely needed one
question I had and Mr chair
representative this does
include investigator for
district office because I've
noticed across the state as I
was a district attorney that is
one position and they're
certified police officers is
extremely hard to fill and we
love retired police officers
because they're so experienced
we're dealing with hi published
CTE high you know of murder
cases rape cases and that that
experience is really beneficial
but we can't bring them back in
in the situation so I I wanted
to first ask that was covered as
an exception in this bill.
Mr chairman and Representative
read yes they are I want to
relate the story to you.
And this goes back to my law
enforcement Tom.
So on now is sergeant with the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department and I'm resting in
individual.
For DWI I've giving field
sobriety test he is fail that he
now squares off with me and
wants to fight.
I took a step back and I showed
him my radio on my caller and I
said I'm the sergeant and I have
twelve rookies and I'm gonna
call them and all of them look
to fight and they will be here
shortly.
Any gave up.
And that's exactly what you're
talking about with the
experienced officers.
Mr chair representative I think
it also support to note with the
taking away of qualified
immunity is officers this is
having a more experienced
officer with the could
definitely save them from
situations that they might be
sued and be liable for and so I
also see that as a very positive
thing and so I I definitely will
be supporting this like it's
well needed especially for rural
New Mexico and I thank you for
bringing this forward.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Everybody saw that you would
like that.
Mr Chairman
Representative I was just
hoping.
Mr chair representative reading
I will be brief in my questions
on.
I'm fine.
Plaques.
T. here on all the people of
start up in opposition of this.
All right all right along with
channel people were recently
elected offices on practice what
I was contacted by every.
Law enforcement agents and that
I represent.
And the number one issue that
they were interested in.
Was a return to work.
Now I understand management and
rank and file are usually
different.
I've been around a while so I
started calling rank and file
police officers.
And every single one of those
rank and file police officers.
In those departments the state
police told me the same thing.
If it means bringing in an
experienced officer on to back
me up when I want to call I'm
all for it.
So I don't really understand.
Watergate.
Why there so much opposition to
this I'm trying to wrap my head
around.
Mr Chairman representative can
you.
Explain to me why there's this
opposition to this.
Well Mr chairman and
Representative Martinez I I
don't understand the rationale
because when I talk to my
friends who were for currently
working at a ET they say that
they need back up this is a bill
that will get back up for
officers but other other
agencies have need.
Let me give you the example.
If you remember about a year and
a half ago there was a
individual from California who
got in a shoot out of the
northeast Albuquerque well
firstly it robbed and individual
and call the police but police
responded there were five
officers.
Who could respond four of them
responded to the armed robbery
when they confronted the
individual they had a gun battle
four officers were shocked.
John will be was critical that
there weren't enough officers on
the street well.
Here's a solution.
But the point is that we've got
to get more officers and more
employees I go back to the FY
January one in New Mexico in
state government five thousand
vacancy.
We've got a problem going to
have to solve it.
Mr chair representative thank
you for the one.
Just from this one short
question answer might be long
but the question.
Mr Chairman representative
readers
Do you know the FIR says that
the state police has a vacancy
rate of seven percent.
Albuquerque department I heard.
Is down to eight hundred.
Officers.
It seems like every agency I've
talked to they're all down
except the time the burly I
think are down one officer.
But.
Then they don't have a huge.
Or.
Mr Chairman Representative
Maureen.
Could she do.
Tell me.
Is this gonna solve that issue
because for me Mr Chairman
representative.
That's what I care about I don't
want that officer to show up on
a call.
Knowing he doesn't have anybody
to show after.
He has no back up called use one
all by himself.
Is this going to be able to
solve that issue for these for
these smaller departments
because they could be doesn't
need the assistance is this
gonna help.
Of Santa sheriff's office Santa
Fe County sheriff's office some
of the smaller departments will
this solve that issue.
Mr chairman and Representative
Martinez many individuals who
retired in the City of
Albuquerque move to a smaller
jurisdictions and so those
officers will they solve the
problem I don't see the will
solve it but they will improve
the forced the workforce at
those agencies.
Mr Chairman representative we
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
And that's a.
Representative.
Mr chair.
Representative rain.
Man a motion brought this ten
years ago.
Is it what is your help me.
And.
Whenever I whenever I think of
this I think of.
Mr chair representative read.
R. Rehm I want to know.
When you start a rookie police
officer.
And at the end of twenty five
years how much money in training
do you think you have.
For Mr chairman
Representative send it is in the
hundreds of thousands of
dollars.
Just to train a police officer
is seventy five to a thousand or
two hundred thousand to get him
on the street.
Thank you.
So Mr chair representative.
Whenever I whenever I was
working in local government.
There wasn't a whole lot of
money to go around in people you
know firefighters in in my area.
The firefighters they were very
aggressive on training and they
wanted so much training that I
couldn't even afford to send.
So.
Would you think that the city.
Are the cities that are going to
benefit from this program.
Are going to right off the bat
with the twenty to twenty five
year.
Police officer or firefighter.
They're getting a hundred
thousand dollar rebate right
when they walk through the door.
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative the
invention exactly not only the
rebates but the experience that
he brings with that and that was
just a Representative we as a
pointed out the investigative
experience of how to go about on
the case one direction to fall.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative Rehm up.
Just to make this clear so I'm
just going to point somebody out
in the audience which I have a
lot of respect for Chico Mendes.
Guys like you and I are not
going to go beat the doors down
to go back to work I don't want
to go back is V. firefighters I
just don't want to do it I don't
think I can do it to be honest
with you because there's a fit
for duty that everybody has to
go through and in the way that
we're talking about this is
going to open the floodgates
you're just gonna have all these
retirees coming back to to be
B. police officers and beat
firefighters India beat police
officer be firefighters that
that is not popular work.
So.
Talking for myself and myself
only I don't want to go back to
work doing that I'd rather go to
be here at the legislature not
get any in any money.
This.
I've always.
Hi this is in.
Anyway I would.
I I just whenever I think about
this and I think about my
colleagues and I I just got a
text message.
A share of the money will come
in my district that they're all
for this.
And.
The question I would like to ask
you out of a hundred percent of
retirees how many of those
retirees do you think you're
gonna come back to want to go
back on the street as a police
officer.
Mr Chairman representative since
the new year you bring up a real
good point of for myself I'm not
going to return to work I need
to roll for far but.
But I asked that question of
pair of early on when they had
returned to work and it was
about four percent.
There's not a large number of
people and all of those people
who return to work most of them
told me they had to return to
work because of insurance health
insurance for the family.
And they're only other choice
was now that we don't allow
return to work is to leave the
state.
So.
One of my best friends is with
the Colorado DPS.
Because you can't work in New
Mexico.
The last thing I'd like to ask
Mr chair representative is.
If you don't pass like this the
only thing you're gonna do is
send all of our experience
talent to other places and
there's there's people there's
districts there's thirty three
counties and with all those
there's municipalities and
counties.
They can all use.
The additional help from
retirees that that they can go
ahead and get their hundred
thousand dollar rebate as they
walked through the door.
And as a retiree.
I would I would seem to think
that they're not there for
another twenty years twenty five
years there for maybe five
years.
And then they're gonna leave so
it if it's the problem is
they're going to go straight up
to a management position.
You know how long are you gonna
be able to stay in that
management position you've got
you coming in as a as a of the
rookie and are not a rookie you
come in as a B. police officer
and they're still a testing
procedure they're still
interviews with with the chief
of police that has so many.
And it's not a bad deal if you
don't want that person in there
you know they they just don't
get promoted so thank you.
Mr chair.
Yeah.
After.
Thank you Representative for.
thank you and I have been
partners of listening to this
These pieces of legislation.
Many years as chair of the
investments pensions and
oversight committee referred it
over and over again and we.
offered.
Lots of arguments law offices
of.
Discussion concerning how hello.
This would impact and then
throughout the years of there's
been Mr chair less and less
I would say we've been kind of
still having the same arguments
pro and con that nothing really
has changed and I raise that
because
of the investments pensions and
oversight committee here's this
these pieces of legislation
because of the impact on parents
and also because of how we have
been trying for years to address
the solvency issue related to
our retirement funds and so.
I have a couple of.
Comments.
We also have faced pre Mr chair
pandemic we heard and we've been
serving on these committees for
many years and I've heard
reports and corrections to the
house to sit on that I also
Senator to share.
For all these years and this is
my eleventh year you and I came
in together we were elected the
same year.
All these are your before yes
yes you have slight edge on the
okay.
That's right Mr chair so.
We for you because you've
contributed to the discussions
Representative and we've we've
heard how.
Systemically we've had an issue
concerning recruitment retention
and training.
In law enforcement as well as in
our public safety.
Communities in general and
throughout the years of
questions have been raised what
are you doing to recruit retain
and train and retain.
First and foremost.
The of public safety falls on
the local community.
So the argument came back to us
we don't have the funds so there
and they're been questions about
budget and how they've evolved
throughout the years and there's
been criticism.
So I just raised the the that is
as being.
This is not new local
governments.
Including the rural and urban
areas.
Four years have been talking
about not having funding or or
not being able to leverage
sufficiently from the state.
So.
This was pre our current
governor because I came in with
another governor and it's kind
of spilled into.
This administration however this
administration.
And representative offices
correct has been.
At the forefront of
understanding.
What we have to provide local
governments and how we need to
help subsidize from the state
level.
So part of the priorities Mr
chair and representative have
been.
This administration together
with our legislators all of us
in the body has said public
safety and we all know that
there's only three charges in
government three or maybe four
public safety public health
public education and missing the
fourth one maybe there's only
three those are only charges in
government.
We're public comes into the
picture.
So whatever the reason why local
governments have not stepped up
and been more Representative in
their budgets.
It could be because I you know
local that they're comfortable
low revenue generating come with
all that knowledge but those
requests have been made it to
the state until recently so for
the last three four years now
under this current
administration.
We've done Matt taken many
medications to support.
recruitment training and
retention and we're on that path
and we've been on that path
however things don't change
overnight so I bring that up
because there's already
a class action to by the
governor.
To pump it again I don't know
how many hundreds of millions of
dollars into public safety for
local communities and our state
please.
There's already several bills
coming into the the legislature
with will do several things to
help retain current employees as
much as possible and then there
are those few others coming into
the pipelines that will and we
heard increasing minimum wage
we're we're doing a lot of
things that don't happen
overnight.
So I say on this Mr chair and
and Representative because.
Whatever way you choose to
believe it or not this is double
dipping double dipping is when
you're retired retirement salary
and then you go into and earn
another salary period that's
double dipping in line.
There's no other way to look at.
And this is another way of.
Exempting local governments from
the responsibility in terms of
re sounding their their budget
and their their demands to us.
and the state and it's also
another way for us for internet
easy I hate to use the word easy
but the easier way of addressing
systemic problem.
In all it's going to do is
contribute to.
Exacerbating.
A division of most employees
because there's gonna be a
resentment there always is a
resentment when you have
employees of and and and the
perception of the public that's
been negative in my in my case
I've been receiving tons of
communication about.
Why this is.
Table in the communities because
there's a perception around what
retirees coming back to work and
taking away colorful tops and
all that we don't need to
address it because you've
already talked about the vacancy
rate so.
Mr chair and and Representative
it just doesn't.
We're on a path right now I'm
creating systemic changes we've
heard from law enforcement we've
heard from public safety all
across the board that they heard
us loud and clear that they are
strengthening their recruitment.
By providing more bonuses which
Wirth helping to subsidize
you're aware of that so we're
already addressing investing in
our workforce investing in
recruitment.
And we also.
They also heard us loud and
clear training because we now
have aggressive.
training models that are being
undertaken so we that's an
investment in workforce.
And retention there also have
been loud
Suggestions on our part to
increase a person of policies.
In order to.
Make it much more attractive to
retain employees.
So the opposition we heard was
from writing file not
management.
And there's a reason why there
was so much opposition from rank
and file so I have one question
Mr Chairman representative and I
want.
Going to Claire tension to page
eight.
And it started online I.
And it continues to on page
nine.
At the top of the line one and
through.
Could you explain to.
The one where it says retired
members and.
Including any cost of living
adjustment shall continue to be
paid during the period of
subsequent employment.
Is that means that this person
return to work persons will be
selecting their retirement and
will also be able to receive
cost of living adjustments.
Is that associated with the rate
that they will be receiving upon
return to work.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
so the return to work person.
Well let's take the retiree he
retires he has a choice.
Not to work at all we're gonna
go work at some other company so
if you works that some other
company I don't know if that's
doubled that the but this
opportunity says it also come
back to the agency and work at
that agency collect your
retirement.
Could into pero just like you're
a new employee.
Not increase your retirement and
you won't be able to get the
money out that you put in the
pair.
So I don't see it as double
dipping they could leave and go
to some other company was safe
Walmart there working for
Walmart or leave the state go to
some other agency in another
state Mr Chairman representative
that question is following with
a return to work are they
standpoint to receive the
eligible for cost of living
adjustment on the salary that
they will be receiving upon
return to work.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
they will receive their full
pensions and the cost of living
which is by a formula and they
will receive the paycheck they
are earning at the current
Agency there working for.
Mr chair and representative that
that's exactly what I'm
referring to just double could
be so my concern is that we have
a workforce around the state
that's not even able to live off
of the minimum wage that we're
offering they are not subject to
cost of living they are not
having the same opportunities as
in our public safety.
Ralph to be able to earn.
Even in retirement because
they're not in that room.
So that's the perception and
that's the inequity and the.
And Justice that I see and
trying to circumvent.
Systems and processes in order
to make things work for some.
Thank you others.
I'm not having that that's an
inequity in my perspective
perspective and and then just as
and that's the perception the
negative perception that I'm
saying that causes division in
our communities and among some
work forces and that shouldn't
exist we can't even be able to
invest.
Property and I would.
That's.
That was my.
You could just.
We we kind of arguments
appreciate it thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
clarifying.
Representative done thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
for bringing this bill forward I
I just have a statement I want
to make it clear that when I
retire don't ask me to come back
to work.
I want to be traveling the
world.
On that note in my community and
I think as state
representatives.
And community members it's
incumbent upon us to encourage
our children to become
professionals and contains an
education and and the the
comfort is offensive the
workforce and I support growing
our own.
Those are initiatives to educate
retain train recruit what our
health care workers educators
might focus on so I think my
concern is duty post and wage
suppression in this area of
You know in this in this process
and I just called home and we
have six applicants who just
graduated
Oral for their oral boards and
we have three new officers on a
lateral pending one is from the
SUNY tried and we have four
Academy and two more on deck to
go to academy so we know that
that's still not enough we know
that there's a shortage and we
need health but we're trying and
I think that's that's the point
where I want to focus so that's
my statement thank you Mr chair.
The statement right those
question thank you Mr chairman
One one more player tired.
The city research done or in the
that applied
New people the single into this
positions why is the salary is
what is the reason that they so
much many kinds of.
But this is the story
in this area local people like
personal and the research that
the salaries what what is
international so Mr chairman and
the scripts are Representative
growth you I and my
understanding is question is why
don't we get more people to live
in
I think that there's several
reasons what I've talked spoken
to the administrators.
Our young kids want a job that
doesn't involve weekends doesn't
involve shift work they want to
have more flexible time when
they can come to work and
unfortunately that does of work
for of law enforcement.
The environment
towards law enforcement is not
very friendly right now and so
there's not many people
applying.
But almost every agents well if
I know of no agency who is told
me that even with the sentence
that we put in place that they
suddenly have a flood.
Five officers coming and wanting
to or applicants wanting to be
officers.
and I don't advocate Lori nor
requirements for police officers
because of I I look back in the
seventies
Miami Dade and particularly in
Florida lowered the requirements
and then they have a lot of
officers who were involved in
criminal activity so I want to
keep the standards I don't see
that we can lower but for those
reasons that I've said we don't
have many applicants right now
and that's uniform all across
the state.
Mr chair thank you up with some.
I'm sorry that that as we do run
long enough.
The point of order.
At one of our questions was this
bill officially amended I don't
think we do.
The billion and I would to an
amendment that in you just said
you were thinking about an
amendment there was no on that.
We don't know an amendment that
lists the factual action is
taken care of and the step by
step the number one issue would
not and then to Albuquerque out
of it there's no way we can pass
a state bill that would leave
the.
The government that we are
involved with all of the state
bill thank you Mr.
I know you're you're thinking
with well just trying to
understand I don't know the
extent of your amendment anyway
but never did and then the thank
you for research I think that
the first an organization
they're not of mental health I
tax.
The representative.
You that your.
Thank you I just have a couple
of thousand dollars some of the.
Around the block to.
The.
I see in this day and the
possibility of being able to of
the the working I feel a lot of
problems with a number of other
colors.
A word the government the number
of the leading.
And I see this this is a of
incentive for government.
Three people back in on the
cheap the state of.
No you can bring in a retired
officers in remember the lower
salary.
And the the you don't promote
them officer decided just item
as it just give.
That officer has the experience
or not you have this officer
working.
And you say you're a senior
officers to look for I'm not
able to see you but you are a
pool side so therefore you will
be the lead officer and
therefore we don't need to hire
in the or promote the staff is
to dissolve that the officers
that can do this work.
So long we're we're working on
the cheap like I say that is the
big thing about it we're trying
to find a way to make it easier
for government to save money on
the back of the employee yes.
And the reason that we don't
have people wanting to work for
government.
Because we don't pay them.
Will they be able to come work
for us.
You.
As a security guard amid this
much money is a state police
officer.
So I'm this was not there.
I mean I heard that the the end
of the Legislative duds I never
had a security officer and my
magistrates court there was
never any money for there isn't
any money today so where are
they going to hire security
officers for my district but
they never have that the money
to do it before they're not
going to have the money
tomorrow.
All they want to do is I know a
cheap we bring these people back
in not pay on their role wages
and not hired the younger people
at the rate that they should.
At the rate that they should
hire a young person to come in
and want to be a police officer
and be able to feed their family
and friends.
That is what this is all about
finding a way to get around.
A young person starting off and
starting to raise a family
we come part of society like I
said if you can go where proceed
will be security officer make
more money than the security
guy.
Every that a police officer what
can I say.
We can hire state police
officers investigate.
So with that in my I will just a
motion.
New Mexico.
Representative motion.
The problem most individuals
have second.
Of the secretary of the federal.
Representative Jarvis yes.
this general.
Yes to table.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative we will not yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative right now.
Representative also spoke.
Representative and no.
Vice chair of all yes the table.
And Representative.
Yes they will.
Will serve for people this bill
will go on to the next.
Maybe about.
Representative.
Representative.
Right.
I'm
here yeah Mr chairman and
Physically everything that I've
said previously apply this this
bill is only focus on law
enforcement and tension so
detention officers of police
officers and fire officers I
noted in the
why are of this bill that
there's a technical issue.
This board tactical and notices
today that there's just a couple
words that need to be changed if
we decide that so.
I would also note for you that
it's easy to exclude the City of
Albuquerque you for language in
here that says applies to
everyone except of minister
hello the with the last of
senses of five hundred thousand
or more in the City of
Albuquerque's strong.
With that I'd I don't know that
we need to go back to the public
it would be the same.
Of those four Agence and with
that I'll stand for questions I
would just that would raise your
hand to those in favor of.
Okay those in opposition.
Probably the same thing over to
another hearing in.
Thank you.
All right so the the with that I
will go to the committee
Representative.
I I Mr chair I think this
ammendment Mr chair
representative I've heard no
maybe we're only at our thirty
year but I have seen some bills
be expanded on that committee
the chair I just use it the way
it works okay the way it does
affect this not but that's not
the way it was amended it is the
way it would or would not work.
So Mister chair.
And that's that was my question
is did it on increased twenty
five women is here in our
community.
That's not the story that was
not the that's not my answer
Representative.
We saw that in the thank you for
that so we'll just move for at
the for all the same to do it
would be really special interest
legislation okay and only a you
can only do that by removing
class eight counties.
From the home of the largest
Albuquerque so miss.
So you're saying Mr chair
representative that is the
motion would have to be to amend
it with class city council so
that would be the way to do it
do it but to get the the we're
not really doing the limits on
this through the.
Offered.
We just existed.
We can do that.
So are perceived Mr chairman you
would not want over with okay so
let's help run this bill.
I'm not that will justify some
of those support Abbas within.
Mr chair representative I'm
talking on bill sixty five
basically the same thing small
portion of our.
Thank you for your I want to
stop for a minute Mr chair to
need to clarify Representative
Rehm then that this was the lan
port speakers.
This one hi everybody else your
first one was law enforcement
and.
So please make sure we were
aware of on the record with the
proper.
Bill.
This is every this one is house
of sixty five.
Forty two.
Title it is related to the
public employees all public.
House bill sixty four with your
lawn.
Fire.
Because I wanted to make sure
because when you introduce that
you introduce it hi
Rivers okay for the record you
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
you're exactly correct sixty
five is only certain public
employees law enforcement fire
and detention turn to work.
The build up for.
I'm sorry now from what we heard
in the sixty four was the law
enforcement
what sixty five is is everybody
can come back to work that's
right.
Thank you Mr chair.
Districts.
Here.
Okay.
Mr chair representative again
for the same reasons of that my.
My
It is a crisis and that the.
There.
The last four this is the third
year that it might.
They've asked for this
Mr chair and so it's just it's
devastating.
See that
The for our communities that
those individuals all schools
seniors for calling in part.
response is basically because of
a lack of officers departure
Representative
the thing is.
We've seen some of the salaries
I don't think this is allowing
people to come back to work if
they want to with the message.
They're already offering Mr
chair representative we've we've
never passes before Mr chair
representative so how has it
affected their ability to hire
people.
It's evident that is not
working.
And so with that I'm not going
to go on a month's work Mr chair
representative but other than.
Nothing's working for here we
are we're trying to find a way
to make that happen maybe just
maybe a little bit but we have
done nothing and so it's just
getting worse and that's what
chair representative we're in
the situation we are in Christ
Water State and wife some of my
constituents are able to see a a
police officer hours so with
that.
I yield my time.
Representative market.
Mr chair of Representative Rehm.
Does this cover law enforcement
officers or orders law
enforcement officers left off
this.
This proposed bill.
Mr chairman and Representative
Martinez I'm sorry I misspoke on
prior bills.
The prior bill was only law
enforcement on this is everyone
coming back to work the No Way
Out to address five thousand
they can.
The the the state.
So and it would include one.
And of.
Mr chairman if you with wife we
could roll over I can get an
amendment to exclude the City of
Albuquerque.
In just the.
We do not you'd like to roll
overs noted that and we that
that'd be your responses would
be you want to roll over you can
say you other rule over I have
no problem with that you don't
want to I don't have to well yes
Mr chairman the the question is
more for the committee if it is
more favorable if we exclude the
City of Albuquerque I'm willing
to do that.
If it if it is unfavorable the
idea to the committee then we
can just take a vote on that let
me let me say it this okay we
can think of a new thing that we
do with on the whole bill okay
we can stay with favoritism with
the pavement is at this time.
Well Mr Chairman was we hadn't.
The choice is yours you ought to
remember we're not.
Mr Chairman what's going and
what we received and you know if
they don't want we don't want to
if some members later decided
they wanted to school you City
of Albuquerque I'm willing to
do.
Okay let's go ahead that is
would continue with this
question Representative Martina
next on the list of.
Sure Representative Rehm
I would like to offer an
amendment.
Eliminating the classic
counties.
That would eliminate.
How many County.
Mr chairman and Representative
fourteen is a cannot be classic
elements still take out Los
Alamos Albuquerque and what of
Dona Ana County what we have to
do is you have an amendment that
says that you want to live in a
minute is hello these with a
population of over five hundred
thousand as according to the
last census and I pray that you
know if we want to do that I can
get it drafted but that will
exclude Albuquerque only.
The committee room and you gotta
tell us where you want to.
Okay I'm still trying to figure
out.
Those are the number one number
one of the number of.
Chairman I I will if I'm able
to.
For the.
Point.
Representative reading.
Can you explain to me why you
brought this well you brought
these bills return to work at
all.
What are we trying to solve the
amendment.
Mr chairman and more
Representative Martinez as the
FIR point seven five thousand
vacancies just in state
government if you go to each of
them our local
jurisdictions you find that they
all have vacancies across the
board everywhere and so what we
need to do is we need to address
how are we the state going to go
ahead and meet its duty of
Supporting the the resources and
the person to answer our
constituents.
This is not the golden bowl.
This is just temporary way to
get some people in there while
we try to figure out how to get
more employees there will not be
a floodgate of people coming in.
That's what I what we saw with
the past one that actually was
more opens.
This one says entry level again
but our previous of bill our
blog was just returned to work
and that was only four percent
of the law enforcement actually
coming back I don't know what
totaling pair of what's.
Mr chair representative right
earlier on on your your generous
Roybal Caballero said that you.
I have been wrestling with this
as part of your interim
committees for several years for
eight years I've only.
Mr chair representative in that
time.
Could you.
Tell me if if in that eight
years you've been pushing this.
Have you have you worked on the
objections that all the unions
have.
Mr chair and representative
Martinez yes I tried to work
with them
that is why we have been working
here is to try to address the
issues about individuals coming
back and being in a higher
position.
their objection is that they
will come to us and tell us that
they don't have enough employees
but they don't want to return to
work well it's kind of one side
or the other you know if you
want more employees helping out
I'll try to get you some more
employees this is gonna fill all
the vacancies there will still
be vacancies and up.
I'm just trying to put a bandaid
on the problem is what it is.
Mr chair representative rang
Debate
somebody said that this is
simply an incentive for.
Government agencies to bring
people in cheaper.
Than anybody else.
If we don't pass this or we
gonna be able to fill all these
positions because it would seem
to me Mr chair representative
that.
We have five thousand vacancies.
Because nobody's applying for.
Mr chair representative I I
worked in state government for
twenty five years I never did
the get rich I did want to serve
the public.
Mr chair representative read I'm
trying very very hard to
understand.
What the what the real
opposition to this bill is a fix
that the opposition is this is
the way for state governments to
hire cheap labor.
That would be a good thing.
Those that there will be more
money for other projects.
At least the way my brain is.
Tracking right now.
I'm Mr chair representative
remotely trying to understand.
What the opposition to this bill
is the special for law
enforcement.
I'm getting calls from agencies
and not only management I'm not
just getting calls from a share
of I'm getting calls from
deputies were worried that
they're showing off the coals
and not having.
More a management thing that's
not up.
You know they're worried about
career advancement they're
worried about showing or coming
back home from going on that
cold because there's not enough
people to to back them up.
Mr chair representative ring.
Is there any way that you could
explain to me.
Why there are so much opposition
some of.
Mr Mr chairman and
Representative Martina salty
very long.
The agencies are not re hiring
problem officers.
If you have a problem officer
you don't want a back he's a
liability.
So they're hiring senior
officers who are
Who are of.
Not problem officers but what we
what I've learned is they're not
joining the unions and that's
why that they agencies are
against up is because they don't
come back and join the union.
Mr chair representative right
that cannot be.
The opposition to this the HSD
is not loading the higher
problem officers.
All up I do not mean to be
disrespectful Mr Chairman
representative what.
That cannot be.
That could not be the problem.
Be something else and I'm trying
to understand.
What it it's no no if I if I am
not a chief of police.
And I get rid of an officer Mr
Chairman representative
removed I'm going to do
everything I can to protect my
other officers.
Why getting rid of the problem
Sir.
Please tell me Mr chair
representative review that
that's not really why we're
hearing opposition.
To hire right experienced
officers and put in the back on
the street.
Mr Chairman representative
Martinez it's not.
That the unions are complaining
that they're not hiring problem
officers.
What.
The agencies that is they have
to look at the reliability
who you know is this guy going
to cause us losses the problem
officer could cause you losses
so that's an agency decision
however the individuals that are
coming back are not join the
union and that's why the union
is directing to it is because
our they're not joining the
union.
Mr chair representative.
I will admit.
To.
Feeling a little right now the
lead frustrated.
Because of the.
We all came up here every single
person that is serving in this
building.
Came up here because they care
about the state of New Mexico.
Mr chair representative reading
we all want to do the right
thing.
Mr chair representative
remained.
Okay.
The.
I'm I'm really having a
difficult time really struggling
with.
Trying to understand.
In in my head this is the right
thing to do.
The first bill for was just
along for.
Chair representative that was
the right thing to do.
And I'm just I am really
struggling right now trying to.
Trying to make sense of it.
Still why.
There is there is opposition and
Mr chair representative.
That curiosity is not been
satisfied.
I don't I do not understand.
What Mr Chairman representative
what the real underlying reason
is to opposed to like.
I did all I.
I'm really frustrated by it on
because I think we could really
solve some issues.
for some of the smaller
municipalities that are having
problems.
Hiring the experienced law
enforcement officers I would
love.
For them to hire a twenty two
year old and let him roll
through his career but there are
not enough people apply I spoke
to one of.
County sheriff's agency.
Just this week.
Percent of the cost they open up
recruitment
hi hundreds of applications come
through.
They're lost recruitment fair.
They have one percent fly.
So what we're saying I oppose
this bill because I want to give
that kid Mr chair representative
chance to grow in that career.
While all these water opposing
it should be portion will apply
for these jobs.
Mr chair representative I am
hearing from actual real life.
Agencies hello.
Nobody is applying because
nobody wants to be a police
officer and more because the way
they are treated they do not
want to be police officers.
Nobody wants to be caught Mr
chair Representative when I was
a kid.
Everybody wants to play cops and
robbers and everybody wanted to
be at the top.
Now it is Mr chair
representative.
I apologize if I if there's a
little bit of the motion behind
my argument but.
Please Mr chair representative
understand the.
I feel and I realize on one of
seventy voices in the house of
representatives but in my mind
this is the right thing to do.
And and Mr chair representative
I'm struggling.
For somebody that gives me the.
Of of.
Announcer to satisfy that
curiosity in my hand right now
is to white people or close to
this bill.
Mr chair representative.
The.
I wish I could I wish I could
give an answer.
That would satisfy.
Improve my role but this is not
the right.
Mr chairman and Representative
Martinez when I became an
officer there were three
hundred.
About applicants who just passed
the background and everything
four fifty positions.
Today from eight PED and from
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department.
If you can pass everything your
heart.
Period.
That's what other agencies are
telling me.
Mr chair representative I will
sit here and I will.
Wait for of.
Satisfactory answer to my
question as to why people are
opposed to.
Bringing on experienced law
enforcement officers
firefighters whatever it is
goals five thousand insertions
or to bring.
Somebody with experience to then
for those younger kids that want
to grow in that career
Chair representative but to this
moment.
That city has not been
satisfied.
Mr chair that that's from.
No Sir all right anybody else
anybody else I in the last year
sure.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for the bills.
Like the vice chair and
representative Mr chair I serve
on so I.
Oversight committee in.
So we hear these bills transient
Mr chair being on that committee
verification learned a
tremendous amount about how.
The retirement funds for.
And back in the state our bond
rating how much we pay for the
loans when those funds do well.
And our bond rating it's not
back.
So probably because of that
services to Care I'd listen this
bill and we've had this
discussion.
Mr chairman ladies and think it
was necessary to keep that
conversation bill sixty four
because Representative and I
have had this conversation
about.
Preserving the funds.
preserving the pension and
that's important for the state
of New Mexico.
And that undermine fiscal
responsibility we have
constitutionally sound.
To protect that for the services
we always.
So in terms of bills.
Mr chair and and Representative
like to talk of their guardians
the I want to see their to
protect.
Need you put some in and I
appreciate.
but one of the big things that
are pension funds actuarially I
predicted.
When we say it's this percentage
Fund.
Mr chair part of that is based
on predictable retirement rates.
And if you pass a bill like
this.
it's not that.
Mr chair folks who have retired
we've had a conversation about
folks who told don't want to go
back.
It's not that those folks it's
not that group we're talking
about Mr chair is one of the
folks who quite sensibly was a
okay this bill is passed I need
to retire may go back to work in
October in that same position
and make a hundred ninety
percent of what I make and that.
That is a logical decision for
them to make and I would not
blame anybody for doing that I
would do it.
But it doesn't feel are under
line need to pull people in to
fill the vacancies are there you
see how that scenario doesn't
build vacancies we have Mr chair
and in addition.
The fund the pension funds can
take a hit the actuarial
projections and what percentage
is funded will change because we
will have a big unexpected all
of.
Retirement.
That is a tremendous fiscal
risks so Mister chair I wanted
to reiterate that and you would
only have talked about this and
and I appreciate the fact that
there's two pieces in here
trying to work with the guard
rails that need to be there are.
And we have to add language that
says.
This only pertains to people
hired as thirty first two
thousand twenty two so you don't
incentivize the time.
Those things have their.
To protect the pension fund Mr
chair that the other piece of
this.
And we've also discussed this so
if I don't want to spend
Got to get long term people into
Long term the answers we need to
be debated doubling.
We need to be debating providing
housing for law enforcement and
public servants we need to be
debating Hey maybe they'll stay
longer if we pay a hundred
percent of the health care
Creative alternative options and
we need to set up.
As the heroes and public
servants that they are.
Change that.
Of so it's Mr chair frustrate G.
and I apologize I never want to
speak in committee.
Hard question for the
representative.
But a question came up in our
debate and I wanted to share my.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
chairman return we are we are
I'm just asking for your
directions.
The the
Representative federal brought
something often before I.
Able to vote on a bill of.
There's just a question that I
have is there a mechanism for me
to be able to get that
clarification or do
I need your question so that I
get to my questions and the your
place to put somebody else
we go there but okay I'll give
you a second job.
I'm just.
Mr chairman I really applaud
does.
Really it's just one question
Michael it's just a very this
represents the right Mr chair
representative re.
What I understand about this
bill if I get hired by.
I pay into the P. R. A. fund.
But I'm not able to pull that
money out.
Is that Mr Chairman
representative brings that
correct Mr chairman
Representative Martinez you are
correct I go back to this page
law enforcement is put forty two
million into the fund with no
future benefit I go to this this
is an actuarial study.
Why of the P. R. A. saying it is
positive to the funds.
Mr Trujillo in the back room
testified it's positive to the
frontier and I go to this is
working for the teachers.
Chairman.
Question asked and answered okay
thank you.
I go to the vice chair.
It.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
And thank you to Representative
here because she should really
just some of the.
The the other side of this
argument which is
Pension fund insolvency and
growing.
And getting out of this number
and the cycle of
Not being able to reach our
goals.
Part of that Mr chair and
representative and we have this
discussion again very quickly
and and I.
Is that you don't and you
workforce you're not
replenishing and entertaining
replenishing the fund.
we're in a cycle of.
Constant
problems as described
Representative so that is a
major concern
It and the other part of it Mr
chair those but what I think
previously and that is that.
You know we're we're in these
bills are willing to.
protective for it is reward or I
don't know what the word is a
retiree.
The current workforce and what
the problems are with our
current workforce because we're
not honoring salary good
salaries we're not competitive
in our our salaries and there
are.
We need to strengthen our
training.
along with our recruitment
incentives there's a whole of
things that we doing that we're
just now in the last three or
four years beginning to.
Have the administration of
respective departments do are we
just now having you Secretary
workforce.
Public relations workforce
solutions.
And the others that are really
attempting to address.
Building continuing to build a
workforce.
We're trying to address
adequately paying the work force
not even at.
That well that I I.
and then help replenish and fill
that pension fund because the
reality is we and you all have
described and we have an aging
population.
employees reaching out of their
departments.
And so that if we don't continue
to build that.
Recruitment training and
retention.
There.
What suffers large pension funds
and so that aging population
that it's a vicious cycle so I
just I I just needed to.
Make that statement and and
thank Representative to create a
lot for.
And we've had these discussions
Representative it's not meal and
sorry Representative that you've
not been privy to all of this
and hopefully answer.
Sessions and
The.
And we did I think a very good
job of explaining our opposition
there were several.
That I I spent a great deal of
time explaining it along with
others that Steve Senator we can
continue to have discussions but
as far as this is concerned I
don't see that this bill does
anything any different and thank
you for it you did make some
address some things that were
brought up and I talked yes
Representative product but
We were not addressing what we
really should be addressing and
that is how we're we going to
do.
With the representative
secretary secretary of funds for
the future.
Are we going to do looking at
innovative and creative ways to
incentivize our current
workforce and also to recruit
and so there's a lot of ways and
things that we have already in
the in the.
Working we just have to give
them a chance to work so
that in this particular case.
I answered my own question I did
have if you notice.
Would we review the bills play
at the before I come in and so
Representative must be assessed
some of the questions that I
have highlighted
in my previous job so Mister
chair that's that's all I have
to say.
The else that pretty much this
follow the same basis but I have
earlier.
One that is.
I mean I know that one right
now.
In this is bill members unions I
think what we have to remember
is that the members of the units
are the people that work for us
it's sometimes when we get that
even life bill the people that
percent it might be our
membership the Human.
But they are employees of our
rona there are employees and
school were leaking the
statements it's it's hard for me
to just sit here and say it's
that you gives this is really
the people that work that
promote do you do it it's not
just a.
So those people say the you it's
not one person it's a bunch of
people.
Well you know like I said
earlier the office of the
elderly or the way I felt was
that.
If I had the new member with me
I think that had to a complete
testament bill.
The.
Let the fact that there is you
there are it kind of puts some.
The state.
As a purely.
That should be supported.
And I don't think that's in all
fairness but I see this is not a
thank you for you build this is
a bill that if you to help or
not help that's what we need to
look at.
So with that the to the
committee for a a motion for
commotion to pass a second.
The.
Substitution.
Mr chair table for.
I'm over substantive motions to
table them second and that's of
the two most section on that
basis substantive motion after
able is not available in thanks
president so we're in the motion
some of the load on the motion
to table.
Hello will take.
Representative with.
Representative Seattle yes.
Garcia.
Representative.
If.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Right now what.
Seven US should.
Representative that sent no.
The director of photography
Representative Garcia yes.
To
rights are
vice chair right well yes to
table.
Sorry.
Representative trial by the
nature of.
Yes.
Of the three we have cable TV I
would like.
Our new bills to the at the
local decisions.
But I think we played for the.
Rex's would increase everybody's
right.
Senator at.
The.
Thank you madam.
Thank you guys.
This.
Yeah.
Right here.
That.
Have.
Is.
One eight.
As well you.
Percent the size of the
percentage.
This.
Call.
What what.
This is.
Please.
This.
One.
Our.
It
is.
Is.
It is our.
Pots and pans
Once.
I don't want.
Please.
This is the part of.
Usually
when I.
We use.
What is.
That is.
This
is.
This is.
I'm sorry.
Decisions.
A recession.
If you don't want
to.
The state.
But.
Representative.
You your.
Is.
The
person that
This.
The system.
As
long as.
This.
Okay.
Because it can.
No.
I know.
That was.
Thank
you Sir my.
Yeah.
Is.
In New
York.
Is.
My issue
is.
We know.
You just.
The
issue was.
There
is.
The.
That is.
It was.
The.
He
has.
To.
Is that.
This
News.
It
was.
This
is.
These.
These
are.
Those.
This is.
Thank.
This.
circles.
Thanks.
Because it is.
This.
Yeah.
Is.
This
is.
The.
That is.
Yes.
Just.
We.
It
is.
Yes.
The.
News that.
These.
Is.
The for the.
And.
In.
He's.
The.
He's not for that.
Even.
This is.
You're
tier.
We can.
Okay.
Is the to order real fast we we
got a quick one for you.
I would hate to the other.
Doesn't that we do with the.
Don't agreement.
So Representative Rehm is you'll
what the film is on your house
bill sixty cents so Mister
chairman I was aware that he has
of return or you know an
accelerated once you get hit
ninety percent requirement for
public safety they
you could work longer and get a
hundred percent I have worked
with chairman and the chairman I
work with.
We found out
my bill has a smaller multiplier
than does the chairman bill so
following the chairman bill they
will reach a hundred percent
faster four years.
after they reach ninety percent
and that's faster than mine so
we're going to go ahead and push
his bill not my bill
so let's roll is this one over
and I'm gonna sign on to his
bills.
We'll get is accomplished.
That.
Senate is
Okay thanks.
So
we're gonna go I'm just going to
go back to order.
And hearing that.
We are going to hear house bill
one zero six and whenever you're
ready Mr chair thank you madam
chair and.
The committee we have a house
bill one of six the city than we
were we were single the man from
waste.
And I am going.
Here.
Explaining exactly how this is
going to work through you.
The he's done they were to deal
with these movies but not.
I don't think.
Chair of the greater you with P.
R. A. we did with our board this
one did not take a position on
this.
but in general are valuations
are done once a year and we do a
assuming we're capping pensions
at ninety percent if this bill
passes in the pensions go can go
higher percent of.
See a one time loss anymore
because now we're taking that
into account for going forward
the longer somebody works the
longer they're paying into the
the fund of the shorter period
of time they're gonna be taking
out from
so we in general of the
incentivizing people to work
longer is positive for forty
five.
In evidence or anything else on
the.
Mr chair.
Used.
Sessions now.
We spent quest Representative of
madam chair and so the letter
that I or the last year and out
that has house bill sixty six.
Is what right it's just that
okay.
All right so we're gonna go
ahead and
Hopefully the audience was
listening to what we're doing
this so right now I'd like to
get a handle on who's here and
support of one zero six.
Okay.
And there's one hand of the
screen is there any opposition
to one oh six.
Any opposition okay well then
we're gonna go straight to the
support and I'm gonna go with
the hand.
If I will madam chair members of
the job Mexico federation of
labor are we in this case we
very much like to thank both
sponsors for bringing up this
bill this is one of those
efforts and we were just talking
about that will certainly help
with retention of officers by
fire awful please advise stick
around a little bit longer click
on higher pages of.
The measure on page again just
state this father's for operated
out.
Thank you on the side Madam
chair of the US yes absolutely
this federal comments on that
one thank you chairman for
bringing this for these are
great alternatives to measures
previously
Senator workers to stay in a
position over the longer it is
of everyone so we urge the
committee to support.
Thank you senator anybody else
in the audience.
All right we'll go to the
virtual participation and we
have Baker on here on.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee again I would like
to echo you know what we've seen
and the room today and and the
work that you all have done and
I'm with the U. a local for
twelve summers and pipefitters
and we stand in support of this
measure thank you.
Thank you for the record I'm
gonna repeat your name is still
on speaker.
Thank you all right so there's
no further public comment now
that to the committee.
Quick.
Okay what does not.
and and you know I talked to a
lot of the calls after a little
break during a break down of I
want to think that this is what
we're talking about for me this
means a lot that we're at least
coming together trying to make
Find a way for me refers to find
a way to.
Move forward on this rather than
just getting stalled over
overall so up to three hundred
which is access this is
something that I I'm very.
Cool thank you any other
committee members you if there
was Representative McQueen just
chair just click on thank you
all for leading by example.
Appreciate it.
Thanks to president Obama's that
was his one of his key are
closed not lead let us not.
Lead whatever that was.
It was the man sample that way
left is the wish of the
committee made the motion to
pass second so there's been a
motion made by Representative
federal office for the past.
It's been seconded by
Representative planets and madam
secretary please call the roll
well let me ask you this is
there any opposition to the
bill.
If you have any opposition.
Any opposition.
Then because we have no
opposition bills
bill.
Thank you.
You press one of the.
Was.
