Chillier there must have here
here.
You're here for a house Bill
264. Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh,
committee.
I am here, Uh, this bill to 60
for what I'm trying to do with
this bill is take the sunset
off.
Of this house Bill 264 guy has
no physical impact until 2028.
And what I'm afraid of if the
sunset goes away, the bills can
grow with
And you know the issues here.
There's a lot of people that are
retiring and New Mexico.
They can stay New Mexico but the
tax rate on them. It's kind of
high. So what I'm trying to do
is alleviate some of that
problem.
So they can get more people to
stay.
You know, Workforce is kind of
hard.
And you know people that are
retiring either. Doctors,
lawyers
Mechanics, plumbers.
Nurses, all kinds of people that
are retiring.
Leaving our state because
the notice that this but this
will entice them a little bit to
stay in our state.
And with that, Mr chairman asked
questions.
Do I have one of the audience?
Do I have anybody here in
support of this legislation?
Anybody in support?
Yeah. Okay. Anybody in
opposition?
Make a shirt Do we have? We
don't have anybody in
Um, we're really we're waiting
for the that we can get the
people that are online. Testify.
We got two of them with their
head. We're having problems
getting them.
Okay, Whenever you're ready,
sir. Go ahead. We heard right.
Hello.
You know we're ready. We're
listening.
Okay. Great. Thank you. Good
afternoon, Chair L cone and
committee members. I'm Claudia
Wrister. I'm a retired Navy
veteran and I'm chair the
veterans and Military Families
Caucus. It's always a pleasure
to speak with this committee. We
are in strong support of house
Bill 264, as well as the two
Senate bills, numbers 56 and
125.
They both. They all proposed to
remove this sunset clause from
the bill passed in 2022. And we
think that this makes New Mexico
and even more desirable place
for military retirees who bring
an unparalleled level of work
ethic, specialized training and
experience in a variety of
career fields that we could use
here in our workforce.
To allowing the sunset clause to
become effective in 2026 would
result in significant
instability to the financial
security of veterans and
military families across the
state, lifting, removing the
sunset clause with lower that
financial stress on these
families and let them know that
New Mexico honors our service
and values their continued
contribution to New Mexico's
workforce. I want to point out
that the F I R the fiscal impact
Important is not correct.
It says that there are five
states that fully taxed military
retirement income. In fact,
there is only one state and it's
California.
We do not want to join
California and being the only
two states in the US that fully
taxed retirement income starting
in 2026, but also like to point
out that House bill 264 does not
include extending this tax
exemption to surviving spouses
And we would like to see that
Both of the Senate Bills do so
we asked the committee to vote
to pass this bill and I want to
thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak with you
this afternoon.
DeVol Westfall.
If you would like, Well good
afternoon, chairman and
committee members. I'm Duval,
Westfall and I'm with the
greater advocacy chamber of
Commerce. And we'd like to thank
the committee for hearing this
and the sponsor for bringing it
forward. We all know our state
has a very proud history of
service in the nation's military
branches, and in fact workforce
solutions because we rank 10th
in the nation concentration of
veterans.
Around 145,000 men and women
9.1% of the civilian population
and that's compared to the US
average of 7.3%. But
unfortunately we fall down when
it comes to how we treat these
veterans. Only 11 states has
some sort of tax on military
reports retirement benefits, and
we're one of them still to 64 is
going to remove that 2026 sunset
on exempting the 1st 30,000 of
their military retirement.
30% of New Mexico's veterans are
under the age of 55. These are
educated, trained individuals
who have many years ahead to
contribute to their community
and our economy. It just makes
no sense not to fight to keep
them here and to attract more of
them, continuing a modest break
on their military pensions, and
so we urge you to support house
Bill 264. Thank you for your
time.
Okay that go back to the
sponsor.
It was indeed Garcia. Do you
have anything else to add?
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman. Uh,
probably you're all aware that
this, uh Bill scented bill
passed the house in the Senate
last year, and whatever reason
the governor vetoed it.
But that's we're not there, and
what I'm trying to do is make
sure that our veterans get
treated.
The with respect and dignity
reserve and you know what we're
trying to do here is get more
people in the state of Mexico.
That are well skilled and we
don't have to retrain them.
When they come out of the
military. You know, I was in the
middle. I was in Vietnam in
1968, and I learned a lot.
But now the way everything is in
one hole, we're lagging behind.
On workers throughout the stand
in Mexico. This would be a real
benefit to our state and
The the
Reduction start from 10,000 the
first year 20,000 or 32nd.
30,000 and third year and it
kept off at that it will not
change. It will not increase as
it goes down that's capped off
at that point, Mr Chairman.
Very committee. Anybody
questions?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Garcia for
bringing this forward.
Standing full support of this
The, uh, secondary benefit of
something like this is the
majority of veterans that come
out that are
Very highly trained is that they
start a business.
And those business owners hire
other veterans. Um and if we
look at the numbers of
unemployed vets, this would go a
long way in solving that.
Ah! So I stand full support of
that, and I'm ready to make a
motion for do pass when you're
ready, Mr Chairman to you.
Representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I'll
make it brief.
Mr Chair and represent what can
be learned from states that do
not tax
Too much best of knowledge that
will like we have two bases.
Three bases your new Mexico.
What happens here when they
retire, and there's not
Suitable because of the tax
rates. They will move away and
we lose out both ends of it.
Because what they bring in
representative is
More economy more money into our
state because they're working
here.
And what? We're trying to give
him back his next to nothing.
You know where the state has
abundance of money.
But even if we didn't have it
Bringing more people in and
anybody's in business here knows
how hard it is to get somebody
to work. It's almost impossible
and like represent, Martinez
said. You know, these people are
highly trained, highly skilled.
And if you, uh, if you're a
veteran
The same you to do the best you
can. You know, we were taught
that when you're in there,
you're going to do the best you
can and these people are coming
out of the military has the same
training, you know.
You do the best you can. You
don't start missing work because
you want to miss work, And
that's not even in the book
Energy question.
That's exactly what
quick Mr Chair thank you,
representative for bringing this
Um
Me too. I think it passed in.
2022 did when on the tax bill,
and then went past the house.
Anderson and then, like I said
earlier, the governor vetoed
that. So
was it a Mr Chair
representative? Don't remember.
She's just outright veto that
hopefully we can. We can make
this permanent Mr. Chair. Thank
you for bringing Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. It's my
great honor to move a do pass
on.
Hospital to 64 2nd that proper
motion eruptions.
What do you call the rules?
Representative Travis
Chia.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Represented by the horn if their
masters yes.
Vincent.
Yes. Go back to representative
Johnson, Representative Johnson.
Yes, yes.
Thank you, baby. What? His name
to zero text and tell them what
we did here. Okay, Mr Chairman
and Committee members. I was
taught a long time ago. When
you're built passes, get up and
leave. But I really want to say
thank you twitching. Every one
of you could you know, being a
veteran is very important to me,
and it's very important to all
veterans. We always need to
remember if it wasn't for
veterans. We will not be here.
Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman. Okay, we're done in
mind. We are ready to go to
house. The Bill 36.
Madam leader, the hot care is
yours.
Ah!
Madam leader on your, uh, get
ready.
Yeah. You're thinking you're
tall enough.
Mr Chair. Uh,
that's right.
In the water.
Yes, sir.
I don't have a phobia.
You're right. I don't need it to
committee son.
Okay to 24 hours in advance
Okay?
What
Uh, that you do have a committee
sub
So in that case, I will best in
purposes and we will pass it
out. We can get going from
there.
We don't have the building the
packet.
Other subjects. Sub is coming up
now.
Okay, Everybody got a copy,
okay?
Okay, Madam Leader if you will
go ahead, and, uh
Explain your sub, and we can get
going. Thank you. Mr Chairman I
have with me today. Grace
Phillips from New Mexico
counties. General Counsel. Is
that your title? And, um Carter
Bundy, whom I'm sure you've met
before we have a committee.
separate house Bill 236, which
will allow some former public
employees who retired 2003 2023
to return to work on a very
limited basis.
And there are certain retirees
who are very
Much in need. We we need them in
our fine positions. Um, include
adult correctional and detention
officer, juvenile engine
officer, Municipal police
officer, Sheriff's Deputies,
State police officer,
firefighter and EMT paramedics
and the only real change in the
substitute.
Court security and
It's very narrowly crafted so
that the concerns about some of
the return to work.
A pair of fun negatively for the
new people in a profession to
advance to seniority is go first
to explain briefly how this is
accomplished.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. I know we have a
couple of new faces, but for
those of you who have been here
for any length of time, Carter
Bundy with AFSCME, for those of
you have been here for any
length of time. You know that
for the last 14 years since
representative RELA successfully
repealed
Uh, double dipping returned to
work. Um, abscess. Um, we have
offered our we've explained our
problems with previous bills.
There have been a few bills,
including last year's County
bill for Corrections that
address some of our concerns,
most of which leader chase he
addressed, Um
But this is the first bill and
that really took care of what we
think all the major policy
concerns about trying to make
sure that we don't incent people
to retire earlier than the
otherwise would have trying to
make sure that we limited only
to public safety. Frontline.
Don't get me wrong. We still
think as a hiring method in a
way of staffing and building a
reef workforce. This is not
great policy.
But one thing the county was
even if you started paying
correct art.
It would still take four or five
years of academies to get enough
people through to really put us
In the meantime, we're running
the risk every day at many of
our county facilities, and I
would argue all over steep
facilities.
Of another 1980 Penitentiary of
New Mexico Riot.
We're not only were inmates
killed, but workers were held
hostage, tortured and lived with
that for the rest of their
lives. So, um, we do want to
fill these front lines. We want
to thank representative Ream for
bringing this up for years, but
this is really the first bill
that has a very narrow focus on
frontline public safety.
You have to be retired already.
There is a sunset. We view this
as a bridge. This is not what
workforce development should be.
This is a bridge between our
high vacancy rates in life or
death positions.
And over the next four or five
years getting to a place where,
thanks largely to the people in
this building the House and
Senate which which I'll plug
right now.
That you were going to help
local government.
Um, have the resources to hire
at the levels we need to
Um
We just want this to be done in
three.
You can only do it if you have
vacancy rates of over 10%. We
thought that was important for
two reasons. First, this really
is something that she sent
staff.
The second reason is because you
don't want to bring in double
dippers, return to work
employees and then have somebody
whose entire life goal.
His been to be a Valencia County
sheriff, and there's not a spot
for that person because we
brought in people for what is a
temporary bridge solution. You
want to have some spots
available so we can keep
bringing all these people in in
our new workforce. Um there is
protection that if there are
layoffs were very far from this
scenario and any of these
entities. But if another covid
another
You know, Crash of 2008 happens
in revenue plummet We want don't
want to throw people out on the
street who are going to be part
of this work force for the next
20 years to just hold a spot for
somebody who's already on their
shift bidding protections we
reached. I think very good
compromise that Grace really
deserves all the credit for, um,
where they can build seniority
as they come back for these
three years.
But they can't bring their
previous seniority to
essentially take current workers
may have 10 or 15 years and make
them go into a nature there is
tracking. We think tracking is
really important component of
this two track with the vacancy
rates are and who's taking
advantage of what it looks like.
And finally, um they, the
employer and employee will be
because they're potentially
taking the spot of someone else.
We want them to pay into Parer.
They are not going to accrue any
new service credit or a new
three year high. So with that, I
think it's fair to say and I
know director Trujillo is here
and what I think it's fair to
say that it will be neutral to
slightly positive for Pere.
That's everything we've been
asking for. For 14 years. It's
temporary. It is a bridge. We
have an emergency crisis.
This will relieve the pressure
on our front line. It really
started with corrections. So I
talked about that The most are
corrections officers who doing
mandatory doubles.
I m d C and burn away. Oh
county.
We were losing more and more of
them because mandatory double
spend your life Even if we only
get 20 people taking advantage
of this at MDC, that is 100
shifts a week where people will
not have to do doubles.
This is important for our
frontline safety people
important for the public safety
and we're
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I'm Grace
Phillips, and we really
appreciate the dialogue that
we've had with the unions over
the interim leading to this
bill, of course, Appreciate
Leader chases leadership in this
particular area, But I really
want to emphasize for a moment
Why this is a crisis and again,
this was detention facilities.
Where we have been, You know,
One of the one of the outcomes
of Covid was
Widespread sits very serious
staffing vacancies. And when you
have the kind of vacancies that
we have, um, I've heard it
described as a force. It's very
hard to attract people when they
know they're going to be working
in a place that isn't fully
staffed. It's it's impossible to
give people the training. They
need the rest and the time off
and believe that they need and
to give you a sense of where
Things stand and it's really
unprecedented that we've had the
widespread had for the last 18
months, Um seven facilities over
20% vacant vacancy, four
facilities over 30% 5 facilities
over 40%. We have one facility
agency, so the size of the
facility makes a difference, but
to give you you know Bernie Leo
killed positions And this is, um
is untenable for the women and
men who are working.
King in our facilities, and we
really feel that growing
The the pool of applicants even
temporarily, um, to fill some
positions, hopefully will
retired from from all aspects of
governmental service to come and
serve in some of these public
safety positions and and give us
to be able to, um, take a
breath.
Train rest, higher recruit and
and, um I really hope that we
can. Now we're also supportive
of, although our focus has
really we know that there that
the need and the other areas
described, um by leader Chase,
er, very cigar, the bumpers that
are that are submitted so
And finally, Mr Chairman. I just
want to pro TEM senator. Many
Stewart and Leader Ryan. Stand
for questions. Question. Yeah.
I'm going to go to you for you
to make the motion and the
Removing that are going to the
audience. Uh, anybody here in
support of this legislation?
Anybody here in opposition of
this legislation?
Anybody here who really wants to
speak about it? No kidding.
Anybody here was to speak about
it. You have about ability,
Behalf, So I'll start here with
the young lady. Other
Thank you. All right. So then I
Go ahead, young man.
Go ahead, sir.
Family.
Next. Go ahead.
Yes. Thank you again, Chairman
and committee members. Um
We've all we've heard these
stories, and we've all read the
headlines about how
Sees
Um to hire and retain officers,
and this offers a concrete
financial incentive to help
encourage trained officers and
that's a key. They're trained
officers to return to work or
move to New Mexico to continue
their public safety career. By
allowing some of these retired
members of para to return to
work and keep their pension.
This program has a real chance
of increasing the number of
experienced law enforcement and
corrections officers in our
state.
And smart guardrails are going
to ensure that the pension funds
not hurt, and it's going to
eliminate any chance of abuse by
early retirees who are just
looking to double dip. It's
designed to deliver more
officers to help keep our
state's safe and that's what we
need, and that's why we had the
chamber are here to encourage
you to support it with the do
pass. Thank you again.
Hello. This is Shaun Willoughby.
Can you hear me?
I hope you can. Sean Willoughby.
I'm the president of the
Albuquerque Police Officers
Association. And to some of you
on this committee, um, Committee
chair, Al Cohn. It pleases me to
see you. I wish I was there in
person. But obligations took me
back to Albuquerque.
It's gonna be surprising that
the A P O is actually supporting
a double dipping bill. It is not
a shock to anybody that we don't
like double dipping. We don't
think it's smart policy and we
don't think that it's the best
step forward for the state of
New Mexico that being said for
the first time we have a double
dipping bill with the necessary
guardrails not to incentivize
incentivize early retirement.
And also take away the
incentives that we've all worked
so diligently over the years to
instill in the professional
policing like growing the
retirement to 100%, or the
retention programs that we've
been working on for years. This
bill is exactly what it's
described as it's a bridge. It
is a bridge to allow these
communities and these state
local municipalities and
counties.
To continue being incentivized
to recruit and retain their best
and brightest and also have a
tool to stop gap. This huge
vacancy rate that we're dealing
with in the state of New Mexico.
I really am appreciative that
this particular bill also
carries with it data points. We
are going to be collecting data.
On this program to see just how
effective it is at solving some
of these problems that we can
use in the future. Three years
from now, when everybody in the
state says that we need to
prevent the sunset and we need
to continue double dipping
forever will have the data to
make an educated decision.
As you know, I come from an
agency that has a lot of
experience with double dipping.
That's why we take the positions
in the previous legislative
sessions. I think it's now 14 to
be opposed to any double dipping
concept, But I appreciate the
work that went into this bill. I
appreciate the guard rails that
this bill possesses. And this
particular bill and only this
bill for the first time. The
Albuquerque Police Officers
Association and the members that
I represent we definitely
support
And we could definitely use the
influx of support and field
services. Uniform police
officers responding to dispatch
calls for services what the
language is in this bill, the
only job available for double
dipping for police in the state
is the only job that we really
need the help in and that is
responding to calls for service
for our community members with
individuals who have the
experience to do so
professionally.
And thank you so much for giving
me the opportunity to speak.
Thank you, Leader Casey for
bringing this bill forward. I
appreciate all the work that
went into it, And I hope you
guys have a great day and again.
I wish I could be there in
person. Thank you.
Mr Chairman. I think that
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just have
a statement to make
It's unfortunate.
That we've been trying to get
people and I watched
Folks in this room oppose it.
And then we're gonna allow them
now and only because we're at a
crisis.
And then under that
We're going to use them as a
bridge.
And then after we bridge it up.
They were gone, and we're not
gonna let them work anymore.
Just wanted to make that
statement.
Mr Chair, and I don't think
that's any way to treat a C.
Questions. I don't
Um, I don't find an end date in.
Mr Chairman. We're going to find
the location in the bill. But
just let me tell you that, um
the requirement is that they
returned to work before the
period of return is limited.
Okay from the time they begin to
work, Okay. Thank you, Um, will
put will direct you to the
section of the bill, though.
Mr Chairman, representative
Chavez. Subsequent employment
has to begin prior to the land
They can only receive up to 36
consecutive months. It has to be
consecutive and that's it. I
just want to make sure you got
you got that right? Okay. So
somebody can hire on June 1st
30th 2017.
And they can stay on for three
years.
I mean, after the 27. I'm sorry
I'm a few years behind.
Mhm. Mr Chairman, That is
correct.
So I have a couple of more
questions. Um, So, um
Reviewing and reporting back on
the progress of this, So is
there. Are you gonna be
reporting back to the
Legislature who will get the
implement? Actually,
Mr Chairman, Representative
Chavez. There's no entity to
whom to report but the the
employer needs Should we want
that information? We can get it
from the employer, you know?
Um, be able to have the data and
information to see what
Um And then the other question C
y f D or that some of the C Y F
s because there they are also,
um, experiencing a, um, Was
there any considering just how
What was the response to see why
F d
Mr Chairman, Representative
Chavez. This really started
organically because the counties
were focused on detention, and
they were the ones who it was
The first they were the first
people who really said yes to
the idea of significant
guardrails. So we worked from
there, um, and representing
sheriffs and then working with a
Po, A
We realized that there was not
only the need but the desire for
them to come forward, Um and and
a few other people sort of right
at the end. Um, I know that the
governor's office and we want to
thank Diego Erin, but we want to
thank Diego and the governor's
office. They brought a list of
EMTs paramedics. Firefighters at
No point Has anyone from CFT
approached me or to my
knowledge.
Senator Brandt. I'm not sure
about leader Chasity. Senator
Brandt is carrying a mirror bill
in the Senate. Um so
Um well, it just it sort of grew
organically, and they were never
brought into this, Um
The the sponsors. Really? It's
their bill, but, um we feel like
we have reached a very delicate
fragile
Um, place where we have a lot of
different people satisfied that
this will be a good bill. Um and
and it's certainly something
that in future years if we
needed to bring in some other
people, but that that was the
history C y f d just honestly
never involved themselves in
this discussion because Mr Chair
representative because I noticed
that the
Juvenile. The correction
officers are included in this,
so they're under c Y f d, You
know? Um so I think I mean,
I'm not asking for to make an
amendment, but I think they're
all of those, um, job you do
have we do have a crisis there
And I think if there were I
don't know. You know if there
were some seasoned C y f D
workers that were willing to
come back that might be
Um and then so just I'm kind of
getting into the weeds on this
question, but are are the
retirees who are coming back?
Are they being brought back at
the wage that they left or are
they being treated as
Um, Mr Chair Representative
Chavez. They would apply for an
open position and they would be
that open position.
So it would be unrelated to
whatever they representatives.
So then does that mean that
their wage would be based on
their years of experience? Mr
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um um
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh,
representative for bringing this
Ford, Um
And thank you, Uh, face were
Working with them.
Uh, quick question here and just
kind of was just thinking I was
pondering this. I sat on this
committee for four years.
And I've been, You know, I've
listened to Bill after Bill
after Bill
Um, that ironically, Bill ream
and so my my questions, chair
representative.
Um
And this is just out of respect
to him. Is there any way that
You would invite him to be a
part of your bill.
In that he put so many hours and
years of his time to similar my
groups.
Um, Mr Chair and representative
to the Asus. I am representing
Raymond. I have supposed topic,
but and were longtime
colleagues. He did speak to me.
I think it was yesterday. And I
said that as far as I knew that
if um, who had
A narrow approach because his
has been rather and, um, when we
we were told there's a mirror
bill in the Senate.
We had the committee in this
first go. Okay. We were pushing
for that it just help it again.
Didn't Mr chair represented? I
don't know that I want you to.
You know, I think I just respect
I see that. There's some spaces
there on the top line, and I
don't know if you guys had that
conversation. Maybe you have
having time. I think it would be
just appropriate from my
Vanish point.
That he gets some recognition
for his hard work.
In the years of that he put into
Because this bill is I read them
all.
Is built off of that work.
I know that for a fact. So, Mr
Chair, Representative, I just
again. I'm obviously going to be
in full support of this bill. I
think, um
I hope that we don't wait too
long. I mean, we sat here and I
worked on getting support.
On previous bills that were
similar to this.
Ah, always we can. That's the
process, right? We start with
something and you started with
something, Mr. Chair
representative, and obviously
you had to substitute it to
clean it up, and I was hoping
that we would have done that in
previous years only because in
my rural areas in my district we
were in. We were already in
crisis. We had been in crisis.
And I had been begged Mr. Chair
representative.
For
Uh by mayors accounts by
commissioners by the sheriff.
Bye, everyone to that This was a
dire need, and and I could go on
and on about all the different I
mean, we hear all the
Different.
Testimony. Uh, including what?
We're hearing just right next
door to my district in Luna
County, where they just bombed
one of the one of the district
courts.
And so you know what? I'm afraid
of it as a person who is hired
many, many people were my my
career.
Sometimes when you allow it to
go so far.
They look at that, and they
still to bring people back there
going to be having conversations
with people that are currently
working. They're working double
shifts, and it's gonna work.
It's gonna be a job.
I'm gonna be honest with you to
work your way back out of that.
Because we have let it go. So
far so deep into now, we're the
plane's about to crash and now
we're we're deciding to do this.
Um, I'm only saying that because
I'm disappointed that the unions
didn't come forward earlier.
And and that they're finally
Allowing this to happen. I'm
disappointed in that.
Um, I think we should all be
working together The counties
and the unions.
And and us as representatives,
And so you know, the chokehold
that was here for four years.
Excuse me being on this with
what I see.
When I live in an area that, um
Has elderly calls.
And so anyway, I'll just I'll
just end with that. Thank you,
Mr Chair, Representative. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and
representative Chase E. I have I
have just one question that I
need clarified.
Um, starting on Page nine.
Lying 24 all the way through.
Page 10 line four.
Um, I think I misunderstood
earlier.
When this discussion was
happening, because the way I
read that
There is
The 36 months.
Is not how long that person is
can be employed. Is that
correct?
So the 36 months is just how
long vacant collect their
pensions that a. Is that a
correct statement?
Mr Chairman, representative,
That is absolutely correct. But
the current law is that any of
anyone could suspend their
pension and come back to any
position. So if they suspend
their pension, they could become
a Cabinet secretary. Um, but if
they want to keep their pension,
want them to come into the to
these frontline positions.
So that that just Mr Chairman,
representative.
I was just confused by an
earlier
Discussion about the what? That
36 months was.
So if if somebody chooses to
come back to work
There is no limitation on how
long that
As long as they Mr Chairman,
representative. That is
absolutely correct, but they can
only double depth returned to
work and collect their pension
at the same time for 36 months.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Uh, Mr Bundy and Madam
Chair and
Yeah.
Thank you. Mr Share, had the
same question The rep Martinez
It's got clarified. Thank you.
And I have another question for
us. Thank you, Uh,
For bringing this bill two
things that I haven't seen this
before. Mr Chair was, uh,
Requirement of the vacancy rate.
Apply for this. So I thought was
a great idea. And also, if
something to have been conscious
about that, so I think that that
was new for me.
My my other question That was
clarified already about that 36
months is
I understood, Mr Chair did you
said, um
That the person will come back
with experience, according to
the counties.
To whatever rules they have
salary scale. Whatever.
Uh, What about the experience?
Let's say, um I don't know. I'm
gonna make it up. Uh, somebody
who works in jail and have some
seniority there because of that
experience, Mr Chair and is
working in the office and wants
to come back to work and they
need him in a different place in
that position.
But because of his experience
with the place
In another.
Mhm job positions. I don't know
if you got married. I think I
understand you, Mr Chair
representative, so some can will
for compensation purposes. Um,
Consider years of experience.
it's related experience so they
may have arranged that they pay
for that. Somebody who's coming
back out of retirement.
Um, a veteran would probably in
those counties wouldn't when
they're allowed to both draw
options that are limited by the
legislation. Um, and the idea
being that prevents the
possibility that they would
work. Um, where the facilities,
Um, have repeatedly told us that
or that that provide, you know
working the housing units.
That's yes. And so that's what
the bill is One of my questions,
And actually, I raised
But you know, I raised and you
kind of really made up and
Prior.
Came back.
And then he came back at the
same pay.
So we're talking about a
package, you know, and and
that's what it was.
And that's what all this
legislation that we've been
trying to pass.
But this legend deals with you
know, Mr Chair, I do have a
heartfelt question.
One of the
I wanna when main components of
the old system
What's this holding? But then we
have the rank and file so
question that I have, and I've
tried to try.
Loopholes in the legislation.
And one can elaborate.
But the chair is the question of
around. We've got this return to
work, and we've got these
workers correctional officers
that have two years, three
years, five years far away from
retirement.
But then all of a sudden there's
this. Getting what
Eight times more pay than the
guy with four years experience.
So how How is this legislation
taking care of that morality?
You know, and I've got some
solutions.
Proposal, Mr. Chair, Um
Representative Garcia, I really
want to thank you for those
comments. Because this is
something that our union and I
know a P O. A worked with
Um, we've taken this incredibly
seriously for the full 14 years
and we have offered to work with
anyone, including
representatives is a completely
different bill than those prior
bills. There were occasional
similarities, but this is by far
the most responsible bill we've
seen that wouldn't have all
those
Corrections officers are the
ones I've spoken to most about
this.
They hate the way people who
were there when Governor
Richardson God rest his soul
passed this bill, and it was
Katie Burke and to a person I
think every rank and file member
of the state of burly Oh county
of the city of Albuquerque,
probably all employers.
The rank and file people
absolutely despise it for a lot
of reasons, one of which was
that you had people coming in
taking the management positions
because if you return to work
almost by definition, you're
probably eligible.
And can do one of these
management positions and you
will win that bidding.
For that, And it was, um, but a
lot of facilities including
correctional facilities, and so
people who have been working
there 5 1015 years who were
hoping for a promotion. They are
hardworking people. They've
worked their tail off. They've
been looking for a promotion and
all of a sudden somebody comes
back in and is making $90,000 a
year in that position, But also
the pension is good enough in
public safety.
That they're drawing down the
$90,000 a year job management
jobs are important and we have
respect for all work, including
those but the idea that you have
now created this artificial
class of people taking over
management and basically
indefinitely is incredibly
demoralizing. So I think the
most important part of the bill
and honestly this this really
has probably been the biggest
obstacle.
To the bill is on P. J eight
line, 13.
Retired member shall only
The employed in one of the
following positions and it lists
them.
And we were very specific in how
we defined it to make sure that
those are the front line. The
definitions are are in the back
story line one
And we define those very
carefully. It's probably the
time the thing we spent the most
time on making sure that whether
it's police, corrections, or
MTs, any of these positions of
definitions were tight, so they
were coming back to help
alleviate the frontline stress
and vacancies to make our
facilities safer. And I do think
that with this bill, the exact
opposite.
Of the old two thousands. Double
dipping is going to happen now.
They don't have to work three
doubles in a row. Now they get
to spend some more time with
their family. Now they don't
have to worry about getting too
so we think by bringing back
people to the frontline
positions
And and trust me. I would not be
here. If our members did not
sign. We had very specific
conversations of every piece of
this and they said, You know
what? Not only we neutral on
this now.
We will actually support it
because it will help make our
lives better until the employers
can ramp up compensation ramp up
the Gracie or anything to do
that.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair and
representative and I also, um,
the
The the idea that an employee
that's assisted by somebody by
somebody who, um comes back into
the workforce, I think, will
really There's no option to pull
someone off to somebody on the
floor. And so I I agree
wholeheartedly with what Carter
described him in with
His members are and give give to
But I think there's going to be
when you guys have come to this
committee will keep in mind that
the unions represent as well.
When you
Addressing the instead of
passing that responsibility on
to
The county can draw a line in
the sand and say
Care package, Mr Chair.
Revenue and I can see you know,
I could see some type of model
of
Providing
And that could be whatever
You. You get five
That are Matty kicks in when
they see that
Even though these new folks
The higher pay than they are.
Even if they've got a five or 10
or 50, but I think that's a
that's an even more
Factor in terms of actually see
the mullahs and, uh and I think
that falls both.
One on the T putting the blame,
so that's
That's what I see as
I r. P based on
What else do you have in mind?
What other things you have in
mind?
Thank thank you, Mr Chair,
representative. Counties have
made and but I don't want to say
that we don't need the
recruitment.
Um, but to give you an example,
Um, Otero County, and this is in
the last two years went from $12
an hour to 1926 Santos County
from 1423. I can provide you
with
But I do want the county's
Mr Chairman, Representative
Garcia. First of all, exactly
the kind of proposal that Sean
man to do mandatory.
The reception we got and we're
not going to mandate and Mike
But I've got my played for right
there. Uh, you know, that is a
thought.
Because my my Ah
And I think
For onboard.
To where that that bronze the
Had the sisterhood the brother,
you know, uh
But you know that you know my
friends, you know, really, you
know, has any ground to land on,
but it's just It's just I think
we have to continue to you know,
And I applaud you for that. So
So thanks. Thanks.
You would expect me to have a
few questions, right?
Number one is
Hey, I'm looking at the
Okay on Page eight. Okay, It
explains that they can only be
employed in the following
positions. Who's to say that
they are going to work in the
following positions.
To say I am the supervisor.
Of one of these departments.
And representatives that US as
has been working in that area
for ever. He retired, he had not
have worked together forever.
You think staff and retires And
then, uh, we rehire him and one
of these positions.
Who's to say
Uh, this job man is not going to
go back and started to adopt
correctional officer instead of
that one of the nice because she
positions that are available in
the chairman. Thank you for
that. That, as I said, has
probably been our number one
concern. So, um
So there are really two
questions First. Does the
legislation actually make that
the law of the land and we
believe it does with the
language, saying that the
retired member because, remember
if they come back and suspend
pension? There are regular
member again, so the retired
member shall only be employed in
these so then that leads to the
enforcement question. Honestly,
we did not put in the tens of
millions of dollars for an
appropriation to sort of do
internal audit and
Um, have Inspector General's I
can tell you that, at least in
every one of these job positions
If there were someone to come
back and take advantage of
return to work with everybody,
knowing that they're supposed
emissions, starting on page 11
If nothing else, um, there will
be no shortage of people
pointing that out to management
and if management were
complicit, there would be no
shortage of our members coming
to us to ask that to happen, And
then there will be no shortage
of communications between me and
poor director Greg Trujillo,
letting him know that this is
going on and then para
ultimately holds the tool
because, remember, they could
come back keeping their pension.
Pera is making that decision to
continue that pension based on
the representation from the
employer that they are in one of
these positions are not. In
fact, in one of these positions,
that means their pension gets
suspended immediately. That's a
lot of Larry Barker's out there.
Um, there will be a lot of
people with eyes on this, but we
did not put in a sort of
Requirement. For instance, the
thing is, there is no no way
that anybody getting I mean I
can hire. I'm the captain. I can
place that person that came back
to me wherever I want. There's
nothing telling me I can't
Okay. My other question. Okay,
Here's murder. Let's go back to
okay.
Pigskin.
It says that retired members
should not be hired for re
employment and employment
position with the vacancy rate
that is lower than 10% of the
retired.
Members hiring
If I look at the list of
correctional officers
Ah!
The lieutenant's position such
16 5% 5% captains are at, uh
27.8%
So
They're way above that 10%
rating so I can retire.
As a captain, and because I fit
into this category of listed
more than 10%.
Mr Chairman. Um, no, that's
that's not what happened. You
have to be employed and employed
means the entire time. Um in one
of those categories, this merely
says that among those categories
If your past if you're in 93 97%
staffing ratio you can't bring
in a return to work employee and
just to be clear the people who
have already been hired into the
return to work program would not
be pushed out or fired. They get
to run their 36 months. So
that's why it says lower than
their members hiring, so
nobody's getting returning.
But it would only be for the
position, okay?
So now I'm looking at. Where was
I going on? This would
So now I'm looking at
What is my pay rate gonna be? I
already heard from from County
Scottish can do whatever they
want.
That's pretty, basically what
we're saying the county can do
whatever their budget allows
them to do.
Okay, so we can't get involved
in that on the state level.
What is my correctional officer?
Uh, come back pay going to be
Mr Chair. It would be the pay
rate for a correctional officer.
There's not going to be doubles.
It would be the rate that are
listed in the that they're
eligible to be hired into.
So what you are saying, and this
is what I'm understanding that
if I come back, we'll come back
as a CEO, one.
Is that correct? And I will come
back at that rate.
Correct Mhm.
I don't see that anymore. I do
not see that anywhere.
Mr Chair. If you look at the
definition, and I'll focus on
the definition for detention
officer
Um, because that's my my words.
Um, an adult person who is
employed.
Uh um, buying affiliated public
employer, other than that of
adults charged with or convicted
of violations of law or
ordinance. So it is the position
what I can tell you as part of
this process. We actually
surveyed the counties to find
out what the type who worked the
floor and and what I would call
entry level housing unit.
They use the term detention
officer. So that is a that is a
term that is established as part
of the workforce, Man. I'm
looking for the chair, okay?
Let me make sure I got okay.
You're talking about the adopted
attention, officer. If you look
at the big the lab it Nah.
Laying one just says what? It
involved. The correctional
officer means
It doesn't say.
What level of adult correctional
officer
Correct enough days. World could
be a
Your 12 or three? I don't know.
the office of one
when I did when I did my two
years in prison.
And, uh,
So that's another one of my
concerns. We don't have any
definition. Now who? How much
money people are gonna get when
they come back to work.
Are they gonna make more money
than the guy that's been there
for three years, and now they're
coming back in now.
We don't have any way to promote
those people.
Mr Chair in county detention
facilities. There are detention
officers. Then there are
corporal
Sergeants, lieutenants, captains
chiefs none of those additional
levels and we discussed it, Um
none of those additional higher
levels of of position are
included County. I understand
that I'm already said county can
do whatever they want.
Do you understand that because
it's up to the college budget.
They're free to do whatever they
want.
There's nothing
But I'm standing state
Under state level, that
correctional officer is going to
come back at what salary
At what live.
Mr Chairman, Um
Anyone who qualifies for
determined Don't correct cell
block. That was a term we were
using with our members. So
someone in the cellblock could
the state theoretically bring
someone with a lot of who's also
someone walking the cellblock
and being on the frontline? They
probably could. And I hear what
you're saying that that could
cause somebody. Theoretically,
who's the CEO, one to not be
thrilled about it?
But they do have that
experience. And the important
thing is that they are where
they're just as likely to get
shanked or shaved is the next
guy who's the CEO? One? So they
are coming back. We are going to
rely on the Department of
Corrections to follow the law
and to only higher into these
positions, And as I said, Trust
me, there will be no shortage of
people to report if the
department is not in fact
fulfilling its obligations under
this law.
So I've got a man coming back or
a person coming back.
With the retirement of
50 to 60 K a year, Okay?
And now he's coming back and
he's gonna come back at a level.
And making another 50 60 70
$80,000 a year
Or maybe even more. Well, this
guy that's been there for a
while.
It's going to be making 4050.
Mr Chairman, You are very
eloquently stating one of our
general objections. This policy
and one of the reasons why Mr
Willoughby and myself. This is a
bridge. This is not normal
employment practice. We do not
want this to become the norm. We
don't think this is generally a
healthy workplace. But if you're
bringing people to the front
lines, and you're making it
easier for that Seo won
For that C 02 for that other
person who is risking their life
every day. If you are
alleviating some of the doubles
that they have to work every
week, we are hopeful and I can
tell you that our members did
approve this, knowing that that
means people coming back and
pulling retirement and pay.
Um they are looking forward to
having more people to help
relieve the staffing shortages.
And yes, I mean,
I still don't like the concept,
but I think the reality is this
can be a good bridge, so the
counties and they do credit the
counties. They have been raising
their their pay. Um, we can no
longer save it. I'll say for
years. It is not in the bigger
facilities, at least. Um, and
it's something that hopefully on
the state level you can work on.
We're asking Senate finance
right now to increase state
corrections officers back to 8%.
That was put in by the
administration, so I think it's
a team effort by the employers
to raise rates by the academies
to recruit and turn people out.
Anyone who's watching football
right now knows MDC is on every
single NFL game. I hope they
don't have the money to do a
Super Bowl spot, but they have
been on all the games up till
now, and they're on the radio.
Um, I know that you can't
seriously I know that. Um Yeah,
It's Mr share. I'm not gonna lie
uncomfortable. The general
concept, I think with the guard
rails we've built into this
bill.
It outweighs the negatives of
the and that's where my comfort
level goes away.
This retired person wants to
come back.
You need to come back.
At the bottom.
Not anywhere else is about
ready. They're already holding
an awesome check.
I can tell you. My retirement
check is pretty decent.
And, uh,
It was only for a magistrate
position. Okay? Correctional
officer that worked 30 years.
Has got a decent, decent
retirement pay.
So
For them to come in coming in
with a retirement pay. I'm
saying about that 60 K and there
was overtime and everything make
it another day 90,000.
I gotta retired person making
150 grand a year. All that new
guy is sitting there making 56.
Is that right?
So I'll leave it at that. Mr
Chair.
Oh, wow. I found none of the
chair. Ah,
uh, they kept me in judiciary
will almost been night last
night. So I guess I'm still into
anyway. I'll leave it at that.
I just say this is my feeling,
okay? And I just want to be
honest about this, okay?
They were coming in today.
Carol. Cool. We want just this
much.
We're gonna come
And then the next year we're
gonna come back, invest with
this much and then you okay? And
that's where we're going because
it just poquito
Means that poquito is eventually
going to become a lot.
Yes, there.
And that's my concern.
Representatives. Garcia. How
good is Chairman? I, uh
Okay?
Mhm, Mr Chair. Uh,
I move Do not pass on house Bill
236.
But I do pass on House labor
veterans.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes, to explain my vote, please.
And I am voting. No.
And I am going to explain my
vote real fast.
I don't want anybody coming back
to me next year and saying You
gave us this much last year we
bring you up. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I think this is super
vital. I don't think we have
very many choices. Mr Chair at
this time, I also think that the
longer we let it erode.
Um, And at this point, these are
vacant spots that are absolutely
necessary to be filled.
And we need
We need to fill those if I was
working doubles and you when as
a person that has managed people
you sometimes get hired as a
manager, and you end up working
some of those shifts to to cover
some of that. That's what's
going to happen. So I think the
longer we let this thing go
down, it's it's only gonna get
worse. So I appreciate this
legislation. Thank you, Mr Chair
If you don't pay enough, you're
going to
We're doubles anyway. Back to my
office. There's Mr Chair. Thank
you very much.
Oh, I'm sorry I had to vote. I'm
sorry with 8 to 1. Madam Leader.
