And I realize that other people
have built in other Canadian so
if you do just that.
Just let us know that you're
doing that we will try and not
keep you actually I have one in
Judiciary at two but I told my
co sponsor take it so hopefully
I won't be called out for that
one so we are going to start
with the bills that we rolled
over and for the audience we
heard all the all the we heard
them presented we heard the
public comment and we heard all
of the questions from the
committee so right now we are
just and several of the test
sponsors we're very grateful
that they didn't have to be here
for the vote.
One said hello yeah when when
she texted said do I need to be
there and I said no so so they
will not be here so I will
entertain a motion on House Bill
ninety three.
As our.
Madam chair and make the motion
to approve committee serve all
one ninety third.
Okay okay so the motion is a do
not pass on H. B. one ninety
three and you pass on C. pack
Committee substitute for H. B.
one ninety three.
Okay.
It is so moved hello that that
works a second.
Also.
Well well well well.
And madam chair I need to back
up I'm I'm good with the to pass
a motion to approve the
committee so.
Do not pass on one ninety three
this my motion.
Hello.
And I said okay this this.
Many.
We start over.
Okay so.
Madam chair.
Recommended do not a one ninety
three and a do pass on one
ninety three committee so.
Okay.
We get that right so do not.
I'm I'm wrong again I'm wrong
again.
To put.
Okay one.
Well somebody else make to tell
me what you're trying to do I
will help you with the motion I
do not want this bill to pass.
The committee for the I do not
want to.
Okay sure I can make a motion.
Thank.
Okay.
I madam chair I'm I recommended
do pass on and I do not pass on
house bill one ninety three a do
pass on House Bill committee
substitute one ninety three okay
that is the proper motion and
I'll give you a second to think
about it in case we want to turn
around again I'm kidding I'm
kidding.
It
are on a motion for a do not
pass on house bill one ninety
three.
But I do passed on house bill
one ninety three committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety three okay.
Allison what you call the roll.
Representative Barreras.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair we need a second
arms are.
Okay there's a second
sure you have heard Mike on
there she just jumped in with
the second so that was
represented by that just with
the second.
Representative Lord.
Representative lord your your
muted and I'm unit myself as I
started to say that so.
I passed for just a second come
back around to me please okay.
Representative Pettigrew.
Share more.
Yes.
Madam Thompson.
Actually I believe in there
might be someone here that you
go back to the other member
before you go to the chair.
Okay I wasn't sure about that.
What we're looking into it but.
Okay convocation have a hard
time hearing did Representative
predators and now you did okay
now.
Madam Thompson yes.
To okay bye three two we have a
do not pass on H. B. one ninety
three but I do passed on
committee substitute for H. B.
one ninety three okay we will
move on to H. B. one eighty
seven as amended.
And.
Madam chair on the table okay we
have a move up motion to table
do we have a second a second
okay Allison will you take the
role.
Representative Barreras.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord.
After just a second run out run
my notebook real quick just for
just a minute please.
Representative Pettigrew.
Table.
Vice chair marrow.
Yes to table.
Madam Thompson yes.
Three to two vote what on
Representative board passed.
No to table okay so by a three
to two vote
H. B. one eighty seven has been
tabled and then we are down to
HB sixty two so this is the
committee substitute again so I
will entertain a motion.
Madam chair that went to table.
Okay so we have a tabling motion
for eight for the committee
sept.
The committee substitute for
house bill sixty two with the
respect.
A second madam chair okay our
system will you take the role.
Representative Barreras.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord.
Representative Pettigrew.
No the table.
Mr Romero.
Yes to table.
Madam Thompson yes the table so
house bill sixty four as amended
has been tabled and I think
Allison does that get us caught
up on our voting.
I believe we have one more sixty
four I think that was sixty the
sub you just it.
Yes.
Were the amendment okay I'm so
boy I'm.
I know madam.
I.
Madam believe on on on house
bill sixty two we needed the to
vote no to the original bill and
then.
The table.
Because we never dealt with the
original bill.
You too.
To the committee so okay but
where I would my motion to table
was on the committee substance
use we were deliberating okay
all right okay that clears that
up okay and now we are on two
sixty four as amended.
Madam chairman would do passed.
One second let's move to table
okay and tabling motions take
precedence by our rules so we
have a you are here second on
the table in motion I second to
table so we have a motion and a
second to table H. B. sixty four
as amended Allison we take the
role.
Representative Harris yes to
table.
Representative Lord.
The table.
Representative Pettigrew.
No well.
Mr Mero yes to table.
Madam Thompson yes to table.
So I'm at three to two vote
sixty house bill sixty four as
amended is tabled okay now we
are going to move on to our are
down there many of our agenda
for today how we as
Representative black here.
She may have other another
committee to we're gonna be
probably far for that members
and also for the audience and we
are probably going to be jumping
around because there are many
other committees meeting this
afternoon and people are
presenting bills so and please
don't raise your hand yet
we were not at that point and I
promise that we will hear from
you so you don't need to panic
that you need to be in the first
five or ten or whatever you just
hold on until we get there I
promise that everyone will be
will be heard.
Madam chair.
The black is here need thank you
thank let them hold on one
second if I can use my other
committee.
Gosh that's what I was just
explaining that we are all
juggling and we happen to have a
real juggler are not maybe
although she's no help to me
with that scale.
HB seventy three Representative
Black the floor's yours.
Thank you madam chair this is a
really straightforward simple
simple bill I'm.
During the two thousand and
nineteen session Representative
kielbasa actually proposes
legislation I'm originally and
then during the amendment
process residential was left
again in one portion
I'm section to.
Hey residential was left in the
bill I'm.
And so that is all the the
purpose of this is strictly to.
Remove the word residential it
was actually stricken in the
amendment process and the twenty
nineteen session from
believes that the house I'm not
sure if it was a house for a
minute but they're actually was
amendment done that that struck
residential from everywhere else
in the bill I'm but I'm not sure
if it was a drafting error.
I'm that treasures affiliate
actually has
Brought this to my attention
wanted to get it clarified.
So madam chair that's up all I
have the standard questions okay
thanks this is one of those sexy
poll sixty bills that's going to
have two hundred people here
first for public comment I'm
sure so Allison can we do a poll
on this one.
So it if you are out there and
you have a an opinion on this
bill please vote in favor or in
opposition it looks like it has
the wrong Bill number on it but
okay
and that is hostile one seventy
three yes it is one eight three
so it nor the one sixty six
internet it's the Graham once
again mmhm.
Okay so looks like I in favor
and no in opposition so with
that I will I'm if well I guess
if you didn't vote in the poll
I'm assuming you don't want to
speak so we will take up.
Take comments from the public
who are in support of this bill.
So please raise your hand if
you're not assume addict like we
all are you go to participants
and it will show you a place
where you can raise your hand.
Okay we will start with
that with NMC Leandro Cordova.
We can hear you.
New Mexico counties and we do
stand in support of
Representative block and the
treasures affiliate and this
bill
Bill good fix.
Thank you our thank you dearest.
Good afternoon this is not a
Bernalillo county treasurer
Nancy burst and I'm also chair
of the New Mexico counties
affiliate treasures affiliate
are and that we think the
sponsor Representative black and
we stand in support of this
technical correction thank you.
Thank you Nancy last we have
Eric Rodriguez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for having this on this
afternoon my name is Erika Regus
Dona ana county treasurer I also
stand in support of this bill to
make sure that we get this
technical correction done.
for removing the residential
side of
K. thank you thank you Eric.
So with that I will go to the
committee for any questions.
Okay so let me see okay I'm
Representative Romero.
You madam chair and thank you
representative black for
bringing this forward trying to
get caught up on everything
think many of us are looking at
the struggle of of realizing how
hard this is to balance times I
appreciate your.
Bearing with me for a moment so
I got to hear a little bit of
your opening the question that I
have regarding the program
itself in the clarifications on
what Representative Abbas was
seeking to do and what you're
doing is essentially removing
the residential properties from
the pace program I'm just
wondering what the effect of
that would be can you just
clarify what that what you're
what the hope is for that
clarification.
Excuse me madam chair
Representative I I so during
Representative keel's
Original presentation at this
bill house bill for forty back
and and twenty nineteen he
actually did amend out
residential in every other part
of the bill I'm so in my opinion
that this was a drafting here
that was just left in and
Section two part AA because it
was actually stricken from if
you look back to hospital for
forty I'm in the amendments in
context of residential was was
actually taken out of part B..
So that that was my my purpose
of this is just to get it
clarified that it looks like it
was just an omission in the
amendment process.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I'm because
I'm not that familiar with the
program however I know that many
folks in my district and and
throughout you New Mexico are on
rooftop solar or different forms
of solar programming so I'm sure
president of because that's
probably the largest sort of
group of people using solar are
in the residential category
Madam chair representative maybe
not by eight course consumption
use but I'm sure how does this
affect the residential component
to that as far as because you're
saying it's an oversight and and
whatnot but because so many
people are affected in that
category madam chair
representative what happens to
them the original
The original bill actually the
bill was so that he could put a
special assessment on your
property tax bill.
I'm.
And it was it's my belief that
Representative a keel had
negotiate that with the the
night treasures of million that
he would remove that they would
remove that residential portion
so it would not be an option to
have you as a homeowner to get
your financing for your solar
panels at as a special
assessment and input on your tax
bill as a form of repayment.
Does that make sense madam chair
and vice chair yes sorry Madam
I'm just getting into this.
just trying to understand that
component of of the opt in opt
out and I think Madam chair
representative just looking at
some of the questions on the
notes about do residents get to
have the option now I'm I'm just
trying to understand the removal
portion of that because I know
that
Madam chair representative that
the reason residential was still
in there it was just because of
the
I guess like the third party
financing options and I now
understand a bit of the
predatory component to what how
that works out but
As far as the is this voluntary
is that not involuntary so you
know as far as being able to opt
in opt out for for that some.
Residential option I'm sorry I'm
trying to pull this all together
into co dear cohesive question
but I'm I'm still not following
how it affects the residents and
the tax do they get taxed less
or not at all are now there is a
tax doesn't.
Sorry go ahead I'm sorry madam
chairman vice chair it doesn't
it doesn't come into the only
affect.
Thank you.
Is sorry about that
that that.
It doesn't affect your property
tax okay your your solar panels
I mean they're they're not.
The only FINS is this bill that.
Give you the option to opt in or
opt out if your County and your
city municipality they all
agree.
Ordinance
that they're gonna lead a solar
company.
And actually offer to put solar
panels on your house.
And then attach that bill for
the solar panels.
To your tax bill making the
county treasurer basically a
third party that it then has to
become the collection agent for
that long company does that make
sense madam chairman Mr so so
madam chair representative is so
I just thank you for that
clarification trying to follow
all of the lines of command and
chains of command so so now the
county at least can benefit from
the collection of tax should
they all decide that they want
to be part of that tax
collection from the third party
I'm I'm just trying to fall
down.
Sorry madam chairman Mr now
You know what I don't know if I
have and madam chair can you see
if Nancy burst is still on can I
bring her in as my expert
witness.
You are let's see if she's still
here okay.
Madam chair it is she is not
available maybe act brings
clarity to.
I don't see her and she should
be listed under something other
than Nancy
madam chair she so you all in
here you're you're just too fast
tell us.
Do we want to get in trouble
with me by being too efficient
because then you make.
I know.
Thank you for being willing to
our help us understand this.
That's all right thank thank you
madam chair of Representative
Black to members of the
committee
yes we get we're getting down
into the technical part of the
US and really right now there is
no County.
using this program.
Santa Fe County
docked.
the special assessments.
I'll probably when it first came
out as best as we can remember
there's nobody using the program
everybody solar panels are being
bought currently are not going
through this property tax
assessment in this bill.
which is another reason why we
kind of wanted to update the
bill with Representative Abbas
appeal back in twenty seventeen
and say let's let's do this with
commercial property.
but again in in that bill
drafting process
you know we have we have the mix
up there of keeping the
residential in that one space
and we went now it needs to be
taken out to be true and clear
so right now nobody is taking
advantage
Of a property assessment to
finance residential solar.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Nancy for
that response so.
If if they don't have so
currently I'm trying to
understand the option where the
options are for residents and
how this changes the resident
option so currently they can't
have their assessment need
unless there county has opted
in to the process to be able to
value their home of currently
because of the additional
investment of of solar and so
this would Madam chair
representative allow for
counties to make that assessment
and add to the value of a of a
home because of the addition of
solar.
Madam chair madam.
I share.
I'm gonna I'm gonna diverted to
a treasurer verse on this as
well.
Thank you madam chair and madam
question
Thank you.
Your your county or your local
government if you're
municipality house to vote.
To have the special assessment
first of all that's your first
more on this regional bill.
and there are currently only are
two groups that have approved
having this type of special
assessment one is the county of
Santa Fe and the second one most
recently was the of the ledger
someone park in Dona ana county
those are the only two so right
now there are.
Thirty two counties well I take
that back
Bernalillo county once it.
and they wanted it for that
commercial.
Perspective so that's why
Bernalillo county my County came
to you and and open this bill up
and Representative appeals that
yes let's do the commercial pace
as we call it
And then in the floor session it
is there was lots of for
discussion and residential got
the DM but then taken out and
this is the last remaining
residential it didn't get taken
out that we think was an
oversight.
So to sort of wrap it up there
are only two counties and one
beverage in the whole state of
New Mexico that can take
advantage of.
This property assessed clean
energy program.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and because I
Representative in Santa Fe
County I'm just wanting to make
sure that we're not taking
anything away from the county in
doing this to to to their
current program with this take
any with this affects their
their current programming in
anyway.
Eight.
Madam chairman and vice chair
I'm gonna say no
That it should not affect at
all.
That said madam chair
representative
it what I understand that is
that it does allow the county to
finance the R. eight solar and
pay it off and so that would
help me with my property tax
bill is that how this third
party piece programs this cause
and such and this and this and
forgive me that's how it
currently works and that's what
this bill would allow but on the
residential and currently what
Santa Fe County is doing.
Eight.
Currently I'm Madam chair madam
vice chair.
I'm gonna have to diverted to
treasure first I am not a
hundred percent sure if Santa Fe
County is is doing the
residential or just the
commercial so.
Let me have her jump in.
Madam vice chair that is an
interesting question because
right now the only thing the
Santa Fe County has done is
adopted the resolution.
To have as an option nobody has
sought.
This property assessment for
residential.
So nobody that currently has
panels.
Solar panels on the residential
home has done any of this
financing.
This way using this mechanism
they've gone other ways to do it
and there's many ways to do it
so so right now there's nobody
participating of that have solar
panels on the house in this
financial methodology.
So that said madam chair
representative to clarify to if
if we take out the section for
residential
does that mean that the third
party financing is County based
financing or third party
financing with that remove all.
Madam chair madam vice chair so.
If we take out residential in in
this bill.
Then it would take off the table
the option for residential.
To be added to your tax bill say
would not change anything as far
as you can see I have solar
panels you can still.
Finance them through your bank
for your credit union through
that solar company whoever I'm
the only thing this is going to
do is it's going to.
It will not be allowed to be put
on your property tax bill as an
assessment.
So you would have your you know
wouldn't change anything as far
as financing is concerned
because even
In order to purchase solar
panels you have to qualify for
financing okay so if you don't
want if you qualify for
financing in that company if
you're County approved it and
that company could approach the
the county assessor and say okay
I want to have this.
But on the tax bill and I want
you collected for me now there's
the question too does this act
does someone want to hand over
that ability to collect the
money that's owed to them to
another entity so that that's
really what this is doing is is.
Alleviate the third party as the
county treasurer it it just cut
it clears it up so that
whoever's loaning the money is
going to be the one that's
collecting the money there's not
gonna be a password through the
county treasurer's office is
that is that clear.
Very helpful thank you madam
chair we are we're we're always
trying to improve.
Rapid process so that definitely
clears that up for me
I as long as it's elective in on
the of course is consumer public
affairs we just want to make
sure that the customer side
makes sense and that you know
the propose rest those options
are or there and of course in
relationships the county so
Madam chair representative thank
you for that clarification and
for to the continue discussion
thanks.
Representative Pettigrew.
What I'm trying to use my
computer mouse move by our my
mouse on my iPad.
Sen Mark.
I I think the between the expert
witness and and represent a
black picture most of the
questions I was gonna go out for
the to clear up for that
I do think it well.
However my to make up for all my
thank you madam chair I know
about.
Okay are there any further
questions sure I move for do
pass on house bill one seventy
three.
Okay a second okay
do we have opposition.
How you know what I can't see
Representative Romero so go
ahead and take them out go ahead
take the role Allison.
Representative Harris yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Sorry did you just come to me.
Representative paper all the.
Okay.
Hello okay.
I'm sure Mero.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
By a vote of four to one you
have to do passed and
Representative black when you
started I was going to thank you
for bringing us a simple bill
that didn't take a lot of time
but your role in that so.
I'm so sorry you madam chair
that was very short for us I was
I'm just to the I'm trying to
keep us all alert and awake as
best I can so thank you
representative what thank you
have a do pass.
So next we will go to
H. B. two oh six which is
Representative Ortez.
If she is in the audience can
there's she raised her hand so
she's there.
So hopefully that will make make
it easier to our.
Okay J. our own well.
Let's see.
So once we get Representative
Ortez on we'll see if the other
raised hand is her.
Okay
Representative Ferrary I think
is a co sponsor on this.
She is an chair.
Okay I can't remember my own
bill I surely don't remember
other people's bills but I'm.
So with that we are ready to go
on H. B. C. will six.
Going
against.
Thank you madam chair I have to
expert witnesses if we can get
that those folks moved over as
well Tammy people corn and that
and again sinak okay.
Thank you for reminding me I'm
trying to get back in the groove
I was just in committee where I
didn't have to do anything and I
have to do things have to get up
my game a little.
Thank you madam chair and
there's also just a substitute.
For hospital to a six.
Okay.
And I believe we got the
substitute in plenty of time
correct analyst yes okay I see
so I will move the this
committee substitute for
discussion so go ahead
Representative Ortez.
I'm gonna get a second on that
I'd like to second madam chair.
All right go ahead
Representative.
Madam chair I think not of the
substitute my back from my LA.
Finding on the web.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's it's an honor
to present on this bill
you know we've we we know this
for sure that COVID nineteen has
shown a strong and very harsh
life on that on some financial
truce for our neighbors
Families all over the state many
in my district have had to make
the toughest of choices whether
to pay their rent buy groceries
pay their utility bill our
neighbors are going into deeper
debt and are suffering under is
great financial burden.
House Bill two oh six if the
COVID utility really fill that
ensures that we can help those
in our districts who need it
most in these extraordinary
times I like to think of this
bill a little bit as dealing
with our past our present and
our future first this bill gives
as a standard way across the
state to address that is being
heard by folks who've not been
able to pay their utilities
during COVID this bill gives our
customers the opportunities to
repay that debt with some
dignity if you owe money you get
two months for every month ode
to pay back if you're
experiencing hardship for our
low income half of those arrears
are forgiven if you pay half the
other half is forgiven.
I'd like to paint a little bit
of a picture for you for how
many people are already affected
fifty seven thousand families
would have received a
disconnection notice discolored
the Legislative connection
notice twenty seven thousand
families would have gotten the
gas disconnection notice we
hadn't had the current PRC
moratorium in place because they
don't have the means to pay
their bill.
I want to be really clear here
this is that we're not casting
aspersions on the PRC or that a
utility companies they've done
so much to help our families in
need but we need to do more
since November of twenty
nineteen the amount of arrears
for utility bills has increased
three hundred percent.
I know what it's like to grow up
in poverty I know what it's like
to choose between paying the
rent or the light bill and we
were just regular poor we
weren't COVID por we've got to
act right now.
The second part of this bill
puts our state on the path
forward to address the high cost
of utilities all around the
state and the lack of water
access in our state we will
establish a fund that will
empower local governments and
tribal entities to implement
energy efficiency programs in
their communities we hope this
will be seated with federal
funds that hopefully will be
coming our way very very soon.
This bill will also offer low
income New Mexicans lower
utility bills and everyone
access to adequate water to
everyone in our state by twenty
fifty all New Mexicans deserve
affordable essential services
essential household services I'd
like to invite Representative
Romero who's also a sponsor of
this bill Representative
Ferrary to join me here on and
with that stand questions thank
you.
Madam chair.
I'm sorry I just wanted to add
one quick thing for folks on the
panel and I am sure Matt
Representative Ferrary also to
speak Madam chair representative
the reason I got involved in
this with Representative Ortez
and the advocates here chair
representative is because of of
not only what we're dealing with
financially but also how do we
make our industry whole we know
we need to keep the lights on we
know we need to keep the heat on
the question is you know with
all of the different components
of how that works Madam chair
representative had to try to
figure out how the funding works
for this as well and we've been
working with industry we've been
working with the co ops the gas
companies the the big power
utilities throughout the state
to come to an agreement on this
so it takes everyone to to put
this together madam chair
representative and I just want
to thank all of the different
having kids and why I got
involved in this is because all
of that thought process is going
on on board and to make whole
everybody's part of this process
so thank you madam chair
Representative.
Representative Ferrary thank you
madam chair and thank you
committee members I as well have
been very concerned about this
and spoken with
Industries are.
Industry providers in our area
And with the moratorium it
whenever it goes off of
effectiveness we have over fifty
seven thousand families who
would be eligible for
disconnection and the industry
as well as constituents are very
much concerned about you know
how do we incorporate you know
even if they are smaller
payments into what is already
very difficult for low income
families to be able to afford
their utilities so I fully
support this bill and what what
we're trying to do to provide
for that and also four of water
and I think this is a really
good bill and hope you will
support thank you sh thank you
Representative for test are your
experts here just for questions
or do you want them to give a
statement.
At the they can do either but I
think we should go through that
means whatever your pleasure is.
Thank you I will just ask the
experts you want to add
something or do you just want to
ask you next we will we will do
a poll and take public comment
and then I will come back and if
if there's something new here in
either of those are I guess you
don't hear in the poll but you
know what I mean the opioid
Allison can you please put the
Polack.
And once he's doing that I have
to give her a shout out she has
that she came on a little late
so didn't get all the training
and he's still knocking it out
of the park so I thank you
Allison.
Okay it looks like we have
Nineteen in favor seventy three
percent and that at seven in
opposition twenty seven percent
so with that we will now go to
the audience for comment if you
are in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand and again
go to the participants and
there's a there's a place at the
bottom for you to raise your
hand this is only in opposition
okay so we will go to Ricardo
Gonzales first.
I
think chairman can you hear me
yes we can hear you go ahead.
Hi Ricardo Gonzales without Paso
electric and I want to thank
first of all the sponsors of the
bill and and the advocates on
this bill for the for the
continued conversation that we
have.
And there has been much dialogue
on the bill right now I'm having
to oppose this bill on on a
couple different fronts one we
have had some communication with
our county manager and don't
panic County on some potential
federal funds that I don't know
how this would affect them there
are some funds coming from the
federal government for rental
assistance and utilities is part
of that and so we are working
with our food banks in Dona ana
county because of the pandemic
greenhouse along with Dona Ana
County to see how we can get the
word out on on these funds
secondly just to inform the the
committee in el Paso in Texas.
The moratorium is no longer in
existence there and we have had
great success working with our
customers who who we acknowledge
I've had a really hard time with
COVID along with everyone else
there's there's no one that has
not been affected obviously by
comment and so our our strategy
is to get our customers and have
a conversation and and take what
we can in terms of a down
payment and create payment plans
moving forward
that along with
federal assistance at this point
I don't know exactly how this
bill would affect that and so
for those reasons we are
standing in opposition at this
point thank you very much okay
thank you we did have the time
we're going I'm not going to
stick with the timer but if
people start being long winded
we may have to put in so I'm I'm
just warning you now please keep
your comments brief because we
still have quite a few bills to
get through and not.
Our our bodies well appreciate
if we're not sitting in these
chairs for another ten hours
today so so next we will go to
call guessing.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name is Paul
guessing I am president of the
Rio Grande foundation public
policy research organization
based in Albuquerque in dealing
with New Mexico policy issues we
have concerns about this
legislation both because.
Several of the component seems
to be already done by the public
regulation commission but our
main concern.
In false the allowance of
preferred utility rates for
certain groups.
Utilities are.
Live there a service that we all
buy and pay for they shouldn't
be altered and it used as
another government program
certainly there are plenty of
means tested government programs
and we can debate discuss those
but I don't think utility rates
should be added to that group
of.
Of means tested government
programs thank you for your time
and we stand in opposition.
Thank you next we have Michael
d'antonio.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear you hello madam chair
members of the committee my
cantorial with Xcel energy
be sure that Tracy to the
eastern part state one is
saying.
The Sanchez it's well intended
bill will thank you bill can you
get a great working with us
trying to come to some agreement
on language we do stand in
opposition we thought the bill
is is too broad number one with
just three separate items to
consider you very since you is
what I'm gonna focus on we the
need for the bill which feels
based on a false premise that
customers will be shut off as
soon as the payment moratorium
ends twenty seven governors
health order expiration we have
a SDS is a long history of
working collaboratively with
customers on the stomach
payments to avoid shut off even
before COVID nineteen I entered
the picture the PRC Order are
we're very significant your came
out last week so very for and it
further confirms that there is a
false premise that customers
will be disconnected you haven't
read the order it's a very
customer friendly order and
provides better protection for
customers in arrears due to the
pandemic than the actual bill
for state does and just to quote
on the bill when they talk not
only is there a a hundred and
ninety days for large tell these
between the transition period
and the moratorium period to
take should August thirteenth.
The the installment agreement so
we have to enter can't be.
Can be shorter than the
moratorium the don't don't
November fifth regular part you
should cut extent least November
fifteenth deadline which is nine
months from from now and and it
says the right gender system
should be extended as long as
needed for the customer to be
able to fulfill the terms so it
doesn't look like it's really a
deadline for consultants to work
with customers on installment
agreement since that's very
flexible lack that provision and
up in the other rule the
technician.
we are we are the other thing is
that this bill of the this bill
there's qualifications to those
that.
Why the current situation in
rural from the PRC is eligible
for all residential customers
without regards to qualifying
qualification for hardship for
other reasons so it's easier to
administer.
the last item I want to say or
point to make is that the
commission meets on a weekly
basis so there's changes to this
are you can be done pretty
quickly the legislature
legislature meets once a year
it's kind of cumbersome for them
to change anything that's in
statute quickly to be more
flexible are the terms of the
customers.
Thank you for your time.
We have Kevin Grunewald.
Okay can you hear me.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my
name's Kevin role all I'm the
CEO of the New Mexico rural
electric cooperative association
we represent fourteen
distribution coops around the
state.
And
We are we are standing in
opposition this bill
for a couple reasons we
understand the intentions of the
bill just like to say that we
think in our situation
That is unnecessary and let me
give you just a few numbers yeah
we represent about a hundred
forty five thousand residential
consumers around the state.
at the hundred fifty percent of
poverty level forty eight
thousand hi also will qualify.
Having said that we only have
about fourteen thousand five
hundred households in the rears
in a very from thirty to sixty
to ninety days the vast majority
being the thirty day variety and
typically what we see is a
thirty day arrears they'll pay
their bill and sixty ninety
becomes more problematic but
that's a very very small share
in the nineteen early nineteen
eighties the commission put in
place a rule called rule for ten
is called a customer bill of
rights it covers a whole variety
of things for residential
customers the disconnect process
being one so for over for almost
forty years this has been a way
for us to work with our
customers and it's worked very
well
I will tell you that
our differences are residential
customers that are in the rears
they're not our customers are
members they own us.
And we're not gonna go out there
just shut them off we're gonna
do everything we can to work
with them to come to a
resolution so having said that
madam chair members the
committee we just don't think
there's a need for this bill
there is a utility process at
the commission
and you would like to see that
work and let that play out.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you next we have Carlos
with several.
Can everybody hear me.
Yes yes good afternoon madam
chair Thompson members of the
committee on Carl's looser with
the Public Service Company New
Mexico we appreciate the Sanchez
work on house bill two oh six to
help our most vulnerable
population during the COVID
nineteen pandemic with utility
bill relates since March two on
twenty twenty as as their others
of said cameras work to comply
with the New Mexico PRC
disconnection moratorium
resistance programs in place is
our good neighbor Fund as well
as a COVID nineteen relief fund
which PNM shareholders committed
an additional two million
dollars for PM's residential
small business customers after
reviewing the latest version of
the committee substitute
economic can agree to the new
language on cost recovery garden
a presumption of reasonableness
however we do have to additional
concerns first the bill requires
utility to determine customer
hardship and accept related
applications PNM does not have
the staff and systems for this
function as outside our normal
billing system would require
significant investment PNM
believes the state's Human
Service income support business
better equipped to process these
applications PNM believes
verification would require the
collection sensitive and private
income unemployment public
benefit and health care
information utilities are simply
not equipped to collect maintain
a secure such sensitive private
and confidential information
pursuant to a variety of federal
privacy laws including HIPAA
second PNM believes the
definition of a COVID hardship
is too broad and would prefer to
see the broad definition of
hardship narratives customers
for at two hundred fifty percent
of the federal poverty level
that would allow us to help
those who truly need financial
assistance versus those who got
COVID and are financially
secure.
You know we do think the
represent we represent over ten
thousand our team for taking the
time to discuss our concerns to
the bill and the committee subs
to and look forward to continue
to work with the Sanchez in the
coming days to address our
concerns thank you very much.
Okay thank you so something has
been brought to my attention
that the committee from is not
in the Here file but I'm.
It I do have an email here from
Allison who the committee said
that it did go out to all
members at nine oh seven AM
yesterday so I can see if there
was a specific rule on this and
it it's up to the the discretion
of the chair and since everyone
has had that bill for over this
for over twenty four hours I'm
going to rule that the committee
did get it and we're going to go
ahead with that it appears up
loaded now I'm not sure what
happened I'm gonna break blame
Graham lands for everything
or maybe it maybe today and
tomorrow we can blame
Was that what we can blame
Cupid's arrows got somewhere in
and do that so we are going to
go ahead with this I want to
thank Representative Pettigrew
for bringing that to our
attention and we will connect
trying to a trace back and see
see if we can.
Insure that that won't happen
again so with that we will not.
we will go to people who are in
support of this bill please
raise your hand.
And we will start with James and
James please pronounce your last
name I know I won't remember but
I want to at least your.
Thank you madam chair my name is
James but we wanna and thank you
members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak today I'm
the policy director for the
center for civic policy we
support this bill H. B. two oh
six.
This legislation role per tax
low income families during the
economic downturn during the
global pandemic and that we've
seen and avoid the ambiguity
around what utilities will do to
protect vulnerable families the
bill also help to find long term
solutions to addressing the
Energy burden experienced by
some of New Mexicos most
vulnerable communities so those
are all the reasons that center
for civic policy stands in
support of this bill we thank
the sponsors representatives or
dad's role metal and Ferrari for
the work on this legislation in
the leadership of organizations
like southwest energy efficiency
project.
In order to ensure that this
policy is reached the point that
it's gotten to
as concludes my remarks madam
chair and committee members and
I urge you to each to vote yes
in support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you John Brown.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you okay great
thank you.
Thank you chair and committee
and sponsors of this bill.
Very grateful for my name is
John Brown I'm a Franciscan
sister and director of New
Mexico interfaith power and
light and organization works
with faith congregations faith
leaders in individuals in all
the corners of the state we're
supportive of this bill because
we believe that it offers some
immediate need for families that
are most vulnerable and in need
during the COVID but that it
also looks towards the future
out towards utility
affordability in energy
efficiency and we're very very
much interested in that support
that many of our congregations
are themselves on the frontline
of assisting with utilities and
needs and such organizations
like Saint Vincent DePaul so
this bill would really help them
in their work and help
in the in the long term I'm pope
Francis in a recent encyclical
invites us to look at the story
the good Samaritan and asks us
are we being neighbors to think
creatively in addressing the
needs of our time when it comes
to economics and even during the
time of COVID and we believe
that this bill is very creative
in looking to some solutions and
helping those families that are
so stressed right now and that's
really not helpful for them as
they try to cobble together
moving into the future and
they're caring for their
families and any kind of
assistance like this and into
the future would help them
physically and mentally as well
so we're very supportive of this
bill and are grateful to the
sponsors for bringing it forth
thank you very much.
Thank you but remember to try
and keep things brief we've got
Sammy how.
I can everybody hear me yes hi
my name is at thank you thank
you madam chair and thank you
members of the committee and
thank you to the sponsors of
this bill my name is Samantha
cal and I am the climb and
energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and thank you for allowing me to
offer testimony in support of
house bill two oh six we hope
this committee will also support
this bill.
throughout this COVID crisis New
Mexico has shown resilience and
compassion to all of our
communities and this bill is a
continuation of that spirit as
you heard from previous
testimony in support of this
bill.
At C. B. N. M. one of our our
main concern surrounding the
transition from oil and gas to
renewable energy our equity and
inclusion really making sure
that our decision making as
senator around our most at risk
communities this bill would help
low income communities regain
financial stability all while
promoting New Mexico's
initiatives to be a hundred
percent carbon free by twenty
fifty which we all know well
lower energy costs statewide.
Thank you again for your time
today madam chair members of the
committee for the reasons I say
I hope you also support house
bill two oh six thank you.
Thank you Mona blabber labor I'm
I'm I want to hear have
pronounced to Mona go ahead.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
yes.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Mona belabor representing the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapters
thirty five thousand members and
supporters throughout New Mexico
we stand in strong support of
this bill as a thoughtful and
fair way to target COVID
financial released relief to
those New Mexicans who need it
most where they need it most and
also supports money saving
energy efficiency measures for
New Mexico it for New Mexicans
whose energy burden is heaviest
as well as creation of lowincome
utility rates in the long term
we appreciate your consideration
and ask your support for H. B.
two oh six.
Thank you Mona Lucy at Duncan.
Good afternoon madam members of
the committee my name is Lucy at
Duncan I am here as a
representative of the Santa Fe
mutual aid network also known as
Santa Fe native what we'll do at
least that among this.
ET we are neighbor to neighbor
Aid network with over a thousand
members primarily from Santa Fe
County that we also have members
and we are right at the back
County and San Miguel County the
network create systems of
resource sharing materials
resources navigation resources
and emotional support and
solidarity most of the aid we
have distributed to our members
is to families who have been hit
hardest by the pandemic both
economically and in terms of
higher rates of exposure because
many of our members are
frontline workers.
Most of our members are from
Spanish speaking community I'm a
member of the intake team we do
one on one calls with every
doing member many of our members
are behind in their utilities we
currently have over three
hundred members who are seeking
utility bill assistance
we have advocated for the
current utility shutoff
moratorium we've been helping
fellow members apply for lye
heat and any really funds that
could be used to address unpaid
rent and utilities but we need
you to know that for a lot of
our members it is extremely
difficult for them to access aid
because of language and literacy
barriers the digital divide even
finding a printer at during the
pandemic to print applications
and very extensive requirements
for many aid programs I want to
emphasize how hard it is for the
people who with most need to get
help to fill out applications
during a pandemic we are seeing
first hand the folks who need
support the most are falling
through the cracks a lie he is
not sufficient we are here today
to speak in support in strong
support of this bill the relief
is desperately needed we need to
prohibit shut offs so that
people can have assurance of the
electricity they need for their
food their heat their children's
online schooling are not in
jeopardy we need to find avenues
to eliminate outstanding
balances for those in our
community and we need to make
them as simple and as
streamlined as possible we also
need this to be done through
emergency rule making so that
folks get the support now when
they need it thank you for
supporting H. B. two oh six.
Thank you only Miller.
Good afternoon thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Amy Miller and I'm
representing the southwest
energy efficiency project we
encourage you to support house
bill two oh six as
Representative Ortez previously
mentioned this kind of
legislation is so needed during
these challenging times to
protect the thousands of
families who have fallen behind
on their utility bills this bill
provides the perfect combination
of short term solutions to help
provide immediate assistance to
these families but also those
long term solutions related to
energy efficiency to help New
Mexicans reduce their energy
bills in the future.
I also want to reiterate that
the work on this bill has been
an open and collaborative
process southwest energy
efficiency project started
discussions with New Mexico
utilities on this bill many
months ago and the substitute
legislation is a direct result
of these ongoing discussions
thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me.
Yes go ahead Kirk okay thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chairman
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kurt record
on the director of litter and
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
within advocacy ministry also
speaks on behalf of the New
Mexico prince of trudges I'm
here today to offer our support
for H. B. two oh six we all know
that we're living in
extraordinary times that there
are thousands of New Mexicans
who are incredibly vulnerable
the economic devastation as a
result of this ongoing pandemic
we support the state of New
Mexico in its efforts to help
and protect those most
vulnerable in our state as we
move forward as we move through
an awfully out of this health
emergency therefore I urge your
support for H. B. two oh six and
thank you for this opportunity.
Thank you Kurt next we have Gary
Payton.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Gary Payton and I'm
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico our coalition is consists
of the cities of Santa Fe Los
crucis Albuquerque and Santa Fe
County those members constitute
approximately forty percent of
the population of the state of
New Mexico.
H. B. two oh six offers a number
of real solutions that will
provide significant benefits for
New Mexico's most vulnerable
households it is much more than
just preventing utility service
disconnects upon what households
and providing pathways for
forgiveness of missed payments
the bill provides common sense
ways to address the significant
inequity and utility costs
burdens for New Mexico's poorest
families as you know many low
income families live in
manufactured housing and
multiple generation inherited
houses that may have poor
insulation old inefficient
appliances and perhaps unsafe
infrastructure.
What electric utilities required
to devote five percent of energy
efficiency program dollars to
low income household upgrades
this figure does not meet the
needs of our citizens HB two or
six creates an energy efficiency
community development block
grant to receive money so that
local governments like our
members can develop tailored
energy efficiency and housing
rector fix for their poorest
community members complimenting
the work of the utilities as
much as any bill in this
legislative session H. B. two oh
six provides concrete solutions
for ushering in more equitable
energy transition for our most
vulnerable households we urge
you to vote yes on house bill
two oh six thank you to the
Sanchez thank you for this
opportunity.
Jason Thompson.
Madam chairman can you hear me.
Go ahead Jason thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name's Jason Thompson yeah
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the western resource advocates
and I'd like to thank the
sponsors for taking this up
and for the all the comments
previously stated by the by the
sponsors and the proponents here
we stand in support of this bill
and I appreciate the opportunity
able to speak in support and we
urge the committee support thank
you very much.
Tim Davis.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and we
support this bill for the
reasons that already been
stated.
Thank you I'm.
We have a phone number seven
five oh six are the last four
digits.
Allison are we able to.
Okay looks the it looks like you
need to undo you wherever you
are please introduce yourself.
Afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Tony Porter and I am the
founder America's and clean
energy leader for prosperity
works key features of this bill
address both short and long term
solutions to the difficulties so
many people family have thanks
for the essential commodities of
home energy and water but
there's more much more that will
benefit us all it will also
reduce strain on the and
increasing complex electricity
grid strengthen economic
productivity and competitiveness
move policy and practice toward
the all important issue of
environmental justice.
According to federal research
households earning less than
fifty thousand dollars for a
family of four spend an average
of sixteen percent of their
income on energy cost well
households earning above that
above a hundred thousand dollars
then just three point five
percent imagine if simply paying
your monthly energy built wiped
out more than fifteen percent of
your income.
We don't have to imagine in the
energy efficiency work that we
have done with three hundred low
income homeowners we found that
fully eighty five percent and
deferred medical needs.
I have not eaten had not taken
prescription drugs in order to
pay their power bills well this
is particularly acute problem
for black and brown communities
it is also widespread challenge
for white and rural communities
there are three provisions of HB
two oh six that address the
public health emergency of which
COVID is just one part arrears
forgiveness implementation of a
low income discount rate and
energy efficiency in both the
rears forgiveness and the low
income discount rate the
providers of power and water are
far more better off than they
would be without these
provisions because low income
come customers want to pay for
the session the federal
commodity and in fact go to
great lengths to do so including
not eating or taking their
medicine.
Implementing measures like
reduced heating and cooling that
often jeopardize their health
and safety they want to pay and
provisions in this bill will
facilitate their ability to do
so and finally let us understand
the role of energy efficiency
and reducing energy burden it is
a grossly undervalued solution
particularly as we work
simultaneously to tackle the
climate crisis and equitable
energy transition and
environmental justice in fact
given energy efficiencies
ability to read reduce costs cut
pollution and create jobs I
would argue that the
conversation so many of us are
having about environmental
justice and climate policy
should start with energy
efficiency.
that energy consumption in the
US than related emissions would
be about sixty per cent higher
today if not for the efficiency
gains we've made since nineteen
eighty which they come consumers
eight hundred billion dollars
annually on their energy bills
as we look to create greater
economic.
Can you please wrap this up.
At just about there.
had a.
As we look to create greater
economic opportunity for all
community energy efficiency also
offers an enormous opportunity
for job creation.
While improving energy
efficiency affordability and
addressing climate change our
particular passion of mine it's
important to remember that in
energy efficiency and reducing
the energy burden is also good
for business.
Asian on energy efficiency and
H. B. two oh six and a block
grant to facilitate community
initiative and choice are not
just the right thing to do they
are the smart thing to.
Or eight three two oh six.
Thank you okay that's all the
public comment
and we will go up to the
committee for.
I questions.
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair and Representative.
This is.
I always like to start out have
we talked all the experts and
and they did call and I heard a
bunch of people from various
companies in Chile companies
that that were in opposition of
this bill so I started takes a
look take a look at what things
that PNM is done and they've
gone out of their way to make
sure that people are not being
cut off of the utilities.
they actually do this before the
moratorium for code is even
acted they've taken other steps
by donating money to help us
create COVID nineteen customer
we funds so I've done a lot of
due diligence on their part to
make sure that people are not.
And it was the most concerning
here is I know that we have
social system.
I know we have social systems in
place already that can handle
this kind of stuff somebody is
having trouble with the
utilities and Human Services and
we have got organizations that
can help do that.
I think it's concern is I'm
trying to imagine the utility
companies handling internally
how they're gonna handle this
how they're going to do our our
background checks on people how
they're going to gather their
information who's gonna do that
how they're going to do that
where are they going to store
that information because it's a
tremendous amount of
confidential information that
they're going to have because
you're gonna have to ask these
people questions they're gonna
have to bills okay you need to
send me are you working or not
working are you on unemployment
can you send me a record of your
unemployment are you disabled
you gonna have to send me some
records of your disability why
is it that you are unable to pay
your bills right now is it
because of a COVID related what
what is going on there's a lot
of information that they need to
gather and normally that's
handled by social services or by
outside organization.
So what I'm trying to figure out
is how much is it going to cost.
Cost utility companies and how
are they going to be able to
make this happen when they're
ready doing a lease for a and
with you there they're doing
their due diligence to not get
people shut off and they do have
a relief fund we do have other
systems in place.
And I'm wondering how many
people are gonna hired how are
they going to keep that
information hippa compliant
because these people are not
compliant trained entering takes
long enough we try to do
something online or on the phone
with somebody and having our
utility companies work as social
services I see this going to end
up being a huge flaw there's
going to be huge back up
anything that's going to
actually make the system work I
totally understand absolutely
stands that this is a good
intention Bill but I think
there's just way too many I
think there's way too many
drawbacks to it and I myself am
could be concerned about giving
my personal information to
somebody who is it handled to
know what to do with and how to
handle person personal
information so I think that
based on those even though the
tension is great and we don't
want anybody to be shut off of
the abilities I think there's
other services that can handle
it and I think there's other
ways to go about this other than
trying to get the insurance of
the actually chilly companies to
do this internally so that I'm
gonna have to vote no on this
bill and thank you.
Thank you Representative lord I
have Representative but it just.
Sorry madam chair I was eating
the cheese there's going to be a
question I think I think I'll be
a waitress in a future life I
can get people out the worst
moment.
thank you madam chair and thank
you representative or as an
offer already reinvests this
really creative piece of
legislation
I really I really like what you
said what you said earlier
Representative when you said
that you grew up just regular
poor so line and and the thought
of being a COVID port.
Brings instead anxiety to me
and so I just I just want to say
that that this piece of
legislation is going to help so
many families in my district and
across New Mexico so I I just
want to really say thank you and
I don't I also don't have a
question thank you.
Thank you we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
your premiums for bringing this
bill
What's connectivity's couple of
times and so but I did hear
Representative Bernstine
statement on on regular poor
versus COVID court and I'm
pretty sure I'm the only one
here that got a snow shovel for
Christmas.
I I know that feels like to grow
up on that side in the and our
Christmas trees were tumbleweed
when I was growing up so
As as I go through this right
there's several concerns I have
with this and
The first one.
With respect to.
The federal funding for the.
Well everyone of our counties is
gone after federal funds in a
good portion of the forest Act.
Well the counties to be able to
assist residents with respect to
utility payments and stuff like
that this bill actually.
Is going to make that.
To where.
The residents.
This is gonna take it this is
gonna take one Avenue of relief
away from the residence quicker.
The.
The other the other side of the.
We need to go back and and for
good.
Thank you twenty in line six for
fifteen and everybody needs to
understand that I I think I can
get the committee serve now but
I didn't have some open I'm
still working also to make sure.
Item she.
For see offer page twenty eight
point six for fifteen.
Basically.
no I
goes completely against from
outlets States court ruling from
the early not nineteen eighties.
that says that we cannot.
right structures based off of
income.
And send this actually came from
a telecom rules ready to work
with respect to all utilities.
I've actually talked to right
well Giorgio more on today top
of the utility companies have
worked very hard to do this with
out the mandate prior to the
mandate and will continue to do
the the co op from my area and
and the.
I have always worked hard with
our with with.
Their quote losses because when
you belong to a co op you own it
and and they work for you.
This bill is this creative all
agree with Representative we're
on that but
this bill.
Actually has more damage than
good to it this created the PRC
RD have stepped in balance with
employees to take care of this.
And and and bill actually kind
of.
Kizer hands and so with that
ladies I I will stand in
opposition against this bill
thank you.
Senator Representative
Pettigrew.
Yes madam chair I yield back
okay so I am open to a motion
and remember this is the
committee staff this is a test
to see if we've been paying
attention.
Madam chair on the to to
A do not pass on the.
House Bill to a search and a
table on the committee so.
Okay so we have a tabling motion
to I hear second.
K. lacking a second I will
entertain another motion.
Madam chair I I want to move it
to pass I'm just.
Okay.
Okay so you need to move it do
not pass on H. B. two oh six but
eight do passed on committee
substitute for H. B. two oh six
and Representative Barreras I'm
still trying to get this down
myself so don't street don't
stress.
Madam chair I move a do not pass
on house bill two oh six and a
do pass on the Committee sub for
House Bill two oh six perfect
that was perfect do I have a
second I'll second that motion
madam chair okay the.
Excuse me so Allison will you
take the role please.
Representative grants manager.
Question real quick I'm sorry I
yes yes when two things come up
like this because I want to go
I'm voting no to not pass this
bill but we're doing this so the
regional.
B.
bill itself is that correct you
kind of cut out can you repeat
your question okay hold on.
My dogs actually came is now
walking around I'm.
This year great they're all here
now so I'm.
It's hard when there's two
things going on so please
explain to bureau voting on.
Not.
House original bill but then to
vote on the substitute is out
what's happening do not pass on
the original bill and I do
passed on the committee
substitute so we're just gonna
do the pass and then vote on
that afterwards is that correct
no this is one motion and it it
takes care it essentially it
kills the old bill and not move
moves the and thanks committee
substitute to the next committee
okay so I don't know one and
voting no on the bill itself is
that correct correct okay so I'm
voting no.
You for explained that because I
when we have the two things I
think it's really confusing.
Sometimes I wish that things
were just do you like it or not
you know I mean but but but we
have rules that we follow so I'm
trying I'm I'm not the greatest
on that following every every
cross every T. and dot every I
and everything else but that's
what we're doing so so we will
start over this is a do not pass
on house bill two oh six and I
do pass on C. pack substitute
for House Bill to a six hour I
think can you start over.
Sir all right Representative
Barreras yes.
Representative Lord.
No.
Representative Pettigrew.
Mr Mero yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Three two you have a do pass on
the committee substitute.
Thank you for being here ladies
I'm next up we have I'm not sure
if he's I know he was presenting
a bill and another committee is
representative month Oria in me.
And if he's not he he actually
ask you if you could go later in
the
And I don't see him so we will
skip over that and we will go to
madam chair I think I did
promotion okay okay.
He is here madam chair.
It with the course moving around
thank you thank you
Representative Montoya I I'm
having a hard time keeping up
with everything so you are here
did you have an expert you need
to promote do I have three madam
chair April land.
Lord.
That.
Allison talk P. A. U. K. and
Justice irons.
Like iron irons.
Please promote them all right
Sir okay wonderful.
Okay whenever you're ready
Representative.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Roger Montoya I'm very
proud representatives from
district forty that's more a
some again Rio Arriba and Colfax
counties.
For more than thirty years I've
been a fierce advocate for young
people.
I work in the realm of.
The public education award
winning after care programs the
development of homeless centers
and recovery possibility for
young people primarily in Rio
Arriba county.
I use the arts as a form of
medicine to move children from
trauma to a place of trust.
House bill one eighty three is
an extension of my commitment to
protect young people.
Well New Mexico ranks at the
bottom of most indicators for
childhood well being The New
Mexico children's code leads the
way in supporting children and
families in so many ways.
Developed and unanimously
supported by the New Mexico
sentencing commission house bill
one eighty three is another way
for New Mexico lawmakers to join
me and lead by eliminating
destructive financing fees for
our children's.
From our children's code.
My team.
Carlos Trujillo and Isaac
because of those have created a
beautiful film short mini
documentary the hope is queued
up the two what will in enjoyed
help tell part of our story
today.
Thank you.
I'm Representative who are you
do who is in control here.
Allison yeah I do have that I'm
getting right now okay okay
whenever you're ready.
So just let me know you can see
it we we okay we can see it the
perfect Allison thank you.
We've got into the legal system
as a juvenile because I had
substance use of.
Issues I was fourteen years old
when I first own got caught up
into the legal system one of the
biggest challenges is that many
of the the use who appear in
delinquency cases are not even
old enough to legally have a job
twenty six percent of children
in New Mexico live in poverty
what we're talking about
juveniles were talking about
young people under the age of
eighteen who have been referred
to the criminal justice system.
And those young people typically
go to children's court and
children's court is designed and
focuses on the best interest of
the child which is different
than adult court building.
We eighteen coming out of the
closet to conservative parents
it wasn't the.
It wasn't the easiest thing in
that that really pushed me to my
drug use instead of being
criminalized for my drug use I
should have had more how when
you impose a fine or a fee and
the young person or the family
can't pay for it.
What happens then it becomes a
violation and then then that
triggers a whole series of the
young person having to go back
into court.
And then they never get out of
the court system many of the
users are being raised or the.
Cared for by their grandparents
or other relatives who have no
legal obligation to pay any any
of the the fees incurred by the
young person it's expensive for
a family it's not easy I think
by taking away fines and fees
we're gonna take a lot of stress
on families right now when a
child is made to pay a fine and
fees they are not able to work
so their families pay that means
that siblings and parents also
are paying Miss if we're able to
eliminate it I think that
families will be able to
allocate more resources towards
their children children's corner
this was to do everything we can
to provide them with support
like either through community
service school.
Some kind of technical training.
And if they're having to pay for
fines and fees and they can't
afford to pay for these other
things the juvenile justice
system as stated in our
children's code the ultimate
purposes to rehabilitate and to
remember that these are children
they're still in the process of
learning right from wrong
Stetter being penalized instead
of making my family goes to do
all these court costs I should
have had help instead maybe
things could have turned out a
little bit different using fines
and fees we miss a teachable
moment when we take away these
fines and fees are not punishing
them for the trauma that they've
suffered instead we're offering
them a different sort of
rehabilitation we're offering
them you know a chance to
recognize the wrong they've done
but to move forward instead of
to be contracted to a system the
sentencing commission is
supporting it and the sentencing
commission is comprised of
everyone involved in the
criminal justice system passing
this legislation would be the
first right step in the in the
right direction and not
criminalizing you.
Representative Montoya did you
did your.
Your.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much again for this
incredible opportunity before we
turn the flow or more over to my
experts I just want to say that
working with the sentencing
commission on this particular
piece of legislation has been a
profound profound honor.
And with that I will bring
forward April land second will
be Justice irons followed by
Alison park.
Thank you Representative one
twelve madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
having us here today my name is
April land I've had the
privilege of teaching at the
university of New Mexico School
of Law and our clinical off
programs for about twenty three
years I've had the privilege of
representing hundreds of
children who are alleged to have
been doing when children in the
you've notices system most of
whom were disabled children
children living in poverty and
children as young as eleven
years old I will not attempt to
articulate anymore eloquently
than judge amero and former
district attorney Spencer Czecho
have articulated the damage that
these kinds of fines and fees
are costs to families I think
especially in the wake of the
bill we just heard we're
families are talking about the
difficult choices they have to
make between taking their
medicine and feeding their
families these kinds of
economic impacts and the impacts
on these families also create
challenges for children in these
families so I also think it's
important to emphasize before
turning it over to the to our
clinical law students and are
proud to call law tradition at
the university of New Mexico
School of Law on to emphasize
the a
How important it is to recognize
that this is unanimously
supported bill by the New Mexico
sentencing commission as former
district attorney Spence for
check over now serves as a per
diem judge said this has
unanimous support of the
commission which is composed of
district attorneys the Attorney
General actually help distraught
this bill victims advocates and
others and a lot of compromises
have been made to secure a full
unanimous agreement with this
bill we seek your unanimous
support and with that in our
proud tradition at the
university of New Mexico I turn
the floor over to the next
generation of lawyers are
represented here by justice
arms.
Good afternoon madam chair my
name's just a science I'm a
third year law student at the
university of New Mexico and I'm
currently in the clinical law
program at the law school.
Provide support house bill one
eighty three because you're
gonna find that these are
contrary to the well being of
children and can have long
lasting negative impacts on
children and their families my
role the law clinic I've been
given an opportunity to
represent a child in a
delinquency matter one non
expert in juvenile justice it's
very clear to me and I think it
should be to everyone else that
find that these are not in the
best interest of children.
First of all imposing fines on
you aside from being contrary to
the purpose of the New Mexico
children's code has a disparate
impact on low income families.
For this reason it can be argued
that find that these are useful
for promoting accountability for
you.
Instead find the fees
disproportionately harm certain
children solely because the
family's economic status.
This issues very relevant to New
Mexico where roughly one in four
children live in poverty.
Sadly the statistic is only set
to worsen F. fifty one percent
of households with children have
lost employment since March
twenty twenty.
On top of this fines and fees
can have long lasting effects on
children and their families for
example find a piece of accident
on to increase recidivism and
expose families very real
consequences such collection
actions negative credit scores
license suspension prevention of
reconciling and criminal
liability.
For these reasons for women
dating find the pieces the
necessary steps to protect the
future of are you and that's why
I urge you to support house bill
one eighty three thank you.
Thank you just Allison.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Montoya and
members of the committee my
name's Allison pock and I'm an
attorney at the law offices of
the public defender for the past
fourteen years I've represented
hundreds of children in their
cases in children's court
Albuquerque today I am
addressing the process and
impacts of imposing public
defender fees in juvenile cases.
Under the children's code every
child must have an attorney so
public defender contract
attorneys automatically assigned
then the parent or legal
guardian of the child must apply
for a public defender by paying
a ten dollar fee per case and
providing proof of income or
support such as Medicaid or
other support matters the vast
majority of these children
qualify but Act application
process is burdensome and it's
not just the ten dollar fee some
of these families don't apply
because the lack of
transportation others trouble
getting the required paperwork
and finally there those were
being raised by care givers like
grandparents who don't have
access to legal documents to
apply when these families fail
to apply they are entered mailed
notices and finally sent to
collections for up to a thousand
dollars per new case and seven
hundred fifty dollars per
probation violation.
These financial burdens
ultimately cause harm to the
same fragile children and
families who we are supposed to
be protecting and helping in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Representative Montoya
did you have more are you ready
to go to the public.
Your muted Representative.
I'm sorry about that I'm ready
to move to the public okay sure
thank you okay so Allison can
you please put up the pole.
Okay it looks like this is a
very popular bill twenty people
a hundred percent in support so
I'm just in case someone didn't
get into the polling and is an
opposition please raise your
hand in that under participants.
Okay.
to the.
Okay I don't see any there so if
you are in support and would
like to speak please raise your
hand.
Excuse me okay we're gonna start
with Monica all.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Monica also and I'm the New
Mexico state director for the
fines and fees justice center
and a former public defender my
family is from rural New Mexico
and I grew up here in Santa Fe
I'm here today as a concerned
community member and also as an
advocate for the rights and well
being of use and families in New
Mexico I ask that the committee
vote yes on house bill one
eighty three for the following
reasons our children's code
allows courts to impose harmful
fees and fines on children and
their families while many
counties across our state have
chosen not to charge these fees
and fines we know that some deal
removing this the authority to
assess and collect them will
ensure consistency and fairness
for use across every part of our
state.
With twenty six percent of our
children living in poverty and
thirty five percent of our
parents without steady
employment we need to update our
laws to ensure vulnerable youth
and families do not face added
financial hardship.
Do not fees also her use and
undermine their success nearly
ninety nine percent of
incarcerated use in New Mexico
have experienced some form of
trauma that influence their
decision making tacking court
order costs onto an already
traumatic experience only adds
stress to use to use lights.
Removing economic barriers is
the right and humane step
forward so I I ask you all again
to please support house bill one
eighty three thank you so much
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
caramel Defense lawyers
association we also stand in
strong support as a it's I'd
like to take a moment to thank
the sponsors and the advocates
as a graduate from the UNM law
school myself I am fortunate
that I get to do what I've
always wanted to do and add my
voice to affecting positive
criminal justice reform I think
that our criminal justice system
as a whole has recognized the
devastating effect that fines
and fees have on our not only
are you is this bill seeks to
address but on our communities
of color I encourage you to
support and thank you for your
time and consideration and again
appreciate the sponsor and his
advocates work in this very
important.
Area thank you.
Okay Maria Griego.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Maria Griego I am the director
of economic equity an attorney
with the New Mexico Center
online poverty the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty stands
in strong support of this bill
because we know that fines and
fees are often born by parents
or guardians if they're impose
upon use in New Mexico
significant part proportion of
our use are being raised by
their grandparents many who are
on fixed incomes at prior to the
pandemic and more than a quarter
of New Mexicos children lived in
poverty and thirty five percent
have parents who lack secure
employment as we all know things
are far worse now with add a
comment pandemic
no it we know that many at
children and families in New
Mexico are currently food
insecure.
And as professor land stated
many families are having to make
difficult choices between paying
for utilities by medicine or
paying these fines and fees of
edit imposed upon used and so
for these reasons and we stand
strong support of the bill
eliminating these fines and fees
act for juveniles thank you.
Thank you Maria Bennett our.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Bennett are on the chief
public defender I am here.
To speak in support of this bill
I want to thank Representative
Montoya and your expert
witnesses
Mr irons the professor land and
Miss Pollock I'm here to support
Miss Pollock on behalf of the
department of state agencies
should never be dependent for
their budget up on those least
able to pay and that's what the
fines and fees system that's
been set up in New Mexico
unfortunately does so often
there is a section that removes
eight feet to the public
defender's office for
application and I am here to say
that I'm glad that hello PED is
joining the number of state
agencies that are finding other
ways to provide our services to
the public so I would ask all of
you to vote in favor of this
bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have Fernando
Trujillo.
Can you hear me yes we can.
Brought chair members of the
committee my name is that not
look to see are from Espanola
level currently based out of
that Albuquerque as a policy
associate with gold futures for
many young women United we stand
in strong support legislation
that will not just make life
easier for families of black
indigenous and people of color
but also stop the
criminalization of the poor and
the black indigenous and nynex
you many kids were being raised
by their grandparents and or
extended relatives have limited
income coming into the household
and thirty five percent of New
Mexico parents are not
economically stable if assessed
fines and fees can quickly
calculate up to hundreds or even
thousands of dollars meaning
that in times of a pandemic such
as this sounds can be forced to
choose between paying that these
fines and fees are paying for
their necessities of life such
as food to do gas to get around
are requests for them to not be
out in the streets when you
think you do Santo can all the
go system it becomes harder and
harder to get out of these
revolving doors of the system
increasing the chances of for
them bald man with the criminal
legal system going into
adulthood youth of color are
ready will be represented in New
Mexico's juvenile system which
disproportionately affects youth
white black indigenous or lying
next and their families in fact
brown and black communities are
already over represented
throughout the entirety of the
criminal legal system from the
juvenile steps system up to the
doll system having adverse
effects on I communities and
adding undue stress for families
and you it is time the style and
will basically policies that
will only serve to uphold
systems of oppression please
stand in support for each B. one
eighty three thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and that Montoya.
Thank you Douglas carver.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can yes thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Douglas carver I am
deputy director of the New
Mexico sentencing commission as
a professor landed
Representative Representative
Montoya mentioned this bill was
a bill that came out of the
sentencing commission it's spun
off of work are reform committee
has been doing on adult fines
and fees was work through and
unanimous unanimously adopted by
our juvenile subcommittee and
then further unanimously
approved for introduction by the
full commission professor Landis
a commissioner former DA the
Czecho who we saw on the video
is a commissioner chief public
defender Barry is also
commissioner but the commission
also includes representatives
from the attorney general's
office the association district
attorney's victim's advocate
corrections a number of public
members and members appointed by
both houses both chambers of the
legislature and both parties and
the number of appointees of the
governor so it's a very broad
cross section of expertise and
knowledge about the criminal
justice system and we are very
proud to have this bill before
you today and ask for your
approval thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have hobby
year role.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee.
It is a pleasure to be here to
speak in support of this bill my
name's have yet local number
research and policy policy
analyst New Mexico voices for
children.
Last month we released our kids
count data book in this book we
use several indicators to assess
the general well being of
children in comparison to other
states and although we made
significant improvements our
children still face an uphill
battle in terms of children
living in part poverty we ranked
forty eighth in the nation in
terms of high school students
not graduating on time we rank
fiftieth and in terms of
children living in single
parents health single parent
households rent forty eight.
Our children don't need any more
obstacles and the research shows
that fines and fees create yet
another stumbling block for
children.
Or impose costs can lead to
repeated or extended juvenile
system involvement we need to
enable our kids to invest in the
future not holding that back
this is why we support H. B. one
eighty three and we urge the
members of the committee to
support it as well thank you for
your time.
So next we have Dave Schmidt.
Chair members of the committee
I'm Dave Schmidt.
And I've been working on changes
on the terms code.
And since its initial passage in
nineteen ninety three.
This is one of the consequences
that is remained in the code.
And one of the reasons why it
needs to be constantly reviewed
in order to eliminate things of
this nature.
Commissioner also of New
Mexico's sentencing commission
Representative being appointed
by the president pro tem.
We would just to support house
bill one eighty three as the
beginning movie eliminating all
fines and fees.
In our children's code.
And those impairments that have
remained in the code.
That hamper proper growth and
rehabilitation of children.
It is not just the fiscal impact
on the child and family.
But the status of the child in
the family that causes great
harm.
How frequently becomes the
scapegoat.
Causing trouble within the
community.
And further economic hardship
and deprivation for that that.
Because of these reasons and
many others we'd ask your
support of house bill one eighty
three.
Thank you.
Thank you we have here comes
Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I'm with an organization
called the amendment can we
partner with young people
impacted by the juvenile justice
and foster care systems and we
support this bill into avoiding
repetitive for all the important
reasons that have already been
stated today thank you.
Thank you Karen Witt lock.
Yes I'm madam chairs member
members of the committee
chariman walk with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we.
For all the reasons stated above
we stand and very strong
support of this legislation
thank you very much thank you
Karen and finally we have
Margarita Soriano.
We did four seconds.
Okay whenever you're ready
Margarita.
Hi can you hear me yes we can
okay hi Margarethe study on on I
was born and raised in Roswell
New Mexico on the south and no
in the area known as the two are
with the area and I lost a lot
of my friends to
I guess the system and just as
unfair fines and fees and then I
just kept in a cycle of.
I'm going to jail under they can
get out of it because their
parents couldn't help amount so
for all other reasons of stated
I strongly urge you to support
this bill and yes have a good
evening thank you.
Thank you more read it so we
will go to the committee and I
have Representative Pettigrew.
Well that was by accident.
I think that was still looking.
It's great.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this.
as a kid I sure will what is it.
I guess we'll being recorded
from we should.
So thank you for that the
services is one way of taking
care.
Representative wills.
Our.
Each.
Representative Pettigrew.
I've been hearing rustling
papers and then there were none
and I thought maybe you faster
audio so go ahead.
Which is just.
We're.
Representative.
Representative we can list the
on H. four one one Richard.
The.
The word more workplace it was
working class.
Adam chair representative.
It.
Consider that as that goes
towards Judiciary okay I'm not
asking you to make practices not
just asking you to consider that
you we.
That for some people.
More or less say another in
front of the judge those
products majority of the judges
I talked about this.
What we finally gave me their
personal opinion on it in the
majority of the outstanding
opposition to it thank you so I
depending on the the.
discussion with the the person
this is breaking the law to
begin with
this sometimes the state.
What's the order than others.
To get a message in a little bit
deeper.
Madam chair so I would ask that
you consider that thank you for
sure.
The other piece of **** this is.
One of the five or sixteen
ounces of are right there is
concern that the.
He is actually Christian forty
eight hours to this the street
probation.
Representative for for me to.
To vote for this bill.
I would I would just.
Sure that you.
Sure you're gonna fight not to.
Madam chair and representative.
The group thank you so much for
your questions the sentencing
committee carefully crafted this
piece of legislation and I would
like to defer to my experts to
any changes or amendments and
I'm not sure who will take that
question but one of them will.
Representative my Twitter thank
you madam chair members of the
committee I will take the first
effort at this and I know there
are other people who have more
detailed approaches but this
this is up forty eight hours is
the existing law and I think
it's also important recognize
that while we may be eliminating
the fines and fees aspect of the
children's code that the judges
will still have broad discretion
we're not taking away their
discretion are generally judges
will still have the authority to
impose restitution it was still
have for most delinquent acts
the same authorities that they
do to impose probation or the
one year and two year
commitments that are already in
the children's coat so all this
does is sort of it is it is
there are separate parts of the
hello that are that are being
Amanda but fundamentally there
are still plenty of tools to
hold children accountable while
helping them avoid it don't
consequences for their behavior
as is required by the purposes
of our children's code I don't
know if perhaps Monaco all tests
and things were detailed or
Douglas Harper has something
more detail to to respond but we
appreciate your attention to the
detail we certainly paid a lot
of attention do in the to the
details as this move through and
eventually garnered unanimous
support of all members at the
commissioning clued in the
district attorney's the judges
and the attorney general's
office.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you.
Sorry.
April land there.
Sorry April and.
It will thank you
thank you for so that.
There is one other concern that
that was noted in this in a
request so that in that is the
concern that is why it CYFD
suggesting a proposal to replace
forty eight hours with community
service.
Of the forty eight hours of
community service and probation
probation is is that actor and
yes work need not let that
happen.
Madam chair and Representative
Pettigrew referred to my
experts.
madam chair members of the
committee Representative
Pettigrew we will have been
looking at that over the last
twenty four hours that was news
to us the the secretary of state
of CYFD was represented are his
general counsel to CYFD was
involved in the initial drafting
of this bill he and others from
CYFD were involved at every
level so we will look further
into that concern but we were
assured that the secretary was
in favor of this bill and he in
fact I has representative on the
commission voted in favor of
this bill as is so we do promise
to look into this further but
Inc comes as somewhat of a
surprise surprise to us this and
we will try to address that as
necessary following this hearing
and appreciate your full support
for this measure.
The text from us someone at it
in CYFD and it just I'm gonna
read it word for word CYFD
absolutely is not pushing for
any kids under the statute to
get appropriations we agree with
the intent of this bill.
Madam chair thank you for.
Thank thank you very much madam
chair the lease is my mind or
I get concerned when we when we
look at
Changes like that I will say
that the in its current current
status right now the bills
written
I support this and I support
this and I want to be clear.
Is it as a young man hours of
all one.
One eight your.
And and I appreciate the.
The the way the.
In in in the shirts and and
everybody else in my County yeah
with the with the very R. T. and
but that didn't include me going
to jail or fines right so I do
appreciate what you're trying to
do here in the status site I do
support it in those loans that
that the.
Forty eight hours this is
stricken from the final bill
well she on the house floor in
this for the.
Sure you okay thank you
Representative Pettigrew I have
Representative about us.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair and the
thank you Representative Montoya
I just want to start by saying
that if there was a sorry to
have having trouble hearing.
Now for five it is a if it if
there was an Oscar for best
legislation presentation are
correct Representative Montoya
would win Best Picture that was
amazing
in my in my community I see how
fines and fees negatively affect
families I also see how fines
and fees can be the beginning of
a vicious cycle in our in our
justice system hi this bill
helps are you the specially
those of color and those living
in poverty so I just want to say
that I'm very proud of you
Representative monthly at and
I'm very proud to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you our Representative
Lord.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair yes thank you and to
my madam chair members and my
question was really answered
because I was actually looking
at if they took up to forty
eight hours again appropriations
others actually detrimental to
children because if they got in
trouble they go back to where
they were before and so I I'm
glad that was cleared up I'm I
think that's all I really have
to get a job in a presentation
best selection your bill I will
be supporting this thank you.
Thank you our vice chair Romero
thank you madam chair thank you
everyone and of course
Representative welcome to our
committee I think this is your
first bill before us and and
shout out to you in a moment to
well what up justice
So that said madam chair
Representative I was just
curious you know what we're what
the fines and fees that we do
see is are so minimal as far as
the budget goes and I can't even
imagine someone making the
argument on on that behalf but I
I'm curious what does happen if
you cannot pay currently if you
are a juvenile and you cannot
make up the the funds currently
what happens to you Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative of I
will defer to my wonderful and
illustrious team of experts.
Right now in Bernalillo county
it's not an issue we don't
really that we don't see fines
coming from the courts
as far as the fees coming from
public defender then it is
there's a process where it sent
through collections in
Bernalillo county we're not
using that process it for a few
years now
we actually stopped making
families applied because it was
so burdensome so difficult we
had one person whose whole job
was to collect these ten dollars
fees and so we're paying someone
so much money for very little
result and so when that position
left we actually stopped doing
that so as far as the other
counties
I'm not really sure what the
penalties are but I can find out
I believe we know of one county
that does
charge fees and so I can find
out from and report back.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know this is
the only other question that I
have is about what happens to
the records of fines and fees
that are currently on record for
children that fall under this
category are those automatically
expunge with this bill how is
that being dealt with in those
areas.
If you would like me to take the
first tried this answer mom
madam chair members of the
committee thanks to some very
hard work by the legislature we
do have a ceiling of records
bill there's still a lot that
needs to be done to fix that
bill it has some internal
inconsistencies but ultimately
part of what we are concerned
about the fines and fees and I
think several members have
identified is that if I vis
going unpaid it's harder for
children to complete the terms
and once they're completed the
terms of any sentence of fines
and fees then there's a waiting
period depending on how old they
are and all of their records are
sealed so this is it does tell
in detail was stealing a
financially most juvenile
records are sealed again thanks
to the hard work and foresight
of this committee and the
recognition that about
adolescent brain development I
don't think that Representative
Pettigrew is the only one on the
screen you may not have been
acting as is full you know fully
thinking capable adult as it as
an adolescent child our
children's code recognizes that
it does provide for the ceiling
of of records but it's the
timing and and for many children
this is very important some
children want to join the
military they they're turning
eighteen they're graduating from
high school this is when they
want to get a job this is Lee
that the timing of the science
ceiling of their record is very
important and therefore the
elimination of fines and fees
it's important because what we
do know is that getting children
off to a strong economic start
is what puts them on their
trajectory towards lifetime
earnings so I hope that wasn't
too long winded answer but but
that's how this is fits and we
hope that we can.
Limited these fines and fees and
get children started on their
way look forward to moving this
bill forward because I think
there is spare a lot of issues
that we struggle with as a
culture where we disagree but we
have been able to find common
ground where we do agree on this
bill and I hope that we can move
forward with this bill get it
through the committees that
needs to go through not just to
change the law but also inspired
lost teams have worked so hard
on this that they can compromise
they can work out their
differences and they can change
the law for the better.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative from our district
perspective and Representative
much plan I share this is just
the idea of access to justice
restorative justice and the ways
in which we all really repair
the damage done and
criminalizing poverty and
addiction and other ways in
which we use up really made it
really hard for folks in our
communities to succeed given the
traumas and and so many of the
other adverse experiences that
folks in our communities and had
this is one major way of doing
that so I just commend the
representative and for all the
advocates on this bill and I
hope you have universal support
through and through thank you
madam chair representative and
experts.
Thank you I just have a couple
of things so Representative
Montoya I'm mad at you because
you raise the bar for all of us
and we're gonna have to up our
presentation came and I don't
have the skills so so you do it
was it was very well done and
very nice I watched it I watched
a couple times over the past few
days so thank you for that but
not really thank you I'm and I'm
a firm believer in natural
consequences as a as a physical
therapist you know the kids have
to learn that when they leave
their body too far one way they
fall and and and I don't let
them get hurt but I let them
fall because they need to learn
that so I really like that that
the that the natural
consequences the community
service and I'm hoping and maybe
one of you could touch on this a
little bit that judges are
using.
Community service that makes
sense.
All chair representative someone
in of one of my experts wants to
touch on the actually that with
the reality of how that is in
application right today can you
share.
madam chair members of the
committee so currently we
what we public defender see most
of the community service coming
from is wanted to put on a
probation agreement but there
the probation officers are
usually very good the juvenile
probation officers at finding
programs where these children
can do the community service now
some of the issues when the
children are very young such as
under the age of fourteen these
programs won't accept just the
child alone and their parents
have to do it with them and so
this does because of burden but
there's places they allow
working for at church or doing
different things at school so
it's pretty flexible it's not
just the food bank
Representative sorry the sun is.
That's okay no that's that's
great I'm glad to hear that I'm
and then
one of our clarifying questions
on on one of our analysis is why
keep fines and fees on the books
when they serve no
rehabilitative purpose.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I would like to defer
to anyone of my panelists to to
answer that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think that this bill
is an attempt to answer that
question which is we shouldn't
be fortunately at this point
they're the funding streams are
not dependent on this money and
we don't want to construct ones
that are I think the HSD hardest
hit by this legislation will
actually be the law office of
the public defender
but the have joined on willingly
to serve their clients and in
the recognition that
not only is the best wishes the
children but that it was
economically not beneficial to
try to collect them so we
totally agree with you that we
need to eliminate these fines
and fees and that is what we
have done with this bill.
Okay thank you and this one is
is just personal so with the
name might justice what when
when I saw your name I wondered
if you were going to be at
justice I'm so I'm just this is
kind of this is off topic but
did you feel like you were
destined to go into law with
that first name did put pressure
on you to go to law school.
I do feel like I wasn't given
much of a choice okay I'm going
to be really honest yeah I was
gonna I was gonna be like a
teacher and I'm just like it's a
waste it's a waste of a name
right.
But that yes No so hopefully I
become a lawyer some day
impassable are and can use my
name.
At the thank you for indulging
I'm so I will I'm.
I'm ready for a motion.
Madam chair moving to pass.
If you have a.
Well okay.
Is there let's see can I see if
you see Representative is there
any opposition to a two passed.
Okay the line you have a
unanimous do pass and not thank
you all for your presentation
and for the important work
you're doing.
Thank you very much and shout
out to win.
Madam chair members of the
committee if if I can save a few
closing words of thanks to the
team at the UNM law center and
the sentencing commission.
Also as as a now elected.
Member of this house I'm
approval humanity leader I
believe that from the moment of
birth to hopefully a long life.
Every day in every minute in
between it's our duty as
lawmakers and leaders to ensure
that every human has good
education and healthy food and
transportation all of the social
determinants.
Of health that will will clear a
path for that purpose
productivity and a beautiful
life
I have lost too many in this in
this town two young.
And part of what fuels me to
work in that for preventive you
know using the arts and the the
tools that I have been to now
move into this realm it's so
critical to make such a small
tweak to the children's code but
what a difference it will make I
commend everybody on this panel
today my fellow colleagues for
voting in favor of this and I'm
I'm humbled and honored thank
you thank you representative
that we will go on to House Bill
two oh one which is
representative our.
So she could be promoted.
Representative Representative do
you have expert witnesses you
need to be allowed in.
Yes hello madam chair a good
afternoon and thank you I'm just
popping over from my house
judiciary's you were about to
take a vote but I do have with
me in the semi believe our New
Mexico corrections department
secretary Alicia of Whaley
settled we can might might we
promote her as well.
Okay there's two years go ahead
Representative.
Okay.
Thank you.
Madam chair we appreciate being
that seat with you all and C.
pack again today.
My name is representative other
than not I am joined today by
our secretary of the New Mexico
corrections department secretary
that's where the settle today
house bill two one is what we
believe is a significant move
towards appropriations reform
for those moving getting
Mexico's criminal legal system.
What's really important about
this bill as you all have heard
certainly I have on us this
year.
There have been important and
significant it tends to do
probation and parole reform in
recent years unfortunately those
have not made it through the
finish line and not have been
have not been signed into law to
to one represents a New Mexico
corrections department agency
bill and agency effort so that
they can do their part to lead
on the reform that our system
impacted New Mexicans are
looking for most importantly to
improve public safety for all of
our families and communities and
definitely to make sure that we
are most of teacher grazing the
correctional system including
appropriations tools as part of
someone's rehabilitation and
require most of the work we've
done here madam chair committee
is on page two section see you
will see that.
Christening we are moving with
this legislation changes that
would allow a defendant to
automatically be released from
probation yes they are
classified as a minimum or
medium level risk offender using
a validated scoring instruments
of the kind of instruments that
people inside systems you all
the time to assess someone's
risk we then would expect that
they've met all the other
obligations of their probation
before this release and then
lastly we would need that point
at one half of their their
probation that was part of that
sentence I would just like to
say madam chair of our turn to
the secretary that in my
experience and my expertise I
served for a year and a half as
the bureau chief of recidivism
reduction of the corrections
department.
Appropriations pro can be almost
impossible to complete
successfully when people are
trying to get back into
responsible parent parenting and
find jobs and provide a
meaningful way to provide for
their families so if folks have
made it halfway through and done
so successfully the the
corrections department wants to
honor that there's different
ways we can show up so that
people can move into that next
chapter of life of their lives
also with that madam chair I
would ask secretary if she might
introduce myself and say a few
words before we stand for
questions welcome and secretary.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you thank you so much
Representative cut in a
okay so I'm Alicia to foil is
there I know I was already
introduced but I serve as the
New Mexico corrections
department cabinet secretary and
the this bill is just a really
exciting effort because we feel
like if we just take one
component and we really show
that we can make a significant
change to the way that we manage
our our caseloads to the way
that we help people who are
under supervision with us that
that the next time the next time
we'll just be able to take
greater and bigger and more
significant steps so what this
bill essentially does is it
allows the people who are
serving probation for variety of
felony offenses but these would
be the people that the judge at
time of sentencing decided this
person doesn't need to be
incarcerated we will put them on
supervision they can report to
this probation and parole
officer and what we see what
we've seen is that people in
that situation maybe it's a
first offense a first time
offense or something of that
nature they really work hard at
the very beginning to get
everything settled to me all of
the obligations of parole in pro
or of appropriations rather and
then we find that after a
certain period of time they just
really are struggling and they
feel almost disincentive eyes to
continue to have to stay and
keep going in and reporting and
keep having this probation
officer show up at their work in
their home and it just continues
to be this tender in some
particularly for those people
that have lower level offenses
are on low to medium supervision
and who have really put in all
of their efforts to make sure
they've met the conditions of
probation so what this would do
is this is for a person who's
met all of their obligations
what that means is that they
have paid their restitution they
have followed the court's order
to participate in any kind of
programming or tree.
It meant that the court felt was
appropriate at the time of
sentencing they've completed
their community service they've
paid any fees or fines that they
owe to the court and they met
every single obligation and the
only thing left is for them to
be supervised by a pro probation
and parole officer for the
duration the the remainder of
their time period regardless of
whatever it is that they were
sentenced to as far as other
appropriations link they have to
have completed at least half of
that time though before they can
even reach that place and and so
it's important to note that you
don't just automatically get off
supervision when you meet that
that halfway point it could have
that your your ability to comply
with all of the conditions of
the order that maybe that
doesn't happen at the halfway
mark maybe that happens a little
bit later maybe happen sooner
but very few can potentially
become eligible at that halfway
mark and then have to stay on
probation a bit longer while you
finish up all of the obligations
that you were sentenced to by
the court and and we feel like
this really provides a really
strong incentive for people who
are being supervised are on low
and medium level supervision to
work hard to get their
obligations met and to
potentially come off probation
sooner we also know after having
reviewed studies nationwide and
some of those were made
reference to from some of the
folks that commented like the I
believe administrative office of
the courts the sentencing
commission they they decided
some studies that show that
longer periods of appropriations
do not contribute to a person's
success but rather can
contribute to an increase in the
population in a prison because a
person may face some certain
technical violations that might
lead to a revocation of
probation
and and then being sent to suit
to present in this type of
action really makes it so that
they have a strong incentive to
try hard pushed through.
meet the obligations and beat
get back in state in the
community as productive members
of society now I just I want to
know because this is I mean such
a small amount of amended
language here or or propose new
language we talk about this
validated risk assessment tool
so in New Mexico right now the
validated tool that we use it's
called the compass assessment
and compass stands for
correctional offender management
profiling for alternative
sanctions the reason that we're
using this tool is because it is
a non biased approach it's
evidence based and it gives
it isn't it enables a probation
officer to complete an
assessment of an individual
who's on supervision but without
any of their own introduction of
bias so
For example let's say I'm a
probation officer I go to work
in a really bad mood today and
getting a new client and I'm
doing the the compass assessment
on that client with a series of
questions that you go through
you're you're looking at
specific static factors and
specific dynamic factors and it
really just takes my bad mood
out of the equation I don't
really have anything to do with
how I how that person ends up
being placed on supervision
this tool is used nationwide in
the number of states and we're
in the process right now having
it validated for our population
and what that really means is
simply that we are going through
the research process to make
sure that it does what it says
that it is post to do which is
that it's supposed to predict a
person's
Risk of re offending and also it
helps us to find or to create an
action plan so that it will tell
us what their needs are but
they're actionable needs so it
might tell us a person might
have a higher level of need for
participation in substance use
treatment that we can gear their
supervision time towards making
or taking those steps taking
those actions that would lead to
successful outcomes more
successful outcomes so that's
the the tool that we're using
now and in this law we say a
validated tool because we want
to make sure that we're able to
keep up with whatever it is
that's going on and that we're
current and using tools that are
are relevant to to the world at
the time so with that madam
chair I will of course us stand
for any questions and I
appreciate that committee's
consideration thank you
Representative kela.
Representative.
Are you ready for public.
Yes madam chair thank you okay
okay so we will take a poll so
Allison we'll put that up and
you can vote with the U. R. in
support or opposition to house
bill to all.
One.
Okay I'm it looks like eight in
support in zero in favor but
just to make sure if there's any
please don't raise your hands
yet if there's anyone in
opposition if you didn't vote in
the poll I want to speak please
raise your hand.
Okay now we will go to those in
support if you would like to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay reminder to be brief.
It's already been a long day
after a long week after a long
year it's only February after a
long everything so we will start
with that Rikki Lee Chavis.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
convalescence lawyers
association we stand in strong
support we appreciate the work
of the sponsor and advocate and
madam chair we really appreciate
your work in your committee
members work on these important
issues of probation I think
there's a public perception that
it's an easy place to be it
really is not these people often
have to choose between getting
to their jobs on time and not
missing a day of work or meeting
with her probation officer and
so we think that this is the
right tool we appreciate the
work of the department and we
encourage you to support thank
you.
Thank you Fernando Trujillo.
can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name's that not look through
your policy associate with gold
futures from the young woman
United and we stand.
In support of the H. B. two oh
one which allows the release of
low risk defendants from
probation after completing half
way more than half of their time
on probation if they have met
their obligations on probation
non probation makes hardy to re
locate Heidi to keep that mental
gainful employment because of
limitations and hardships caused
by mandatory appointments that
may call into working hours
especially in rural and what the
land areas where transportation
is less reliable way more
expensive which me.
The engine to combat compared to
urban areas who have more
consistent transportation and
alternatives this is a step in
the right direction and allowing
people who are living the
connections to move on with
their lives because we all know
probation and parole oftentimes
Act more as a as obstacles to
equitable it reintegration into
society rather than saving the
true interests of the people why
under the K. we know that
communities of color are
disproportionately affected
incarcerated by probation and
parole which I have experience
for various had in my home town
of Espanola we need our support
of each we two oh one thank you.
Thank you for not under Douglas
carver.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee again I'm Douglas
carver deputy director of the
New Mexico sentencing commission
are legislative committee which
is a subcommittee of the
commission that meets during the
legislative session to.
discuss criminal justice
legislation that is introduced
discuss this bill and
unanimously supported it with
just one abstention so they it's
a it's a unusual to get such a
full support for bills they
stand in strong support of this
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Barron Jones.
Hello good afternoon chair and
members of the committee my
name's parents also ACLU of New
Mexico we I would like to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
very important piece of
legislation in the last couple
years that had the pleasure of
working with hundreds of
individuals will have on
navigated some form of our from
the legal system and and and and
this bill is a step toward sort
of healing some of the suffering
that they put up to as you heard
other speakers for a probation
and sometimes very difficult to
navigate it makes some maintain
and employment up disco and this
is really just some sort of a I
don't know of as I'm losing my
train itself and this does
excellent and we really
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing to and we explore
support the bill and full thank
you much.
Thank you and finally Diane my
cash.
I'm respective committee members
I'm Diane the cash speaking for
myself in support of HB to a one
I was really pleased to see this
common sense bill this is a
measure that can save taxpayer
money will improve the lives and
increasing public safety when I
was teaching middle school and
happen to have some students
with challenging and destructive
behaviors in my seventh grade
science classes I consulted with
the talented fellow teacher who
specifically work with kids with
very challenging behaviors the
wise and helpful thing that he
shared with me in order to
encourage adaptive rather than
maladaptive behavior is that you
must never stop for the
opportunity for redemption this
bill similarly gives individuals
an extra shot agency.
And sorry and exercise agency
and motivation to exert control
over their lives in a very
positive way allowing the
conditions set forth in this
bill that would allow people who
are truly motivated and
consistent in their behaviors to
the possibility of early
automatic release from parole
will give people hope and
encourage rather than discourage
the belief that life can be
better that a person can do
better this bill is good for all
of us.
Thank you Diane did did we hear
from Bennett Baur I.
Bennett I think have we heard
from you.
Hello madam madam chair members
of the committee thank you could
not I'll make a dark room okay I
want to thank the Representative
and a for sponsoring this and
secretary to foil zero I think
there is a group of people
through the sentencing
commission other ways and been
working on this issue and
struggling with how how best to
address this issue of making
sure the probation is only for
the people that really need it
and that those who don't need
that kind of supervision are
able to be released for their
own benefits so that they can go
on with their lives and so that
the department can really focus
their limited resources on on
those who need the direction and
supervision so we support this
bill that losses public vendor
supported and we asked members
to vote in favor thank you madam
chair.
Thank you let's go to the
committee and I have
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair representative I
have some questions on this bill
please.
What I wanted to know is so
let's see somebody does a crime
and they're given one year in
jail usually what I've seen is
that they're out and half the
time and good behavior so the
ship about six months if they do
good behavior and then the put
on a period of probation and the
terms that appropriations are
basically again good behavior
right because if they were to
commit a crime they could
possibly go back to jail is that
correct.
Madam chair representative let
I'm not quite sure if I
understand your question one of
the things that I would just
clarify quickly is the New
Mexico corrections department
houses those are defined as
often offenders in the system
that have received second a
felony conviction and been
sentenced to the custody of the
New Mexico corrections
department so what's happening
with jails is a little bit
different as people come in and
out of jail for different
reasons but if if you might ask
again I'm in the I'll do better
to try to what it is you getting
out okay so break this down
because I saw appropriations on
here I was under the
understanding that probation is
something that you get when just
deferred order released from
jail parole just when you're
released from prison is that
correct of those two differences
between the two.
I'm not quite Representative
asset and madam chair I'll have
secretary explained that
sometimes probation and parole
run at the same time on a prison
sentence but will have the
secretary clarify.
Thank you madam chair and the
Representative Lord.
So probation is that typically
something that in the in the
judicial realm and and get
Judiciary a person who was
charged with a felony offense
any level felony offense but has
to be a felony offense there's
very rare situations or
circumstances where a person
gets put on probation with the
state for a misdemeanor so we're
talking about primarily felony
offenses fourth degree felonies
or any felony really where the
judge felt like it was not
appropriate for the person to be
sentenced to prison or to
incarceration so most times we
see people coming from work
directly to appropriations from
us after having been sentenced
so sometimes that might include
jailed maybe after the arrest or
things of that nature
but what what I've seen in
general is that a person will be
sentenced to probation from the
court but then also what we've
seen based on certain offenses a
person might get sent to a
felony conviction they get sent
to a term of incarceration for
imprisonment and then when they
get out because the crime has
attached to it statutorily
required parole term the person
may also have a probation term
so somebody might leave a prison
on parole as a parole E. serving
two years of a parole term but
then they still have the
remaining three years of
probation that they have to
serve independent of the parole
term yes Sir could be with you
thank you madam chair it that's
a consecutive or concurrent with
his opening round.
I think it's consecutive I think
with the running side by side
anyways it sorry doesn't happen
Representative concurrent thank
you okay so there so I see
there's multiple ways I guess
what I'm trying to get at if
somebody does something they do
a crime they get convicted and
two things happen there could be
some jail time this is this
present time but there's also be
deferred they just a we're gonna
put trump appropriations is that
correct I guess I was trying to
what I'm trying to get at the
first place okay got that not
just regret okay so usually when
somebody is released on probate
I have a correct understanding
of this let's say they got a
year appropriations.
The goal of that probation is
supposed to be that the person
will be on their best behavior
right they're not going to go
out commit any more crimes we're
telling you got this year and if
you mess up you you could be in
trouble in somewhere another is
that correct.
Chair representative generally
yes the secretary certainly has
expertise that we we we don't
want to quite speculate on every
way that someone might want to
become the legal system I just
want to note when people are
released are are moving out of
prison and the incarceration are
they do have to go in front of
what's called the parole board
again different information
after all conditions that often
year over overlapping probation
conditions there is a national
debate generally about why we
have probation and parole and
other states have sometimes
proved to eliminate one of those
so we can have a system that's
more straightforward but yes
they they overlap the interplay
one maybe a longer term than the
other but certainly year you get
the basics of thank you madam
chair representative.
Madam represents sort I guess
what I wanted on that is if
somebody gets one year of
probation or parole either one
is a next the goal that they're
supposed to be out and be model
citizens and be on their best
behavior or if they commit a
crime or do something that could
potentially end up back in jail
or had or have another set there
we're trying to get out of this
behavior right on that probation
period.
Madam chair representative yes I
would say the other piece of
that and certainly the sense I
had when I got to work at the
corrections department is that
we as an agency and an
incredible leadership and see
and and secretary of the oil is
that on now
If we're doing probation or
parole right we are making sure
offenders have room to provide
jobs somewhere safe to live to
programming they need
wind up certificate so they can
seven to the next step to
chapters of their lives but
there's certainly an extensive
system of of what we might call
violations so that if someone
does mess up for better or worse
and there's lots of
conversations about how to make
it better this is one of them
but when someone makes a mistake
they would be violated and
potentially have to return to
incarceration yes the ideas that
you're keeping an eye on people
but you're also allowing folks
to have a transition out of
incarceration with support and
resources to move into this next
chapter of their lives thank you
manager Representative course we
always want to make sure that
our people being released have
opportunities to get back into
society so I do have a question
I'm on page two and it's line
twenty four X. C. one it says is
classified as a minimum or
medium level risk what would
that help how do we determine
what is a medium or minimum
level risk.
Thank you madam chair and I
Representative I'll turn this is
secretary just a second but I do
want to share that when we
invested and will responsibility
of these gigantic systems like
the criminal justice the legal
system one of the tools that
many agencies use is what's
called a validated assessment my
background is in policy research
has recently the research
director at a nonprofit for many
years and I want to explain that
what the validated peace means
first of all validated means
that after you have an
instrument to measure something
in any population actually
tested it on that population so
the validate dated piece means
is that the secretary here and
our fabulous team have invested
and and evidence based risk pool
it's going to issue as she
explained it will do again for
their measure people's potential
risk to re offend and a lot of
other things going on but the
key part to me is that before we
use these tools and in
accordance of public safety we
need to make sure that they're
actually tested for our
population because frankly the
people living there systems in
New Mexico or California or
Michigan they're different right
there's different socioeconomic
factors different poverty
factors different
Where is that that potential
drug use and substance use
disorders are rolling direct
communities so what's important
for this piece here is that
we're saying not only are we
going to have a tool that will
be used hopefully in a
consistent way that minimizes
bias it's also going to be
tested on our New Mexico
population but where we expect
it to work at a high degree to
to guarantee and work towards
that public safety for
communities but alternates that
Madam chair to secretary that
where we set up to add anything
else.
Thank you madam chair and
representative a so so yes well
the classified into a low and
medium level in this situation
so we use this this assessment
it's called the compass
assessment so that's what we're
talking about right now at this
moment when we talk about
validated risk risk assessment
this tool itself I believe as
the Representative stated is a
validated tool but it's not been
yet validated for our population
we are in the process of doing
that right now it's really
important that we do that
because there's just so many
unique things about our state
and are the people that live
here the people that we
supervise and we want to make
sure that this tool is really
speaking to what their needs are
and that it's doing what it says
that it is supposed to do and
what it is supposed to do is
that it's supposed to assess the
needs of the person and whatever
the risk to re offend is it is
also supposed to help us develop
a plan of an action plan
essentially so that we can
identify whatever those that
person's needs are so that we
can help to take action to make
it such that they have a better
opportunity to succeed when
they're on supervision a better
opportunity to be able to find
work that's career paths
educational endeavors in that
we're able to support whatever
the needs are that we're that
are born from this tool so I I I
think it's important for your
for for me to share Madam chair
representative lord that this
assessment begins first with the
pre assessment in that pre
assessment we looking
specifically at the static
factors in a person's life and
then that really gives us a
baseline about what their risk
to re offend is right so I'm
looking at what how old was this
person when they first they
committed a a first offense how
many times perhaps are have the
maybe been arrested or
participated in tree.
It meant or at what age did they
use substances that the first
time and we really look at the
basic lay out of of where they
come from and and who they are
and what offense they committed
then the next step which just
happens very shortly after that
first step we do another
assessment where we start to
also look at the dynamic factors
like the things in a person's
life that can change like for
example if the person has a
substance use disorder when was
the last time that they used
when was the last time maybe
that they went to a treatment
how long did they stay in that
treatment center how successful
were they what was the input
from their treatment provider so
it's not just this one sided
evaluation right we we meet with
the offender the person who's on
supervision the the person on
probation and we also meet with
their counselors so we talk to
the people that are in charge of
their treatment in their
treatment plans we talk with
their employers we talk with
their teachers if there and
involved in school and it really
is a very holistic approach to
following that person success
and then helping them reach a
place where they can Matt meet
some goals with small goals we
start with some small attainable
goals and all of that's really
part of this assessment so if a
person completes a treatment
program for example that would
trigger a new assessment so that
we can start to incorporate any
changes in those dynamic factors
and it's it's an assessment tool
that tells us where a person
ends up meaning like how
frequently they have to report
to the office what exactly types
of things that they have to do
like to they have to come in
three times a week and we show
up to their job twice a week so
person who's on low supervision
would be seen once a month a
person who's on medium
supervision would be seen maybe
every couple of weeks and that
might be one office visit in a
month in maybe one office or one
visit.
Where the parole officer go to
their job or to their school or
something like that to see them
in their environment but but
what it means really is that we
don't see that they pose a
significant risk to the
community that they live in we
see that they're making progress
it's mindful and intentional and
we see that they do not need to
see their probation officer as
frequently as maybe they did at
the beginning so it really is a
person who's made bunch of
progress they're doing really
well and as we move to the lower
levels of supervision it means
that they need less and less and
less of our attention but they
still are on our caseloads.
Thank you tell explanation madam
chair representative I
appreciate a great detail you
went into that that does explain
some of this because I was very
confused on what kind of system
and I see you're you're doing a
holistic approach to looking at
a multitude of things and then I
see over there that they have
obligations and that they have
to do at least one half their
time I have just two more
questions for you
I know that you're you're saying
we have to develop this this
assessment and who and why house
to work and I get that there's
two things I want to know would
a
child sex offender I'll be able
to do this with a sex offender
be eligible for this and with
somebody who committed domestic
violence.
Two things on that I want to
know if they'd be eligible and
how would you report the victim
to their victim and the same
thing with actually all three of
these because there's victim
reporting I wonder how that'll
be done if this is going to
happen but I'm also want to know
if a child sex abuser anyone
convicted of sex crimes or
domestic violence would be
eligible for this program to be
released on half their
appropriations I ask.
For very serious reason because
Domestic violence on which the
big dollars but the other two
unfortunately I have a degree in
psychology there's no your for
sex offenders and child abusers
and I get a little worry someone
there's not anything that says.
Except for I mean I know you
guys use discretion but I get
really worried with sex
offenders and child abusers
because the recidivism rate
recidivism rate is so high so
thank you.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the questions I'll just
start by saying that we're not
doing anything that changes the
victim notification process
which moves through our state
system combine
I would just give a shout out
like I always do slide needs
real funding
those offices that support
victim notification sometimes
things slip through the cracks
that'll happen whether or not
this legislation comes forward
but we need to make sure we're
we're continually investing the
right kind of resources so that
folks that have survived land
mines are there any crimes
certainly have the notification
we're supposed to provide when
someone's being moved from
housing or read at the end of
their their sentence of their
term but I'll turn to the
secretary of the oil is set up
to speak to the way that we
designed the the statutory
change as such thank you madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative so sex offenders
first I'll start there no B. up
and all explained it very
quickly why we have a different
method of supervising sex
offenders the officers in our
field offices are specially
trained in dealing with managing
sex offender caseloads they are
part of what we call us special
programs in supervision so the
people who oversee and supervise
sex offenders they have really
fairly small size cases like
nobody's case load is gig seats
thirty and the rules are very
different for sex offenders they
do not get assessed on the same
scoring instrument because we
found in speaking with the the
compass the folks that develop
compass that there's different
mechanisms to evaluate sex
offenders specifically any type
of sex offender I be clear about
that.
So we use a different
assessments call the static
ninety nine there's a whole lot
of other stuff that it does but
ultimately those people are
never ever placed on low medium
supervision so they would never
even be part of this
conversation at all now moving
on to a person with a domestic
violence is issue so this would
also exclude two additional
categories and and it's based
upon supervision so while it may
be possible for for certain for
people to work their way down as
far as like how much supervision
they need we're always very
mindful about what our
population needs are and what
New Mexico's needs are so
in a similar vein the way that
we look at something like a
domestic violence is it's a
serious violent offence and and
and I I believe in most of the
statutory language so we know
that in our state serious
violent offenses are crimes that
need a higher level of
supervision so there won't be a
circumstance by which somebody
who has a serious domestic
violence offense gets placed on
media at a minimum supervision
and then only reports once a
month we really keep a close
watch on those people they
report to us quite often so we
are.
Who have serious violent
offenses and in our state people
who have a felony level D. W. Y.
they do not ever they're not
ever able to progress lower than
high level supervision so they
also would not be included in
this category.
Thank you I really appreciate
your re detailed explanations of
the staff Madam chair
representative one last question
this is it is there any way in
this bill to Addis progresses
forward what we just discussed
like sex offenders fall under
did different categories so that
nobody else has this question as
it moves forward.
Madam chair representative I
actually appreciate the AG's
office for pointing something
out in the technical issues that
relate to the different status
and sex offenders and I
especially appreciated because I
ran a bill two years ago to
clarify something for the
administrative office of the
courts on this issue so as it
stands already as part of a sex
offender status it's almost like
they are on probation and
definitely and what is required
is that they're supposed to be
returned to court every two and
a half years to review the
status of that appropriations
and that's a key component of
public safety does do they need
to have a higher level of
supervision is there something
else that needs to be adjusted
or done differently I run bill
couple of years a was not
successful but this and I've
asked AOC about it whether or
not it's because the Supreme
Court assets to pay attention to
this what's happening right now
is that nobody's watching that
two and a half your clock and
the the ideas that the
corrections Department should
just somehow know when it's time
for those hearings and ask the
court to have a hearing public
safety isn't compromised it
anyway because they're still
remaining operation but the
system would work better if we
had a mechanism to make sure sex
offenders were getting those
hearings every two and a half
years in the case like we said
that we might need to review the
circumstances and Bob something
up on the other side also maybe
Representative Lori might work
on on that little fix in the
future but because of that I I
had to learn up on this issue a
couple of years ago and that
that's the part that that brings
my reassurance to this question
that there probation terms just
happen on a different scale that
relates to the original sentence
I'm gonna jump in here and ask
if we can keep our questions and
answers a little bit shorter.
Madam chair no it's a I think
our bodies are telling us that
things that we need to be
effective here so we can just be
brief thank you thank you yeah
I'm finished with my question
I'm gonna vote no on it mostly
because of that but I think with
some restructuring that that was
kind of I think is it goes on
down the line I think people
would like to see that that that
those people are still thank you
for questioning thanks for one
more question I'm tired thank
you.
Representative Romero I didn't
mean to scare you off if you
have questions I I wasn't being
the stern mother I was just I
just I know how how my body is
feeling right now and I'm trying
to and I know that we've got
Sanchez in the in the other room
waiting cell so go ahead but
please if you have questions go
ahead you madam chair thank you
madam chair I did have one
clarifying question and I I'm
just wanting to know about folks
currently on probation first of
all let me just say a hundred
percent support your bill on
access to being able to reform
our justice system as we've
spoken with probation and parole
through our interim sessions
there's just so many ways areas
in which we need to fix this and
this is absolutely one state
commend the sponsor and and
advocates for that so what
happens two people currently on
probation and what happens after
the bill goes into a fact.
You're more.
Representative what you're
muted.
Madam chair representative
Question what happens people
operation does that mean if this
bill is passed.
Secretary the violence I don't
yes absolutely what goes on with
them currently information
manager Representative.
Okay madam chair Representative
Romero
So a person now on probation
they have the opportunity if if
they meet the criteria that
we've spelled out here if they
met all their conditions if
they've met at least half a
percent if they're medium or low
supervision they can potentially
be released early from
appropriations as of right now
we make a recommendation and
referral to the judiciary and
then the judiciary makes the
decision.
Thank you madam chair
representative and then which
department is officially in
charge of keeping records on
that process is it corrections
probation which I know that
there was some is it the courts
I there were some confusion as
to where that
sort of accountability or
reliability on the record
keeping with life.
Madam secretary Representative
secretary the set up.
Madam.
Madam chair representative thank
you so we the corrections
department of probation parole
is a division of the New Mexico
corrections department and we
file that type of record and
documentation with the courts so
even in this situation if a
person were to be released
having met these conditions we
would still file documentation
and the court for records
purposes we also maintain that
record so we're the holder of
the record but we file it so it
becomes official thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think those are
the only questions that sort of
came up as to the process so I
appreciate your time and support
your bill thank you madam chair.
I just have one quick question
and.
And it's just yes or no because
sex offender probation is in a
different statute does that mean
that this bill would not affect
their appropriations.
Okay okay just just getting
clarification okay and I will
entertain a motion madam chair I
have my hand rates I'm I'm
sorry.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and at
your request I'll keep this
brief I reached out to about
twenty judges across the state
to get to get opinions on this
bill and some other ones when
read two statements from.
one of the most some that I
think is critical I believe most
judges will just increase
initial sentencing at the
beginning of appropriations if
this bill passes.
And then the second one.
Is and is it seems that there's
a push to take discretion away
from local judges entire hands
with the progress of I ideology
perfect example the schedule is
the catch and release system
local judges have very little
control and are bound by
decisions made elsewhere and so.
I guess that I sent out requests
to twenty different judges
across the state none of which
were were in support of us and
so I just want to.
Wanted to share a couple of the
comments and in notes that the I
too will be voting no for this
thank you.
Okay thank you I'm I a will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair and would do pass we
have a two passed we have a
second.
I would like to seconded okay.
Sorry.
And I'm trying to listening to
my human trafficking bill and
judiciary and I'm.
Thanks I'm so I was than what
you'll take the role please.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative group no.
I share more yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
And by a three to two you have a
two passed and I imagine you're
anxious to get back to
Judiciary.
To go.
What your question I didn't want
to ever say yes or no I would
say that the intention of our
our legislation but we will make
sure that we met that intention
we get to do district thanks I
appreciate it thank thank you.
We are house bill two sixteen
Representative Hochman Vigil I'm
not sure if she is in there.
Okay there she is.
Chair thank you members the
committee you never know when
you're and you can be
illustrious panelists and it's
just a major shuffle the
representative.
Did you have experts you need to
promote to panelist I'm sorry
madam chair yes I Senator Ivey
Soto Michael Sanchez going to
help present as well okay so you
can go ahead when you're ready.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee house
bill two sixteen does two things
basically M. poses a fine or
sanction on parties who by a
finding clear and convincing
evidence willfully and
unjustifiably interfere with
another parents custody or
visitation rights and it also
imposes at least two hours of
training per year for anybody
who is actually involved in a
child custody time sharing plans
so I'm you know we can I'm sure
all of you are asking why it's
necessary for us to bring this
bill and and and what is the
problem we're trying to fix so
eight.
Does not bring me any pleasure
to tell you madam chair members
of the committee this is a long
standing problem that we've
witnessed throughout the family
courts.
In New Mexico for quite some
time I don't practice family law
myself but I used to be at a law
firm that was predominately
family law practitioners and we
are.
Gosh several times a week at
parties that would bring
a falsified motions for
protective orders under the
family violence protection act
they would file false claims
with the at CYFD and they would
even make calls current claims
of domestic violence to simply
interfere with a child custody
arrangements that they did not
like.
why this is a really bad thing
for New Mexico's kids is because
we have research out
specifically at two hundred
twenty seventeen study it's for
the war stock at consensus
report which tells us that
interference with child custody
arrangements I'm actually
traumatized children and so much
so to the point that I can
interview it can interfere with
there are developments I've
heard of several actually
several different cases in which
this happened amongst parties
and children would regress you
had travelers that were walking
and talking and then there there
time with there's share time
with their parents to be
interrupted and they would not
stop speaking stop walking it's
an extremely unfortunate
situation and so I'm you know
it's unfortunate we have to
bring this proposed piece of
legislation but it's it's
necessary at this point I don't
want to anybody to think that by
bringing this legislation are
discounting the viable the
justifiable reports of you know
domestic violence or the need
for
The need for I have.
I think my.
My other committee and
everybody's blowing my phone up
but I'm sure
where you are of.
So it's I'm not trying to
discount.
People that actually need the
protections of value of the
family violence protection act
in our filings motion to
protection under that but I'm
this is also another aspect of
of the process is going on and
so we need to rectify a fairly
narrow standard which I think we
accomplished chair which is
clear and convincing evidence
that a party is willfully and
justifiably interfered with the
child custody arrangements
that's a pretty high bar to
reach and also we make sure that
we're training the folks that
are putting these child custody
arrangements together because
there's no training requirements
and some of the
information that they the second
judicial District Court is using
right now is parking back to
nineteen ninety three and I can
tell you Madam chairwoman
members members of the committee
the science the standards have
changed quite a bit since then
so with that I will turn it over
to my co sponsor if you would
like to add anything Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much
Representative of the hill madam
chair members of the committee
I'll be very brief
there are okay and and and I
want to start off by by
expressing one thing in a
definitive way which is there is
no one incidents that has
prompted this legislation so a
lot of times something happens
that get somebody of sat and
then also there's a bill that
shows up want to make a new rule
as a result of one thing
happening that's not what is
taking place.
What.
I was I was thinking about the
previous bill that you all were
just discussing.
And Representative Lord us
Representative and I and the
secretary of corrections well
what is the evaluation tool.
And who is this a valuation tool
applied to and she was able to
get answers as to the valuation
tool that they normally use on
the fact that the use the staff
ninety nine for certain other
evaluations and in that exchange
that they have if the secretary
had said oh well you know
everybody else into our worlds
static ninety five six better
well but we choose not to and we
just go based on a hunch right
that should be something that
should be able to be explored in
the queue in a process.
Well what's happening right now
the family courts is that judges
are pointing usually lawyers to
be guarded lines to make
recommendations to the court on
as to a custody arrangement.
And you could not have had that
image.
Instead when Representative Lord
would've asked what's your
valuation tool why don't really
have one I just did a based on
my got.
Really so what about this
population verses that
population I don't really I
don't know if there's any
difference about because I
haven't taken any classes
literally that is what's
happening right now.
And so the exact discussion that
you what just happened is the
reason why this bill is going to
place so that when
recommendation comes in there's
a basis for the recommendation
there's research behind the
recommendation and with that we
happen staff rushed.
Do you have anything else.
Madam chair December questions
okay okay let's go to the to the
audience first we'll go to a
poll.
So you can vote either in favour
in support or in opposition to
this bill.
Okay I'm this is not this is not
one of those that that brings
out passions and folks I guess
so we have one in support and no
not in favor so if you would
like to speak
Okay so if you would like to
speak in in opposition or
support raise your hand.
Okay I'm not seeing anybody so
we will go to the committee.
Are there question okay
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair yes there's always
questions from the lord some.
So Representative thank you for
that I appreciate you referring
back to what we're just talking
about because I thought it I'm
not familiar with this because
it's something I've ever been
through so that the court to
really have the power to
sanction these violations so
you're telling me what was I
understand correctly that they
don't really is a standardized
tool for this is that we were
you were trying to say.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative lord I mean a
court always has the power to
sanction their various roles of
you know the professional ethics
that allow a judge or the court
to do so but I'm it's it's a
very high standard to meet and
it usually takes a lot of your
repetition of the same type of
situation that a judge might see
in order to bring them to that
point where they have to assess
the sanction and so because this
is become such a systemic issue
in family law we felt it's
necessary to actually codified
the court's ability to sanction
and actually can tell them to do
so when a very specific standard
is match and so if you can meet
that are ensuring factual
standard than it actually the
court must assess the sanction
to the other party rather than
taking away about discretionary
elements that they had before.
Thank you I don't actually have
because it made sense for what
we just spoke about to to now
and you references to things
that tie together so I have
thank you.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative and senator
welcome to our committee first
time I've seen you on zoom.
Senator Madam chair
representative
I'm interested in the sort of
best interests of the child sort
of constraints that we've seen
with some of the HSD push back
on they're already sanctions are
already things in place to
evaluate that when making these
arrangements and agreements and
I understand that part of the
the you know the real push back
just talk about inconsistencies
on that best interests so
Madam chair representative power
how is this more of a house this
approach better I guess for for
that that important standard
when we're talking about sharing
time and and talking about the
best sort of interest in these
in in a in a situation where you
know sharing time is is ideal
but when we're talking about
children and their best interest
how does this help that.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Romero it is good
to see you if not just
electronically and yeah I know I
I I saw that our critique and
and the analyses to and I do
think I have a couple that's a
madam chair Senator Ivy Soto
will too but I I would say that
the agencies are going on old
information and there is kind of
a theme throughout family long
in New Mexico that you know
whatever it is you're doing it
is for the best interest of the
child but how we actually gauge
what that is needs to be updated
I'm gonna reference back to the
war stock a study the twenty
seventeen study are I reference
my opening which tells us that
our children really benefit from
having time because the
generation with both parents of
course you know it you can't put
them in an abusive atmosphere at
Mister this can hinder their
development but when you have
situations such as this much you
have a straight between the
parties and one parent perhaps
is awarded more costly than the
other or you know one parent
wants to alter the arrangements
and they can't do so through
that the various you know a
rifle channels to to do it we
they're they're filing these
types of motions to kind of
Representative the child out of
the custody arrangement there's
already been I'll get it for
them and and place them in a
protective context because the
way these types of laws work if
you file for a motion at
protective orders under the
family violence protection act
that the court actually has to
implement the order is like an
intermediary step and then
there's hearings held and then
the court decides whether have
orders to stay permanent so that
trauma and that separation of
the child that they're coming
from of supported atmosphere is
actually I would I would venture
to say much more consideration
as to the welfare of the child
if you have a parent that is
doing taking these actions
because of their own selfish
desires that's not in the best
interest of the child and you
really need to start
changing and moving.
Our records in to this
understanding of what for
automatic development trauma
does to your brain development
with children and every time you
have these types of situations
occur your best putting
additional trauma much better to
you know put put in enforcement
mechanism in place that a parent
knows that they can't do this
that it's it's they're not going
to get away with it and that
they need to go through the
proper channels to modify
custody if that's what their
ultimate wishes.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that I guess I'm just
trying to understand how that
how that stated in the bill
you know from from you know to
prevent those sort of situations
from happening
Madam chair representative
because I know that so many
times we're talking about the
reality of these decision making
process sees especially in
family law is that a lot of it
is done off the books I mean I'm
thinking even currently within
COVID times madam chair
representative you know everyone
was told to walk down in place
go all the a lot of those
custody challenges were
challenge themselves as far as
what's the right way to go about
that was without violating a
certain situation but keeping
the child safe Madam chair
representative so that as you
know even one of the sort of
years of of challenges to
something that we're trying to
legally enforce and have to make
critical changes with the court
involved Madam chair
representative if we were just
going to talk about you know a
lock down situation between
parents what we what are the
implications of your bill in
that situation.
I'm thank you madam chair
representative I would direct
you back to the third condensing
evidentiary standard I
referenced before this bill does
not come into play unless you
meet that very high evidentiary
standard if you can't if you
can't do that and a judge finds
that you have met that standard
this this bill has no
application whatsoever.
madam chair Representative
Romero the other thing is I
think that HSD analysis.
When I read it seem to miss
apprehend the point at which
this would be taking place in
most cases so it seems to be to
be Representative
the the context of the COVID
seem to be in terms of an
initial recommendation.
What is recommendation losses
very high point
and and and and the initial
recommendation usually that is
handled in a in a collaborative
manner for the judge makes a
decision
but occasionally the just does
need to appoint regarded line to
make a recommendation.
Well let me give you a couple of
examples none of which are the
drivers for this but I I just
happen to be done over a decade
of family law.
So one example I'm gonna give
you is and this is where
nobody's doing anything wrong.
Nobody's doing anything wrong
but where
where up there's a couple
they've got time share
everything is fine she gets
offered a job in Denver.
And she she lives here their
families live here she wants but
that works she wants to take the
kids with parts of that for.
So so there's there's a couple
of ways that place up one way
that plays out.
Is just simply thanks for
getting us to number.
A second wave plays out as you
go before
the judge or hearing officer and
the judge or hearing officer
makes the decision and this
doesn't affect about all we're
not impacting judges of your
officers or the third way
decisions made is that the judge
appointed guarded like.
And we are delighted that comes
in and makes a recommendation to
the court.
Well the all this says is that
you're going to have a great
lead to make a recommendation to
the courts that G. A. L. has to
have some kind of a background.
In terms of the the research on
children and instability and I'm
families systems so that you
don't have somebody who
automatic.
Welcome I'm going to go to the
kitchen of the mop but you also
don't want to guard a lot of
that is automatically get a
state that's the job of Mexico
the job stays in New Mexico
regardless of anything else you
want to more sophisticated
response to that this is what
the stress get at let me get to
the passionate passionate
session one of the things that
we're very careful about
Representative Hochman Vigil and
I in terms of spell is that this
doesn't say what the sanctions
would be we don't want to
interfere in the court in terms
of what the such.
On the other.
When you have a situation.
As I was aware of the situation
this last year where and uncle.
gets with his sister.
And they convinced the girl.
Two reports that she's being
sexually abused.
Why so they can choose will cost
so they can disrupt custom.
Now this particular case in fact
the evaluator happen to be a
trained doctor.
The trade evaluator and talking
to get the get it let it go I
was told by my uncle to do this
my mom was there she was aware
of it and this actually
happened.
Public these things really
happen.
And their devastating to shop
for.
The worst thing that happened in
that case was that when the
allegations first native force
the time share was disruption.
Once there was no there was
never any sanction imposed upon
the party that that manipulated
a child manipulated the six
you'll.
In July about the other parents.
And lying about something really
heinous.
Now what should that what should
that that'll do I don't know
because I'm not the job.
But some kind of sanction should
happen in that kind of
situation.
There are other times when
somebody has a good faith
belief.
There's something wrong and they
distrusted the they get support
to explain themselves that's not
will.
That's not quite clear
convincing evidence a willful
Act to this rocks.
Unjustified what so that would
be impacted by this.
I hope that helps.
Thank you madam chair
representative so in that case
we're not provide is you're
saying that sanctions on their
face would prevent that sort of
situation from happening for a
parent would coach a child or I
guess I'm trying to understand
what the two things that what
the sanctions do to prevent that
from happening and to what the
sanctions might be by a judge
who would impose such sanctions
if that will if they found that
there were through clear and
convincing evidence that
you know some somebody did
interfere willfully or
unjustified yes so the so
I'm I'm more chair
representative I remember those
of the sanctions to be added
the where from the monetary
sanction it could be review of
the crosses the arrangements are
it could be it could frankly it
could be jobs are.
That's up to the judge.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and then finally
on the training piece that's
attached to
Where that would come from do we
have that ability to train and
where does that come from
currently and our judges already
imposed with the opportunity or
the our officers of the court to
Able to offer that sort of
you know bad advice or whatever
it may be and what and in what
form.
Certainly no it does not exist
at this moment we also want to
be sure to stay away from
writing it in such a way that it
mandated a particular our
commercial application.
But what it does do is that is
it creates a standard a law it
is a reasonable Senator law
these could also be C. always
are at their lawyers of their
there are it could be other
continuing education CEOs
consumers patients of their
therapist but in these in these
categories and and what we know
is that once we once we put
these requirements and all that
and then that's where them you
have a combination of the Courts
stepping out with or vendor
stepping up or variety of
options happening but they don't
happen until tomorrow.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative that's that's all
my questions thank you.
Thank you know we have our
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill in front of us today
and I think between
Representative boards questions
and.
What the senator
just spoke on answered to the
many the majority of my
questions it's not all of them
trying to go through my
checklist right now.
One of them was on the sanctions
and the other one was on clear
and convincing evidence neither
which and my my overly happy
with the response but neither on
the less I received an answer on
that.
I will say from a personal side
I would have preferred something
that would of.
Allowed sanctions to go against
CYFD at the same time
the stuff and other issues for
another day though thank you
very much I yield back.
Okay I'm I am I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair I make a motion to
table.
Okay we have a motion to table
do I hear a second.
Or an alternative mode I'll turn
a motion Madam chair of the
past.
Okay seeing that we couldn't get
a second on a on a
Tabling motion we have a motion
to a do pass do I have a second
madam chair I will second for
the do pass okay representatives
on this are on the second okay
Allison will you take the role
please.
Representative rarest yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Okay with that forty one you
have a do pass on House Bill to
sixteen thank you we'll
presenters are welcomed Senator
I didn't say that before I'm
trying to multi task too many
things and not.
I'll just leave it at that so
we're thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair thank you
good luck moving on.
Is representative Lotta in the
Audience.
C..
There yes I'm looking I'm
looking for you in the.
That's okay Representative
wanted did you have an expert
that needs to be promoted to a
panelists.
Your muted.
There we go madam chair yes Sir
do I have Mr available small.
Okay
if you could move him in.
And whenever you're ready
Representative Lotta.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee this is
our honor presenting to you
today the first time I've been a
part of this committee so it's
it's I'm I'm looking for to to
the debate House Bill to twenty
five he is a bill that is going
to require government he
entities to publish Spanish
public notices in Spanish media
if they are available and the
reason I'm bringing this before
you madam chair because there's
a local entity here and
mindlessly of districts who
publishes of public notices in
English and Spanish in the in
local English language newspaper
and thus we are in the meeting
very large portion of our
population by publishing a
Spanish notice in English only
newspaper and this bill seeks to
to remedy that and to give the.
Agencies are out some guidance
or at least let them know that
the if there is a Spanish
language and newspaper in the
area in the circulation area
then they but they have to use
that newspaper and madam chair I
have a also my my my expert
witness I don't know if you want
to see words but not if if if
you doesn't that we're we're.
No like separating questions.
Mr small like your if you have
anything to say you can unmute
General.
Gerald.
Maybe I maybe I said your name
so badly you didn't even
recognize it that's why I went
to the Gerald.
I'm guessing then he doesn't
have anything to add it because
we can so we will go to the
audience and now we will do a
poll in support or opposition to
house bill two twenty five.
Okay it's a real horse races two
to two fifty percent and fifty
percent so we will start with
those in opposition if you would
like to speak please sign please
raise your hands.
Okay we will start without Larry
her rant go ahead Larry.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico press association in
Albuquerque publishing
are we actually opposed the bill
only is drafted we've had and
we've had some good
conversations with the sponsor
Representative Lotte and Mr
smaller as this bill approaches
committee hearing we we agree
with what Representative lot is
trying to achieve with this
legislation and and also with Mr
small and in fact the press
association our goal is to
expand and continue the use of
newspapers and in the state of
New Mexico and and having the
discussions with Mister small
actually may have given us an
opportunity to create that
relationship with another
newspaper partner our concern
really is just in some of that
as you look at the legislation
some of the language that has
been stricken out or changed we
think that could that could
create some unintended
consequences and some and
unintended impacts on legal
notices as they are used in the
state of New Mexico but we as I
said had conversations with
Representative water will have a
follow up very quickly to come
up with some fixes so we think
we can help Representative lot
of Mr small get to where they
want to be and then also not
have an impact on legal notice
in general so we do appreciate
the conversations in the work
and the commitment that
Representative has given to us
to try and help fix this
legislation so maybe it can it
can work for their goals and
also protect the legal notices
of people get notified
appropriately throughout the
rest of the state thank you
madam chair I'm not allowed to
see thank you Larry I'm next we
have seventy Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sammy Lopez I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico press
association Representative
thirty eight weekly and daily
newspapers of readership of
seven hundred seventy six
thousand readers in print in
over million readers online I
mean there's New Mexican growing
up in a foreman in her Alice New
Mexico I've been a publisher New
Mexico for most of my career
working as publisher in fort
Sumner Deming read also the land
Carlsbad Los crucis in
Farmington I also manage the
newspaper group which included
Alamogordo and Silvercity.
House Bill to twenty five looks
to add
the commuter rail as a Spanish
newspaper and and we have no
issue with that as long as it it
fits the current requirements as
a as a point of of information
the legal any legal that is
published in New Mexico
newspapers also gets posted
online to the sunshine website
which is run by the New Mexico
press association at New Mexico
public notices dot com New
Mexico press association is
committed to help the sponsor
make changes to House Bill to
twenty five to work with
everybody concerned.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sammy and we have Brian.
Central control.
Madam chairman can you hear me
yes we can Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Brian federal I'm I'm
employed by Albuquerque
publishing company in
the Albuquerque journal as Mr
her and stated we have some
problems with the way the bill
has been written we think is
that there are sections that
become in conflict with each
other should we adopt it the way
it is and we look forward to
working with the sponsor to
clarify the language and help to
build move forward but as it
stands right now we do have
problems with the language thank
you.
Thank thank you now although it
seemed like there was a little
bit of fun opposition and
support mixed in there so if
there's anyone who wants to
speak in support.
Okay miss Thompson.
Yes I apologize I hope that the
government would be what should
the cold meeting this is Jerod
swallow and when I tried to talk
to you and address the board.
The committee are what's.
Okay way to communicate.
What.
You will probably get that echo
if you have your computer on the
program and you're all to
I'm not sure if you meal your
computer I need some help here
from the yet maybe if you mute
your computer it won't get that
feedback but I'm not I'm not a.
The students a bright.
Try to fix the extremely brief
right now we all.
Thank
you.
Let me let.
We were stationed.
We have one more person for
public comment so I'm gonna let
that person go ahead and
hopefully you can get your
Your.
Our audit on your back so we
will go ahead and go to Davis
and then we will come back to
you Mr small lot thank you
ma'am.
Okay go go ahead Tim.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty people
who speak languages other than
English should have equal access
to legal notices that affect
them and their community and
Spanish language newspapers in
the state are great tools for
our research our large Spanish
speaking population state agency
legal notices and advertisements
are already required to be
published in Spanish it is not
enough for these notices to be
published in any newspaper
having general circulation
because Spanish speakers may not
read English language newspapers
mandating publication in
official Spanish language
newspapers will make it more
likely that the notices reach
the intended audience the center
supports this bill thank you.
Thank you let's go back to
Mister small and see if he's
gotten.
Gremlins taken care of.
And Representative Lotta I'm
where are in this committee we
have had a lot of gremlin work
going on people go crazy and
other things that were just
blaming it on the gram and then
I I'm I'm fine with that madam
chair.
You still having difficulty so I
do not see any questions from
the committee actually I do have
a question what what are
Representative lot of when you
said when you're introducing is
that if they are available do
you mean that if there are
Spanish language publications
available or if that that
translation is available thank
you madam chair up thank you for
that it's if there's Spanish
language me newspapers available
so there may be there may be in
certain areas the state where
there aren't Spanish language
media newspapers then been in
the the the regular method of
posting those public notices
when apply okay and I see
Representative Romero has her
hand rates for go ahead
Representative.
My apologies madam chair I
didn't raise it on time okay.
I I just had a few questions
more on logistics and I we did
hear the opposition so it sounds
like your working on the fixes
were directly with folks who are
affected I guess I'm I'm more so
interested and and in practice
right now how
because we know that there's
challenges on mandating what the
private market does I guess I'm
trying to understand how the
intertwining of of mandating
publication on public
information within a private
entity and how that works for
the newspapers and is it only
newspapers are we talking about
online based newspapers as well
or is it only prints Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair Representative
Romero thank you for that
question so it we the the
organizations that we are asking
for mandating to do this or the
government organizations not
necessarily the newspapers and
and the gate you right now all
madam chair the target used
newspapers but if we have
other language in Spanish
language media that is willing
or or the government agencies
Madam willing to work with other
Spanish language media of radio
and or to be then I I think that
would apply as well madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative and then the
other question that I have is
regarding how we sort of mandate
this by population how often is
that assessment on as far as
when this would become effective
and how would we make sure that
it's happening madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative we would use a
sense census data for that
Madam.
And so madam chair
representative every ten years
will reassess what the
populations gone and then just
hope that it's it's it's in
there madam chair and I just I'm
just look wondering about
logistics chair representative I
think there's a there's a
there's another story that's
done between the the census is
and the census counts and I
think we you know any any time
there's updated information
regarding that manager is that
the US one and that would be
updated.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and if you
know currently how folks are
getting their information or
news being that we do have such
a large Spanish speaking
population where the disparities
really are currently do you know
where that might be madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
dispirited disparities assess
what I'm I'm not sure what
you're asking my apologies.
Madam chair representative I'm
just wondering based on how in
public information is currently
access where it are there
certain communities where there
were information is lacking in
access or we just talking about
a broad swath of the the state
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative so I I can
speak to my experience and my
and my legislative area up you
know the the there's a very
large population Spanish
monolingual Spanish speakers are
in my area and
We're we're looking at access
reduces the ability to this
information for example you know
the City of someone park is in
the southernmost part of my
legislative district and they
are closer to a possible than
they are to lost crucis so many
many of the residents from from
from that particular area depend
on and receive much of their and
from the during use from from a
passing.
As opposed Los crucis so the
government agencies Madam chair
in in my area.
Publishes the public notices in
the Los crucis and use which is
the largest these paper in the
in in the area in and so so by
doing that madam chair many of
the people the southern part of
legislative district do not
receive or even read the Los
crucis and used for due to the
process and the toll posso so
you need so by madam chair by
including especially the coming
over this paper in this the
coming over this paper is the is
the Spanish language newspaper
that serves.
Pretty much Dona Ana County and
even parts of of do not and I
Otero County so there there is a
local Spencer's paper that can
handle the bees public notices
that connected and that can do
that so I I hope I answered your
question Madam chair
representative but that that's a
particular situation that I can
relate to and that I can explain
to you about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative that's very
helpful and I am a hundred
percent on board with ensuring
that folks have access to
information properly and I know
that with our increasing
Vietnamese population and
Albuquerque and surrounding
areas to this would be one of
the proactive responses so I
would encourage adding language
relative to any growing
population that speaks a
different language to have that
public notice as well but I want
to thank you for your proactive
approach to this and I support
your bill thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and up and we
have also considered a the
indigenous languages as well so
that it that media is available
before the happy to add that on
thank you Madam.
Thank you saying no more
questions I will entertain a
motion I'm sure I move it to
pass.
Drive a second.
In general second okay.
Is there any opposition.
Okay we will take the role then
go ahead and take the role
Allison.
Representative Barreras.
It's nice to meet you
Representative Lotta I'm a test.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative group.
No without explanation please
madam chair.
Mr Merrill.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
So with the four to one you have
to pass that we will go back to
Representative Pettigrew for an
explanation.
Representative lot is good to
talk to you again and thank you
for bringing this bill I do look
forward to supporting this on
the floor I I am interested in
seeing the changes that bring
the concern from the press
association different papers so
that receives around and so you
said I I look forward to
supporting this on the floor and
I hope to see those changes
thank you very much.
Thank you and congratulations
Representative Lotta and I have
to say my are you the human
trafficking bill passed
unanimously in Judiciary so.
Before that so we're moving on
to our last bill which is the
house bill two twenty six which
is representative bash and I
believe she she was not she I
think she's been on the whole
time so she gets a gold star for
hanging with that.
And I believe Representative you
are yes Sir is also a co sponsor
I saw him on before I don't know
I know he's on Judiciary as well
so.
Thank you madam.
Chair.
And
We have some fixes to this bill
that have been kind of last
minute and would request that we
roll it to the next available
slot.
We will do I'm not exactly sure
what it looks it looks like we
will be doing a floor session on
Tuesday again is that right you
know what I'm so confused let me
make sure that I'm.
Yes yes madam chair we look we
have a four session at a level
so just just out of curiosity
I'm.
I know that Representative Lord
and Representative but it just
and I don't have committee on
Tuesday morning Representative
Pettigrew and Representative
mineral is there any chance we
could do an early Tuesday
morning committee.
Madam chair I I'm I'm available.
Madam chair I
Iman house transportation and we
will be done budget
negotiations for hospitals for
okay okay I just wasn't sure
what other committees so it
looks like maybe and.
We will get you in as soon as we
can I'm thank you madam chair
of this year's Daymon Ely so we
are very close to getting this
worked out it'll say that
W. or roads question.
But we're trying to work with
the Santa Fe DA are to address
concerns Representative Romero
hat we think we're there we'd
like to get this movie so as
soon as possible okay we we will
we will put you on at the
beginning of our next whenever
we have a time when we can
actually meet them this is where
we usually juggling in different
ways when we're there in person
I ask this is different and
Representative Pettigrew did you
have something yes I'm sure in
response to Representative needs
the lions statement I I just
want to verify are we working
with dust across the state or
just.
Now so so so Madam chair
representative no I don't want
to see the committee we're
working on exceptions for
Children witnesses and
informants I have no idea if it
would satisfy other dust
concerns it gets closer to where
they would be but I can't answer
this will only work in Santa Fe
do it right now the once
prestigious so I try to be
accurate with respect to where
Representative so I want to make
sure that you know that now I
know I am frankly I I don't know
what to do should be with this
then goes to Judiciary where we
typically we'll hear from the
dust
That's not use they're not shy
about expressing disappointment
and you do.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you again for you to hear from
the dust we do hear from the
dust and Judiciary yes we do
they're not shut yes okay so I
think what we have completed the
agenda for today thank you all
for hanging in there and we will
put an agenda out once we know
when we have a time that we can
actually M. do some more work
but thank you all happy
Valentine's day and don't let
the gremlins get you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members thank you.
