C. code six eleven early
childhood education and care
department miss Kelly client
will start us off for the LFC
working with miss MaryBeth and
more Kelly could you kick this
off please have Mister chairman
I'm gonna senator Kelly this
morning she's double booked over
and Senate finance.
So I'll run through it this
there's not very many
differences in this agency
but if you turn to your packet
in terms of the.
Third of what says page three
your high level summary I think
that's the easiest document to
work off of to understand the
differences.
The big picture story here as
you all created a new early
childhood education and care I I
called early childhood Trust
Fund.
And it's working as intended
it's going to be populated with
billions of dollars unit tenant
for about a billion dollars as a
goal but.
You're taking a very volatile
revenue sources that was causing
lots of problems for the general
fund and your smoothing out that
revenue source as a stable form
of revenue for a priority of
yours early childhood services
and in this particular case it's
spinning off twenty million
dollars this year I will
increase to thirty million
dollars the next fiscal year so
there's an opportunity to
allocate some of that increase
and then in the future there
will be a it will spin off about
five percent of whatever it's
average corpus is over a three
year period.
So.
Starting at the top with the on
this form is a a general fund
summary and then I'll get into
the trust fund recommendations
at the bottom of the for the
only two differences in support
intervention and early childhood
education and care for general
fund the LFC had funded a couple
of financial coordinators and
specialists that I think the
department had wanted those were
not in the executive
recommendation.
There is that
a reorganization of at the if
you look at the key code level
in your different sheets it
looks very messy but just know
that basically the department
works with the LFC and DFA to
consolidate pre K.
appropriations that both go out
to public schools as well as
community providers into one
program so you can see all the
preaching dollars together in
one place and have the
accountability and performance
metrics in that one place as
well within the pre K. P. code
the biggest difference is there
was some nonrecurring fund
balance that was used in the
current operating budget that
needs to be replaced the LFC
recommended replacing that with
recurring revenue of about three
point six million that was not
the executive recommendation so
that's the difference.
And then in the executive
recommendation the executive was
higher on some admin F. T.
budget H. R. I. T. X. cetera
that was not included in the LFC
recommendation yes in overall
growth in general fund of about
three point five percent in
reality it's a little bit more
once you at in terms of overall
spending growth because of the
bottom table.
When it comes to the early
childhood early care and
education fund again both
recommendations executive and
and LFC very close just a
seventy thousand dollar
difference
part of that hunger initiative I
think of the executive that was
not in the LFC recommendation
otherwise the big ticket items
are all the same moving in the
same direction I'd turn it over
to MaryBeth missed in for she
like to have some comments and
and I think the we hear from the
secretary next Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr solely the stands
are please.
Thank you Charles thank you Mr
chair good morning everyone
Charles covered everything
pretty well I don't think
there's too much more to go over
I will just clarify
on the trust fund what trials
that is correct that is one
position
that I ate the executive has
recommended for I think it's
seventy one thousand dollars so
you we're really very very close
on that trust fund allocation
which is great makes things
pretty easy
and meet the other differences
are are pretty minor and I don't
think I need to re hash anything
so I'm going to pass it over to
the secretary if that's alright
Mr chair thank you very much.
Yes great madam secretary please
thank you so much for
participating date please feel
free to briefly introduce other
members of your team if you want
to and then we look forward to
hearing from you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it's wonderful to
be here with you today I first
want to introduce our
administrative services director
Mr Rahman Cerro and a great
support here this fall budgeting
process and our budget director
Drew Roybal Chavis thank you
drew and getting such a great
budget put together at and our
Assistant Secretary for native
American early education and
care Giovanna arch Aletta is
with us and
R. W. secretary.
Dr Kate Gibbons but I don't see
here that.
So that's who's with us today
and I'm just really pleased to
see that alignments and the
between the executive and the
LESC we are very excited about a
couple of collaborations the
deepening of the work of ECECD
we are now eighteen months old
and in this budget you'll see a
deepening our connections to the
child welfare work with that
comprehensive addiction and
recovery act of bringing ECECD
in as a partner with the O. H.
and CYFD to support families
prenatal and through the birth
of their babies babies were born
drug exposed making sure they're
connected with outcome based on
evidence based interventions
also our work I'm not going it's
in the DFA budget but very much
part of our budget is the farm
food and hunger collaboration
across cabinets a collaboration
they're excited to bring more
New Mexico grown foods to our
preschool programs and help our
children who we know on our
families who are struggling with
getting access to good fresh
fruits and vegetables and other
wonderful New Mexico grown
products but bill building that
into our pre K. programs that is
a very exciting partnership and
also I deepening our literacy
work in the year of literacy to
make sure that all of our New
Mexico pre K. students and there
educators have access to high
quality literacy instruction and
coaching to make sure that our
children are entering those
kindergarten Torrez with all the
skills they need to be
successful and then I the last
thing that we are very excited
about that is about the
executive and the legislature
and the LESC recommendation is
the tribal investment strategy
I'm gonna just a little bit
about it but I did want to have
our system secretary speak about
why this is so important we have
heard from our tribal leaders to
our ongoing consultation through
her.
Our work with our tribal
education directors we know that
more worst investments are
needed in our tribal communities
for that prenatal to five period
and so I'm I've if it's okay
with the chairman I'd love to
just turn it over to the
Assistant Secretary to share a
little bit about why this
particular investment is so
important and why we are excited
about it here ECECD.
Thank you Secretary madam
secretary then about W.
secretary please.
Chairman small I would love to
see that this investment go
toward tribal communities to
continue our collaboration our
dedication to the twenty tribes
the nation's in New Mexico and
ensure that they're getting
access increased access increase
our I think.
Operation with the public tribes
and nations so that we could
you know really start and set up
our departments to I.
Have that consistent dedicated
funds to our tribal communities
so I really look forward to the
outcome of this land and our
partnership.
The tribe's.
Thank you very much.
At W. secretary.
Secretary you can see that do
you please continue.
I think those were the main
points I think you know we
continue to focus we have the
five strategic priorities of our
department and I would say this
twenty three budget really
builds on the successes of this
administration and then this new
department in particular in the
areas of increasing access and
quality so that's the
investments in expanding pre K.
expanding home visiting and
doing that with our Medicaid the
Medicaid home visiting.
Program the centennial home
visiting also again with the
infant early childhood mental
health consultation more than
ever we already knew that our
babies are toddlers and
preschoolers needed support
within their classrooms their
teachers needed that
with the pandemic what we are
hearing and seeing in our early
childhood programs and we're
probably seeing everywhere
though is the stress and the
social and emotional issues in
the trauma that is happening
across our program so being able
to bring that kind of quality
into our early childhood
programs and help we know from
research it will reduce turnover
it'll help educators feel more
confident and competent in being
able to support the social
emotional needs of children and
again the literacy so those are
all about increasing access and
quality and making sure that our
pre K. teachers in our community
based settings are paid at the
same level as our pre K.
teachers and school based
settings who have the same
credentials so we are really
grateful to both the LFC and
exec to have that recommendation
in there again and then again
the achieving equity tribal
investment strategy that's one
of our key priorities having
both the actual investments and
then the grant coordinator to be
able to support our tribal
communities are childcare
programs are head start programs
we hear from them consistently
that they just want more support
and grant development grant
management and we're now going
to be able to help them with
this through our Assistant
Secretary and her leadership and
the leadership of the department
and then finally just that and
and panting out authentic
collaboration
across agency farm food and
hunger and becoming a stronger
partner in the comprehensive
addiction recovery act a car
work being there as an equal
partner training our home
visitors are early intervention
providers on on what it needs to
work.
With families where there has
been substance use disorder at
where babies have been born drug
exposed so I think those are the
G. three things and then an
investment in our infrastructure
we want to be able to provide to
the legislature to the community
actionable data be very
transparent and accountable in
the work we're doing and so the
investments in our information
technology and the again the
investment in the farm to
preschool we will be able to
take the New Mexico grown
investment and bring that into
more pre K. programs we're
seeing increasing obesity rates
across our state we need to do
more in this health and wellness
and we see that that is very
much a part of this agencies
budget and this administration's
commitment for FY twenty three.
That'll stand for questions.
Thank you so much madam
secretary very thank you to the
LFC in the DFA for the quick but
detailed presentations we're
gonna now go to the committee
and we're going to begin with
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you madam secretary for
your presentation just.
Through four quick questions
Senator density of in your
performance sheets that we look
at
your family support and
intervention it says that the as
the S. home visiting program
expands it's unclear how ECECD
intends to recruit additional
families and whether the current
system of providers connect and
accommodate increased.
Can you speak to that a little
bit how do you plan to recruit
families and and do we have the
capacity if you do expense.
Mr chair Representative Crowder
thank you for that question we
do have the capacity to expand
we had a working group meet last
year and they provided a set of
recommendations to the
Department in how to more
effectively expand the
centennial home visiting program
we also acting as I mentioned in
my August hearing have received
a federal grant called the early
childhood comprehensive systems
grant which is about better
integrating and aligning health
and early childhood systems so
we just hired two new FTEs who
will be working with OBGYN
family practitioner doctors
pediatricians to make sure that
they know about our home
visiting programs and that we're
getting the referrals and the
families are getting referred to
those programs across our state
right now we have the capacity
to add another probably three or
four hundred families and so
we've asked you know to our new
program to come on board to make
sure that they are actively
recruiting families okay so I I
hear you say you have a high
level of confidence that there
will be enough providers to take
care expansion yes okay.
My second question is in FY
twenty one Representative
Secretary Mr Chairman the
average annual cost per child
rose nine percent above the
previous fiscal year despite a
significant decline in the role
but.
Can you help me understand that
if we have less people.
Help me understand where we got
a nine percent increase in cost.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Crowder that was due to
because we have declining
enrollment that was impacting
the ability of childcare
programs to remain stable and so
we used our funds to give them a
two hundred dollar differential
for every contract that they had
for childcare systems to just
make sure that they had enough
revenues to keep the lights on
the doors open and could be
serving families and so that it
would drop the cost and we waved
parent copayments because
families were struggling to make
those payments so that's why the
cost went up child out well then
roll that went down.
And I assume madam secretary law
that's related to COVID issues
and and stay home and people
can't function so to two quick
question to follow up in your a.
There are books that shows your
reversions and transfers out of
PS yes very you transfer to
million six hundred twenty nine
thousand out of PSEB was that
money used for.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Crowder so we
transferred six hundred and
twenty nine thousand seven
hundred from our program support
to support and intervention and
aid to PSEB still is in the two
hundred category so it's both of
those transfers and then the
million from.
Program support to program
support now that the trump
Department asked are HSD
director if I get this wrong I
was another million again all
within the two hundred category
but as we set up the new
department many of the staff who
work in I think I have this
right out we're in another
division had been under the
program support so it was really
a matter of getting that two
hunt the PSEB to the right staff
and not as much of a transfer
but MaryBeth are wrong you
wanna.
On.
I sure yes so basically to
answer the question good morning
at Mr chair and committee
members
the the transfer state within
the to wonder category they were
just program transfers to the
other programs where general
fund was needed to shore up the
expenses.
Very much appreciate that yeah I
think that's the first time in
years that I've heard it was
stayed within PSEB transferred
off and and by cars or trucks is
actually being used for what
this body at appropriated for so
I appreciate that my final
question is the eight million
two hundred seventy nine
thousand know that you reverted
which programs did that come out
of or or can you tell and what
was the difficulty in getting
that spent.
Yes.
Mr chair Representative Crowder
thank you for another excellent
question we had in program
support we did revert a hundred
and sixty four thousand that was
primarily in salaries and
benefits.
In the US supported intervention
this was the largest it was five
point six million and that's
where we have money in the five
hundred category to pay the
Medicaid match for early
intervention and we had such a
reduction in services that we
did not need that match and
because it was in the five
hundred we we couldn't really
move that we don't have that
Authority with in the budget
language in house bill two to
allow for that kind of are in
transfer so that money reverted
and then in early childhood
services six twenty degree we
had two point four million and
this was due to contractual
funding that did not end up
getting utilize pope of child
care bureau I'm visiting and our
policy research and quality
bureau however we did receive
one point three million of
revenue in excess of our
operations budget so the revenue
was
So that's also why part of that
is the reversion that two point
four million and then we did
have.
In the special code five hundred
K. was appropriated to ask for
start up costs and we ended up
not needing it so that was
unspent balance.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
Chairman those are the best your
responses I think I've ever had
on the transfers and budget
reversions so madam secretary
I appreciate much you're well
prepared better secretary thank
you.
Thank thank you Representative
Crowder excellent questions next
we're going to go to
Representative Dixon.
I thank you Mr chair and thank
you secretary or wonderful
presentation I'm really excited
about the work that time ECECD
is doing and I just have a
couple of questions
In reviewing the materials.
Shared by the LFC one of the
questions that I have is are you
guys looking at any policy
options are to ensure that
increased payments to early
child care providers are going
to
turn as opposed to the director
I noticed that there's a
significant increase in how much
the directors of child care
centers are getting paid versus
a much smaller increase for the
instructors.
Mr chair representative Dixon
thank you for that question we
are in discussions and we're
looking and learning from some
of our just across the country
what other states are doing
there's been some recent
publications released on
different compensation
strategies so it is something
that we're looking at as we
complete some of the work in our
the authorizing legislation that
created us to release that
waging career ladder and lattice
and so I think there's some real
opportunity there for us in the
coming year to think about how
to do that the good news is what
we heard from providers within
receive the stabilization grants
that is their number one
priority for the use of the
funds is to increase their
staffs rate and their budget.
Great thank you so much yeah I
was just interested in the
correlation between high quality
instructors and
impact
another question for you also
from the LFC materials Rick
relates to
Expanding the Medicaid waiver to
allow more models to qualify
especially for the light touch
option for families for home
visiting.
and I was just wondering is that
within your department or is
that it is a different
department and are we able to
expand the light touch options.
Mr chair representative Gipson
we are it's up at model called
family connects and this year we
have it's a partnership we have
with the O. H. it's they it's
nurses who are in hospitals
birthing hospitals and may make
sure that every family gets
offered at least two or three
visits and then again the
connection point to do you need
childcare you need more home
visiting are there other things
you need so that is the model
that we're looking at and the in
terms of like touch great
wonderful thank you so much Mr
chairman I have no further
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon the next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lara.
Thank you Mr chair of madam
secretary it's good to see you
again and I'm very happy the the
in the direction that the that
the department is going and
there's been a lot of.
Gains made and I'm very happy
with that however I do have a
question regarding the Medicaid
match home visiting.
Look in the following two and I
know I'm very familiar with the
parents as teachers home
visiting program and and I know
they've been looking at thank
you.
Thank you the ability of an
expert are looking at expanding
on the on the Medicaid home
visiting our however here it
says will actually however first
one with the most promising
homegrown programs is not
eligible for Medicaid funding
and more research is fine is
likely needed to make the
program evidence based.
Why why are we still using
programs that are evidence based
when it comes to home visiting
home visiting programs Madam
Secretary Mr Chairman.
Yes Mr chair representative Lara
thank you great to see you as
well I think first born is a
promising practice it's a
promising program and so this
year the department actually
added it to our federal maternal
infant early childhood home
visiting application as a
promising practice and are we
are working with the statewide
first one office to look at and
the valuation because it is
something that was created here
in New Mexico and is very well
received and very popular among
families and among providers and
so if we can make given the
evidence which we believe is
there then we can have this as
an evidence based program to our
centennial way alright.
So we we are taking the steps
that had not been taken
previously to at least get it
added as a promising practice
and then putting some funding
and support to getting an
evaluated.
Thank you for that ma'am
secretary of Mr chair so what do
we have a time line as to when
when we will have that
information madam madam
secretary.
Mr chair representative Lara it
is up to the health resources
services administration and at
the federal level to make those
determinations and so our job is
to make sure that the program
evaluated and we've been in
conversations with the statewide
first born office about how they
can help support that and how we
can use some of our other
funding to get enough families
who are getting the treatment
and not getting the treatment.
Because you have to use a
randomized control sample to
have the level of evidence that
the federal government requires.
Thank you for that anymore our
secretary of Mr chair so I think
this is something that's really
important because we really need
to take advantage of this
Medicaid match.
This is really gonna help us
expand our own but I'll hold
this up.
The home visiting programs so
that so that's all I had thank
you Mr chair thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative Lara next we have
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I have a
question victory you want to a
budget committee you know I've
had an opportunity to work with
the secretary madam secretary
been a pleasure working with you
all the questions that have been
asked today about anything you
have answered them.
One hundred percent accuracy and
I look forward to working with
you again and thank you for the
good job we're doing for the New
Mexico is thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
representative Garcia very well
said.
I don't see any other members
hands up for questions
really share sentiments that
have been expressed so I go to
Representative Sweetser for the
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam secretary and your staff
for doing such a great job for
us and with that I would move
the executive recommendation for
approval our first
consideration affected I Mr
chairman X. is moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Garcia to
adopt for recommendation the
executive budget is there any
opposition to this motion.
Okay I don't see any opposition
to the motion Mr Chairman
Representative Anderson just a
quick question
I listen to the presentation I
was just curious whether there
was any difference in the LFC
language and the executive
language of that merits of
perhaps some hybrid motion but.
That that's all it is Sir and we
can certainly do that later in
the process if necessary so it
was really a language question I
don't think we should dwell on
that today thank okay chairman
thank you Representative
Anderson.
So seeing no opposition to the
adoption of the motion what
we've adopted the executive
budget recommendations and as
with all agencies of the
continued work in dialogue
including the points have been
highlighted by members.
Thank you very very much
Secretary thank you to your
team.
and and we look forward to
seeing you again this session.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it was a pleasure
to see all of you today in part
is seeing you here in the coming
weeks.
Excellent thank you so now we're
gonna go to HSD code six two
four they're aging and long term
Services Department Kelly if you
can start us off Mr silly I
guess you'll be will you be
doing the executive or excuse me
the LFC presentation yes Sir Mr
chairman great please start us
off.
So for.
They're aging and long term
services department I would call
your attention to the
The high level in your packet as
well.
just to go over some of the
General Fund differences.
So the overall increases are are
fairly similar between the two
recommendations LFC is a little
bit lower
But starting with the consumer
elder rights there are no
differences the LFC
recommendation an adult
protective services took into
consideration agencies request
to to deal with pay issues for
its adult protective services
social workers on line twelve
it we did not have a a request
from the agency for the in home
services and all at the Mary
Beth was just missed this for
talk more about that in the
executive recommendation.
The LFC also recommended at one
point five million dollar
increase to the aging that we're
as well as creating a new
Office of Indian elder affairs
that the department had record
requests.
The department I think had a
request for help with their
program support in their IT
infrastructure the LFC
recommended two hundred for
that.
as well as implementation of
from I. T.
hefty.
And with that
those other items we're not in
the executive recommendation
executive focused on funding for
in home services and.
I'll turn it over to Mister
Moore to talk more about that as
well as that performance
measures.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Charles thanks sorry
Mr chair hello again members of
the committee
so yes as Charles said there was
it was a late executive add
to the recommendation and it's
for in home care giving services
and my understanding of this
program is that it is intended
to I'm I work with of the Human
Services department and get the
Medicaid match on on the
services which I think as you
all know provides like a three
to four federal dollars per each
general fund dollar put in so so
typically very good investments
I don't want to take up too much
time with that I think the
secretary can speak better to
the intricacies of the program
but but that is probably the
biggest difference is that this
this effort is in the executives
but it's it's not in the LFC
recommendations so so with that
I'll just mention that we had
discussed the performance
measures we've come to consensus
on everything so there should
not be any outstanding concerns
in that area and so with that I
think I think I'm ready to just
turn it over to the secretary
that's alright with Mr chair
thank you again.
Secretary hope from Lopez thank
you so much for being here today
we're excited to hear from you
and please feel free to
introduce.
The attending your staff in team
briefly before you begin your
presentation sure sure thanks so
much as always a pleasure to
come in front of the if the
finance committee thanks for
money and we we actually like it
I I had to have some highlights
to talk about but before we do
that I do want to introduce my
task by staff that is on on the
screen with me today and that is
Tim struck he's our chief
information officer Valerie
Garcia she's our administrative
services director Leticia Ortiz
she's All Things budget in our
budget director Rebecca Baca
she's our office of Indian and
Albert their affairs director
and Denise keying in the aging
network director we do have
additional folks behind the
scenes that that are listening
today I think a particular note
are two new additions to our
staff first we have a new
general counsel which is
Anastasia Martin as well as a
brand new state long term care
that's many started this week so
go easy on her for another week
before we give her the hard
stuff which is Carmen blessed so
just really really pleased to be
building our team again I also
want to thank DFA you know Kelly
and and Mary Beth an allegory
for their hard work and their
thoughtfulness and putting all
of our budget together I know
it's been very stressful
expressionism elation as most of
you know we had to take a lot of
time and we had to have it
because COVID is really impacted
our seniors and adults with
disabilities and you know I I'm
not sure how many people know or
understand how much work we do
on COVID every single day and so
I just thought I would highlight
some of the things that we've
done we are in charge of all the
rapid responses and surveillance
testing and all long term care
facilities to date we had nearly
nine hundred rapid responses.
Since the pandemic began and so
that means that we you know it
intervene quickly we work on
their infection control measures
we get them PPE and the things
that they need in order to to
protect residents in long term
care facilities we take the lead
in issuing all the guidance for
long term care facilities and we
do that in partnership with the
department of health we share
our weekly long term care
Medicaid medical advisory
committee for just long term
care facilities every week we
assist hospitals in in long term
care discharges we take the lead
in managing our COVID only
costs for all the long term care
facility canyon that's an in
Albuquerque to make sure that
hospital discharges happened
quickly and swiftly and to make
sure that we're mitigating
spread.
We also lead to efforts in long
term care facilities home health
and hospice and
the ICF DD eight community and
vaccinations and you know we
coordinate clinics we make sure
that that there's a provider on
one and a provider on the other
we schedule and manage those
clinics and then we we are in
charge of keeping track of who
is vaccinated in our vaccination
rates for both staff and
residents and also booster rates
we also lead our efforts in and
backs needing can Archibong term
care community and people in our
community that are adults with
disabilities or our seniors and
so to date we've
we've put nearly four hundred
thousand shots in our forty
thousand shots in arms just with
our community alone at senior
centers we also take all the
overflow calls with the
department of health and they're
called why to date we've had
we've answered nearly seventy
nine thousand COVID calls just
in this past year alone we've
registered so many seniors and
adults with disabilities to get
vaccinations and and actually
make them to our clinics
and so we we we've been doing a
lot of work just on COVID and so
as we try to get normal every
time we try to do that there's
another variant that comes out
we gotta get it and shift
quickly I want to say that I'm
really proud of our team because
we've really done this without a
lot of additional resources we
had to take people from our call
center and make them rapid
responders and we had to take
APS workers and make sure that
they are following up things in
the field and so we just have it
as quickly as we could to make
sure that we are serving our
seniors
we at you know just in the
ombudsman program alone we
develop we now have seventy four
volunteers and again I.
I just highlighted that we need
do you have any state ombudsman
even know our our adult abuse
and neglect complaints are
actually down that rate of US
screening complaints in is
actually higher we're almost
eighty percent acceptance rate
in screening folks sent
which now brings me to my well
and the other thing that we've
done is that we had to go
virtual so we had to train a lot
of seniors had to use different
platforms get them not only
tablets in long term care
facilities but really start
managing and and and assisting
folks to registering things
online working with family
members and so we've done a lot
of different things that this
past year that we're really
proud at and R. I. T. department
there are four and they're
strong and they're mighty but
they're also implementing new
services such as search stand
which would be easily once we we
train all of our providers it'll
be easily accessible to pick out
on on one day how many how many
meals we serve to whom we serve
them to make sure that there are
duplicate accounts and so we're
getting everything geared up and
ready which really supports us
needing additional I. T. staff
and I just want to talk a little
bit about the care giving that
we had talked about you know
we're asking more in the case of
a trust fund but we're also
asking for an adult protective
services one of the things that
I want you all to know is that
during this past year we have
between five and six thousand
Representative reports in adult
protective services where there
was insufficient staffing for
those home and community based
providers to go into the home
and served eight a consumer and
so that means that just that a
consumer maybe didn't get fat it
didn't get changed and get the
assistance that they need it I'm
not is really that's devastating
and that's really devastating to
small and rural and and.
And frontier communities where
we need to build back and
infrastructure where we can do
care giving better and so some
of the thoughts and ideas in
terms of partnership is should
we expand what we're doing in
adult protective services we do
have a homemaker program but it
might be better for us to also
have certified nurse aides that
can respond to these non showing
of you know caregivers because
we're in a major crisis so that
we can make sure services are
delivered not only that but if
you look at these rural fronts
and and you know the small front
tier places like Representative
Armstrong is always that it's
really hard to get services out
there so what if we can train
some of our staff to do
restorative therapy and make
sure that we can keep people in
their homes for a longer period
of time we are not only willing
to do that but I think that we
could build the capacity to do
that over the past year we've
lost a lot of care givers and
primarily what they're saying is
they have a lot of high burn out
but they also don't get enough
pay and so if we brought them is
state employees if we gave them
benefits if we grew our program
we could stand strong in serving
New Mexicans and being a safety
net service which we are more
than willing to do and we're
excited about these new types of
challenges as most of you know
our goal is to keep people in
their home for a longer period
of time and and to to live in
the community of their choice
and so we are committed to doing
that and and want to diversify
into doing all of those types of
things which then brings me to
the Kiki Senator fund many of
you asked about what are we
doing with that fund well this
past year we didn't get the
language to actually spend down
we want to invest in
in in adult daycare services
especially in rural and frontier
communities we will.
Want to be able to do respite
services or mobile respite care
we want to hear court in the
state of New Mexico and we also
wanted to you I care giver coop
which is a way that are
caregivers who who are invested
in this type of work can
actually own their own business
and actually set their own hours
and be able to do a lot of
things and make a little more
than a living wage but then find
the right type of care that our
clients need in the community so
we want to do those innovative
things that give our seniors a
variety of choices and options
and I just highlight one
exciting thing we you know we'd
ask for additional dollars for
I. E. a and that's our Office of
Indian and an elder affairs
and we've we've really been
working with our community and
our pueblos and tribes and we
are trying to set up not only
adult day cares in these types
of communities but also you know
can we do something more
intensive with the medical model
and so we're working on those
things and we're trying to make
a difference for seniors as we
transition to learning how to
live with COVID and with that
I'd like to thank you again and
thank all at the are aging and
long term services department
and our partners
and our providers in the
community who work so hard over
these past couple years to not
only make sure that our seniors
are safe make sure that their
voices are heard you'll notice
behind us it says mines as the
voice if I moved it would be B.
R. boys that I just want to
thank are legislators who could
attend and it quickly with us
because we couldn't have senior
day this year because packing
the round house with seniors was
not a good thing to do and so at
the last minute we switched and.
and and we had senior platforms
and I'm so glad and so thankful
for those who attended and and
those I know who wanted to
attend but I give such short
notice that they couldn't so I
appreciate your time today I
appreciate just want to thank
you for your thoughtful
recommendations and with that
will stand for questions thank
you so much Secretary hope from
Lopez into your medical team
gonna go straight to questions
first of the Representative
Sweetser than representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam secretary and our analysts
as well I enjoyed the platform
and the be our voice video and
all the information that was
shared so I appreciate you
putting that together quickly
and and helping us you know just
get get in touch with some of
the seniors in our area it was
very helpful so I had a couple
of questions I know my home
county of Luna is part of that
service stand model and I just
wanted a little more information
on that and to kind of get an
update on how that rollout is
going thank you madam thank sure
sure thank you for that question
so I want to tell you that that
I'm gonna sit back in the day so
the first time I was that aging
before it was even a department
we we developed a new technology
and implemented that across the
state and that was serve scam
and I think it was called Sam
stand at that time so during
that time that the governor was
the director of that between at
when I came on it there was not
that program last but Sir stand
offers it really it does like at
you know it's just like what you
would see in the school
cafeteria with that as students
chart there's electronic stand
and allows us in real time to
know how many services or and
units that we're providing and
the diversity and the types of
services that we're providing
for those who to do it now and
so we started rolling that out
again I know that that Tim
struck is is also available to
answer some of these questions
but in short it's been painful
and that's because we've had to
come up with the provider
infrastructure such as tablets
and training and retraining in
order to get this implemented
now I know that our providers
feel like they're really taxed
and getting a lot of this stuff
done and and.
Lamented what we can't have an
you know we can't continue to
wait until a good time because
as we're finding out with their
seniors there's never a good
time to slow down and start this
implementation but we are moving
forward with that we're going to
continue and we're making sure
our providers have the
technology that they need in
order to be successful with this
model.
So thank you for that Mr chair
and madam secretary and and I I
know that that equipment is
getting to the the counties
where we're starting to and and
is it have you started
implementing it is that software
working I just was sort of
trying to figure out where we
were in that process so I think
we're starting to implement and
pilot those projects I'm hearing
that it's working pretty well
but but but again our rollout
it's it's people anytime you you
you implement something it's
painful but it's not the
software that's not working it
is you know what we typically
say you know it's a user problem
or.
It's a band with problem and so
we're working through those
challenges we expect statewide
employment deployment of this by
March of twenty twenty two so
we're moving pretty quickly and
we've also sent to our providers
nothing's going to be perfect so
we'll continue to fix this as we
continue to roll this out but
the answer of the question and
the option of stalling we're not
implementing this is not on the
table for us okay well good I
appreciate that Mr chairman and
secretary and March that is as a
pretty ambitious rollout so best
of luck to you on that.
Keep up my my next question I
think it is for Charles to Lee
Mr chair on the aging network I
see the the one point five that
LFC recommended that the
executive recommended I'm sure
you explain that but I missed it
would you mind refreshing my
mind of what that is for.
increases in aging network that
was in the LFC recommendation it
was not and the executive
recommendation.
Centers provide a variety of
different services and and have
transitioned into a pretty
significant way with the
assistance of the department
through COVID and they've got a
lot of you know they're feeling
inflationary pressure just like
everybody else
and so food cost in particular
are driving a lot of increased
need.
And hoping for a more post
pandemic kind of fiscal year to
be able to help possibly with
more in person Services work on
new models of services that they
could find it I know the
secretaries been working on
to be able to help people keep
stay in their communities in the
state for.
So thank you for that Mr chair
and Mr silly I was hoping that
it was sort of four overall
increases and not anything
particularly because I'm hearing
from my providers that they're
they're hitting getting
increases all across the board
so
I was glad to see LESC put that
in and and and I hope that we're
able to to get these these
providers enough the way where
they're able to absorb some of
those increases that they're
saying so thank you I have other
questions but I know so my
colleagues do as well so again
madam secretary thank you for
the great job you are doing for
our seniors in our communities
they are so dependent on the
providers in those areas and I
appreciate I should have started
making a little tap noted how
many times you mentioned rural
and frontier because I'm so
happy that you that's where your
mind is because as I said with
they're just so dependent on the
providers in those areas and I'm
happy to see your department
rising to that challenge so so
thank you for that madam
secretary thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
Sweetser next Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary for your
presentation
again I reiterate what's
Representative Sweetser said is
on the rural and frontier line
in New Mexico a lot of people
don't understand.
The way we live and that's why
we choose to live that way but
I'm proud to be Representative
catching County R. as well as
one since the coral and I know
that for sure the Sapporo county
is requested additional funding
because there there the costs
and so I appreciate that that.
One point I was in there for the
LFC one of the questions I had
though that I need to ask is
about your transfers
and if you could just let me
know where the money was
transferred to and about your
reversion.
Certainly so I can talk a little
bit more about are reversions
and then I will pass this on to
my HSD director Valerie Garcia
we did have some reversions but
yet you know we are actually
trending down in our reversions
some of our reversions were due
to things like foster
grandparent programs and
volunteer programs that we could
not that that have been closed
for a while be by versified as
much as we could but couldn't
expend all of those dollars as
we continue to open up we will
spend all of those dollars and
so we did have some of those
reversions we do have some an
adult protective services I
think it's really critical to
understand a couple of things
one is adult daycare was not
open.
And so and that's where all some
of that money goes the other
thing is that we sort of clean
up our list with adult
protective services I'm really
pleased about this so we had
eight hundred individuals at one
time that we're all on our
dollar in order to provide home
and community based services for
we actually transitioned over
two hundred of those individuals
off of our dollar either on to
their third party payers their
their insurance or and most of
this was Medicaid and so we were
pleased to be able to clean that
up because we know now that
we're gonna be able to do more I
have been talking with the
governor's office and about how
we open up safely back in our
senior centers you know for
cooking both COVID positive and
or it were vaccinated and
unvaccinated you know seniors
who want to participate and need
that socialization and so we are
working on those plans to re
open so that we can fully expand
those dollars but for additional
details I'm gonna turn this over
to to Valerie Garcia.
Good morning Mr chair
Representative Armstrong did you
have specific transfers that you
wanted to know about just on
general.
Just in general thank you ma'am.
I think this one was nine
hundred thousand that we
transfer from the two hundred
category are person so salaries
and benefits to the four hundred
category this is an ATS we did
that since we weren't able to
spend the one point one million
that we reverted from there
because of appropriate placement
if you're not aware of the
program placement we
we're trying to get our
employees to be right where they
are at D. eight what is it D. O.
H. no CYFD that way because
we're losing a lot of employees
so back in FY twenty we had
We had got approval for that
from the from from the spoke
board and we and we're moving
forward with that well that's in
the pandemic hit and so we
weren't able everything was
halted as far as HR stuff and so
we try to get in our in FY
twenty one however our budget
was decreased because of
Medicaid match we are it we were
thank you we're we know we're
gonna get Medicaid match
in into our budget so they
decreased our general fund
however I do know we didn't know
how much so we couldn't we
couldn't fully sustained that
increase yet so now in FY twenty
two we are we are doing that so
we will not see that reversion
so that reversion of all my to
if so the proper placement had
gone we wouldn't have it
reverted anything at all I'm the
five hundred thousand that we or
the rest of the line in two
thousand that we moved into the
four hundred we sign increased
and senior placement due to the
reducing your senior placement
to say place due to abuse or
hazardous environment in their
homes so we get that cleaned up
for them and then we we get them
back into their homes so we saw
a rise in that so we put more
money in their just so that we
can help our seniors and our in
those ways
those biggest one the one thing
I wanted to mention is in the
aging archer ladies did not
remember anything at all that's
this is the first time in thank
I don't even know when they'd
never reverted so that was
really good they they really put
all their money into into the
providers and and the providers
are making sure the seniors were
taking care of we did have a a
reversion in our
In R. O. Y. EA but it's because
a lot of them were closed as
well so I mean it if there is
something else you want me to
I'm point out in the transfers I
just think that with pride the
biggest one everywhere else.
We didn't move around money too
much thank you so much thank you
secretary and and thank you Mr
Garcia for that
information I I just really want
to encourage to the re opening
of the senior centers I saw
reports Mr chairman the other
day where
you know being locked away in
your home and not being
socialized
enhances Alzheimer's and I just
really appreciate.
Secretary Katrina hold from
Lopez for all that she's done in
my community and especially when
it comes to the whole
Home care and hospice in rural
New Mexico she's been a champion
and I would encourage that we
make sure that we find this to
the fully extent thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Armstrong next
we're gonna go to representative
Allison and representative
Garcia Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam secretary for a very
interesting and enlightening
presentation
That you mentioned just an aging
senior population I think I'm
part of that category now
I'm proud to say that of the.
A long term services department
is one of the agencies that my
district utilizes quite a bit
and I'm very happy to hear some
of my colleagues of a knowledge
that there was a that was a big
one million.
What are one of the students.
increases.
Hi Representative Allison.
Thank you at the I think the.
Make sure that we're hearing you
we missed the last maybe thirty
seconds speaking directly into
the camera thing maybe works yes
Sir.
Okay I was trying to read off my
notes that a I'm just saying
that I appreciate of the LFC
recommendation of one point four
million that was extra and they
included the Indian elder
affairs and that and I with I
was I said that I was happy to
hear some of my colleagues
acknowledge of and most recently
of Representative Armstrong
saying that we need to fund this
agency to the fullest amount so
my final comment Mr chair would
be at at to have all of my
colleagues consider the LFC
recommendation even though it's
a little higher amount I would
of us support the LFC
recommendation thank you Mr
chair thank you madam secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison next we
have Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman US
secretary Lopez than for the
presentation you get to see you
again I had the honor to tour
the rabbit result into your
sheet an awful couple of senior
citizen centers with the
secretary and.
Both representatives return and
Armstrong and mistrials in touch
on the same thing that I will
touch on we need to fully fund.
Of this
Organization number one you know
I I went to the senior citizen
center with all the Secretary Mr
Chairman and and I was the
criticizing people in my own
head so you know what I don't
see the care what's going on
what what is use happening Mr
chair and and then I started
looking at it if we're not
funding these people.
it's awful hard to provide good
care for anybody.
Eleven dollar an hour salary or
twelve you know I saw a sign
yesterday or day before and the
places starts up people a twenty
two dollars an hour flopping
burgers.
If you want to flip burgers for
twenty two dollars an hour
preface you citizen Rollin for
eleven dollars an hour just
doesn't work Mr chairman and you
know it's it's wrenching to see
what's happening with our senior
citizens and and you know I
fully support the tool the news
do we goal on the lower.
We really need to if we do go on
the lower we really need to
revisit this Mr chairman but a
check mark on it so we can go
back and and see what we're
doing so we can help these
people and the invasion Jehlum
of this committee with the
people over here in this if you
have a mental issue citizen
center what located.
The main complaint is Mr
chairman we don't have any
funding of we cannot hire people
to deliver food our years of our
vehicles are too old we can have
taken to the doctor a doctor
visits and stuff and it would be
in all it really tore me up when
I went and visited the center
with the secretary and I don't
really hard and now you know I'm
not getting motion anybody but
the reality of it is that we are
leaving our seniors behind.
We cannot afford to do that
because at the end of the day if
we don't provide good care Mr
chairman forum.
At the end of the day they wind
up getting sick now we have
taken to the hospital now would
cost more for hospitalization it
would have cost if you have care
firm right and been to begin at
their own home or in the
Senators and and like I said
again in all of the people
really need to open your eyes to
what's happening or other
suggestions.
Mrs Lopez you have any comment
on that.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
representative Garcia it is true
we we we're struggling and our
providers are struggling as well
to get people in the door to to
work with our with with our
state our seniors and they've
struggled you know and and some.
Facilities really want to re
open but can't because of
staffing challenges and it's
really hard to get folks in the
door and you know the
representatives right it's
devastating because you see the
the the type of inner action
that even those employees want
with those seniors that can't
necessarily have and they're
doing the best that they can we
got to re open we've got to
focus on our seniors and we've
got to give them a variety of
options we owe it to them to
allow them to age in place in
the community of their choice
you know our seniors as most
people now and I I try to hit
home with this you know that are
in nursing facilities or
assisted living or even in the
community these for your former
doctors these for your former
teachers law enforcement
firefighters and Veterans and
and we need to do better by them
by twenty thirty we're going to
have the fourth highest
population per capita in the
state of seniors sixty and older
looking at the heat maps of
where they're aging they're not
necessarily aging and in the
urban friends there there they
want to stay in there rural
communities and we need to be
able to design and implement
programs that support that.
Thanks to digital because of Mr
chairman.
When I was up in Jersey with the
secretary.
They did they were giving meals
outside the senior citizen out
of the center because they could
not afford to hire people.
Lunches to these people and I
saw some people walking by to
get their lunch.
Right bicycles Mr Chairman and
you know there were the twenty
century with that there should
be no reason for that
You know just to this hard to
swallow Mr chairman we really if
we go the lower we really need
to re visited while when and if
you would like I said earlier
put a check mark on that so we
could do that okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia next we
have Representative Dixon and
then Representative Chatfield
Representative Dixon.
Okay let's go to Representative
Chatfield eight.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I just.
Madam just a about the great job
that just sectors during
reaching out to are extremely
remote areas and and I would be
remiss if I didn't mention the
good work that REC boxes during
a.
Our area and we really
appreciate that we're just so
remote and services are hard to
get out there and you know that
the for the year that I read
additionally for this office I
am I decided that one of my
goals was to go and spend the
lunch hour with each of the
senior citizens centers in our
area and I'm glad I.
I did that because it gave me a
real understanding of what
happens there those senior
citizens centers.
For the last two years.
Although I had.
That was one of my goals but I'm
just are you know they were
either closed or do want to take
the risk of exposure of exposing
them you know to to comment but
I just really appreciate the.
Warmus effort this been made by
the state agencies to recognize
the more rural areas of our
state and the it's hard.
Our situation and it will be.
We hear you without.
Funding so I just urge the
committee to for this agency to
the Max.
I believe that C. LFC.
Recommendations so.
Think it's money and we the
least we can do is that care the
very youngest literario list of
our society rest of us to meet
there Representative so that's
we know that.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
all.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're gonna go to Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary
long time no see it's good to
see you glad you're on board
with the about this of when they
were talking about our seniors
nerve thing I am I do resemble
that remark because I R. one
okay have been for quite awhile.
The thing that.
The other representatives have
basically said what I said.
Our rural seniors have the same
needs as the other senior center
more metropolitan area one of
our state was shut down last
year I took it upon myself I
would call at least ten of my
seniors.
Every week different ones how
are you doing what can I do to
help are you doing okay I can do
need anything.
What I was hearing after quite
some time.
There's no point in the slip and
we to get up in the morning we
look in the mirror we see this
Haggard face we see hearing in
down we can't see our kids we
can't hear grandkids we can't
even bend over to trim our own
toenails there's no point in
this league live at and that
scared me bad enough that I
called the governor's office and
I said we have depression set
then on all of our seniors
because they have now been a
slight.
To me that was heart wrenching I
hope everybody else feels the
same way I did whenever I was
hearing those remarks it broke
my heart.
We have in terms County alone we
have three senior citizen
centers that fall under the
state.
Funding if you want to call it
that we have one that is run by
the city across well that's
different can of worms I'm not
going to get into that one right
now.
But I know that several years
ago there was a problem and I
hope this doesn't happen again
one of our senior centers in
a new client in the past and we
had a big I think a trough
slowly was probably.
Very helpful in trying to get
this old agency all straightened
out when these numbers were
going to some sort of.
Or into can carry where they
were languishing and I know that
our senior centers in Travis
county Eddy County Lee County
and of.
Lincoln County I believe was.
They were not getting the money
that they were need and even
though they have the Roman
numbers that we're going up.
And I know that are.
All of the director of our
choice Senator she doesn't
excellent job.
Without rate just so that they
could.
The meals for the St seniors
because.
Thanks let's be real is
sometimes that's the only meal
they get a day and that's that's
unconscionable.
Are we going to let our veterans
and our seniors just how you you
all talk to you later don't bug
we can't do that we can't do
that at all.
Our our rural areas are the ones
that are the most vulnerable
mainly because of the.
The amount of time it does take
to get some of these people to
the same this to this three
years and everything.
Everybody we have to protect our
seniors because if it's not.
We're we're the ones next in
line.
And I think that.
Search term Lopez I think you
all are doing a good job you and
your whole staff but just keep
in mind if I can do anything to
help I will thank you very much
Mr chairman.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Ezzell next we're
going to go to Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman my questions have
been
answered by the many good
questions.
Asked by other members of the
committee
but more importantly I concur
with the comments
of two of our favorite words my
favorite words in Santa Fe is
front here in rural.
The secretary certainly has that
up high on the agenda so I to
look forward to supporting this
agency and their good work thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson.
I don't see any other questions
from members I'm gonna go then
to Representative Sweetser for
the much.
Thank you
Mr Chairman just one minute I
forgot I forgot one of the
things
that consent okay.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Secretary how term Lopez one
thing that we do need to push
forward to protect our seniors
also.
We don't need to keep taxing
social security on our seniors
thank you very much Mr chairman.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary and your staff I
think that the comments in the
support have been very helpful
today and so before I make the
motion I guess I would like to
to make the comment that I do
think we need to probably take
another look at the adult
protective services
Sit.
Differential and and figure out
what we can do there and also
the I made note of the laid out
in the in home care giving
services to be able to get that
Medicaid match both of those
seem super important so I hope
that our our staff will take a
look at that as we try to bring
these these recommendations a
little bit closer so and with
that I move that we adopt the
LFC recommendation also.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Armstrong to
adapt the LFC recommendation
with guidance to take special
note of adult protective
services in the in home visiting
is there any objection to that
motion.
Okay seeing no objection the LFC
recommendation with continued
work in two areas is adopted
that and as is been noted the
LFC recommendation is is the
highest recommendation number of
key areas that members of
highlighted during today's
hearing thank you all very much
thank you Secretary hope from
Lopez and to your team.
And we look forward to
continuing to work with you as
we go through the session.
Thank you members of the
committee thank you so much.
Thank you now we're gonna go to
our elected agency for this
morning's full committee hearing
this is gonna be the department
of public safety agency code
seven ninety agency on raven is
going to start us off
from the LFC briefing and then
we're gonna go to you minutes
miss right.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee as noted I'm Ellen
region LFC fiscal analyst
unfortunately this morning my
better half from the executive
Diego Jimenez is not not present
but Simon Miller will be
stepping in for him I'll be
doing the majority of the
presentation and then I'll give
it over to Simon for additional
comments from the executive.
We're also joined this morning
by Jason Bowie secretary for the
department of public safety as
well as members of his staff who
he will introduce during his
presentation.
Quickly orient you to the
different she packet and LFC
documents you have before you.
So on page one of your pockets
you'll see there's a general
fund high level.
On page two you'll see something
a little different which is a
compensation high level for the
department and that will be very
useful to us as we go through
this presentation and on page
three you'll see the HSD summary
different states overall
following pages have more
details on the different she.
We also have more information on
the LFC recommendation and
relevant policy information in
our volumes.
So in volume one that starts on
page fifty five for policy
information and on page one
thirty eight for performance.
in volume two detailed
information on the
recommendation starts on page
three sixty five and there are
some useful graphs and charts
provided billion three on pages
sixty three to sixty five and
I'll particularly note the
manpower projection for string
projection that's included on
page sixty three of points
right.
The overall LFC budget
recommendation prioritizes
improving public safety and one
of the key steps to doing that
is improving policing.
All of these recommendation for
DTS seeks to do this by
investing in recruitment and
retention of high quality law
enforcement officers I enhancing
officer training and education I
expanding the use of evidence
based pop leasing practices and
by increasing officer and agency
accountability and strengthening
police oversight.
I believe these goals are also
an alignment with the goals of
the agency as it prepared its
budget request and the executive
as it aired its recommendation.
I'm also going to present you
all from the high level of
compensation high level.
So if you look to the general
fund high level on page one in
line forty eight you'll see that
the LFC recommendation for
section four exceeds the
executive recommendation for
general fund by three point nine
million dollars.
It's showing that the executive
recommends a seven point eight
percent general fund increase
well the LFC recommended ten
point eight percent increase
that's in line forty nine.
Hi this is somewhat misleading
because the LFC included
targeted compensation for state
police officers in section four
and the executive recommendation
includes all compensation for
officers in section eight.
So if you look at line fifty six
of those high levels LFC the
LESC recommendation for section
eight for this agency is
actually ten point six million
dollars lower than the expected.
So between those sections the
LFC recommendation for agencies
operating budget is six point
seven million dollars less than
the executive you'll see that
online fifty seven.
And the executive overall is
actually representing a
recommendation of a general fund
increase of almost twenty
percent all the LFC is
recommending a general fund
increase of about fifteen
percent and that's also what we
out there in line fifty eight.
I just want to make sure that
the committee is really aware
that while LFC is higher for
section for its lower overall
and if the committee did choose
to adopt the executive
recommendation for section four
I would suggest that it may want
to revisit the issue officer
compensation when it reviews
section eight if it wants to
continue implementing a plan to
provide officers with an average
increase of about fifteen
percent that was approved by LFC
in the fall otherwise if the
committee were to adopt the
executive recommendation
perfection for and the LESC
recommendation for section eight
as they currently stand without
demanding any changes improve
general fund budget operating
budget for the agency would be
three point nine million dollars
less than the LFC recommendation
and ten point six million
dollars less than the executive
recommendation so it would be
significantly lower than either
recommendation.
The driver of that overall six
point seven million dollar
difference though is
compensation for officers.
And to review this I would refer
you to a high level on page two
of your packets that the
compensation high level.
I'll start by asking you there's
a column all percent increase
general fund under the executive
recommendation section that's a
calculation Callum that should
have been hidden and I apologize
that it was not it's not an
accurate but it's not helpful on
my copy I just went ahead and
frosted out.
I would request you all do the
same just for clarity.
Overall we're looking at LFC
including targeted compensation
amounts for officers
transportation sectors and
dispatchers and forensic staph
infection for one section in LFC
have a seven percent increase
that affects all employee.
On the other hand the executive
has targeted compensation for
officers in section eight and
doesn't have any chart
compensation increases for them
inspection for an overall
section it recommendation for
other state employees doesn't
apply to those officers they
have a separate component of
section eight.
It does include targeted
increases for transportation
inspectors dispatchers and
forensic staff in section four
and those employees are also
covered by the overall state
employee compensation planets
and section eight that doesn't
quite officers.
On just briefly and Simon can
certainly speak in more detail
to this if they're interested
that executive recommendation
for overall state employees
again not including officers for
section eight is all those
employees a minimum four percent
increase and gives additional
increases based on their
compensation ratio and rate so
it can really very a lot between
different positions agencies we
estimated these costs and the
impact for the targeted DPS
additions that we refer to the
tech transportation inspectors
dispatchers and friendly staff
but for others DVS employees in
the state we actually just so at
that minimal four percent with a
footnote that we do expect the
actuals be significantly higher.
For each recommendation if
you're looking the columns we're
showing the overall percentage
increase the estimated total
recommendation from all funding
sources for compensation and the
total general fund
recommendation for augmentation
and the final column on the
right most side of the street
you'll see the difference in
general fund between the two
recommendations.
We have sections for program
support law enforcement and
statewide law enforcement
support on this high level those
are in lines one through
nineteen and these are the
differences in compensation
recommendations on the program.
The alliance twenty through
twenty three we split out the
compensation recommendations by
section section four and section
eight program.
And then inspection lines twenty
four three thirty was let out of
competition recommendations by
position tech and this is where
I would suggest the committee
focus in line twenty five you'll
see the X. executive
recommendation totals for an
average of twenty five percent
pay increases for officers well
the LFC recommended raise is an
average of almost sixteen
percent if you look across all
funding sources it's a
difference of six point four
million dollars and that's
almost the entirety of those
total net differences between
the racks in both the both.
Section.
In lines twenty sixth through
twenty eight you'll see the
executive recommend slightly
higher increases for other
targeted position types but
they're not huge differences and
recommendations to provide
significant percentage raises
for these this.
And on line twenty nine issue
difference for all employees but
again that four percent increase
for the executive with the
minimum so it's expected to be
higher.
I now ask you to turn back to
page one to look at the general
fund high level.
I will go through it.
Briefly.
Some of the significant
differences our compensation in
the interest of time and I can
discuss the reliance of please
feel free to ask me if we need
more information on it.
Under the law enforcement
program lines three through six
those big differences are
compensation items we just
discussed.
In line seven and eight you'll
see that the executive does
provide additional funding for
recruit schools I'm lateral
schools Representative
recommendations do
Representative increases
compared with FY twenty two and
significant increases but the
executive recommendation is
higher.
If you look in line twelve
you'll see these act does impose
a one point one million dollar
increase in the budget they can
see right through this program
the LFC recommendation does not
do this.
And if you look down at the
bottom of these of the seat at
one forty one this is an
expansion for this program of
recommendations support
expansion to add additional
civilian staff to support
officers there are only minor
differences between those
recommendations.
In a statewide law enforcement
support section started online
sixteen.
you'll see the difference is
there in life eighteen that's
the compensation increased
differences there that we just
discussed.
In line twenty you'll see that
LFC has funds to help bring
local law enforcement agencies
into compliance with statutory
reporting requirements this
isn't part of the executive
recommendation.
And then I would direct you
again down to the bottom the
expansion section five forty two
through forty five or for this
program there are largely
similar for the recommendations
are provided for a request to
expand forensic staff and
records staff the LFC
recommendation does include more
funding for I. T. expansion on
the executive does not support
expanding funding for staff and
operations for the law
enforcement academy board while
the left LFC recommendation does
that.
Finally briefly and program
support in line thirty you'll
see LFC does provide funding for
existing positions the executive
does not provide funding for the
existing positions and on line
thirty two does increase the
budgeted vacancy rate for this
program but in understanding the
life forty six you'll see that
the executive instead support
adding and funding new position
so it doesn't provide the
existing positions it it adds
new business.
If you'll turn to page three of
your pockets that summary
different sheet for the entire
agency I'm just going to review
a couple important non general
fund differences.
So the LFC recommendation
includes two hundred thousand
dollars in other transfers it's
from the law enforcement
protection fund that's not in
the executive recommendation and
this is a contingent
appropriation in contingent on
legislation that expands the
allowable uses of that fund to
include DPS carrying out the
provisions of the law
enforcement training act these
are provisions that were
included in last year's Senate
bill three seventy five which
was vetoed and is expected to be
re introduce.
The legislative recommendation
also includes a hundred twenty
point two thousand dollars other
revenues the person in the law
enforcement program and this is
contingent on passage of the
proposed bill to of fund up
create a fund that provides law
enforcement retention
differentials the state and
local law enforcement officers
statewide that's also not
included in the executive
recommendation and it's a
component of the LFC
recommendation for longevity pay
for all.
LFC recommendation does include
contingency language for both of
these but and executive doesn't
because it doesn't include this
but otherwise there are no
differences in the language.
I'm we've come to consensus on
all performance measures and
targets students of this agency
and these are laid out on to
just fourteen to sixteen of your
packet.
That's pretty much it for my
presentation but before I handed
over to Simon for his comments I
do just want to note and
compliment and thank the agency
for their cooperation and
transparency with us especially
over the past year.
He has made huge progress in
budgeting and performance
reporting in the time that I've
been it's analysts and I'm
honestly really pretty proud of
the work that each test system.
The HSD works really really
closely with us and so does DFA
and I think that the LFC
recommendation with a
significant increase is
reflecting the confidence that
we have in HSD and in DFA to be
good stewards of these of these
funds I'm not turn it over to
Simon for any additional
comments from the executive
thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee can everyone hear
me yes okay great my name is
Simon Miller I'm an analyst at
the FAA normally Diego Jimenez
is that analysts for the PS but
I'm feeling in today so please
bear with me I won't take up too
much of your time since our
Ellen I really went into the
details but at a high level both
recommendations in front of you
support a handful of the
agencies requested increases
this includes expanding New
Mexico state police recruit
schools as well as adding a
substantial number of civilian
staff this additional civilian
staff will consist of
administrators investigators and
data analysts allowing officers
to spend less time on
administrative functions and
more time performing their
public safety responsibilities.
The major difference between the
two recommendations as Ellen
pointed out relates to
compensation unlike the LFC
recommendation the executive
recommendation includes most of
the compensation increases in a
different section of the budget
bill that's a section eight that
she was referring to this is why
the executive recommendation
looks to be lower than the LFC
recommendation on the different
sheets in front of you
I urged the legislature to
carefully coordinate their
decision making between section
four and section eight of the
budget bill when it comes to the
department of public safety
given this structural difference
between the two recommendations
the LFC and exec and so with
that I will turn it over to the
honorable men and women of the
department thank you.
Thank you so much Secretary
Bali.
We're very pleased to have you
here today please go ahead with
your presentation but prior to
that please feel free to
introduce your team.
Thank you Mr chairman I really
appreciate that before introduce
the team I just want to say that
I want thank Ellen real quick
thank you for doing that
presentation she really is a
great partner to work with
through this process is been
very instrumental in helping me
understand the budget for the PS
so thank you and and thank you
for bringing a lot of the
information forth unsure about
this morning Mr chair at before
serving introduction for self I
think it's important just
introduce my staff they are
truly the ones that put all the
work for I'm just the person
sitting in this chair with the
the reality is that the the
daily activity of the challenges
that we have they're the ones
that keep this organization
forward so I'd like to start
with introducing staff we have
been big from a call of a point
about a month ago to deputy
cabinet secretary Troy
Whistler's deputy chief forces
Egypt Planning and our special
projects so yes Sir our is the
director Herman about the deputy
director for technical support
division we screening our budget
director we have Kelly also are
not director Family eight in
cans are seen chief information
officer for information
technology division carried
about Cox's our lab director for
France's laboratories and region
to come our bureau chief for our
call Forces records bureau
there's quite a few more people
probably in different conference
rooms right support this
presentation I won't
the person time one should be
small but again we have a lot of
people working behind the scenes
just real quick about me I came
to DPS in August are to that
serve the city Rio Rancho for
twenty seven years so and large
part of the speaking some of my
past experience I recognize and
I'm still learning in this
position today I might have some
shortcomings understand the
entire process I will do my best
to try to get over the goal line
for you as I did for a the LFC
presentation.
What will start with the real
quick just giving you know
review what I'll be covering
today will have we have some
power point information we I
don't want a chilly with a power
point I will be covering for
beta Ellen just a great job as
well touch on some of the
variances so I don't necessarily
see the need to cover those
those of those differences so I
will cover kind of who we are
the services that we provide
cover can what we feel are the
big picture issues.
thanks mom Forsman our strategic
goals in our top three
priorities and the powers that
we feel are going to have an
impact on the solution for crime
in the state of New Mexico so
starting on slide two no one's
gloss over this we felt it was
important to include just as a
matter of proper form our vision
our mission our guiding values
of the should be the principles
that underpin all the sessions
that we make here these are also
the values that of course we
have in mind is a bird we for
today with our strategic goals
in our priorities so moving on
to slide three and four again I
want to provide just for a
minute a quick overview about
the PS.
The most iconic piece is New
Mexico state police a lot of
people always associate that is
who we are and we we certainly
are are in large part but
certainly not the only service
that we provide we serve thirty
three counties a hundred three
cities
and the state of New Mexico
really benefits from all the
other services that DPS provides
we have about a thousand
employees and again we have New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
in addition to what I just
mentioned state police forensic
laboratories we have three of
them one here in Santa Fe hopped
in Los crucis very probably
about three hundred agencies
that that we service.
Three different laboratories
but twenty one thousands of
pieces of evidence a year which
is really a tremendous asset for
the state of New Mexico our law
for the records bureau I did not
realize how large this was in
spite join the agency there's
twenty four separate divisions
or units within our law
enforcement records bureau they
just do a tremendous job a
missing persons consolidate
clearing house neighbors
concealed carry permits sex
offender registry you name it of
they they do the job here within
DPS and and just a monster of a
of a Division.
Our technology department what's
gonna relevant there is that you
know it's not just I. T. for DTS
we provide service to all of law
enforcement within the state of
New Mexico that includes the
courts detention centers
district attorneys they're
looking for information that
would be provided through the
FBI a couple just information
systems that comes through the
yes so our server our network
bureau our applications here
within the PS we service the
entire state of New Mexico so I
want to touch on that just for a
minute because it really
demonstrates the vital resources
that we provide to other
criminal justice agencies around
the state really a dollar
invested in DPS is making an
investment all law enforcement
and criminal justice agencies in
New Mexico and it's it's
definitely of.
Large part of what we do so real
quick I want to touch a kind of
a problem so it's not for the
effort of course and we have
people that leading for to every
challenge that we have crime is
up as you know accountability
for criminals is low we're
hurting for police officers and
there's a national demand for
increased accountability on how
we police so we feel that our
citizens expect safe communities
through constitutional policing
is something that we intend to
deliver our budget request that
we have today for both the PSA
please we believe will provide
that statewide law enforcement
sport as a whole and and meet
that expectation so
what we identified was and on
the national level we have
settled our police officers with
duties and responsibilities for
which the pressure was truly
really never intended we have
really overload them and and
although I always answer the
call for service communities are
negatively impacted of through
the decrease officer
availability the the fact that
we've overload.
Sadly in the past year officers
have left this profession at a
rate much higher than we've ever
seen at the same time we don't
have people that want to do this
job any longer they don't want
to join at the same rate that
we've seen in years past so
almost every please eighties
experiences difficulty in
recruiting and you know we can
debate kind of a because of this
and and what let us down this
road but we believe that
ultimately these are the
foundational issues that
underscore our priority in the
party today that outlined our
budget so with those challenges
in mind there are again three
things and Ellen touched on it
that we have a Salazar priority
which is retention recruitment
by crime reduction increase
accountability in training so
I'll expand just for a moment
rule on those issues real
quickly for the retention side
we really just want to invest in
the people that we have you're
currently that includes our
officers presentation specter's
dispatchers for the last person
we need to make sure that we
have longevity pay compensation
in place that supports these men
and women that do this job each
and every day we want to be on
the recruiting side would be
competitive in the market you
want to be able to recruit from
out of state right now we feel
that we are training ground for
other agencies out of state
people come here to get trained
and certified with a be an
officer and dispatcher or
laboratory scientist newly
visually see can point elsewhere
we're losing tremendous
investment in our people.
Cross the agency as a whole so
on the violent crime reduction
side again we just mentioned we
have do the responsibilities
that commission officers are
doing currently and we believe
that civilian staff could be
doing these.
Our goals expand expand our law
enforcement support services
with professional civilian staff
for the functions that do not
require law enforcement
commission so non commissioned
people.
Doing these tasks that law
enforcement currently doing all
expand on that here in just a
minute that's in large part our
our expansion a request.
Only accountability training
side we hope to implement
strategies increase
accountability for training of
officers New Mexico and state
police as well as every New
Mexico agency through Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy we believe
that with these three priorities
combined you can have a definite
impact on crime that coupled
with our C. two initiatives for
a data a data analyst a
capabilities we believe better
focus our resources and and have
a tremendous impact on these
powers so before I go too far
into the ask a little bit
further I want to cover just for
a minute and emphasize the New
Mexico state police in the
statewide services they provide
and as you can see their own
slides six
The role for the state police is
always been provide assistance
to other law enforcement
agencies with the resources and
expertise the otherwise would
not have access to and if you
look at the slight animal read
for beta you can see there's a
lot of different missions that
we run for the state police and
we run separately for they're
listed separately for other
agencies.
It's been my personal experience
I I served twenty seven years in
city of Rio Rancho is a very
proud of the police department
I'm very confident age agency
with a lot of capability but
even still there's times when we
needed more assistance and we
need help and we called on the
New Mexico state police for that
assistance I can tell you they
always said yes they always came
through very professional
organization it goes part of the
reason why it was an easy choice
to become part of this
organization because of the
reputation they have the reality
is this
inevitably less visibility in
our communities less officers we
have gonna have less will with
this bill in our communities
more opportunities for criminals
more gaps in coverage less
officers patrolling our highways
in great response times to calls
for service and whatnot less of
backup from an officer safety
perspective and greater
investigative case loads that
will inevitably lead to delayed
prosecutions so this kind of
leads us to our our our ask in
Ellen did a wonderful job I want
some of the differences so I
won't go slide for slide but
starting on slide seven
What take I guess maybe some
responsibility here just for a
minute being in the position and
having sold.
The our initiatives to do
exactly two weeks and I was here
two weeks when we had to.
Present our budget to the
executive then again in front of
the LFC
I really want to highlight today
those areas that I may have
undersold so I know there's some
discrepancy through some of the
slides for or some differences
and variations I should say and
I bear some responsibility I
would say that because it's the
end of the day I'm making a
presentation and so I want to
really underscore a few areas we
have some differences of this
usually hopefully get those
those across the goal line there
so I just mentioned recruitment
and retention of that's
demonstrated there on on the
slide seven.
You know I would note here that
AP is is that happening getting
raises already.
I have of good information there
that they are looking at a
significant pay increase and as
we are still in the process they
have already committed are are
looking to increase salaries for
their officers have been
contacted by other agencies as
well regarding the same I know
Rio Rancho police department is
also looking at this and so you
know it's a very competitive
market and we were hoping to be
the same of you know in in that
area so moving onto slides eight
and nine as far as the violent
crime reduction is concerned.
Second I can't see what sort.
Your pictures are kind of
walking my slides on the move on
to a separate here so eight and
nine.
These are the positions they
were talking about again those
those duties and
responsibilities that are being
handled currently buyer
commission officers that we
believe can be done by non
commission people it it takes a
tremendous amount of time away
from officers to to perform
certain functions and this is
where our us to show us from is
funding new FTEs in order to
handle some of those duties and
responsibilities are officer
currently doing and it's
detailed on slide nine you look
at slide nine of the evidence a
technician statewide currently
currently these are being
performed by police officers and
we could remove administrative
function and have civilian
evidence technicians do this
information if you look at night
even is is another example where
the line is our automated of
ballistic imaging network this
is basically a fingerprint for
shell casings left on the ground
and so we collect those and
after they're collected the
going to the system to be
analyzed to determine where
those casings are showing up in
different communities police
officers are currently doing
that again this is something
where we believe not commission
people could be you know doing
that heavy lifting and I and I
will read these you know for
beta one by one to canceling
crimes investigators so one of
the land that a crime analyst
same thing these are all areas
where we believe we have a
tremendous impact by not
commission people and let me say
this we're not talking about in
experience people we're not
talking about people that don't
have history in law enforcement
there we could hire people that
maybe they don't want to write a
full court anymore they don't
want to be wearing the gun built
that they still want to
contribute to the overall
success in reducing.
What to do instead New Mexico
there's a lot of people that
still want to be useful we're
just not tapping into those
currently we're hoping through
our initiatives of hiring
civilian staff of non commission
people to handle this piece to
really help us out in the area
of crime so say again there's a
lot of potential here to
maximize state wide open
services well having
commissioned officers focus on
crime with the reduction again
of our workforce in policing
really feel like we can have a
tremendous impact here so if you
look at slides ten eleven it
emphasizes a little bit that as
well on the statewide all forms
of Russian support side again I
mentioned our forensic
laboratories and how many law
enforcement agencies that we we
serve the challenge that we have
now is that we have scientists
doing the administrative piece
instead of the testing of the
late evidence that they should
and so we could look at or we
are looking at.
legal second help administrative
staff that could help well for
the last so exactly secretaries
staff managers those are all
areas where we can again lighten
the load on our sciences.
Make sure they can focus on
what's required what's important
there isn't one of to speak from
experience just for a minute it
is very frustrating when you're
working HSD when you're trying
to close out a case and waiting
for that last piece of evidence
in the report to come back and
the delay that's within the
system our our scientists know
laughter simply over worked the
backlog is too great and what
ends up happening is is if you
are trying to give all federal
street.
Your information to to basically
to be able to communicate and
and to a prosecutor K. and so we
can really increase of staff
within the labs and also
increased support staff we can
have faster turnaround times and
again their own slide eleven I
think it is of.
The clerks administrative staff
for more explosions all those
areas are the exact same need
where we see an opportunity not
just look at the the commission
side of these are expansions our
our new introduce a lot of ways
and and so again we ask that you
take a hard look at that and and
make a determination that could
be funded please so slides
twelve of.
Yes my twelve only use Intel
expand your quest and our dishes
the base request I think Ellen
did a good job is kind of
covering the variances there as
well of there there for your
review and
So before it closed out and wrap
up here in just a second I work
with some emphasis really on
slide thirteen and I I wanna
without really being able to
kind of discuss in detail our
cyber security posture your DPS
the very important recognized.
How important is the fund this
specific problem you need only
look at the news Berlin county
just experienced a cyberattack
ransomware.
Demanding ten million dollars
they've gone to papers tracking
or paper tracking of everything
you know they're going back to
the stone age is practically in
order to to deal with this
problem APS just yesterday had a
cyber attack and we received
notice from season which is our
cybersecurity infrastructure
Security Agency just on Tuesday
in partnership with FBI and NSA
releasing this cybersecurity
advisory on Russian cyber
threats to US for critical
infrastructure these things are
not coincidental that we're
having to have these discussions
that we're having these notices
in these these warnings provided
to us that particular notice was
stressing the importance of
being prepared enhancing
organizations cybersecurity
posture increasing
organizational vigilance so I
just want to remind everyone
that big picture DDS provides
criminal justice information
center or NCIC information Nash
national confirmation Center
information to every law
enforcement service within the
state of New Mexico.
Even the FBI although we
authorization from them when
they have to access in the field
criminal history information
they get that through the yes.
If that were to go down you can
only imagine what kind of having
that would create four of the
state of New Mexico and so it's
very important that we
continually enhance our our
needs there are cybersecurity
posture and not just the
hardware but also staff need
FTEs to monitor these things
right now we have I. T. people
that are more these things but
they're not it's not an I. T.
security network team so I want
to put emphasis on that for just
a minute
and again this is probably an
area where I Public undersold it
previously I take responsibility
for that it's very important for
us to to look at this and to
have a very strong cybersecurity
posture all closed out the last
slide slide fourteen which
basically demonstrates our
conversation needs are expansion
request partitions to base our
towards total agency increased
request was of thirty one
million three hundred forty
thousand three hundred Mr
Chairman but without all stand
for questions thank you for for
your.
Sh Secretary body thank you so
much for the concise but still
really detailed presentation
your incredible service years
family service in these areas
speak volumes and so want to go
straight now to questions we're
gonna start off with
Representative Chatfield they go
to Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil Representative
Chatfield.
We'll try was Representative
Chatfield if we can't we'll come
back to them if you're gonna
have yes Sir we got you know
yes.
Sorry about that the last time
it saves you came in before us.
I was concerned about the
difference between the
wage scale in our New Mexico
state police and what fate so in
the end of season surrounding
states.
Just afraid that we're losing
officers to other law
enforcement agencies and I
brought that up in the and the.
We talked about some.
When you my understanding was
that the we had increased those
Wages and that there will that
resulted in about fifteen
percent increased into the
budget to the state which bhajan
look inviting to page three
sixty five.
I just see elector overall the
increase of lower ten percent
I'm wondering if.
Did.
Did I not ask for enough or did
of that money you have to go to
other places or.
What.
Seems like that we can get the
bang for the Buck there that
hope for and I just wonder if we
need to revisit to look it up
maybe rolling the executive.
Recommendation for wages were
all sure state police officer
wages over into the maybe
including.
All along with the LFC budget
Sir
Representative so I just would
like to saw that out there and
see if we.
Consider that.
And just one please mistreatment
so miss members the committee
and Representative Chatfield I'd
like to.
To clarify your concern here so
the reason that you see
something different in volume
two is because going to only
reflects the section for
recommendation and as I
explained the LFC recommendation
for compensation includes
targeted amount in section four
and over a seven percent
increase in section eight so if
you look at that compensation
high level on your packet in
line twenty five you'll see
under the LFC recommendation
percent increase from all
funding sources they were
estimating it's about a fifteen
point nine percent increase I
actually calculated at fourteen
point nine percent in the fall
but did some we had to do some
recalculations on the section
eight estimate for the seven
percent and so we're now and
estimated fifteen point nine
percent increase for officers so
that that is what what we have
discussed with you
Overall if you look on the high
level on page one of your packet
in line fifty eight between
section four and section eight
we have a about a fourteen point
seven percent total operating
budget increase to the agents.
Thank you Mr chairman what was
the increased to the sellers I'm
here's your as a.
Use talking to the average
officer on the street.
So are what percentage increase
that was
which is which.
Mr Chairman representative.
LFC is recommendation aware
sections for infection eight
total to an estimated fifteen
point nine percent average
compensation increase for state
police officer.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative act still neck
gonna go to Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you to yes Representative
ray ban and Mister Bailey for
their informative presentations
I know that a lot of my
colleagues have questions so I'm
just going to keep money
targeted on the expansion of
recruitment and retention
efforts
I I have a question Mr chair
because many of us and and
Albuquerque now we had a real
problem with with that hiring
the appropriate amount of police
officers especially in our
municipality in AP at the APD
and so so the anecdotal evidence
I've received is that are just
you know simple recruitment and
retention efforts in the form of
employment bonuses retention
bonuses are not enough because
there are other factors in play
more specifically Mr chair
issues with recruiting and the
level of requirements
that we have for new recruits
and whether or not those
specific requirements are
getting in the way of filling
those needed position so Mister
chair is wondering if that Mr
Bailey could comment on that for
me.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee representative the
help thank you for the question
first I would like to just kind
of state in general is that I
was gonna feel that people want
to join an organization that has
a favorable reputation and wear
your best recruiting school
really becomes the organization
the agency itself and so I look
at again I can only go back to
school past experience within
Syria Russia we were able to
maintain a full staffed agency
while other people were down and
I think that's in large part
because we were supporting our
organization command staff of
legislative support and the city
too for that matter in the more
more holes incredible in that
sense C. management providing
support the law enforcement
needed and so even over the last
year when other cities were
experiencing the lack of support
we've received a lot and I I
think first of all employees
want to work somewhere where
they feel safe and secure
support by the administration
where they feel support in doing
the job and so I think as a
whole across the Mexico this is
something that becomes very
important every agency is really
to show that support for law
enforcement over and over again
I don't eat too much on the
soapbox here but you know we
have things happen on a national
level and then you know people
react to that across the nation
and so this is a very unfair to
a lot of officers who day in day
out really just grind to to
build community trust and so I
think it was very important to
make sure that the officers are
we're.
Foremost and if you have that
implies officers will do
incredible things for you when
they're out there were right so
I think if you're looking at
specific area you mentioned no
answer mentioning my name I know
that agency in particular lack
support currently I'm not just
saying from the administration
but just
yeah the O. jays in town there's
all sorts of things happening
there that make officers really
feel like it's difficult for
them to their job so you can
throw a lot of money at that
particular problem but until you
make a police officer believe
that they have are out there
supported it's very difficult
the other to make a decision on
a moment's notice sometimes when
you're in the heat of something
and I have that in the
background of your head sit
there and think you know the
action I'm taking today am I
going to legally defend and so I
think that becomes very
important for that organization
I think that you're referencing
their but overall conversation
does need to be competitive I I
believe and so we definitely are
are pushing a fourth two year
recruiting question I would like
to maybe kind of kick that over
to a deputy chief Whistler he's
got some really good ideas there
are some things that we're
trying of their within our
organization and I'd like him to
be expand a little bit on the
recruiting piece if I could
there be chief Whistler on your
one.
Yes thank you Secretary.
Chairman small members of the
committee so as far as state
police perspective to address a
couple things that that brought
up as far as recruiting I know
that the Representative
Chatfield mention the
competition from surrounding
states and the the the rate is
that that we requested
that would put us in comparison
to surrounding states to put its
number two for starting pay
and number three for a maximum
of okay right
so just kind of a comparison for
to surrounding states but as
state police I think that we
feel it's important to us take a
very comprehensive view of the
entire recruiting situation
we have a limited number of
candidates in state and we're
looking to expand things out of
state a couple things that we're
looking at as part of the plan
that the secretaries presented
as part of our long term plan to
help improve some of our
staffing numbers.
Is first and foremost the
longevity pay that he mentioned
to help retain officers that we
have.
So then unload some of the
tastic civilians can hold so
that the officers that we do
have while we are building up
our numbers that they can be
used more efficiently.
and then we are in the process
of doing some lateral academies
now that the good thing about
lateral cat me is that we sent
our officers back to the the
community that they came from so
if an officer does lap road
state police the community that
lease and officer they're just
changing the uniform that
they're gonna be working in
But we are increasing our
advertising and recruiting the
surrounding states and the along
with some other states that have
a high cost of living we've seen
a fruitful campaigns in the past
we've targeted those type areas
a lot of people you know since
the great state of great
outdoors we got lots of things
to sell here as far as the
reasons to want to want to move
here so we're trying to take
more advantage of that so we are
expanding our out of state
recruiting to several targeted
areas and then in state you know
we're trying to set up a
pipeline of individuals yes they
met in the HSD in building the
culture the agency early on and
one of our expansion request on
Ellie decide was our public
service aids
because that's what that's
that's what that's your tier we
can get people in earlier there
are three twenty one like to do
to graduate the academy we can
get people in the door earlier
that along with expanded some of
our transportation inspector
trying to recruit some of those
people Senator pipeline there
Trying to utilize all those
things to to help build.
A steady flow of recruits coming
in because as the as the
secretary mentioned earlier I
mean an investment in and state
police officer is an investment
and all of your communities the
state police officer gonna
respond and handle issues
anywhere around the state that
can be said for an Albuquerque
police officer or I mean just in
the last year to we've had.
COVID issues in Gallup needed
people state police responded
with the needed extra support in
Albuquerque because of the crime
issues state police responded.
They needed extra extra security
a capital D. is different
different threats up there state
police responded so an
investment of state police like
say we were responsive to all of
your communities and no other
agency in the state you know
it's able to do that I hope that
answers your question
Representative automobile.
Thank you very much Mr Ressler
and thank you also director
Broin Mr chairman that concludes
my questions for state.
Thank you very much of so
Hochman Vigil next we're gonna
go to Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
appreciate the presentations
that all of you out again today
is very informative I know that
the rate that we do give our
state placement is paltry.
And they're putting their lives
on the line everyday it's matter
of fact I had the opportunity to
meet one of New Mexico finest
yesterday in their circumstances
I was in I didn't want to meet
him but.
Here business dammit one of.
How many if request you'll get a
month just off the top you had
no set number just isn't
listening to I excess of a
hundred excess of five thousand.
Mr chair Representative if that
question is directed to me I'm
I'm just questions about the.
Department and not about LFC
that requests I'm sorry is the.
Whenever I was like yeah sorry
about that.
Can anybody from the department
give me kind of an estimate on
how many of per request there
are month.
Mr chairman members of the
committee if I could just pass
that over to our technical
support division there in the
other room are you switched on
to be able to try that number.
Hi this is.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Representative Ezzell
this is Regina G. Khan on the
bureau chief of the law
enforcement records dropped we
we can take approximately eleven
thousand requests per year.
And that includes accident
request I often read requested
we also find all of the request
for the rest of the department
the law enforcement academy.
First the capital for.
Thank you for that response I
know that that can that can be
overwhelming and some people
just like to keep pounding it in
they need more information and
it takes full time staff to get
that done just be in compliance
with what are loss thank.
The Secretary Boeing.
Do you buy.
The department by their
ammunition and Side arms
firearms in state.
Ma'am I do not know that I'm
sorry.
Committee Representative I'd I
know I know that the answer.
Four research provision back on
would you know.
Okay well the reason I'm asking
that I know that whenever this
pandemic was going on that there
were certain.
Weapons and ammunition stores
that were shut down because they
work essential.
Well hell yes they were
essential they were provided an
ammunitions and guns to not only
our service department but to
our police officers and our town
into our state policeman.
So.
I think it's very important that
we do.
Look into this there is and
there is a plant down there by
Roswell that is now.
Representative Ann Arbor Senator
Pirtle several of us went on
tour this and it was it was
fantastic what these these
people are doing down there.
As to the point that Mr those
Representative Chatfield my idea
we get New Mexico was on the
pays for the training on the
safety of officers and then
there Lord somewhere else
because we can't.
For some reason come up with the
money to ensure that they do at
least have a living why did the
same are.
I guess my next question is.
Public safety officers that work
at the point of entry to the are
they under your ram are at the
end of the department of
transportation's.
The transportation I'm sorry Mr
chairman the point of the race
yes.
The transportation sectors are
under the yes.
Okay there's a problem and I
want to point this out we have
custom harvesters that.
Do come indoors State.
And whatever they are tied up at
the port of entries because
paperwork hadn't gotten done
that would freak in Santa Fe in
some farmers out there that
can't get his crops.
Harvested to be able to pay back
his bank loans or the.
If you will distribute or
whatever the case may be because
their hunger for the port
because Santa Fe had done their
job there's a problem.
Are you understand what I'm
saying this is a rotational
thing and whenever their crop is
ready to be harvested it's ready
to be harvested in this hadn't
happened once and hasn't
happened twice it's happened
numerous times over the years
and these custom harvesters know
that they can call me and it
might take me a couple hours but
whenever they can get all their
permits within thirty minutes
over.
And it takes the state of New
Mexico six months to get these
permits out there I have a
problem with it.
Do you understand my concern
there.
Mr chairman and committee
Representative Ezzell yes now I
I understand your concern that
sounds a very very long process
for crops there students boiling
oil in this point and if it is
determined that thank you
Representative I want to make
sure that that we all have the
time to ask questions there are
I level differences so.
If you one more question and
then I'll be quiet and.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The Secretary Boeing.
While driving through Texas
yesterday at about one of their
top totals and.
Two X..
I guess yesterday arrested
fifteen convicts to convicted
sex offenders that had crossed
the border.
There state police said that.
What are we doing as far as
protecting our borders are you
all involved in that in any way.
Mr chairman and committee
Representative Ezzell yes we
provide support down to our
cities and towns there are
bordering the primary
responsibilities understand that
but we do find
local
when possible and when necessary
it's not our primary
responsibilities you understand
and and as I just mentioned we
are very short staffed we're
down about a hundred state
policeman and so every community
is is down on staffing so we do
our best to to always provide
support but it's not our primary
or folks in response to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your responses.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell next we're
gonna go to Representative Dixon
and then Representative employee
Representative Dixon.
Thank you at chairman and thank
you.
Secretary Bowie for joining us I
think a number of my questions
will probably
Take.
Answers from Ellen right in and
potentially the secretary as
well
my first question is with regard
to the officer longevity pay
there are a couple differences
in the proposed budgets and
secretary Boeing I'm interested
in.
The proposal that's incorporated
in your budget as opposed to the
proposal that we have
incorporated into the LFC
recommendation and Mr chairman
and members of the committee
there is a line item in our
special appropriations of five
million dollars for a
law enforcement officer
retention fund that would set up
retention.
Bonuses for lack of a better
word up for law enforcement
statewide and so secretary I'm
just wondering if you could talk
a little bit about the proposal
that you guys are looking at
because I think that the LFC
recommendation would incorporate
more people statewide
and be slightly different so I'm
just I'm curious thank you.
Mr chairman of the committee
representation a yes so our
longevity and I'm pulling it up
here the switch on my computer
this morning so it's cool slower
than it was before so bear with
me Our Lady as I recall kicks in
about ten years and so there
would be of bonuses that was
started ten years and with of
run through I believe the twenty
five year time frame in every
year of course longevity will go
up slightly as a similar to what
other agencies are doing we
don't have a longevity currently
there's a lot of agencies that
do have a lot of success with
that and so we were looking to
implement of longevity strategy
with the New Mexico state police
as well to really make sure that
we stop again the bleeding is B.
as we call it we have a lot of
people heading out the back door
we have less people coming
through the front door to to
want to do our job.
Bigger problem in still is that
even when people are signing up
we are not having the success
rate through the police academy
that we that we hope for so as
we have police officers are
leaving the profession all
experience lease yes we may have
a body that replaced it but at
the end of the day that body is
not as common as the person that
left with twenty five years
experience we're twenty years
encouraging or what have you and
so with the longevity were
hoping to retain the police
officers that we currently have
we hope invest in them vote to
stop the bleeding if you allow
me to use that to get an allergy
and then in the meantime as
we're dealing with the
recruiting side of things and
trying to make it more
competitive bring people and
hoping to retain him through
that.
Great I think that's wonderful
do you know
what year do you lose
the highest number of state
police officers.
The question exactly involved
best for our budget and was to
be able to answer that okay.
Okay and Mr chairman and
secretary I think if we could
I'll get you some of the
language that
Get the LFC our proposal is
contingent on because I think
that it would help not only the
state police but other law
enforcement agencies statewide.
my second question and this
might be for miss raven regards
the law enforcement academy and.
The law enforcement protection
fund and some of the differences
between the executive
recommendation and to the LFC
recommendation so Mister
chairman and ms right in if you
would
Walk me through up if we know
why some of the amounts that the
LFC recommended were not
included in the executive
recommendation and I suppose
that might be more appropriate
for Mr Simon Miller I guess
thank you.
Mr Chairman representative I can
answer the question with regard
to the law enforcement action
fund money and then where it
goes and then I think Simon
would be best to answer the
question about why they did not
fund the expansion of the board
so for the law enforcement
protection fund money there was
a bill last year that was passed
Senate bill three seventy five
actually to find six million
dollars to DPS for this purpose
looking at the overall budget
for EPA for the law enforcement
academy which is less than two
million
we felt that a more reasonable
additional transfer to support
increased training requirements
that were in that bill would be
around two hundred thousand so
that.
We because we expect the bill to
be reintroduced at that amount
may change based on
conversations that we've had
again nothing definitive at all
just that was an expectation we
put that number in there we put
the contingent language in there
and and we directed it to be
used as as we thought it would
be generally used for the
purposes of the law enforcement
training act I think it's a
number that could absolutely the
number could change of legend
the legislation moves along and
it turns out that that they want
to go with a different number.
And Simon maybe you can answer
the question about the law
Enforcement Academy board
expansion.
Yeah Mister chair members of the
committee Representative Dixon
I don't have a specific answers
to why that is not included in
in the executive recommendation
right now I have to check with
with the usual analyst for this
agency but we can definitely get
back to you with an answer to
that.
I apologize okay I'm thank you
so much yeah that would be
wonderful it's it's certainly
something that the legislature
has and talking about for a
while so would really appreciate
some additional information on
that I'm the other thing is Mr
chairman and secretary that I
wanted to highlight is there a
few things in the LFC budget
recommendations that have really
been part of the discussions in
the legislature and at least
within sort of that Bernalillo
county our members I would say
for how we improve public safety
statewide and two of those
things that I wanted to flag are
on the overview sheet line
twenty online nine and it's the
lead program and the local a law
enforcement officer at reporting
and so.
I think both of those are very
important and I'm glad that
they're in the LFC budget and
was just curious if.
That you know there's a
particular reason that they're
not in the executive budget.
Mr chair sort of go ahead I'm
sorry.
Mr chairman and representative I
I I think again I'll give you
the best answer I can and then I
thought maybe seven can fill in
with the a little more from the
executive perspective but for
those particular initiatives
those for something that was
just discussed internally on the
legislative side and so it was
not requested by the agency
although I have discussed both
of those items with the agency
to make sure that they
understood what they would be
and and if they would be
possible to implement so I I
think that the executive
recommendation doesn't you know
there wasn't requested they're
not supporting it just wasn't
information that they have at
that time I don't know Simon has
anything else to add on that in
the that's correct thank you
thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you so much I I
really appreciate that and then
I believe Mr chair this is my
last question
I just wanted to flag the
A civilian versus certified
officers and secretary Bowie
this just sounds like a
wonderful way to increase the
effectiveness of your
organization you know sort of
thinking outside of the box and
so I really just wanted to
commend you for that I thought
that sounded wonderful and I
didn't know if this was
something that
You know the LFC had not
included or it just wasn't part
of discussions
but it certainly sounded like a
good approach so I don't know if
their answers or it might just
be more committee thanks.
Mr chair and and Representative
Dixon and I just want to clarify
in terms of the.
Expansion of quest for state
police civilian support that
that is included in both the
executive and legislative
recommendations online forty one
of the high level of page one
you'll see that there's a very
minor difference eighty two
thousand eighty three thousand
dollars between them
so so that's where I'm supported
and I think this other
initiatives as well within the
budgets that that Secretary
berries referring to United's
it's not just about everywhere
that we can pull up the
resources that support law
enforcement and can continue to
take some of those additional
duties away I think it's it's
not just expansion but that is
that that is the primary area
again filling all those you know
Reagan positions out and
increasing support in all those
areas would help.
Great thank you so much yeah the
the section for versus section
eight all of that was sort of
mind bog boggling to me for that
so I appreciate that answer and
that thank you Mr chairman I
have no other questions.
Thank you Representative Dixon
excellent questions let's go now
to Representative lane and then
we'll have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair I
think my question is for Ellen.
So it's one make sure I
understand how these numbers
interacts so on page one of the
high level one fifty one I see
compensation increases for state
police officers there's a
difference there about eleven
million and then on page two.
Well.
Twenty five.
There's a difference there about
six point three million so.
My question is.
Does page one line fifty one
does that not include seven
percent.
For all state employees that.
Is being proposed.
Mr Chairman representative lane
actually line fifty one only
includes that seven percent the
remaining target in route for
state police officers in the LFC
recommendation is in lines three
and four and so if you add that
together line three line four
and line fifty one.
You get the total number that is
on page two line twenty five
many also see if you look on
page two
lines are five and six in the
General Fund column correspond
with lines three and four on
page one and let's see it line
nine.
Corresponds and you'll see it's
labeled section eight rate that
corresponds with one fifty one
you know there's a this is a
complicated way that the budgets
are different and
I can.
I I understand it's confusing
and I've done my best to try and
clarify it for you all to please
ask me as many questions as you
need to to make sure that you
understand because this is been.
It'll to figure out how to
displace information in the the
clearest way and I've gone with
a few different different Senate
different ways of displaying it
here and so I recognize that
that could be confusing when
really the hope us to clarify so
please please ask anymore
questions that that I need to
answer to clarify that.
Mr chair Ellen you don't have
any need to Polish as an insured
stated my lack of intelligence
and not your lack of ability to
explain so I'm just trying to
get at the the baseline.
Difference between the agency
asked and the LFC reckons that
that six point four million
dollar number at one thirty on
page two.
Yes Mr chair representative yes
that that three point three five
eight that would be the that is
that is the main difference.
Okay six point four million.
Six point three I apologize yes
but six point four million
dollars that is the difference.
Thank you you know Mr chair
it's.
My biggest concern I think.
With this agency it is
recruitment we have a we have a
huge following the New Mexico is
facing.
And we know that the prime
packages it is a priority for
the governor and for good
because I think actually she's
given a press conference now
we've been on on the bills she
wants introduced and we as the
legislature can pass lots of
bills but if we don't have boots
on the ground to enforce what's
written on the page that's
that's all it is.
And so to me I think this this
compensation issue as low
hanging fruit that the
legislature can address
and I know there's reasons why
we have a LFC racked
but I would just ask if there's
any chance that we could we
could put a sticky note with
this agency and have staff sit
down with staff from this agency
to see if there's any way that
we can bridge that gap because I
mean frankly.
Six point four million is not a
lot of difference to see if
there's any way that we can work
through that
because.
You know I think.
The secretary said they're down
a hundred officers we're having
a hard time recruiting younger.
Populous you know there's a
number of issues here
And this is I think vital for
our local communities because
yes.
They are state police but they
do serve also our local
communities so to whatever
extent that we can make that
happen I would appreciate I know
we're gonna go Phelps you back
today
but we need boots on the ground
I think this is an easy way to
address that thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lane
it will address your and other
comments and suggestions which
are very well taken.
Next we gotta go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr secretary only have one
question I heard you mention the
same that the Representative
Lane heard your down a hundred
officers I'm assuming Sir that
that as you went through that
process their exit interviews
taken from those officers.
As best you could sum up we'll
talk some more.
The committee that I'm from just
lost our chief of police
affected January first you
resigned and retired on January
first
It is our number one issue that
came out of his mouth was not
pay raise.
But it was the loss to qualified
immunity.
And how that decision impacted
the morale of his men.
as far as the community in the
state standing behind him and
believing at all.
This second issue was pay it
couldn't pay is man enough I was
having a difficult time so I'm
wondering and by the way that
our our chief of police was an
amazing man we had a.
Huge murder issue in our library
for four years ago he was the
first man through the door he
didn't say getting guys you
should follow NMAA guidance it
was an amazing guy hated single.
But I wondered in your exit
interviews for the top three
issues that they gave you as to
why they were stepping away.
Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
Crowder I think you've
identified it I I mean overall
when people are eligible to
retire and they are still
assuming risk for themselves and
their families they make
assessments of of where they're
at in their life if they need to
carry on and I think overall law
offices and will be sharing a
secret here I was also did tell
you that that is exactly the
case do I feel in some cases
it's after the place not always
I mean I think it in the day for
out there policing
constitutionally you're doing
the job exactly we're supposed
to be doing should be worried a
whole lot right you have a body
camera to to record all of your
actions and if you're on the
right side we should be doing
I've always felt justice to job
do it well and you're gonna be
fine and so but not everybody
has that same opinion people
want overall feel they are
supported and I do believe that
that have an impact on the law
enforcement
the officers are still and then
the fight through the
organization they work for but
not all will understand that are
probably take the time to fully
understand it and so it probably
just becomes like what you're
describing is the overall
feeling of of support and fear
whether it's it's accurately
placed remote people question so
the back in their career whether
they should still assume the
risk and then it's not just the
police officer understanding
it's the family who they come
home to to understand as well
right they watch TV and this
guy's always falling on every
news channel here watch and so
at the end of the day the you if
you don't have home support and
people question why you're still
doing the job and you have a
spouse potentially that's
telling you Hey Hey how and why
don't you retire you know let's
do something different in those
things all star weighing on on a
on a man or woman and so at the
end of the day I think you have
identified it I think it's you
know this is why I am all for me
I do think it's cyclical I think
that that you know people just
said and I said to the pendulum
swinging back in our favor of
for the moment you know the
bottom line is that all it takes
is is because of one person's
only on someone's.
Act up north and somewhere else
and we're gonna be right back in
the same boat again people's you
know screaming for four so I
think all we can really do day
in day out is just continue
working on community trust and
then our individual communities
work as hard as we can so that
we do have our lows and law
enforcement on that we are trust
or trust bank if you will what
kind of care is to the next
level in the meantime we just
keep encouraging please offer
that we have keep supporting
will tell on there doing a good
job and it showing the love and
support that we offer them both
from the committee decided
internally from the agency side
and and and we will get through
together a police
Thank you Mr secretary
appreciate that I I I think I
heard confirmation that the
probably qualified immunity as a
role player pay is a role player
I I just wonder do you actually
have a statistical.
information from those that I
would love to know what number
three number four are some
update they have family needs
and move to another state they
have different reason I'm just
curious as we look at this to
make sure that we are
addressing.
All of the needs and not just.
One.
Mr chairman that's all my
questions Mr secretary thank you
thank you excellent thank thank
you very much Representative in
ranking member
Mr secretary I think the
committee members of access to
excellent questions and I want
to get to kind of a of a sense
of of how we are going to
proceed
we're gonna go to Representative
Sweetser for the recommendation
prior to that though and
obviously.
you very in mind madam chair it
has asked this committee during
each session to focus
specifically on department of
public safety shall have of
course for a very strong part
role in leading that said I do
want to appoint a subcommittee
because there's many different
that.
Many.
Areas of commonality a number of
key differences and I think as
is been discussed very strong
confidence displayed both from
the legislature and the
executive secretary billion you
your leadership team the men and
women.
Under that leadership in so
there's clearly a commitment to
investment many details that
need to be worked through and to
so for this group and and most
we want to ask Representative
Dixon Hochman Vigil
Representative Sweetser and of
course madam chair and I'd like
to participate along with
Representative Lane ranking
member Crowder Representative
Chatfield
and and representative Armstrong
to to participate it's quite
large but there's been a very
high degree of interest and
Representative Dixon
Representative lane I look to
you.
To help really help steer us so
with that
Let's go to Representative
Sweetser for our recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair I apologize I
just I wanted to make sure that
I was there you're you're
pointing an ad hoc subcommittee
with.
The.
Yes and I'll get those members
the yes you need.
This again under no.
I heard Representative Dixon
Hochman Vigil us we've fair.
Chatfield when Armstrong
yourself and your Lundstrom
that's right okay.
Just wanted to make sure that
that I got that right thank you.
Thank you very much.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you for the the emphasis
on the subcommittee because I do
think we want to get this one as
close as possible to help on
here secretary H. and thank you
Mr secretary and your staff for
the great work you've done along
with the analyst and with that
I'd the LFC recommendations.
Been moved by Representative
Sweetser is there a second.
Thank you.
It's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Dixon with the
ad hoc subcommittee is their
opposition to the motion.
Seeing no opposition we're gonna
move forward with the LFC
recommendation was clearly a
significant amount of work to
come and and a great deal of
interest in appropriate thank
you Mr secretary again to you
and your team it was great that
we got a few of of just a
portion of that team everybody
was tuned in and really engage
so thank you again and that
thanks everybody that'll
conclude our mornings business
we'll be firing up again at one
thirty PM for our subcommittees
thanks everyone thanks the
analysts and all who have
participated in more.
All right talks in thank you.
