And without an amendment and it
was a verbal amendment last time
if we could just get a do pass
on health L..
to Senate Joint Memorial one.
Yes roll call first place.
The roll jumping ahead of
myself.
Representative Chasey is
excused.
Representative Eli here.
Representative guy it goes.
Representative.
Representative my part.
Your.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm present.
Representative Zamora.
Here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair here.
Madam chair with that we've
reached a quorum with a present
and one excuse.
Thank you send that we can
begin.
So as stated previously just a
housekeeping matter on site
Senate Joint Memorial one.
Are there questions are can I
get a motion pretty pass madam
chair all the commotion.
Was right.
We have a motion by
Representative Eli and I think
it's that.
Is there any discussion.
Is there any objection to the
pass.
Okay seeing now and we have a
due pass on Senate Joint
Memorial one showing all members
present voting in the
affirmative and that is without
any amendments.
Okay great so now we have house
bill two one nine and it is a
committee substitute.
And if we could get the niece
yet to raise your hand.
Okay.
Great so for the committee's
information we heard this a few
weeks ago and it did pass out of
this committee and it also went
to the house health committee
and it passed out of their
unanimously but we had some.
Concerns I you tribes that
everyone was working really
really hard to address and those
have been inserted into the
committee substitute there is a
two page handout that is
provided in the handouts portion
of the chair I am for this panel
and I am going to turn it over
to the east yet to explain the
changes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
having us again this morning my
name is the second I'm the
policy director pulled futures
or futures has been supporting
this effort
in shepherding it through the
legislative session as madam
chair explained after we left
your committee we did take a
committee substitute to the
house health committee that was
primarily to address issues
raised in the FIR and then we
heard some additional changes
from tribes that they wanted
included in the bill so that's
why we brought forth this
committee said today
it's arranged in six primary
buckets of work we did make some
changes to definitions to
further clarify rates to the
tribes or Indian children there
were changes made to allow for
differing tribal structures and
functions for example some
tribes have tribal court some do
not.
there were changes made to
clarify additional obligations
of the department so for example
that the department may send our
must send notice yes certified
mail and with return receipt to
ensure that those very important
notices go out and are received
there were changes made to
clarify standards required the
primary changes are to read were
to raise the standards of
evidence to clear and convincing
standard of evidence and that
was made in several different
sections.
there were changes made to
clarify additional rights
afforded to the tribe's
including changes related to the
qualified expert witness and
clarifying that even placements
made voluntarily
must be covered by the State FY
act as well and then some
additional the last bucket of
work additional protections for
Indian children and families
around the inclusion of
traditional ceremonies and
saying that for Indian children
the standard of active versus
reasonable efforts must be
applied and I think that
summarizes the majority of
changes madam chair.
And madam chair because we
passed the gavel onto vice
chair.
I just also wanted to add that
to you know I I know there's a
lot of questions around the
Indian child welfare act and
really what this is trying to do
is hold the CYFD accountable to
ensuring that they have
immediate and constant
communication with the I so that
native Americans and are staying
with that hierarchy that's
established in the federal
Indian child welfare act
including notice to immediate
family to extended family and
two members the tribe's so with
that madam chair I think it
might be most beneficial to have
a poll going and depending on
the results of that poll
if it's if it's.
Official to take public comment
that we can but if there isn't
any opposition then I think we
can go back to the committee
since we've heard this and this
committee before and it's also
been heard and health help.
Okay thank you madam chair so
now we will go to the audience
and conduct a poll.
And.
Okay so we have that thirty four
in support of the substitute
bill and one in opposition now
we will go to public comments
and I see one hand raised.
And that is the star family.
We'll begin with.
Morning my name is Marshall
restore I'm a proud member of
the Choctaw nation of Oklahoma
I'm it will foster parent and
echo adoptive parent and equip
educational decision maker.
Education professional and a
member point by communities
thank federal entities about how
to best serve native children in
previous committee meetings it
was stated that the goal of this
legislation is to give Natick
native communities and families
the opportunity to retain
custody and.
And raise the children in the
care this is already to go and
should remain the go.
If I support this bill and
believe it will be a good thing
for our state.
And our children when it is
ready unfortunately there are
many areas where the amendments
are needed the goal is to
maintain native children and the
tribal communities that is not
always possible until we recruit
retain.
Train and support more and
retain more native families who
are are we pulled.
Actually inflicting more trauma
to our children especially our
children who are older and come
into care.
Thank you next we have Karen
what lot.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen would walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we stand in strong
support of the state or act we
we believe this is really needed
and it's long overdue thank you
very much.
Thank you next we will go to
Donna Quintana.
Madam chair you just I needed me
and I've already spoken this is
Keren would walk.
We have asked Donna Quintana.
Your and muted.
Donna can you hear me can you
hear us.
Okay while we get organized
let's go to Secretary Blalock.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of private elected
cabinet secretary at CYFD
dishonesty with deep
appreciation for all the
leadership Representative Lewis
and from the tribe's when this
bill first came the committee we
had a little over half the
majority of the tribes to
formally supported the bill but
we recognize that there was some
tribes to wanted opportunity
Kumari input and so we're able
to convene those and the result
is this committee substance use
in front of you today we feel
that this is now has the support
of of the twenty three nations
in New Mexico or at least we're
well along that path to bill
where everyone feels comfortable
with it's such an important
issue to ensure that the a
native American youth in New
Mexico have all of the
protections of the patient out
of so we send a strong supporter
and greatly appreciate of this
process thank you.
Thank you Secretary now we have
Brenda Garrity.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
regarding a lot we do not
approve.
And John court across the line
on behalf of the New Mexico
coalition perceptual hold by
thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have at a
current.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is that
act wrong I am the social
services director for the public
Santa Ana we I am speaking on
behalf of the Pueblo and
governor Ulises Leon and we are
in strong support of this bill
and we urge you to.
Further support this bill and
pass it thank you.
Nicole Martin.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michael my and I'm a great
and then just numbers of the
public.
I was born and raised here and
here sorry sorry just over the
support sagging areas I'm
eight one of all the providers
for indigenous formalizing at
all costs for.
Well I do believe that native
children deserve to.
With indigenous communities
And support House Bill to thank
you.
Next we have Hannah Burlingham.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Hannah Burling and I'm speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico the league stands
in strong support of this bill
thank you.
Next we have Candace L..
Woman members of the committee
my name is Kandace Littlefoot
policy associate both features
formally known as young women
United ample features fully
supports house bill two zero
nine we would like to think
Representative Lewis for
bringing this important
legislation board and we urge
the members of this committee to
support this vital piece of
legislation thank you.
We have Robert Apodaca next.
Okay good morning madam chair
members to be my name's Robert
up with Austin the lobbyist for
the.
Welcome Pueblo we also in
support of this bill we do also
appreciate the changes and that
been made to make more complex
funding for the tribes in New
Mexico so thank you and we are
just support thank you.
Thank you next we have Jan
billing.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am Jennifer
Billig with girls Inc of Santa
Fe and we stand in strong
support of this bill.
And next we have Christian.
Morning chair members of the
committee my name is Christian
Radford I am twenty eight years
old my tribes are standing
around okay what and I'm also
for Mexican I was born and
raised in New Mexico I grew up
in a society where native
Americans are underrepresented
especially in politics and media
our culture is diminished our
tongues are later literally cut
when we lose our languages and
our land is no longer hours just
as addiction is a symptom of
poor mental health being removed
by foster carers assist symptom
of poverty and the lack of
resources I urge you to keep our
children and our native
communities and to support these
communities of basic human
rights that include but are not
limited to access to health care
running water and affordable
housing sh native Americans
deserve the ability to break
their keeping our families
together is the best you can do
please vote yes on H. B. twenty
nine thank you.
Thank you next we have a common
rate Chino.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Khan
which you know and I
Representative this the problems
of Aqaba and trials and we also
support latest version before
the committee.
We also want to extend our
appreciation of to the sponsor
for allowing additional
recommendations and changes to
be made to the current version
the address the concerns we had
about definition procedures
process in particular as well as
qualified expert witness
and so we are in support of this
current version but we were
extremely
are concerned about the.
Have a consultation that was not
fully undertaken and reaching
out to tribal leadership as us
said for the StateTribal
collaboration act but regardless
we are in support of this
current version of a committee
substitute thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you I don't see any more
hands raise so now we will go to
comments in opposition of the
bill.
I see the star families hand
raised again okay.
All right now we will go to
committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair when this so bill
was brought before us
originally.
Hi there are raised one issue
and that was the issue of
whether our children who.
Have been placed with us.
Non.
Indian foster parents.
Whether those parties would be
able to participate and to be
part of the process.
Particularly where they are
fostering children who have.
Have a substantial weight the
relationship with the.
And.
Madam chair and and
Representative I don't.
My my quick re.
And that was where
my quick read of this version
does not address that issue in
fact the the only thing I can
find that that kind of deals
with that issues on page ninety
four lines nineteen of twenty
nine basically that says of the
foster parents
The foster parents don't have
any our ability their
relationship should be
considered by the court and so
with respect to children I'm not
talking about respectively.
I understand the prospect of
application and your desire to
to to have the supplies but I'm
talking about retrospectively.
Foster families who have have
these children in their house
also we service birth and have
developed a real relationship
with these children
I just would like to have some
assurance that there is
something in here that allows
those families to participate in
the process.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative the so thanks
for asking the question and in
the drafting of this bill what
was really great about having
Time to review and revise it was
really first to getting the
initial input from the folks
that are you
workers both with the social
workers both with the Indian
tribes as well as CYFD who deal
with this issue so I'd like to
defer to us and the a Travers to
answer that question.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for this important question
we have in the current statewide
in the original
draft as well as the current
draft we have added in a
component that requires a
cultural compact.
To be entered into by the non
relative foster hole that would
have Indian child placed the Act
also would require that the non
relative foster parent receive
training on the child's tribal
customs and traditions we
I hope that this act will
increase accountability on the
front end so that the children
are placed within relative
placements upon removal from
their parents or from their
primary care takers when they're
placed in the foster care
system.
So that we have children that
are in place in compliance with
the placement preferences as
outlined in the federal it why
and the state what from the very
beginning so we know that if we
can increase that accountability
and for the state to have
children placed immediately
that.
Less children will be placed in
non relative foster homes but
when those children are placed
in non relative foster homes the
courts still have the option of
naming that rostrum parent to be
the adoptive or guardianship
parent for those children the
changes and intervention status
do not change anything about
that they still would be able to
be considered for long term
placement of children in their
home.
Madam chair and Mr Evers where
where in the bill it is that
because I.
I mean I saw the line that says
you know the Indian child foster
parents should not be considered
as a factor in terminating
parental rights but I didn't see
any protections allowing non
Indian foster parents to have a
role in the process where that
foster child has been with them
for an extended period of time
and and those bonds of for.
Representative madam chair and
representative Nibert to buy
could direct you to at the
beginning of our excuse me on
page two.
The definition of cultural
compact bans in agreement that
documents how an Indian child
placed in adoptive or
guardianship home will continue
to actively participate in the
child's cultural learning and
then.
Moving along to.
This is page forty one.
Section G. the administrative
office of the courts in
collaboration with the
department shall develop and
deliver annual mandatory
trainings to all children's
court judges District Court
judges attorneys guardians out
late and you the tourney's who
are quite appointed so this is
more talking about the cultural
compact.
And then again on page forty
three.
Yeah and is this a point to to
four nine six point two virgin.
Yes okay.
So on the bottom of page forty
three a we're we're talking
about new material pre adoptive
adoptive and guardianship
placements maintenance
maintenance of cultural.
Ultra compacts.
of culture cultural compacts
sorry to ensure that the federal
ECWA in the state we are fully
and Clemente ed and the all
children have the opportunity to
maintain strong connections to
other cultures of the household
into which an Indian child is
placed Representative option
adoption or guardianship.
Does not include a parent who is
a member of the Indian child's
tribe the court shall require
the parties to the job tion of
that option to enter a cultural
compact.
Yeah that would be in the
instances where you have foster
parents that are non Indian that
and do receive the child and.
production adoption
guardianship.
But I'm madam chair madam chair
I think that so.
What you pointed out your it's
all a one way street there's no
provision in here that allows
import tax.
The foster parents who have.
At the Indian child possibly
since birth and have for all
intents and purposes that child
as a parent
child relationship with that
family and you know what I
brought up last time was and I
think one of the.
People who who spoke
from the public last time
brought out the fact that when
we have those situations it's.
It just doesn't seem to be in
the best interests of the child
not to have their parents for
all intents and purposes having
a seat at the table and being
able to comment and be engaged
in the decisions that are made
with respect to that child in
the potential for that child be
taken out of the home the only
home that that child's bone yeah
and that you know I can see
moving forward but if if this
bill.
R. becomes law and there's no
protections to deal with
existing relationships I
question whether the best
interest of the child are
actually being advanced.
in those cases are impact I
would consider it to be cruel
yes this bill would result and
suffering that parent child
relationship
And removing them from the only
home with no.
Actually one when they've been
there for three years and and
have that relationship and so I
was hoping that this graph would
would address my concern that
was raised earlier and are you
the I just don't see anything in
here that does that
and I understand these the
legislation and and I would
support it moving forward.
I.
I I'm not sure whether I have
that same desire to support to.
Allow
along the be implemented that
would.
Potentially be very upsetting
to.
Parent child relationship the
that existed in is being
nurtured and and the the one
example that I personally know
of here in Santa Fe.
the foster parents who would
ultimately like to adopt this
child added address child since
the
virtually birth.
They.
Are in full agreement of
entering into these cultural
compacts and fully in agreement
with making sure that that child
understands that that that their
roots are are with this
particular tried making sure
that that child understands and
has those opportunities but but
the it would seem extremely
cruel.
To allow.
A process to occur that would
extract that child about family
in this one instance of but I
will.
And so I I was hoping that that
issue will be addressed.
It doesn't appear to be up here
and lie I have a real concern
for the I don't have any further
questions it's just that I have
a real real concern for that
because I think.
In all these.
Children code issues the job
records the job of our US is
legislators that job of society
is to make sure that we we
walked out after the best
interests of the child at the
when those bonds to be informed
what would that's the only
families children have have
known that they're being cared
for their love
To to to upset that
just doesn't seem see more.
R. right it doesn't seem Jaster
and it doesn't say mac bowl to
the so I'll just leave it about
Madam chair thank you maybe
If that's a concern anybody else
maybe maybe that ought to allow.
Those situations to be addressed
in this law reports thank you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I'm glad I finished my eight
thirty hearing in time to join
in on this
I I have a fairly
Well I have a response to our.
Representative night madam chair
and that is that.
The federal Indian child welfare
act.
Was passed and this is a state
version of it because we were
breaking up Indian families we
were literally taking them away.
From their homes and it started
with the boarding school
Frankly tragedy where children
were ready they were
Way to boarding school but we're
not their culture was not
respected and
We were really actually.
Taking the life blood out of the
tribe's.
The
Federal Indian child welfare act
hi some pretty high standards
further proof yes.
You're on these cases and one of
the early on when I started
doing this work I wanted to feel
and and echo case because of
Bill your by the department of
for active efforts.
A very young father out.
Very remote areas.
Pretty far from Crown Point was
literally just told well you
have to go to Crown Point signed
up for classes to take and he
needed more I.
So that was just that's just one
issue.
What the research has shown in
addition to the fact that our
policy and our lot in New Mexico
is to reunify families whenever
possible what the research shows
is that children are much better
off with their own biological
families or extended families.
They suffer less traumatic in
the end and what I think is that
there.
I do know of the.
The family and one county where
I worked where they did
successfully adopt an Indian
child no engine family dot
adopted an Indian child.
It was
When.
When this family hi.
Other children in fact the
children of my client.
They realize that they were not
going to be able
to do that again because they
have been through the process
and they knew how rigorous it
was but with the research shows
that children do better and have
your adverse experiences when
they are with relatives or
reunited with their parents
that's really where you want to
go so I guess what I'm thinking
is and and I have not.
I as I said I was on a hearing I
haven't looked at the
The.
impact that's contemplated but I
really think faster families
should not.
Hold themselves out to be.
They should not be fostering
Indian children unless they are
trained specially.
In the fact that the children
need to stay in contact with.
Members of the tribe or nation.
The Pueblo.
And unless these parents are
truly dedicated to returning the
top are.
To the Indian culture ultimately
I'm I understand that.
Many many foster parents.
Are very dedicated to
reunification because that's the
law and the policy in New Mexico
but I think
I can understand it it gets hard
when you fall in love with the
child and you have cared for the
child for years and years by.
The I'm.
The whole idea here is not to
have a child in a non Indian
home with no contact with
relatives for his or her entire
life and then suddenly just say
okay here we go.
In the case where my client.
Did alternately are relinquished
her rights because she was
having a
she she actually just could not
overcome her addiction probable.
And they did find.
A our extended family member.
The Navajo Nation.
For the children
with the children went to live
they tried to ease the
transition as much as possible
with therapy and so forth but
ultimately.
Not.
It made it better for everyone
because you know when terminated
any ground hello I think it's
both parents said we agree
that we can no longer care for
our children and
Actually I got that wrong but I
think the issue is the children
are with family and
I I think.
Perhaps there can be.
Individual sets of parents the
foster parents and the any
doctor parents can agree to
continue to contact everybody
has to be comfortable with that
but we can.
Right in but somehow there's
some sort of preference or
expanding for the foster parents
when it's contrary to federal
law in New Mexico law I mean I
guess we can say we could change
New Mexico a lot but it is
contrary to federal law so I I
appreciate the
The difficulty.
With the whole situation but
what I have found is it's a
number of the implications I've
had are resolved by guardianship
with family and all the parents
are often much more comfortable
with that because they still
have an opportunity at some
point to show the court that
they've made a substantial
change in their circumstances
and current again
We take full responsibility for
their children.
I
I I I guess what one of the
thing I want to say is that I've
dealt with a number of that.
New Mexico tribes in it but I
have a case right now in San
Juan County where the he'll
revert tried in Arizona is
involved I was so impressed with
their.
Procedure because at the very
first hearing they were there it
will Representative from.
Strong I was there and they had
an attorney who was
Sworn and and again the
Enter the tribes to Karen's and
it was a it was very powerful
and that tried is been but about
I am the guardian Adlai item in
this case and setting of
culturally appropriate
materials.
My little clients in treatment
lost your care so she's not
somewhere that she's going to do
it.
I'm not.
Is keep you very very close
contact with the parents lots of
visiting lots of videos and I
think that's really how you have
to go thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair is
Representative Nibert I had
spoken about this.
Prior to.
Our our meeting today is that we
agreed that you know the best
interest is the child with the
family you know but there are
situations where the family for
whatever reason it step up
And and that's troubling all
right echoed the concerns of
Representative Nibert.
And I wonder if the if there
isn't a way to kind of fix this
and I have a suggestion but you
know Representative Nibert line
spoken about what if we but what
if the family has a child let's
say from birth or shortly
afterwards and there are now you
know what's say eight or ten
years old and they're trying to
adopt a the the language on page
ninety four.
Here's to go ahead and trump
that the that adoption
And in fact one of the things
that I see is that
the language on ninety four even
if the family had intervened
early in the court had said no
we thank you the child's best
interest is with a different
family.
It looks like when they moved
for adoption if you would
there's now a second bite at the
apple
But I'm wondering if the
language on ninety four if we
are it and what we totally agree
that the best interest is with
its family members you know
early on
I'm wondering if we should
include an effective date so
that correct
relationships with children of
you know if the court would
consider what's in the best
interest of the child.
And
And you know maybe that of you
know if there was the first
hearing that the our court would
look at what is the best
interest but we agree that you
know with the best interest of
the child is with its baby
American family in the beginning
anyway that's my comments I just
have some reservations on that
one issue thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair.
I'm
sorry about that I wasn't
expecting to speak about very
Representative Gallegos next
but.
So I'm gonna take it to a
different part in the bill I
want to go to page sixty four.
And read the the bottom.
Part of that page from.
Probably line fourteen.
On down the line twenty five it
it it's states that the court
after hearing all the evidence
and hearing all the allegations
of neglect or abuse.
So make a record of its findings
on whether the child is that I
make like to child.
An abused child or both.
Very good.
And then it goes on to say
except in the case of a petition
that relates to an Indian child.
Comma.
If the petition alleges the
parent.
a guardian or custodian as
subjected the child to
aggravated circumstances comma
then the court shall also make.
And recorded findings on whether
the aggravated circumstances
have been proven period and this
is the part that that I have a
question on that bothers me is
if the petition relates to an
Indian child.
Activating circumstances shall
not be considered by the court.
And shall not be recorded in the
court's findings on the
petition.
Pursuant to the state Indian
child welfare act.
Madam chair and and madam chair
can you explain that to me why
we would ask the court not to.
The.
Report those findings and and
have some kind of documentation
on with that is that what we're
doing there.
Madam chair representative I was
looking for the language that
you're referencing and you said
you're on page sixty four is
that correct yes.
And what money.
From Madam chair madam chair
from I read from line fourteen
July twenty five.
So line fourteen begins with
bodily harm or death to another
parent guardian or custody
custodian of the child.
Now are.
I think you might have the wrong
a different committee some.
Okay but what's the number on
the one we're working on them
can you and I'm sorry I could
prepare the number is point two
two zero four nine six point
two.
Okay and and I'm on the wrong
Madam chair madam chair I'm on
the wrong one.
Yeah and I tried to do a search
just a word search why you were
talking to maybe just find it
and I couldn't find advocated.
But.
although madam chair madam chair
I'll go to marketing and try to
get on the right one sorry about
that no problem.
Representative Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to make a motion if it's
appropriate I do see that.
Representative is a stand up so
I I I'm I'm ready when you are
welcome back to you
Representative Daymon Ely nope
that's all right madam chair I
was going to make the same
motion so I'll let the the web
make it okay so before we at.
Take that motion let's go back
to the sponsoring.
Legislators chairwoman blue for
closing comments.
Madam chair.
Could I direct your attention to
page seventy two lines four
through eight which I believe is
the language of the
Representative Zamora was.
Referencing earlier.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair and and madam chair
I'm I'm still I've got two
computers on I'm still not think
about that but for the the right
sub so Representative night for
the takeover and explain it
maybe your this was I would
appreciate understand.
I don't know that I can explain
it madam chair but I think the
in sort of language on page
seventy two lines four through
seven.
Sound like the language that the
representative read earlier.
And so I think this question
was.
What.
What does it mean are or why
with the court the.
To consider those those factors.
If I understood his question
correctly.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I am going to.
Deferred to.
Cindy are gone.
Good morning Committee thank you
madam chair
reps Lois to committee members
my name Cindy are gone with the
office of general counsel with
children youth and families
department and I'm an attorney
with the the opposite assistant
General counsel with that office
there's two parts in which
aggravated circumstances are
mentioned in the bill one part
from the existing children's
code specifically states that
one there are aggravating
circumstances that the court the
act efforts would not even be
considered whatsoever and that
if if the aggravating
circumstances have occurred then
it just.
Pretty much says don't even go
there don't even try to reunify
the family don't even try to
make efforts as required by
federal a car of the mandates of
into the Indian child welfare at
so in regards to Indian family
situations it takes away the
case by case structure that
needs to be a good that needs to
occur and in those circumstances
so it's mentioned there as well
that in that situation that that
that the act efforts will
continue in regards to act
efforts in this in this
situation and at page seventy.
I may find my information here.
the circumstances has a number
of different factors that are
listed according to the B.
Iraq's and some of them have or
may not be relevant to the
current situation in this and
It never the less the findings
of the court in regards to abuse
neglect and the fines of the
court in regards to a
determination that abuse neglect
has occurred those findings will
still exist in regards to
aggravated circumstances those
in and of themselves by
themselves according to the B.
I. A. bureau of Indian affairs
regulations and the regulations
that the rules that that
Hello direct and guide.
The call to the proper process
for federal Indian child welfare
act
also indicates that the M.
activated circumstances
Can't be considered or they
can't they should be looked at
on a case by case basis
so that's the concern that we
have is that if you just.
Generalize the instead of
looking at a case by case basis
and so the bill one size fits
all that you all look at those
individual circumstances but the
court can still make its
findings based on abuse and
neglect the court could still
make its findings based on that
criteria that set for
determining whether abuse
neglect has occurred.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee chair members.
And madam chair madam chair I
said maybe you could you could
the.
It made understand better if if
we in pointed down to why would
we ask the court.
Not to.
so.
I think any kind of.
Of a filing or any kind of
procedure to to pass the
information forward quite wide
is it do I understand right that
we're asking the court to erase
everything not even.
do anything with that.
Madam chair and representative I
could let Cindy continuing that.
So the reasoning is that it's
not it's not a race let's say
for instance we have a child
that is found
the there's concerns regarding
act activated circumstances that
have occurred here and if we
don't take it on a case by case
basis
activated circumstances in in
other jurisdictions if that
family moved and if that's noted
on the record that would be it
would be automatically if those
if those other states had laws
that stated that they would be
considered and that they would
automatically not be considered
whatsoever instead of taking on
a case by case basis it doesn't
erase it I think that there are
ways that the court can note in
the findings and if I can go
back to the findings that are
listed on the sehk let me see if
I could find that will help
guide you in regards to that
The court the opportunity to
state that on the record.
In that it the also follows the
guidelines of the B. I. A.
regulations in regards to
aggravated circumstances.
And it doesn't say that we are
wiping it clean as an op option
we're not that we don't go there
whatsoever it just indicates
that there's the court.
We'll look at it
and such but it's not going to
be the.
So Megan record its findings
either way on abuse and neglect
but it's not in regards to
aggravated stricken
those are going to be the
prevailing reasons of for the of
the past actions of past
behavior the parents passed the.
Matters that those would be not
be the prevailing factors to
look at those factors that exist
currently in deterministic lower
still exist.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair if if I could also
add to that I think I get
exploited.
Thank you committee members just
on a practical.
Madam chair.
Representative Chasey let's have
a Representative Zamora finished
and then we'll go to you but we
need to move on to the next bill
if we could with all due respect
thank you madam chair and madam
chair thank you for that
It really bothers me to see
that.
That says that the circumstances
shall not be considered by the
court and shall not be recorded
in the court's findings and I'll
leave it with that if somebody
else wants to comment on it
that's fine with me.
Thank you an ideal part.
Representative Chasey.
I'm just going to say madam
chair that it's not that the
facts are there in front of the
court it's just so the court
doesn't make that finding so
that we don't automatically go
it's contrary to I.
Efforts to make.
Thank you Representative.
Representative at chair Lewis
I'm gonna go to you for closing
comments and then we'll take a
about a motion will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair I know there's a
motion was our second.
I'll settle.
Okay you're right yes actually
madam chair if I could make the
full motion.
Is that appropriate at this
point madam vice chair yes
Representative K. because okay I
like to make a motion that we do
not pass on house bill two oh
nine and do pass on how state
government election an Indian
Affairs Committee substitute on
house bill two online.
Okay I'll second that.
We have a motion and we have a
second we have a motion by
Representative K. goes we have a
second by Representative Ely
Daymon.
And
we will go back to chairman
Louis for closing comment and
then we will take role as thank
you madam chair and I I do
understand the concerns of folks
that are trying to address the
issues relating to your friends
and again as stated before you
know what we're trying to do if
we can get someone of you
please.
In a lot of feedback all I think
it's Representative Nibert thank
you
So what we're trying to do is
get the department to not only
comply with federal law but also
to comply with state law now if
this is.
chapter two but but really this
is the end stands when all
processes aren't followed so for
instance if it turns out that
consultation was in may with
another biological person or
excuse me a biological parent in
the instances where you might
have a child regardless of any
race or political classification
that goes into the CYFD system
and that child is with a foster
parent they're still rights that
are provided by that biological
parent I believe there's also
still writes provided to
biological grandparents so in
this instance what we're trying
to do is to first ensure that
people that have rights to that
child and in this instance of
the hierarchy of between
Immediate family which includes
parents grandparents siblings
and then also extended families
which includes aunts uncles
cousins and and really just
everyone within the community of
the tribe because that's how
native Americans are racist by
the tried and we need to ensure
that these customs languages
their traditions are all
respected and going back to
Representative Casey's point is
that these child children and
flourish in these families and
they have a sense of belonging
and you know where where child
it doesn't have the opportunity
to reunify and learn these and
I'm sure there's a sense of
absence in their hearts and
their minds so you know really
again what we're trying to do is
have the department be
accountable both to federal law
and to to tribal law and and
this federal law was established
in nineteen seventy eight.
So it is almost as old as I am
but we want to ensure that this
this happens and that there is
no more of taking away native
American children from their
families from their tribes
because when we are in the
policy error of save that save
them and kill the Indian Kelly
Indian save amount and that's
what was happening so this is
something to really address
those concerns and lastly madam
chair and committee members I
just really want to thank the
echo workers the social workers
that the tribal level and the
state level that have really
engaged with advocates for
almost a year long process I
know Donna can Tana tried to
speak earlier and I know she's
at a club worker from the hall
of justice okay and I know she's
been involved for several months
and even before that I know
we've had governor deal the hill
involved for many many years to
try and bring it where
updated from when the last time
it was update at the federal
level but I just want to thank
everyone for their long I
efforts and thanks to the tribes
or also
Working with us to really ensure
that this is a bill that works
for everyone and with that madam
chair that's that's all I ask
and I think you and the
committee for listening.
Thank you so we have a motion on
the table for to pass with the
clerk please call the roll thank
you Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
No with reservations thank you.
Representative Zamora
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that you have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative.
Thank you madam chair you have
would you pass on house state
government elections in any
errors Committee substitute for
House Bill two oh nine.
Thank you madam chair and
members thank you and I'm going
to return the gavel to you madam
chair and taking it from you.
Thank you.
So thank you committee members
we are now moving on to Senate
bill ninety three and we do have
Senator Padilla here if there
are any experts please raise
your hand and we will get you
moved over to the panelists
otherwise Senator Padilla we're
ready when you are.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam vice chair and and can you
all hear me okay.
Wonderful and and and that thank
you to the committee welcome to
the new members of the
legislature have been able to
see many of you just because of
the personal nature of the
session thank you very much
madam chair with the permission
of
of your webmaster I would like
to share a document it's just a
one pager I believe it is also
in at your work space right I'm
not sure share drive I'm not
sure what you call it all the
committee seem to handle the
stuff differently with your
permission may I please share a
slide to introduce this piece of
legislation.
I'm Senator did I think we have
it in our shared drive that's
available to everyone if you're
able to share on here and that's
fine and we did have John.
Salazar raises hand is here your
expert.
Madam chair no actually a
secretary Salazar is going to
speak in favor of the bill today
but I did not us to speak okay
as an expert I don't have any
experts for the for the
legislation I'd be able to cover
it with you.
I don't see the ability to share
so if you all can maybe look for
that document all reference it
and if you happen to have it
thank you all very much for
allowing me to present Senate
bill ninety three as amended by
the way this was amended in the
Senate finance committee and all
all walk you through that you're
just a few moments.
But I think that many of you may
know that that one of my major
siblings are the legislature is
the proliferation of broadband
here in New Mexico it's not just
about access to broadband it's
also expansion were broadband
already exists I'm attempting to
solve a a massive serious
problem here
I've been chairman or vice
chairman of the science
technology and
telecommunications interim
committee since I've been part
of the legislature now in my
ninety year and every year that
I'm chairman I try to make the
that the your broadband.
We've gotten quite a bit done in
two thousand seventeen I was
able to chapter three bills one
of I had to take the previous
governor to court on three times
and we finally prevailed and got
that done and that was to place
broadband to the local
infrastructure act broadband is
a water line it's a a street
sidewalk and exit off the
freeway
a lighting system a sewer system
a water system you name it
and so this place is now
broadband in that in that act
second I was able to reform the
USS Fund that year to direct
most of the money's coming out
of the U. S. at frontier to
broadband whereas before about
eighty ninety percent of those
dollars we're going to a dying
technology our pots line Plano
telephone system lines we flip
the script with the Senate bill
three oh eight three fifty seven
in the two thousand seventeen.
In the the legislation called
for the first six million
dollars out of the U. S. at
frontier it's that little fee
that we all pay our telephone
bills we always wonder where
that goes that goes to what's
called the universal service
fund.
The first six million is now for
broadband new technologies are
broadband or two thirds of the
money in that in that fund yeah
it was previously allowed to
grow to eighteen million dollars
it's now allowed to grow to
thirty million dollars in two
thirds of that money must go to
new technologies are you
broadband the third thing that
we did that year which was a
thirteen year effort I had the
bill for three years and it was
quite the effort I rewrote all
of our telecommunication laws
here in New Mexico that had not
been updated and modernized
since before the internet came
along because we have done that
the state was really a flyover
state with regard to investment
were broadband was concerned
we've already seen somewhere in
the neighborhood of forty six
million to one hundred and ten
million dollars in broadband
investment since that occurred
we've also been able to bring an
additional one hundred and sixty
five million dollars into New
Mexico for the federal
government.
And
it is an investment in broadband
and then in two thousand
fourteen and fifteen we were
able to bring ninety million
dollars one year and ten million
dollars the next year so we've
had about two hundred sixty five
million dollars plus an
additional private investment of
about forty six two hundred ten
million dollars into broadband
and while that seems like a lot
madam chair and madam vice chair
members of the committee we need
to do a couple of really
critical things in order to to
bring down the lion's share of
the dollars that we need here in
New Mexico because this is an
area that I focused on for for
nine years now I felt it was
important to bring governance
consistency accountability and
all those things to how we
deliver broadband here in New
Mexico.
You may recall I introduced a
Senate bill twenty two back in
two thousand nineteen to create
the the early childhood
education and care department.
Much like we did with that bill
that I was able to pass that
here in the governor signed into
law now we have an early
education department I want to
take up an iron to a very
wrinkled shirt we have seventeen
different maps with regard to
broadband here in New Mexico we
have about four hundred plans we
have a lot of times money here
part of money there and it's
just very inefficient it's
woefully underperforming
etcetera with Senate bill ninety
three does.
Is it does six critical things
it creates an office places it
in statute.
States that have done this have
seen massive improvements and
investment in broadband.
which is a huge issue that we
face here we know the broadband
brings us economic development
and job creation we know that
broadband brings us telehealth
and and that and telemedicine
into our communities if
something committee have never
had a health care professional
ever madam chair in New Mexico's
history and this brings some of
that to help telehealth in
health care and telemedicine to
those communities and the third
thing which we don't really
became apparent here during the
pandemic was the proliferation
of of distance learning and and
making sure that that is this
occurring in the manner with
which it's supposed to.
so this office does six things
to iron that very wrinkled shirt
of how we deliver broadband.
It creates the a documented New
Mexico broadband plan which will
cover also consist of a
financial plan and will also
consist of a plan on how to
manage statewide bulk pricing
agreements to dramatically bring
down the cost of broadband here
in New Mexico for low to
moderate income families but
also for businesses can flourish
as well you know we don't have a
documented broadband plan it's
much like a twenty one years ago
when I went to open my business
I'm a business owner here in New
Mexico as as a couple of you may
know I walked into the bank
didn't have a business didn't
have a business plan to have a
financial plan I was literally
laughed out of the bank it was
bank of American downtown
Albuquerque went there about
three months ago with a business
plan financial plan and it was a
whole different story well
that's what we're trying to do
here in New Mexico we go to the
federal government and we say we
really need money for broadband
but we don't have a plan we
don't have a financial plan and
so we get passed over quite a
bit this is going to
dramatically move us forward the
second thing the office is going
to be responsible for doing is
documenting a New Mexico
broadband map and it shall be
that that that they link up to
Federal Communications
Commission standards USDA
standards and other requirements
to date I have personally
counted in my role as chairman
of the science and tech
committee I personally counted
seventeen different broadband
maps and and they're all over
the place and so this is going
to tie all of it together link
us up with federal standards to
help us again be able to tell
our story we want to bring down
federal dollars.
The third item that the office
will be responsible for is
negotiating rights of way an
easement access we are if let's
just say for kicks you wanted to
take broadband from you know the
southwest part of Bernalillo
county which is my district and
you want to drag it all the way
out to say Gallup you literally
probably have to go through
about four hundred easements and
rights of way because they're in
place they're this office will
be a central repository for the
rights of way and easements and
instead of hiring an attorney at
every step along the way the
dramatically reduce your cost
because we have one place to go
in order to to to provide these
rights of way these easements
and to negotiate them and to get
your project moving the fourth
major thing the office is going
to do is to provide reporting
and analysis on the state of
broadband here in New Mexico to
the people of New Mexico it to
us here at the legislature into
the governor so that we always
know are we pushing the dial up
pushing it down where where is
one of the upload speeds
download speeds have a week of
compared to the federal
standards how we compete
nationwide and internationally
so the reporting analysis will
be there so that'll help us with
the tremendous amount of
accountability the next item
this office is going to have is
three to five specialists that
work with other political
subdivisions here in New Mexico
I use the example when I present
this bill and and madam chair
this is literally the two
hundred and sixty eight time I
presented this this this bill to
different community groups and
committees and legislative
committees and this and that and
and and and what we do is we
have this this more state down
in Columbus New Mexico wakes up
every day knowing that they know
that they need broadband in that
town and the community
has a hard to get it done but
unfortunately like you and I
he's a volunteer and so they
don't necessarily have the staff
to get that done these
specialists will pull everything
together and items one through
four and they'll help them help
them to design develop fund and
implement a broadband plan for
state Columbus New Mexico.
it which is going to really be a
leap forward for our state of
the six item that this office is
going to be responsible for is a
specialist that leverages our
dollars here New Mexico against
other dollars around the country
and around the world you know
it's looking as though with my
legislation and and another bill
in the house that we may be able
to bring down that we may be
able to appropriate a hundred
thirty five million dollars to
broadband this year the governor
in her state of the state
address spoke of the the massive
need and I she agrees with me
that we need to focus our
attention on broadband.
If we can make that one hundred
thirty five million dollars
available if we have governance
if we have a plan financial plan
a bloke pricing plant a
documented Matt how do we manage
right so wait easements etcetera
are we reporting on this
information do we know where
we're at we have plans to work
with local governments we can
leverage that one hundred thirty
five million dollars Madam
chairwoman and vice chair
members of the committee to
somewhere in the neighborhood of
nine hundred and forty six
million to nine hundred and
seventy million now the earlier
in the in last year the
information technology
department of information
technology reported in a in
assessment that they performed
that the broadband need in New
Mexico is probably upwards of
one point three billion dollars
if we do everything that that I
was able to get that in two
thousand seventeen everything
we're tempting to get done here
this year create this office we
may be able to leverage almost
all of the money that we need to
bring New Mexico up to federal
standards and really make us
competitive.
When we went to the the Senate
finance committee I do want to
highlight an amendment that was
performed there we did formally
establish a council to oversee
the awards of those monies that
would leave this this fund that
we also created in the
legislation the fund will be
where the money will land a
council of of industry experts
government experts and broadband
will come together they're
they're very clearly outlined
it's about fourteen folks would
serve on this council and the
council would review proposals
as I mentioned the example for
Columbus and they would grant
them the money or not or have
them go back and work on
whatever we did strike the
appropriation of nine hundred
fifty thousand dollars in the in
the bill the initial bill
because there is about a thirty
somewhat percent according to
the chairman of the Senate
finance committee there's about
thirty percent vacancy rate in
the department of information
technology right now and we
believe that re purposing those
roles to fill the rules that
that that I've outlined here for
this office will be the best way
to to utilize that are there
were three actions already with
this piece of legislation madam
chair the Senate business taxed
transportation run by chairman
we did go through that committee
eight to three.
within we went on the Senate
finance had a very robust
conversation there was a whole
presentation on broadband and
this is one of the key the
capstones of the presentation we
passed Senate finance tend to
zero and then we went to the
Senate for a late last week.
Excuse me Madam and and we
passed through the Senate for
thirty three to six.
I just wanted to present that to
you into your committee so that
you know what I really thought
this was so critical and so
important and I'm happy to stand
for a public comment or
questions were you like to go
chair.
Thank you for letting me get all
that out there's a lot to it.
Senator we appreciate the
detailed explanation behind all
of everything that's gone on to
this bill into this bill and
before we go to public comment
we will take a poll of the
audience
Senator as you know we would
have folks raise their hands in
committee if they were for or
against a bill so we're doing
that via a little pole right now
so we'll leave it open for five
more seconds.
Okay great I tried to vote madam
chair but it wouldn't let me
get.
We did that on purpose.
But we have a hundred percent in
favor so thirty five percent of
the attendees are in favor of
this bill.
now we will move on to take
public comment from folks.
Can I just mention something
before you go to public comment
real quick sure what do one last
thing I apologize so folks it
may I don't think you're gonna
be able to be here today for
public comment AFT New Mexico
step nearly as they're in favor
of the peace legislation retired
public employees of New Mexico
there executive director Miguel
Gomez and favor the legislation
I think we owe Baca from
Centrelink women will still I
don't know if he's able to speak
or not he's also in favor and
and that so is their
organization and the Albuquerque
public school board voted
unanimously to endorse
legislation as well thank you
much thanks for that information
so we will go to public comment
we have sixty seconds for
everyone so after sixty seconds
you will be muted so please make
your comments as concise as
possible at the inner Christian
Jo Dulu sorry about that you're
now and it it.
Thank you chair and committee
members and especially Senator
Padilla for this wonderful bills
I am a tech entrepreneur as well
as the political director for
the Adelante progressive office
and broadband is going to take
us into the twenty second
century just like electricity
brought us here to the twenty
first century so I thank you for
that I want to make sure though
that you understand that we need
to make sure we're going to
streaming and not back to DVDs
that
we should be looking in the
future and considering the
technology that will take us
into that twenty second century
without sticking us with.
Old technology already so just
for that I do want to do past
this is an awesome bill and
thank you so much for your
persistence.
Thank.
You are now in muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support this bill
and applaud the Sanchez effort
to bring more and better
broadband to New Mexico finding
ways to increase broadband
access in the state and remove
the barriers holding us back has
been a top priority for the
chamber for a long time and we
also know that Senator Padilla
has been working on this issue
for many years we appreciate how
he continues to work with
industry to ensure that we get
more private investment in New
Mexico not less I urge you to
support this bill thank you.
Thank you C. Quinn Lopez your
now and made it.
Good morning madam chairman
committee members my name is
Quinn locus vice president
western sky community care as a
health insurer we're dedicated
to transforming the health of
communities one person at a time
to freshen innovative health and
social service Lucien's we stand
in strong support of Senate bill
ninety three during the COVID
pandemic we've seen increase
clients for townhouse Services
particularly in the areas
primary care behavioral health
Connick connectivity is the key
to developing and delivering
patient centric value basically
social determinants solutions
for New Mexicans and SB ninety
three will increase connectivity
to urban rural and frontier
communities throughout New
Mexico to support telehealth
remote learning and economic
development we applaud senator
but the and the legislature's
with legislature's efforts to
successfully take on this
complex challenge cut through
all the R. O. W..
Red tape and pave the way for
New Mexico's future thank you.
Thank you Karen Witt lock your
now and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee hearing rock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we per we proudly stand in
strong support of this
legislation and we think Senator
Padilla for his social work life
persistent in getting that for
he has been a champion for many
years and again we urge you to
support this legislation thank
you.
Thank you A. A. R. P. E. state
president Roger good to have
you.
You are now needed.
You madam chair and members of
the committee good to be here my
name is Raju Greer and I'm
here's the volunteer state
president eighty RPG Mexico I
speak for over two hundred forty
thousand eighty RPG Mexico
members they are pretty Mexico
is in strong support of Senate
bill ninety three because as we
learned this past year is so
important that all New Mexicans
from the youngest to the oldest
have access to broadband to
every part of New Mexico and we
like to thank Centerbridge
Padilla for bringing this much
needed bill forward thank you.
Thank you.
I am Lidstrom you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Diane Lindstrom and I'm a
volunteer advocate for a a RP
New Mexico I am the co chair for
the utilities issues team and I
am the lead for broadband.
Broadband is an essential
service for all New Mexicans
people age fifty and older need
access to high speed internet in
order to connect to doctors say
family members shop online for
groceries and other necessities
and access remote education
especially while raising our
grandchildren.
We thank the senator for
bringing this bill and we hope
that you will vote to pass this
bill is a step in the right
direction for access for all New
Mexicans to high speed internet
service thank you.
Thank you Manda MA gone gold
your now and it.
Thank you I am going to go the
registered lobbyists for
Economic Forum we stand in
strong support of SB ninety
three all of Senator PED is
efforts to date this proposal
provides an important reworking
of how our state effectively
built this broadband
infrastructure our situation
here in New Mexico that we're
dealing with a large expanse of
land and limited funds this bill
will enable creating cornerstone
maximizing our resources we're
very encouraged by the progress
of this bill and the entire
broadband initiatives which
showcases how our legislature do
is committed to betterment
assisting well being of every
New Mexico community we would
appreciate your support thank
you.
Thank you at Richmond you are
now and made it.
You madam chair the morning
madam chair members of the
committee and creating small
with New Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
I would like to thank the
sponsors will bring in this
broadband bill forward once
again we stand in support of
this legislation.
Many rural areas remained on
serve when it comes to broadband
infrastructure especially the
most remote areas in rural New
Mexico the other point I would
like to make is that rural
electric cooperatives want to be
involved in the process and have
input to broadband expansion in
rural areas of the state's is
cooperative serve over eighty
percent of the land mass in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Hannah Burland you're
now and maybe at.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling and I am president of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
The league stands in strong
support of this bill and we are
very grateful to Senator Padilla
for bringing it forward we
believe high speed internet
affordable internet access is an
essential service that should be
readily available to all New
Mexico residents and businesses
state and local government
policy should support affordable
broadband wireless and other
internet access throughout the
state and should encourage
consumer choice in broadband
providers legal also supports
making high speed internet
access available to all New
Mexico residents without charge
to schools libraries and other
secure public buildings thank
you.
Thank you Steffi wise bird you
are now and muted.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members thank you for
your diligent work during this
legislative session and thank
you to Senator Padilla for his
committed
Champion for broadband I A. M.
with three fifty New Mexico will
advocacy and on behalf of
farmers ranchers and all those
students who would like to be
trained to be
Just to solar and wind
technicians and would like to
learn through broadband we thank
you for in courage ing the
development of more broadband
throughout the state I would
like to echo as Hina
Christodoulou however and hope
that the council will look
thoroughly into emerging
technologies which can reduce
broadband rates such as low
earth orbits technologies which
are starting to pay yes in New
Mexico now so thank you again.
Thank you Rossetto you are now
and made it.
Sh.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roy Soto and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the Microsoft
corporation and also happen to
be the first cabinet secretary
for the department of
information technology we're
here today in strong support of
this the ninety three just a
minute of this legislation will
create a single entity to
coordinate broadband activities
or at least seven different
state agencies which currently
have different roles in the
development of our broadband
infrastructure and sometimes are
duplicative and sometimes are in
different directions this
legislation this legislation
will also begin to leverage all
of the state's broadband
resources to improve and expand
broadband connectivity to all
our citizens the creation of the
council will also allow all the
stakeholders different state
agencies with tribes local
governments and the local telcos
to come to the table would like
to thank all the sponsors for
bringing this book.
Hand Baker you are now in need.
Mr Baker you'll have to new on
your and.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and so
Senator Padilla thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
My name is Pam Baker United
States Navy veteran.
And I'm representing both the
New Mexico democratic veterans
military family caucus and I am
the current president of the
baton chapter of the American
veterans for equal rights.
I spent the last thirty years of
my career as a senior project
manager deploying computer
systems and software nuclear
world.
This bill provides the structure
necessary to be successful in
the deployment of broadband
throughout the state of New
Mexico to the rural and to the
front tier parts of the state I
strongly urge you to vote in
favor of this bill thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
David you are now and it yes
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee on
David Henkel on a professor
emeritus of community and
regional planning at UNM and
also board member of the New
Mexico foundation and a member
of our working group that on the
broadband access in
collaboration with New Mexico
Association grant makers we
stand in support of this bill it
helps to coordinate the
disparate functions that now
exist provides a focus for
financial and planning support
for small communities and with
respect to Senator buddy is
reference to Columbus we've
recently made a small grant to a
private sector company down
there in Columbus but almost to
help the it to help the
educational links between the
students in those schools and
the general public schools so we
believe that this provides
educational and residential
support for people in outlying
areas thank you very much for
your time.
Thank professor.
Jim this chart intends you are
now and muted.
Thank you very much.
Sorry about that.
You are now in muted.
Thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jim data and I'm the
executive director of the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico where
a group of local solar companies
and like many industries a solar
industry uses broadband internet
and in many ways and one of
these is to report system
performance and we use that for
troubleshooting a lot of other
things but the real reason why
we support this bill is that we
believe that access to broadband
is essential for all families so
that we can have true equity and
to our to opportunity for all
New Mexicans so we strongly
support Senate bill ninety three
we thank you Senator Padilla for
running that far thanks again.
Thank you JD Bullington your now
and it.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce and the Pueblo of
Laguna this bill will lay the
critical groundwork for getting
our state's connectivity to the
level and standards it needs
debate Senate bill ninety three
will especially go a long way in
making reliable internet more
affordable for local governments
and families as users by
leveraging the state's ago
shooting power and knowledge of
available funding resources.
Well staffed office in state
government that is accountable
for extending broadband across
New Mexico is a good investment
and as we know lack of broadband
is holding back development.
Many of our American Indian
communities so we are support
for this bill and look forward
to seeing it make a difference
in our local communities and
tribal areas.
Thank you.
We have a caller with.
Ending in nine nine seven one
and you will have to press star
six nine two and we have
yourself.
We will get back to that person
Jason Espinoza you are now and
made it.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza that
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico technology council
associated general contractors
New Mexico as well as to Mexico
kids can now three organizations
expanding transport to Senate
bill ninety three and for the
sake of the time this agree with
everyone else's comments and
support thank you.
Thank you Rhiannon Samuel you
are now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for members to the members
of the committee for allowing
everyone to speak on this
important bill we want to
commend my name is Rhiannon
Samuel and I'm the executive
director for the on to New
Mexico County New Mexico is a
non partisan grassroots
nonprofit that seeks common
ground solutions to New Mexico's
most pressing issues we want to
commend Senator Padilla for
working on broadband for so many
years and we feel like Senate
bill ninety three is the next
logical step in addressing the
vast inequities that we have
across our state and we urge the
committee to pass this bill on
to the next stage thank you.
Thank you Sharon Berman your now
and made it.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Sharon
Berman I am a civic engagement
and policy manager in New Mexico
first we think Senator Padilla
for bringing this bill forward.
In our latest town halls on
health and education
approximately one thousand New
Mexicans from around the state
overwhelmingly agreed that fair
access to broadband is a key
factor to our state's well being
on many levels.
The office of broadband access
and expansion would allow a
permanent home for this
essential work the council a
statewide expects word would
assure this bodies knowledge and
decisions are informed by local
data and experiences on the
ground.
New Mexicans deserve just and
fair access to reliable
broadband in order to attend
school communicate with their
doctors keep in touch with their
communities and work remotely we
respectfully request to support
Senate bill ninety three thank
you.
Thank you have yet been
evidence.
You are now and it.
Sorry about that madam chair
thank you good morning members
madam chair have yet been every
this organizer with Albuquerque
interfaith we are a coalition of
sixteen dues paying institutions
and throughout this pandemic
we've done virtual house
meetings with dozens of public
school education leaders and
congregations in areas like
Albuquerque's south valley to
listen to how families are
surviving this pandemic
broadband access was a
resounding theme and this
legislation will be game
changing for these communities
and for public education
economic in tele health outcomes
for generations to come we
appreciate this legislation's
role in remaking tomorrow and
thank you legislators for your
leadership on this.
Thank you John Salazar your now
and muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John Salazar and I'm the
cabinet secretary for the
department of information
technology I want to thank
Senator Padilla for his work on
Senate bill ninety three the
department of information
technology.
Supports the bill because it
provides clear definition
direction and guidance on the
role of the New Mexico broadband
office hired to do pass on
Senate bill ninety three thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and we don't have any
more hands up and we don't have
anyone to speak in opposition.
So I think we got three more
hands up I don't of these are
opposition or support we'll Baca
you are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Leo Baca I'm the
director of government affairs
for CenturyLink and can't really
add much more to all the glowing
remarks that have already been
made so in the interest of time
I'll just say that we support
Senate bill ninety three thank
you.
Thank you Bob Edgar here now and
it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee.
Kirke interfaith and I want to
also think on Senator Padilla
first hard work on this bill I
have to endorse the issues that
have been stated about the
importance for school important
for health both physical and
mental health as well as the
economy I can't help but think
my friend merry who lives alone
here in Albuquerque is
physically impaired can't drive
and intermittent air that makes
it difficult for her she came
down with COVID a couple months
ago it stable internet which
critical for health this is let
alone for mental health.
So one thing I wanted to add was
I really appreciate Senator
Padilla as homework the pew
research study found the six
issues that he included in this
bill work important for the
states that were successful.
Please do pass Senate bill
ninety three thank you.
Thank you.
Tiffany were very here now and
it.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in very strong support
to Senate bill ninety three and
think Senator Padilla for his
hard work access to high speed
broadband is no longer a luxury
the central for the modern
farmer rancher dairy producer
and all of us in between
reliable connections make
agriculture more production more
productive and sustainable and
we're extremely grateful to see
this piece of legislation before
you all today thank you.
Thank you to take a Santa Fe as
your now and made it.
You have to be on your and.
Good morning chairwoman Lewis
and members of the committee to
take us on the honest executive
director for the New Mexico
exchange Kerry group the enemy
CG is a telephone industry
association of eleven income at
local telephone companies
providing voice and internet
service to customers in rural
areas of New Mexico we think
Senator Padilla for his vision
and sponsoring the bear and for
being a champion for the
industry we support establishing
an office of broadband
understanding that currently
several state agencies have a
responsibility for broadband
development in the state and
we're very grateful for that
however having one single entity
or agency tasked with the six
main purposes and objectives
Senator Padilla highlighted in
the bill has great advantages
which ultimately ties together
the maps and tracks specific
broadband projects investment
funds and coordinates activities
between state agencies including
reporting analysis that
strengthens the accountability.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment and now we will
go to the committee.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair and the I
am grateful that you're putting
forth this legislation I I'm not
sure if you know but I live in a
rural area I have two daughters
who are at this very moment
stealing every single bit of
information and and data that's
going back and forth the through
the through the internet lines
so it's really challenging for
many of us most of us in in
rural New Mexico to get the
access that we need to broadband
I have a question about
about how rural New Mexicans
will be served by this bill.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Ortez and again
welcome to the legislature you
excellent question I think that
we don't we don't know what we
don't know right now because
there's mapping everywhere
there's there's almost you know
planning you heard from the
cabinet secretary of department
of information technology
sometimes groups are kind of
working in opposition to each
other I'm sorry Mr so the
previous cabinet secretary
in any number of things of that
nature now we're going to
clearly be able to look across
the state and find out where
broadband it's one of the upload
speeds downloads what is the
capacity where do we need to
invest or as right now it's sort
of a community coming together
and having to wait maybe six
eight ten years to get that done
by the time they get that money
together the cost is going up
exponentially and the number
quite get there so what this
does is it's a massive planning
tool it reduces the cost to say
the community where you live
Representative so that you don't
have to go out and hire an
engineer attorneys a specialist
or whatever to put your plan
design develop funding implement
your plan I can go to this
office you'll be able to find
the right way to easements will
help you link up with the state
broadband plan specialist to
help you write the proposal for
your particular area and then
they'll help you find the item
either through the local
infrastructure act as I
mentioned that I didn't
seventeen applied to the U. S.
F. frontier possibly apply to
the the fund the office of
broadband access expansion fund
to put the package of dollars
together to actually get this
thing done quicker rather than
you know having to to just you
know all over the place over
multiple years.
But thank you madam chairs are
by the so that so the broadband
plan which should be developed
by by the department will will
they also implement that plan.
Thank you madam chair and
representative will be at the
office will answer
yes.
In the office will be
responsible for the statewide
plan and that they will help
develop plans with localities
local political subdivisions so
that will help document that the
only sure that it links up with
but the state plan and and the
good news is that once the state
plan and the likelihood is it's
it's a wonder percent match with
the federal plan and several
mapping favourites weight
federal easements you name it so
what we're going all the way
down into the most my new part
of the the most small section of
New Mexico I hope that answers
your question I'm gonna make
sure I did.
Yes thank you madam chair and
senator by the that you did and
that's that thanks.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair nice to see you
Senator.
Good to see you.
Senator Padilla I'm wondering
about how this ensures that the
our rural areas of the most
underserved areas receives the
at
I guess I would say the bulk of
the attention I mean I know I'm
in an urban area and I have.
I need to upgrade I need to
change providers to operate by.
He is what it comes down to but
I don't think I need to be
beneficial a beneficiary of this
bill so how do we ensure that
those who are really in need
because they have no access.
Our our
I really put first in the
process.
So madam chair and madam chair
Chasey so so we we don't have a
plan right now we don't have a
documented plants we we have no
idea where the dollars that we
do have are going we don't know
if they're in the highest impact
needs it's our the council the
funding and the six areas of
responsibility the office will
help us to define where is the
greatest need because the moment
that we start chopping off the
lowest well well that in the
name of the office you know
access and expansion I chose to
put the the word access first
because.
Twenty one percent of New Mexico
has a zero broadband access
seventy nine percent has access
but it needs to be dramatically
expanded so so you know they
would start tearing apart the
the the state you know in terms
of where it is where it is and
and and and putting the plan to
lift all boats at the same time
I I can't tell you that that the
council was in this prescriptive
have the council say the money
must first start here but the
likelihood is that that's where
it will happen because now
they're going to have data
they're going to have reporting
the gonna have analysis to gonna
have a plan do you have a
financial plan about pricing
agreements that are to work with
those local our local political
subdivisions to to turn that
around for them.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
Yes.
Right now all is it true is it
correct that the PRC funds
broadband projects.
Madam chairman and madam chair
they don't funded the projects
themselves but they oversee the
universal service fund which I
spoke of earlier which are
reformed in and you helped me
with that a three year committee
back in two thousand nineteen
for two thousand seventeen
What was happening was that they
were putting money into dying
technologies and and and and we
flipped that script and and he
oversee but those dollars aren't
so now the fund is grown from
eighty million to be authorized
to grow to thirty million we
gave them the flexibility on how
to collect the money either as a
percentage or as a flat rate to
grow the fund to the thirty
million but in the legislation
what we said it was signed into
law instruction that you're that
the first six million out of the
fund must go to new technologies
are you broadband or two thirds
of the fund must go so now
upwards of twenty million
dollars is available on an
annual basis to do that work and
then it but but that the the PRC
is the regulatory body I mean
that's the one fund that they do
oversee the rest of the dollars
will be administered through
this particular fund that's been
created this new office.
So madam chair and senator the
pair still be involved just to
the extent of regulation.
Well they don't regulate the
internet let me just start
there.
Yeah so this is this is a huge
can confusion comes in so they
don't regulate the internet but
they do regulate
telecommunication companies and
so I don't know if you have an
opportunity madam chair at
Chasey Madam chair to see my
broadband for all planned so
there were seven items to the
plant there were really only two
or three that were structural in
nature and the other for
regulatory nature so the problem
is I to find it here in New
Mexico on broadband really is
two fold one is access and
expansion and then the other is
regulatory so I've been working
very closely with industry with
community with the PRC is in and
so far as you can work with the
PRC to reform all of the the
regulatory environment in New
Mexico as I mentioned I'm not
sure if you were on a chair and
then chair at JC when I first
introduced this bill a few
moments earlier this that this
morning we have reformed R. or
modernized our telecommunication
laws here in New Mexico since
before the internet came on it
took me three years to get that
done and we got that done in
seventeen unfortunately I have a
bill to clarify that bill I know
we all have to do that
periodically because the PRC I'm
not trying to you know to be
down on the PRC but but and this
is one area where they just have
performed poorly in my opinion
they implements that that law
that the in the complete
opposite intention of the law
and I'll just leave it at that
so you may possibly see another
bill coming your way which is
our making its way through the
Senate right now that further
clarifies that in the directions
of the PRC.
I'm proud of.
So thank you very much Senator
thank you madam chair and really
there's only one madam chair in
the state state government
committee your tech.
To we're not we're not introduce
your right now.
So I really.
I also want to endorse your your
statement that we have to come
back and fix what we did because
we are what might my refrain
that I can do to Hey is that you
know we don't have enough time
we aren't even so by
professional we don't have staff
and we're constantly fixing or
expanding on our clarifying what
we have done previously thank
you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Chair I move do pass on the bill
as amended.
Second have a motion for a day
pass on Senate bill ninety three
as amended by Representative
Rehm and a second by
Representative Ortez is there
for their discussion.
Okay is there any objection to
the past motion.
Seeing and hearing none you have
a do pass Senator showing all
members president present voting
in the affirmative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam vice chair members of
the committee and I will let you
know that I have asked the vice
chairwoman Johnson to carry the
bill on the Senate floor and
that's our next stop I would
appreciate your support there as
well thank you.
Thank you senator collect.
Next we have a Senator Rodriguez
and Senate bill twenty seven.
Welcome Senator.
Morning madam chairman and
members of the committee I am so
happy to see you my goodness I
realize now how much I truly
miss all of you this is
something.
And so we Mr chair Senator.
My gosh we'll get through this
together yes my gosh if it'll
pass but anyway I'm talking
about that Madam chairman I do
have is the Hernandez for the
mortgage finance authority he's
the director and that Rebecca of
the lord a from the MSA also
mortgage finance authority of my
witnesses in case you have any
questions madam chairman this is
a very
familiar acid tuition that we're
all in countering that is we
know that during the pandemic so
many people have lost their
homes or can't pay the rent and
for their mortgage and to
whether I their homes and so on
so this is a a pandemic really
fail you may have heard about
the housing trust fund for New
Mexico in this housing trust
fund generates a twenty five to
one return every year for
affordable housing so we thought
during this pandemic time is a
perfect opportunity for the
legislature to allow the fund to
have a little more flexibility
to provide for example rental
assistance and mortgage
assistance weatherization
programs and so on for people
in this is the committee
endorsed bill madam chairman we
just put the emergency costs on
it so that it can if we can get
this bill passed we can just get
the funding out quickly thank
you madam chairman that's what
the bill does.
Thank you senator good to see
you and just you have your
experts for technical assistance
later if there are questions is
that correct correct madam
chairman yes the time already
and and I know I have to get to
the Senate chamber to unless you
all have questions and I'm ready
to answer and get great thank
you so we'll start the poll and
if folks would like to vote in
support or opposition of Senate
bill twenty seven we will keep
that open for another twelve
seconds.
Great thank you so we have
eleven in favor and zero against
you would like to speak in
support.
Bob Edgar you are now and made
it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name is Bob that
you're I'm a leader with the
Albuquerque interfaith
Albuquerque interface is a
consortium of of R. eighteen K.
school and nonprofit communities
representing thousands of New
Mexicans.
Senate bill twenty seven allows
for the New Mexico housing trust
fund to maintain homes are low
income families and also to
assist low income families that
are falling through the cracks
with their mortgages or with
their rents it's important
during this time of the pandemic
to keep New Mexico families
healthy and keep them from
becoming homeless.
I urge you to vote do pass on
Senate bill twenty seven thank
you.
Thank you Gerry Williams here
now and muted.
Good morning madam chair thank
you again for an opportunity to
speak on behalf of the R. P. New
Mexico A. R. P. New Mexico
stands in strong support of
Senate bill twenty seven as it
does provide emergency relief
for individuals who are facing
hardships we strongly urge all
your members of the committee to
vote in favor of Senate bill
twenty seven and again I thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today madam chairman thank you
thank you Kelly said you're now
and it it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Kelly
sing a director of asset
management with the greater
Albuquerque housing partnership
and we stand in strong support
of SB twenty seven simply stated
we consider MFA to be good
stewards of the New Mexico
housing trust fund act and
allowing for greater flexibility
in its use especially in this
time of greater need due to the
national health pandemic is
imperative to supporting housing
stability we urge all committee
members to vote in favor of SB
twenty seven thank you.
Thank you A. R. P. New Mexico
state president Roger you are
now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair and members of the
committee as I said earlier my
name is Roger career I'm here is
to volunteer state president
with a a RP New Mexico they are
P. isn't strong support.
Senate bill twenty seven we
would like to think Senator
Rodriguez for bringing this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you Karen Witt lock you
are now in muted.
Members of the committee.
Workers New Mexico chapter.
Point of this legislation we
believe that flexibility is
crucial in the and difficult
time and we appreciate Senator
Rodriguez for continuing to
carry the banner
that you carry the banner for
housing.
Again we're just for this
legislation.
Thank you current rigor you are
now in needed.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
director of the director of
Lutheran advocacy ministry of
New Mexico and we speak also on
behalf The New Mexico conference
of churches as previous the
supporters of stated we support
those arguments and urge your
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Reseller you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I represent the
New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness to stand in support
of Senate bill twenty seven the
statutory changes will have
significant positive impact on
the community by allowing for
the flexibility to respond to
the eviction and homelessness
crisis MFA will be able to
distribute these funds to
provide rental assistance needed
and fill crucial gaps left by
other rental assistance and
eviction prevention funding
streams this one for the
outcomes for community housing
retention and keep people in
their homes while supporting
landlords in recouping money
that has been lost due to a
household financial crisis thank
you for your time and have a
great day madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you Rachel Biggs here now
and it.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless and we stand in strong
support of Senate bill twenty
seven the fallout from COVID has
exacerbated our housing crisis
and there's an urgent need to
invest in affordable housing to
address the continual rise in
homelessness the proposed
amendments The New Mexico has a
trust fund act would allow MFA
to use these essential funds to
address the current highest
housing crisis in our state in
fact as many as forty two
percent of New Mexicans are now
under threat of eviction and
these changes would allow MFA to
directly
urgently needed funding towards
rental assistance and other
affordable housing needs
Albuquerque health care for the
homeless receive first hand on
our reaches throughout the
county the increase in need I
urge your support of Senate bill
twenty seven thank you for your
time.
Thank you C. Quinn Lopez your
now unmuted.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Quinn Lopez
and vice president of the
western sky community care House
security is a key determinant
for social determinants of
health and we stand in strong
support of Senate bill twenty
seven and apply the sponsor
thank you.
Thank you is there any
opposition.
Seeing none we will go to the
committee that I chair Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass.
Thank you we have a motion for a
day pass by vice chair Johnson
and a second by Representative
Eli discussion Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I'm
looking at the page for winds
thirteen and fourteen.
I wanted to know why the trust
wells.
Will be awarded.
One or the other and maybe not
both.
I thank you madam chairman and
Representative Nibert good
question the reason for that is
because currently the housing
trust fund is particularly for
the art for producing wi caller
producing housing this whole
scenario is intended to do
production of affordable housing
and preservation of housing and
so what we intend to do here is
be able to do either or or even
both you know the the chief the
the housing trust fund the
intent it doesn't change here
the current intent of that it
just expands their ability to be
able to do that or they just if
they if they so choose the
funding is already there and
they already do a lot of rental
assistance and other things but
this year would be and and allow
meant for them or allowing them
to to do it based on need also
not only on a competitive basis
for example for construction
that's what they do now is
produce housing to building and
so on this would give them the
ability to do that and whether
rise homes for example and and
in for other things that need to
be done to housing to help
people remain in their homes
thank you madam chair and
senator putting the word either
there means I have to make a
choice they can do one or the
other they can't do both and you
just stated you wanted them to
have the flexibility to do both
and yet the word either maybe
you have to make a choice.
You Mr chairman chairman and I
want to bring is the Hernandez
the director of the MFA if you
can allocated to the panel but
up to meet the the reason for
that would be that they can do
either or depending on the
funding that's available and
that and that was the intent but
what we have is the
Representative command give you
a little more detail on that is
the are you available.
Yes a good morning can you hear
me.
Thank you yes I get that thank
you madam chair not
representative Nibert to a
Senator Rodriguez is correct in
the and all cases there would be
there's a need and their that is
a evident in the applications
that command what we're changing
here is that instead of just
being able to
Judge the different developments
that come in normally for large
developments in this case I'll
give you an example if we
receive a thousand applications
for rental or mortgage
assistance we don't want that
that it would that would be
based on need and we wouldn't be
judging one application against
the other as we do in the big
developments where we award
points but I can assure you that
if we're awarding funds that
there there's still be a need
for those in this case we're
just the French differentiating
I and how the funds are awarded
whether it's on a competitive a
notice of funding availability
or in some cases the advisory
committee would set up a program
for a rental and mortgage
assistance and we wouldn't that
have the competitive basically
if you will between those
applicants I come and I hope I
explain that properly.
Madam chair
all right I understand what
you're saying okay I'm just
saying what you put on paper
here of black or white doesn't
do it sure maybe maybe my
English teacher by other chair
who who knows much more about
English structure sentence
structure of that may want to
weigh in on this but I think the
word either means that the
Entities going to have to make a
choice choose one or the other
and if that's not your intent to
have that choice to be made but
to choose from from both them I
think it needs to be worded a
little bit.
Madam chair yes the
Representative Chasey wants to
wants to why are you at all that
I'm always are deferred her
English language skills when it
comes to this but the word
either causes me trouble in
light of your state what you
intended.
Representative Chasey I see your
unmuted do you want to help try
I need to be taught I'm sorry
had because of I've been getting
calls from the children's board
attorney about hearings that I
had it okay and a.
could you tell me just the line.
Yes my mind because I have to be
on screen madam chair it's a and
madam chair it's paid for.
Winds thirteen fourteen and it
goes on there a little bit of
fifteen and the issue is whether
the word either forces the
entity that's making of this the
the decision to choose one or
the other the intent is for them
to be able to apply funds to
both our.
Transponders it basically and
be able use some money for for
need as determined by the
authority and my point was I
have a concern with the word
either there because that seems
to create pick one or the other.
Madam chairman if I may please
interject for just a second and
then if I just may do that for a
moment into Representative
Nibert teens this or based on
need can't do both based on need
for competitive we're trying to
make it to worried expanded to
based on needs already
competitive and so that's where
it is but thank you madam
chairman for allowing me to do
that and I'll.
Defer to our great
Representative Gail Chasey thank
you.
I guess I think madam chair.
That.
They either is as.
Rodriguez said they can use this
basis or they can use this
basically.
To figure it out I don't know
that it limits them because they
have two choices on which to
decide.
I guess I I'm not familiar
enough with hot NMFA works.
To say that to endorse your
interpretation Representative
Nibert but I think you might
want to check with much council.
And and with your expert NMFA
and see if that needs to be
changed when it comes to the
floor.
I just think came in simple
terms madam chair you you can
have either a piece of pie for a
few subject.
You don't get both the one or
the other at and this seems to
work good in the were either
there.
Seems to the point of choice so
if you don't have a problem with
that that's fine with me but I
I'm I just think that if.
Your the.
Creates in my mind some well.
HM Cernan and if not a concern
it weighs potential where.
That's the only comment I have
madam chair.
Thank you Representative so we
do have a due pass motion
You need to call the roll.
Okay.
Is there any opposition to the
past motion.
Seeing none you have a do passed
Senator showing all members
present voting in the
affirmative thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee you have a great day
stay safe policies.
Thank you same to you so we're
gonna try to address house
excuse me Senate bill two sixty
six Senator Ivey Soto we have a
very limited amount of time
because I of the committee
members must get Judiciary so
please again.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so in this last
election we adopted article on
changes to article forty section
three of the state constitution
allowing us to stack or alligned
terms of offices for non
statewide offices at the time
that we were considering that I
indicated my intent.
To work with the judiciary in
order to stagger the terms of
offices of district and
metropolitan court judges these
are the ones that are up
retention court appeals and
Supreme Court are already
staggered right now we have all
ninety six district judges
statewide operative shin at the
same time reduction takes fifty
seven percent which means if
someone were to drop money in
New Mexico in a manner as to
cost out and forty three point
one percent of the people as to
the judiciary they can wipe out
the entire trial bench at the
same time while some may find
that to be a virtue that would
be very disruptive to the branch
of government the staff was that
allows for better
evaluations and allows for for
ballots and allows for larger
font size allows for protection
of the branch of government
without we have to stand for
questions.
Great thank you let's go to the
audience if you would like to
raise your hand in support or in
favor of Senate bill two sixty
six please do so now we'll keep
it open for ten seconds.
Yes.
Okay great we have five in favor
excuse me six in favor and zero
against.
If you would like to speak in
favor please raise your hand
heather Bergeson here now and
it.
Madam chair members of the
committee heather Ferguson with
common cause New Mexico and for
the reasons that Senator Ivy
Soto stated most importantly
that we've been seeing a
national trend of money coming
into a lot of judicial elections
and seeing that this is
certainly a concern we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you there are no other
hands right so we're moving to
the committee Representative
Chasey.
In the past.
We have a deep has motion by
Representative Chasey and a
second by Representative Nibert.
Is there any discussion I'm
Madam chair representative
Daymon or is it representative
Ely because we heard this
morning.
So I just one question I I saw
on the FY are that AOC didn't
weigh in on madam chair senator
and they taken a position on
this one way the other I was
just curious what madam chair
members of the committee have
been working with the Supreme
Court directly on this issue
Selena at and and
the the legislature I'm in the
district at this point
provisions on basically the
policy before is just simply the
constitutionality of it would
fix the constitutional issues
therefore bring.
Yeah I was I mean you know there
is the the third branch of
government I want to make sure
we're treating with respect and
I appreciate that thank you
Senator madam chair.
Representative is there a
further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
past motion.
Seeing you have a do pass
Senator with all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Madam chair members of the
