Representative on Nordin.
Representative block present.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mejia?
Here.
Or was it Madame Floli,
representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Oh, here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We have a quorum and
before we begin to hear
Representative Brown's House
Bill 497.
Maybe I should wait for the rest
of the committee members. I had
talked to you about consenting.
A few Senate bills. Shall we
wait?
Until
Yeah, we'll, we'll wait. So with
that, Representative, go ahead,
you may begin. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Uh, this is House Bill 497 and
it's regarding the inspection of
Public Records Act, which we
usually call IPRA for short.
And my goal with this bill is to
actually start a conversation,
um, we've been hearing from, at
least I have been hearing from
so many public bodies,
municipalities, counties that
they're feeling very
overburdened by the way IPRA is
being used right now.
Um, they're hoping for some
practical, uh, changes to the
act.
And in fact, there are um
6 bills regarding IPRA this
session and um each of them does
something a little bit
different, but I think uh this
bill has bill 497 is really a
very practical
Um, suggestion of ways to
improve the act.
Um, I do believe we can make
IPRA better and uh all the while
preserving uh transparency and
access to government, public
records.
My expert today, Madam Chair, is
Michael Eschelman, who's the
county attorney from Sandoval
County.
He deals with IPRA on a daily
basis and has ideas on how to
improve.
Uh, the act and
House Bill 497 is really a
compilation of his ideas.
For, uh, for reform.
And uh I want to thank him and
the Legislative council drafter
who worked very diligently to
put this bill together. It was
really a, a monumental project
for both.
Um, I think the quickest way,
Madam Chair, uh, to describe the
bill is to just walk through the
bill section by section.
There are 7 sections to it. Um,
and before I do that though, I'd
like to let Mr. Eshelman give
you some opening remarks. Madam
Chair, thank you.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair
and Representatives.
Like many things, um, a small
number of people cause a large
part of the problem.
And I'm gonna introduce two
Of examples for you.
Daniel Cowett is uh an inmate at
the state prison in Hobbs, and
his hobby is making IPR
requests. He's made hundreds and
hundreds of them.
And
Um
Then he files lawsuits, which
he's granted, um, he doesn't
have to pay the filing fee
because he's indigent.
And there have been at least 70
lawsuits he has filed about
IPRA. And the type of things he
requests aren't related to his
case, they're there, I want a
copy of the sheriff's business
card. I want a map of the
county.
Um, and if people don't follow
through, he sues them. Um, not
one of his many suits has gone
anywhere. They either get
dismissed on procedural basis,
they get dismissed on.
Um
Uh, fail to comply with court
rules, um, they get dismissed on
the merits, but those 70
lawsuits, think of the tens of
thousands of dollars in legal
fees that everyone has had to
pay in response to this. One of
his pending lawsuits is against
the compilation commission,
which publishes the state code,
those red books up there behind
you. He asked for a copy of the
code, and they said, what's on
our website? He said, I don't
care, so he's suing them because
they won't give him material
that's freely available.
Um, another
Um, we have a problem with
Large corporate interests
outsourcing the research costs
on the taxpayer. And one of the
biggest requesters around the
state, I know particularly in
the city of Albuquerque is
LexisNexis.
LexisNexis is a big data broker.
They gather information and then
resell it. It's owned by a giant
multinational conglomerate based
in London, which whose market
cap yesterday was $88 billion
called relics. It used to be
called Reed Elsevier.
And
They make cause a huge amount of
work. Don't pay for any of it,
and then make a lot of money
selling the data that taxpayers
have given them and done a lot
of work to create.
People like that are what we're
trying to address. This um this
bill is not going to address,
not going to hit.
The journal or KRQE or John Q.
Public that's trying to watch
his government uh government.
Most of our requests are very
straightforward in Sandovalt
County. They need an accident
report. They want a copy of the
county manager's contract. And
we turned those requests around
very quickly. The police-related
requests, we've been turning
around an average about 3 days,
and the other requests about 7
days. Um,
And there's precedent for
Charging power users something
in the federal courts, there's a
system called Pacer, which is
the access to documents filed
with federal court. If you run
up under, I believe it's $30 a
quarter in charges, you don't
get a bill.
But if you are somebody that's
very intensive on the system and
using a lot of resources, you
have to pay. 90% or better of
users of Pacer never have to pay
a cent.
But some of the power users.
Do
Um,
And Sandal County we believe in
transparency, we believe in good
customer service. For instance,
um, under the Recording Act,
documents filed with the clerk
aren't actually subject to IPRA,
but we go above and beyond.
Somebody says I need a copy of
the deed on my house. We'll get
that for them. If somebody's
asking to do essentially a title
search, we'll say, go hire a
title company.
But we try to help our citizens
and we do, it's just a handful
of bad actors that we need some
help with. So, um, the bill has,
and I would um also give credit
to my colleagues, my fellow
county attorneys, they came up
with these ideas. This is it. I
kind of shaped them, but this is
in a team effort, as
Representative Brown said,
everybody is struggling. So the
bill has essentially 3 areas.
One is some exceptions.
about
personal information about
security-related information. It
has some process changes about
how we handle requests, and it's
got some uh related to the
remedies of what happens when
there's non-compliance, and I
will hand it back over to
represent Brown to walk through.
Madam Chair and members, I know
you have a very long agenda
today, so I'm gonna really try
to blitz through the bill, but I
do want to make sure I highlight
some of the, uh, some I think
the important parts. So starting
on page one, section one of the
existing statute, Madam Chair,
um, does provide um quite a list
of exceptions to the inspection
of public uh records.
Um, so I, I won't detail those,
but I do want to say that some
of the changes that Mr. Eshelman
has recommended or backed up by
case law, and when he initially
when we met actually at a social
function at the start of this
legislative session and we got
to talking and he mentioned IPRA
and I was like, oh, my ears went
up because I know it's an issue.
And so we talked and he said,
could you put this down in a
format a bill for me.
And so he
He did that and he also included
footnotes on everything, and of
course we don't do that in our
drafting, but he's backed up
everything. There, there are
reasons for the changes that
he's suggesting. So, let me move
to um I'm gonna uh head on over
to.
Uh, let's go to section 2 on
page 5.
Um, there, well, there are, you
see the underlying material is,
is all new material and um it's
Let me start on page 3 actually
with that. So it, it does point
out that someone's personal
email address or personal
telephone. Those are some things
that would be exempted. Um, and
then it goes on to talk about
like if there's a
public bodies, security system,
um.
that that would be exempt as
well for, for obvious reasons.
Uh, talks about security codes,
um,
And then on down the list, um.
So, uh, rather than go into
detail there, I want to go to um
section 2 of the bill, starting
on page 5.
And this is dealing with law
enforcement records, Madam
Chair.
And the statute currently says
that law enforcement records are
public records except.
And then it gives uh um reasons
for the change. Um,
At line 8, they're on line 6,
There's a new provision that
says if a law enforcement agency
becomes aware of a crime to
which a request for law
enforcement records relates.
The time for responding to that
request for law enforcement
records is told for 45 days
immediately following the day on
which law enforcement becomes
aware of the crime.
And Mr. Esham, we can go into
some detail as to why that's in
there. Uh, but I just want to
point it out first. And then on
page 7.
Um, you know, there are a lot of
things already in the statute
about um stalkers, aggravated
stalking, criminal sexual
penetration and on and forth.
We're adding um the things that
would be shielded, um,
kidnapping, abandonment of a
child, abuse of a child.
Um, enticement of a child
voyeurism, incest.
And uh some of these records may
involve photographs and things
that you really wouldn't want
other people to see.
And so we're just trying to
protect privacy here.
Uh, so, human trafficking is
also there in the in that
listing.
Um, let me go on next to.
Next section of the bill,
Section 3.
I think this is one of the
strengths of this bill, Madam
Chair. um, Mr. Eshelman has
added some definitions of
phrases, words that we often
hear, but don't really
Have a universal understanding
of what they mean, so there's a
different definition now for
broad or burdensome.
And briefly, that means that um
If the request requires the
public body to spend more than 3
hours to locate the public
record and redact information
exempt, uh, that that would be
considered broad and burdensome.
There's also a definition now
for critical infrastructure.
Uh, page 12, line 10.
Uh, defines current records and
basically those are records that
um are no more than 12 months
old.
And then, um,
Cybersecurity information that's
kind of a new concept in this
day and age, and that we give a
definition for that there. And
then also shocking to me the uh
existing statute never to find
good faith. We're talking about
good faith effort to uh locate
records and so forth. So there's
a definition for that now.
And um
Also define law enforcement
records.
Medical records and uh
definition for private place
where there'd be an expectation
of privacy.
Also, um, we simplified, I
think, the part about personal
identifier information PII and
what this does is just kind of
Make it cleaner language, I
think.
And, um, page 16.
Staring at line 14, there's a
definition for reasonable
denial.
With respect to a request for
public records.
Uh, also a definition, a few
lines down for reasonable
particularity.
And uh so on and so forth. So
moving forward to section 4.
It's on page 18.
Here we're making it um clear to
everybody that a person, Madam
Chair.
Making a request to put it in
writing, uh, an oral request.
Um
If that's made, it would not
subject, and this is current
law, the custodian to any
penalty a written request, I
think is very important because
then we know what we're talking
about.
OK, so let me go on to page 19.
Uh, this is somewhat existing
language with a time change. So
a custodian receiving a written
request shall permit, and this
is current law permit the
inspection immediately or as
soon as practicable under the
circumstances, but not later
than.
Current loss is 15 days and
we're suggesting 21 days cause
that's more realistic.
And uh then if um the the
records are not current, I
they're their aged, then there
would be a 60 day maximum for
producing those records.
Also, um, on page 20 Madam
Chair, I think this is really
important part of the bill.
Um, a public body, when someone
receives a request for records,
the requester.
Um
May be asked to clarify what,
what the person really wants.
And right now, we don't do that.
So there's this fishing
expeditions sometimes, what did
the person really, what does
that person really want? And so
forth, this allows them to talk
to each other and try to get
some clarification.
The public body, and this is on
line 25, this is new language.
Public body may discuss with the
requester.
Um, of a large volume of
records, how the scope of
request may be narrowed. Maybe
it can't, but maybe it can.
Um
And there's also here um some
language on the next page, page
21 at line 7 that nothing in
this would require a public body
to provide inspection of browser
histories, caches, cookies.
metadata system logs, log in
histories and protocol
addresses. Um, so.
Um, and then section 5, we're
getting to the end here.
This is the procedure for
inspection.
And as Mr. Eshelman mentioned,
Madam Chair.
Um
Something that takes more than 3
hours to um to get.
Um, uh, produced for the, or,
you know, uh, identified for the
requester. um, there would be a
fee if, if it's beyond the 3
hours, there would be a fee of
$30 an hour.
Um, but that would exclude the
initial 3 hours.
And um cause this gets very
costly for our public bodies on
the whole.
And then if a person, and this
is line 7, new new language if a
person makes 5 or more requests
within a 45 day period, um, one
could treat the request as one
request for computing, the time
for labor charges.
Section 6 is regarding procedure
for denied requests.
I think this is really one of
the strengths of the bill here,
starting around line 17, um.
If the requester isn't getting
the records, instead of filing a
lawsuit, that person can notify
the public body. So maybe it's
the county commission, maybe
it's the city council, whoever.
Of, um, a notice of violation
and then
There would be, uh, the public
body would have to respond, and
sometimes they can, you know,
get to the bottom of these
things and why aren't these
records being found or produced.
And uh it gives a time frame
there for that.
Um, on damages instead of shell,
there's a May now.
And maybe be awarded for failure
to provide a timely explanation
of denial.
Um, be awarded an amount that
does not exceed $100 per
business day.
And um
And then there's just a little
bit more there. So now the final
section of the bill, madam
Chair, Section 7.
This is regarding enforcement.
I, I think too this is also a
strength of the bill.
Um, line 3 after a public body
has received written notice of a
claimed violation of the
inspection of Public Records Act
and has failed to respond within
21 business days.
An action sought to enforce the
act may be brought, and we'd be
using the Attorney General or
the district attorney in the
jurisdiction.
Um, and then this is, I think
this is really important as
well, um, and I want to
highlight it, Madam Chair, the
paragraph that line 12. Instead
of going against the employee,
the records.
Custodian, um, the action would
be against the public body.
And I think there's value in
that. Um, I think it puts the
onus where it belongs and that's
it. And then this would be a
civil action, if it's brought.
Um, so that's basically, those
are the changes that we're
suggesting to the inspection of
public Records Act.
And um
I'll just finish my remarks,
Madam Chair, by saying that
We received 10 agency analyses
on this bill.
The analysis came to me within,
I think 2 days of this hearing.
So we don't often get them in a
timely fashion.
Um, but I've been through all of
them and the fiscal impact
report is if you don't want to
read all 10, I've never had that
many analyses on any bill I've
ever carried, but
If you want to get a summary of
what these agencies were saying.
You can find that in the fiscal
impact report.
For the most part, I think
there's very favorable comments.
We did have a few, uh, where,
you know, they suggested we need
to do uh some more thinking and
some more work, but on the
whole, this was very well
received. So, Madam Chair,
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the audience real quick.
Let's take uh those in favor,
please raise your hands.
Let's take 5, please go ahead
and stand so that we can get to
you one minute comments, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Larry Harran
registered lobbyist for Sandoval
County. I won't take much time
cause Mr. Eshelman is our county
attorney, so we're in support of
his efforts. he's trying to
address some issues that we've
had in implementation of the
inspection of public records
Act, so we urge your support.
Thank you.
Chair members, my name is Matt
Thompson, registered lobbyist
for the cities of Carlsbad,
Hobbs, Jal, and Eddy County. I
just wanted to run down a few of
the uh of the loads that uh that
this issue has brought, uh,
Hobbs is a city of about 40,000
people as two full-time
employees and one to handle the
the police requests alone,
Jo, city of about 5000 people,
has 2 part-time employees, Eddy
County has 3 full-time employees
and is adding a 4th for a
coordinator position.
In the city of Carlsbad, a city
of 40,000 people.
As 12 full-time employees to
handle their IPRA requests.
That's almost as much as
Albuquerque.
So something is out of hand and
it's uh most of this is to
review the video footage. So we
appreciate um your attention on
this matter. We don't feel like
these, uh these cities are alone
in in the seriousness of this
waste of resources and, and
public dollar.
OK. Any further comments and
support?
Let's stay with the audience.
OK, I'll, yeah, do you want to
check outside? Let's go ahead
and go online for support. We
will take 3 comments online.
OK, so we have the editor from
the candle. Hi, Bruce, can you
hear us?
Yes, but I'm not speaking in
support. I just raised my hand
to make sure that I wasn't
excluded. OK, no worries. We'll
circle back around to you. Uh,
we have Cass here. Cass, can you
hear us?
OK, we're having a hard time
hearing you, so I'm just gonna
mute you real quick. Just go
ahead and uh unmute.
And hopefully that'll fix it.
No
Yeah, we can hear you now, Cass.
You have one minute.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Chair. My name is Cass Brulotte.
I am the general counsel for the
Office of Broadband Access and
expansion. We are here today in
particular support of the
critical infrastructure
exemption, um, found in HB 497,
services in the state. It is
essential to the operations of
health, safety, security of New
Mexicans, including your
emergency services, 911, your
water supplies, fuel,
educational institutions and
electricity. Obai has received a
billion dollars in state and
federal funding to implement
broadband infrastructure
projects and as part of our
grant review and reward process.
We received detailed maps,
strategic plans, and security
plans for broadband
infrastructure projects.
release of these materials
pursuant to IPRA exposes
critical vulnerabilities, not
only in broadband
infrastructure, but the
corresponding vulnerabilities I
just mentioned in water,
electricity, fuel supplies, and
healthcare. Bad actors can
utilize this information to
cripple systems, leading to
prolonged or sustained
interruption. Thank you.
Right. Up next we got Howard
Hutchinson. Howard, can you hear
us?
Um, you're having the same
problem here, so I'm just gonna
go ahead and mute you real
quick. Go ahead and unmute
yourself. Hopefully, that'll fix
it.
Hello? Hi, we can hear you now,
Howard. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Howard
Hutchinson, I'm registered
lobbyist for the coalition of
Arizona and New Mexico counties,
um, there's, there's been quite
a bit of information already
forward, but I would like to
point out, um, we received
information from Otero County.
Um, work hours worked for a year
on IPRAs is 20,080 hours per
year.
With a total cost or grand total
cost of 138,26394.
This is an important issue for
our member counties and we fir
firmly support uh passage of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Howard.
That's, that's it for everyone
in sport.
OK, let's stay online. Is there
any opposition?
We have uh
here
Bruce, can you hear us?
I can hear you. Can you hear me
OK. OK. First of all, I wanna
thank uh the chairwoman for um
Postponing
This for uh
Today's hearing. I also want to
thank uh Ivan in the staff for
uh communicating with us about
this. Uh, Representative Brown
indicated she wanted to file a
spill to start a conversation,
and I think that's a good idea,
but I think
The fact that we get about a
minute to respond to 10.
Agency reports is not being part
of a conversation. It's not
being part of a discussion, uh,
and as a journalist who has had
to use IPRA, not because I
wanted to use it, but because
Both, mostly at the state level,
but at some county and
Municipal levels, we've run into
roadblocks with providing
information that could have been
handled over the phone. I could
show you, and I think the
representative would understand
what I'm talking about. The
sponsor of this bill
of the roadblocks that we have
placed in front of us when an
agency will simply say we don't
have to answer your questions,
file an NRA. I have that, those
types of responses, um, I have,
uh, responses that deal with
With information we're, we're
seeking relative.
Sorry about that. Just for the
sake of time, we're gonna move
on here.
Right, so we have Daniel
Williams. Daniel, can you hear
us?
We're having the same issue
here. I'm gonna go ahead and
mute you. Go ahead and unmute
yourself. Hopefully, that'll fix
it.
Can you hear me now.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Daniel Williams. I'm a policy
advocate at the ACLU of New
Mexico. We stand in strong
opposition to HB 497. This bill
threatens government
transparency by restricting
public access to records that
are critical for accountability
and public trust. IPRA exists to
ensure that government agencies,
perhaps especially law
enforcement, remain open to
public review and scrutiny. HB
497 will make it harder for
journalists, advocates, and
community members to
Uncover misconduct, excessive
use of force, corruption, and
other abuses of power.
Transparency is not a waste of
public resources. It is
essential to democracy. Current
law already protects much
sensitive information when
necessary.
This bell goes too far, giving
agencies virtually unchecked
power to deny public records
requests and wholesale excluding
incarcerated New Mexicans from
exercising their right to know.
New Mexicans deserve an open
government, not one that hides
behind secrecy. We urge the
committee to vote no on HB 497
and upholds all of our right to
know. Thank you.
Thank you, Daniel.
OK and lastly we have Lucas
Pearman. Lucas, can you hear us?
Same deal. We're gonna do just a
little mute, then go and unmute
yourself, hopefully that fix it.
Um, fortunately, no. Let's try
one more time here.
OK, can you hear me now? OK, we
can hear you now.
Great. All right, so I'm Lucas
Pearman. I'm the assistant
managing editor of the
Albuquerque Journal, and I'm
also the board president for the
New Mexico Foundation broken
government or in in fog. In in
fog does not support this bill
for a variety of reasons. Uh,
two of those reasons being the
$30 an hour fee imposed for
extensive records requests and
extending the time records
custodians have to reply to
records requests. News media
relies on extensive records
requests and timely receipts of
those requests to keep
governments accountable and
informed. For instance,
extensive records requests
played a role in the Journal's
report on the DWI bribery
scandal, creating fee and time
barriers in accessing
information negatively affects a
journalist's ability to do their
job and allows governments to
more easily bypass media and
citizen watchdogs. In Ifog and
records custodians do need to
have a conversation, and we do
need to come back next year with
a bill that more appropriately
addresses the bad actors without
crippling the freedom citizens
have to access.
these public records. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Lucas.
OK, let's go back to the
audience. Do we have any anyone
in the audience who wish to
speak in opposition.
OK. Let's please stand and then
one minute, please.
Hi, Madam Chairwoman, members of
the committee. My name is
Christine Barber. I'm the
executive director of the
Foundation for Open Government.
This bill says that inmates are
not people. It says records of
custodians do not have to answer
questions, but the most alarming
part is that it would charge.
Everyone, $30 an hour. That
includes the media, and that
includes regular New Mexicans
who are the majority of
requesters. Now granted that $30
an hour does not come into
effect until after the 1st 3
hours. This is still going to
cost New Mexicans, just the
regular people who are the
majority asking for records,
it's gonna cost them money.
There are other ways to solve
this problem. Other
municipalities have in New
Mexico have found ways to solve
this. I
totally sympathize with you guys
being overworked. Absolutely.
But again, this should be a
conversation that gets started
here, not a bill that gets
passed. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Amanda Lavin. I am an
attorney and I work for the New
Mexico Foundation for Open
Government. Um, I, I echo my
colleague Ms. Barbour's
comments. I, I don't think we
can overstate enough how
damaging to transparency this
bill would be if it were to
pass. Um, it would fundamentally
depart from IPRA's original
intent, which is to allow the
public the greatest amount of
information possible and
recognize that providing these
records, providing this public
information to the public for
any reason.
Um, is an essential function of
a democratic government. Um, and
so by charging people for
records that their tax dollars
have already paid for, um,
giving governments the power to
withhold records and completely
ignore responses or requests
that don't contain specific
language, identifying records
that really information that
belongs to the government and
that the people don't know, um,
uh, is a, is, is, as I think,
just completely
anti-transparency. Um, and I
think also we need to look at
the way that this bill would
transform the
to trend to enforce IPRA. Thank
you.
OK, seeing no other comments
from the audience,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
want to say thank you for
bringing this legislation
forward, we've, we've been
listening to different bills on
the same topic, I think.
And they each have some holes.
They each have some problems.
Um, I, I would have to say that,
you know, as I'm just going
through it, I'm
I'm redlining a lot of things
and have a lot of questions and
I don't think I even have enough
time to go through those
questions.
But I know you're very thorough,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
and all that you do, and I think
this is a very thorough bill and
it covers a lot of things, but I
think it also opens up a lot of,
if you will, can of worms, and I
think other other pieces of
pieces of legislation too as
well. I think this is a time for
us to maybe look to see what we
can do during the interim. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
committee members.
Madam Floor leader.
Madam Chair and Representative
Brown, um, this is, I think the
2nd or 3rd bill that we have
seen in this committee regarding
uh IPRA as uh Representative Lu
Han just mentioned and um.
I
I, um,
There are
Many, I have many concerns about
a number of these provisions.
Um, one of the other.
Bills, uh, talked about a task
force, and, you know, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, um, I
am curious if you would be open
to
Um, participating in, in a task
force with some of the
stakeholders here. Um, I think
if we had a task force that was
equally weighted with request
stores and public bodies, so
that, so that we had
Um, kind of the full spectrum of
individuals that both are
providing public records and are
also requesting public records
for different purposes, um, and
I think that would need to
include small business, members
of the media, members of the
public that are, you know, just.
Uh, community members, um,
And then stay, county, city
representatives on the other
side. To me, um,
You know, I would really
appreciate that approach because
then I would know when I was
looking at a bill that everyone
had had a chance to weigh in on
it, and I know you mentioned
Representative that you were
digesting 10 different analyses
within the last 48 hours, which
uh seems really challenging. So
I, I wonder, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, if you might be
willing to, you know, roll this
bill, but with an understanding
that they're that we could take
this up in an interim committee.
Um, and so, Madam Chair, I'd
love for you to just share your
thoughts, representative.
Madam Chair and representatives.
So I'm, I'm totally in agreement
with you on this. We knew that
this was
Our contribution, we hope to the
discussion.
Um, I have read the other bills
and I see some merits and I see
some deficiencies in those bills
as well.
What this bill offers is a more
comprehensive look at IPRA.
And um, so I won't go into
detail about the other bills
cause you, I think you've heard
them, but um I, I do believe
this will end up being studied
in the interim for good reason
and um a lot of what I
That got started on this was the
municipal League's report on
IPR, they did an actual major
study and got input from a lot
of different uh sources.
And um
The municipal League actually
kind of lined out some changes
that it would like to see, and
those you see in uh
representative Chandler and uh
uh Senator Trujillo's bill.
So I think um that's a pretty
good bill. But again, it's, it's
more narrow in its focus. So I'd
like to see us um
Improve the inspection of public
Records Act and we're, I am, I
can't speak for Mr. Eshelman, I
thought I hope he'd stay
involved, but I, I think we're
in agreement on that. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, um, uh, that
would be wonderful to have some
interim committee hearings. I
will volunteer Sandoval County
to host such a committee, and I
will help you get contacts from
the clerks, the sheriffs, and
everybody on this, um, I would
love that as Representative
Brown said, we understand.
This is short time the end of
the session, um, but we need
some relief and we need to talk
to some folks and we can assuage
concerns and we can push back
on, you know, I want the AOC's
analysis, for instance, has some
points that that I'd love to
tell them how I, I think
they're, I think they're
incorrect, and this bill would
not cause the problems they,
they see. So
We'd love to have you in in
Sanval County.
Hm
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you for leader
Representative Ona Nonu.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative Brown, an
expert for being here, um, to
present this bill. I just want
to echo some of what we've heard
today that I certainly
Understand
The concerns with being
overburdened and like swamped
with requests, and I certainly
want to make sure that, you
know, hopefully as we move
forward with the task force that
we can
Alleviate some of that pressure,
um, but I did have a couple
questions with regard
With regards to how the bill's
drafted currently because I
think we may have been
creating
Some like unforeseen
consequences with some, with how
some of the the language is
drafted, so I was looking at
item I. Where did I find that?
Um.
Is it? Um, it's the audio
recordings.
I think that's page 9. Yeah, OK,
page 9.
Lines 5.
Starting at line 5.
Um, so that would be like body
worn camera footage and there's
like a couple exemptions.
Um
For when those recordings would
be permitted. So like depicting
an alleged crime.
Recording and interaction
between law enforcement and a,
and a person that results in
bodily injury or death.
Or recording an encounter that
is subject to current legal
proceedings. So which like on
its face sounds totally
reasonable, but.
My concern is, like, what if
it's a civil action? So if, for
example, a person is.
Arrested in their home, and they
believe that they've had their
civil rights violated and they
go see an attorney to address
that. If the attorney wants to
then see that body camera
footage with that attorney then
have to file a lawsuit first in
order to get access to that
footage.
Madam Chair, um, so,
There are provisions, um, I have
not personally done, but I
believe there's provisions and
discovery rules for doing like
pretrial discovery, but we, we
could clarify by making an
exception, for instance, we
redact certain information if
it's a stranger, but if
somebody's own lawyer wants like
say somebody's personnel file or
medical records, we will give
them unredacted if they sign a
release of information. So what
I would foresee in a situation
like that, because the intent is
to protect people from strangers
from knowing.
What, what somebody else's house
looks like. If you can send it
to your own, you know, then
there'd be no problem there.
The, the, so we could put
something in like with the
release of information, we could
clarify that, but that's the
intent is to keep strangers from
looking at somebody's house in
the same way that we don't want
strangers looking at your
medical records.
Thank you for that, um, Madam
Chair and expert, I'm sorry,
what was your name, sir?
Michael Eshelman Eshelman, thank
you, Mr. Eshelman, um, yeah,
that, that makes sense because,
you know, my concern is that
it's going to
Create a scenario without that
provision where we just have.
Like see more kind of unfounded
civil rights.
Lawsuits because like attorneys
feel like they'd have to file an
order to get the information.
So, no, thank you Madam Chair,
we routinely get this we'll,
we'll get requests from a lawyer
and, and they'll say, well, you
know, we can save ourselves a
lot of time and save you some
time and give you unredacted
records if you get to release
some information. We regularly
do that on medical files and
other sensitive information. Um,
so there's, we, we're already
doing some things like that. OK,
wonderful.
Lawsuits because like attorneys
feel like they'd have to file an
order to get the information.
So, no, thank you Madam Chair,
we routinely get this we'll,
we'll get requests from a lawyer
and, and they'll say, well, you
know, we can save ourselves a
lot of time and save you some
time and give you unredacted
records if you get to release
some information. We regularly
do that on medical files and
other sensitive information. Um,
so there's, we, we're already
doing some things like that. OK,
if I may just add so reading
down the page a little bit,
there are exceptions.
for this and they're outlined
there in section, subsections
12, and 3, and I think that gets
to what Mr. Ershman was just
talking about.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Brown. And then I also had
questions over on page.
15.
Oh, sorry.
Um
Sorry, I misspoke. It's still,
um, page 5 lines 14 through 22.
I can't read my own writing
today.
Um
So if you look at page.
Or line 15.
Does a person convicted of an
indictable offense.
So with that
Would that mean a felony
offense?
Madam Chair, yes, um, this
language, um, I, I agree it
could be tweaked because it came
out of the New Jersey equivalent
of uh IPRA. So it was, um, it
would need to be tweaked by our
bill drafting experts that
understand the structure of our
code, but yes. OK.
Um, yeah, uh.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Eshelman.
I agree with that because
Like in order for
Someone to like apply for these
exemptions.
Like the amount of hoops of hoop
jumping that that would require,
I think.
is kind of unduly burdensome.
Like, it's at least
4 or 5 steps.
Of like determining whether a
person has been convicted of an
indictable offense by conducting
a background check.
To see if they've been convicted
in New Mexico or any other state
and have to comb through all
those convictions to see if they
were felony convictions or if
they were in another
jurisdiction.
And then comb through those
convictions to see which ones
were for crimes that have a
victim like violent crimes, then
request a criminal complaint.
And then fulfill the IPRA.
So I, yeah, I, if that, if
tweaking that language would
solve that. I think that
definitely needs to happen as
well, Madam Chair, Mr. Eshelman,
and I think, I think that was my
two big concerns with, with how
this bill is currently drafted.
So thank you very much, Ma'am.
Thank you, uh, quickly,
Representative Locke and
Representative Barrago so that
we can uh move on to our next
bill. The sponsor has agreed to
roll the spill. Thank you.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
I just had one question. So on
page 12.
When we're talking about
critical infrastructure, Madam
Chair.
I'm wondering, is this already
currently something that's not
allowed to be to be given out.
So I do know somebody who didn't
IPRA request, I think it was the
Albuquerque storm drainage
tunnels, and they said that it
was critical infrastructure and
they couldn't give out that
information already, so I'm
wondering is this kind of
repetitive of maybe some current
statutes somewhere, Madam Chair
Representative Mr. Eshelman.
But I'm sure, I,
it could be, you know, the, you
see how voluminous the codebook
is up there on the shelf, and
that's, you know, if you look at
the Attorney General's manual,
uh, for compliance, they list.
At least 5 pages of exceptions
that are scattered through the
code. It's possible there's
somewhere because no man alive
knows everything in the the the
code, other than perhaps some
folks at LSC, um, so I'm not
aware of it, but it's um if if
this already protected
somewhere, be happy to delete
it. Some of this is belt and
suspenders approach, um, making
sure that it's exempt from IPRA,
even if it is disclosable in
certain circumstances elsewhere
in the code.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I guess I'll just hold off on
any other questions.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Barrago. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm not gonna
discuss the bill itself because
I believe that we're gonna roll
it, um, so that discussion will
come later, but I would wanna
caution people because I've been
involved in a lot of IPRA
requests over my
Over my time in government, um,
And just looking at the bill
very quickly. There was a lot to
absorb in a short amount of
time, um, but I would just
mention that.
You know, keep in mind the
people who are, there's a lot of
legalese in here, but there's
also a lot of people that are at
the very lowest levels of
government that are doing the
IPRA response and so just when
there needs to be a balance
somehow in there, in, in
whatever bill the state accepts,
because it goes across city,
county and state, you know, and
causes even quasi-governmental
agency.
And
It needs to be very clear and
very uh succinct in terms of
what is requested and what is
required and what the response
is. So I just, I just wanna put
that out there because
Oftentimes the people who are
responding to these things are.
Being
You know, they're at the lowest
levels, as I mentioned, and they
are managed, but they're not
always managed effectively. So I
just want to put that out there.
Madam Chair, in response to
that, that's part of why the in
my county, we have the staff
that's in the legal department
handle because most of the
requests are perfectly routine,
but my staff knows when to ask
questions, and if we can
simplify this, absolutely for
it. Like, I like to say if I, if
I'm sounding like a lawyer, I'm
doing something wrong, you know,
most of this stuff can, should
be able to be understood by,
you're my neighbor, I would be
happy to talk with you offline.
do so. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you committee members.
Thank you, Representative Brown,
and thank you, Mr. Ischelman for
bringing this bill forward. It's
very important and we look
forward to working on it this
summer, please uh put us on your
list, list serve and include us.
Thank you. So with your
permission, we will roll this
bill.
Madam chair. I, I appreciate
that. I value all the comments
we've heard. I just make an
invitation to anybody who wants
to wait on the bill to please
send me an email. I'm easy to
find my information and we'll
collect everything for the
interim. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's move along to
house Bill 363. Do we see
representative.
Dixon or Hernandez.
Representative Cullen.
You won the race to this hot
seat.
Yeah.
OK. No, no. Uh, before we, um,
move along to here the next bill
committee members, can we review
our agenda?
Yesterday.
I propose to consent.
Senate Bill 47.
Senate Bill 75.
Senate Bill 82.
Senate Bill 19.
These bills, including Senate
Bill 7.
Uh, have passed the Senate
committees unanimously, the
Senate floor unanimously, and
the first House committees
unanimously, and I wondered if
you had time to review them so
that we could pass these bills
in one swoop.
Madam Chair, I have a question.
So, so you announced
Or bills
But then you started talking and
then you announced 7.
And
Oh, OK.
OK, just the 4. So it does not
include 292 at the bottom of the
list. OK, so just, just the 4
right there.
OK, I got you.
Thank you, Manpresentative,
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion that we pass SB 47, SB
75, SB 82 and CSB 19 as a
consent motion.
Before I take the motion
representative Lujan, thank you,
Madam Chair. Senate bill.
75, is that the same bill that
we uh same hospitals are the are
there mirror mirror bills, we
just passed one yesterday and on
the floor for these mirror bills
and
Sure.
All right, thank you.
I don't, I don't.
I
With a motion, Madam Chair, if
you wanted to move forward with
the motion.
OK, I have a motion by
Representative Barrago for
DuPass on Senate Bill 4775 was
amended. Senate Bill 82it
substitute Senate Bill 19 as
amended, and a second by Vice
Chair Little. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none of those bills are
consented and passed out of this
committee. Thank you committee
members.
OK, now we can move along to
Senate bill 70.
As amended, committee
substitute.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for getting this
scheduled quickly. I really
appreciate it. Um, I've been
working on this bill for a few
years. Uh, it is, uh, dealing
with our RICO statute or
racketeering as we call it in
this state, which is, is really
targeting organized crime.
Uh this bill started at a uh
And LFC hearing, um, where the
DA's were presenting to LFC and
so the one thing we really need
for to deal with crime in our
state is to update our
racketeering law because it's
very, very out of date. So
really all the bill does is it
adds new crimes that could be
charged under racketeering.
There's nothing else in it we
didn't increase any penalties.
We just added some new, some new
crimes under the racketeering,
uh, crimes like sexual
exploitation of children. This
is all on page 4.
of this committee sub.
Uh, sexual exploitation of
children, criminal sexual
penetration, criminal sexual
conduct, uh, dog fighting, uh,
cockfighting, bringing
contraband in places of
imprisonment and human
trafficking, um.
It's pretty amazing that that
those weren't in here already,
um, but this will allow our DAs
to be able to charge, especially
on human trafficking, that has
become a huge issue in our, in
our state, um, and right now the
feds have been having to do all
the charges on human trafficking
because we can't do the
organized crime portion of it,
and this will change that.
Thank you. Are you ready for
public comment? Uh yes, ma'am.
OK, let's go to the audience,
those in support, please raise
your hands. OK, let's take
public comments. Please stand.
Where's our committee staff?
It'll be you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington. I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce that
supports Senate Bill 70. This
bill targets the leaders of
enterprises that are committing
heinous crimes that should be
felonies.
And we all know that human
trafficking is a growing
problem, largely because of the
organized criminal development
that's involved. Racketeering
statues are designed to go after
these these kinds of
organizations and the kinds of
people who lead these
organizations and prosecutors
need Senate Bill 70 to have a
new set of tools to protect the
public. So the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges your support for this
legislation, and we thank the
sponsor.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Stacy Sutton Kirby,
Chief Government Affairs Officer
for Animal Protection New Mexico
and animal protection voters. We
strongly support Senate Bill 70
for adding dogfighting and
cockfighting to the list of
violations under a racketeering
law, incorporating excuse me,
incorporating organized animal
fighting into our RICO statute
will align our state's
legislation with what law
enforcement professionals have
long known that animal fighting
rings are frequently
part of larger criminal
enterprises that include drug
and arms trafficking, human
trafficking, money laundering,
and other illegal activities.
Utilizing the racketeering
statute will help to disrupt
these fighting rings and
enhanced protection not only for
the animals that are harmed and
killed, but also for our
communities at large, we urge
you to vote yes on S bill 70 and
Senate Bill 70.
Good Morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Dale Wagner. I'm a deputy
chief of the New Mexico State
Police. Expanding New Mexico's
racketeering statute would
significantly enhance the
state's ability to combat
organized criminal activity.
Racketeering laws are designed
to target and dismantle criminal
organizations.
While in by enabling law
enforcement to prosecute a wide
range of criminal actions that
are part of larger criminal
enterprise.
By broadening the scope of the
offenses covered under the
racketeering statute, the state
can better address and penalize
aboter spectrum of criminal
activities, particularly those
tied to organized crime.
This expansion would strengthen
New Mexico's efforts to combat
criminal organizations on
multiple fronts from traditional
crimes like drug trafficking to
emerging threats such as human
trafficking and financial fraud.
In doing so, the state would
improve public safety, increase
coordination between law
enforcement agencies and ensure
more effective prosecution of
high-level organized crime
figures.
EPS strongly supports this bill
as it addresses a long-standing
challenge in identifying and
tackling upstream criminal
actors that are part of a larger
criminal enterprise by providing
law enforcement with additional
legal tools, this bill will
focus on dismantling the most
serious and dangerous criminal
elements rather than targeting
low level crimes that often
driven by criminal organizations
that evade justice. Thank you.
Thank you. Any
Further comments and support
will go online.
We'll take a couple.
OK.
For those hoping to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
We have Carla. Carla, can you
hear us?
Good morning, Madam Chair. It's
actually Larry Sontag. Can you
hear me?
Sure can, Larry, go ahead.
Great. Good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Larry Sontag here on behalf of
the New Mexico Business
Coalition, and I won't, uh,
repeat what Mr. Bullington, uh,
articulated well, but I need to
also go back to a different hat
I wore when I was a captain with
the Albuquerque Police
Department.
I'm so disappointed that there's
nobody from Albuquerque police
here to support this bill, but
you did hear from a top.
Uh, Deputy Chief from state
police. You've heard that
district attorneys support this.
When I talk to those who are
still currently serving here in
the Albuquerque area, cartels
and organized crime is a huge
problem.
I urge your support.
Of this House Bill 70 and
appreciate the sponsors for
bringing it.
I'm sorry, Senate Bill 70. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Larry. Anyone
else hoping to speak in support
of the bill, please raise your
hand now. no.
OK, let's go to opposition. OK.
Anyone hoping to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand up first. It's
like we have uh Jessie. Jessie,
can you hear us?
Hello, can you hear me?
OK. Yeah, I'm, I'm in support of
the bill, but I just would like
to have an amendment to remove
the cockfighting part, uh,
committee members, honorable,
uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Consider the uh this request to
amend Senate Bill 70 and
removing cockfighting. I would
like to thank Senator Brandon
for his hard work in proposing
the bill regarding criminal
acts. The only request is to
remove cockfighting from Senate
bill. Cockfighting has a deep
historical roots in New Mexico,
particularly in the native.
American and the Hispanic
communities. This practice was
just recently banded in 2007.
cockfighting through
controversials have been part of
the local culture, identity,
deeply interwined with the
traditions passed down through
generations. For many people in
this community, cockfighting is
an expression of their culture,
heritage, which is a way of
people to honor their ancestors
and maintaining a connection to
their history.
advocates for cockfighting often
view it as a legal band and
infringement of their cultural.
Pardon me? Thank you so much.
Sorry, we're gonna have to move
on to for time. But thank you so
much for your public comment.
Yeah, there is state laws
already on there.
Uh, which I sent an email.
All right. Thank you so much,
Jessie.
Hey, that, do we, let's go back
to the audience. Do we have any
comments in opposition?
Let's take one minute comments,
please. Hello, my name is Blake.
I'm an avid game val breeder.
I'm partners with a farm over
here. I'm also, um,
Not trying to say anything bad
about the bill. It's obviously a
great bill, but I do want to
amend the cockfighting part out
of it.
Because in New Mexico State
code, it doesn't just talk about
the fighting aspect of it. It is
also ownership in that. We
raise, sell and export these
fowl overseas. This could have
unintended consequences if they
do compete with them overseas. I
could get charged with the RICO
Act here, even though I did
everything legally on that.
I don't want to see a day when a
man from New Mexico loses his
farm, loses everything he's
worked for because he exported
some fowl overseas.
And um
On the fighting aspect of it,
Jesse was correct of it. This
was just recently outlawed back
in 2007.
Well I'm not advocating for it,
a lot of people grew up doing it
legally.
And if they were to revert back
to doing something that they did
legally throughout their life.
I, I would hate to see the reco
act come back on that as well,
right.
Ladies and gentlemen, my name is
John Landolt. I have a doctor at
a pharmacy, a BS in biology and
a BA in teaching, I used to
teach down here at uh Los Nunes.
I had some students from this
letter.
That were involved in
cockfighting from the
reservation down there, and they
had substantially less trouble
with crime, with these
policemen, because they had
things to do after school. They
were, they were bound to those
chickens.
And they had pride and they
could take them and fight them.
And you should see the joy in
their eyes.
When they come back from
winning.
These are chickens. These are
not people, this is not sexual
penetration of a minor, these
are chickens. This year we've
killed 150 million in this
country.
Either for food or for the
The
Virus.
Now, um, I struggled to speak,
but I want to tell you my story,
um.
Have sons that are police
officers, daughters with their
Um, um.
The degree in criminal justice.
You're gonna turn me out. I'm a
5 5th generation combat veteran.
I fought for my country and
you're going to turn someone
like me into a criminal.
For owning chickens.
I'm, I'm for Center Bill 70. I'm
against everything except the
verb it's cockfighting.
We're good people.
And like I said, I struggled to
speak.
But
Don't turn me and my family into
felons under the RICO Act.
I don't think we deserve that.
Thank you, man. Thank you,
mister.
Thank you committee members.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Presenters for bringing this
bill forward.
So I too, when I read the bill.
Um
Yesterday and last night again.
I was looking at it and I was
thinking, why is cockfighting in
there? It's more of a sport than
And I have seen some crime.
Uh
Over there where I live in
eastern New Mexico that was
related to cockfighting.
The drugs and and stuff that
were going on during the
cockfights.
But
That's kind of
I could see where you could have
cockfighting.
And, and let it be a sport and
not have crime.
Involved in it.
And
I do see a lot of the Mexican
people that
That participate in that. I, I'd
never have even been to a
cockfight, really, to tell you
the truth, but
I know there's
There's a guy that has raised
Uh
fighting, whether you want to
call them chickens or roosters
or what the proper term is over
towards uh
The Texas state line.
And
They've done it for generations,
his, his, uh,
The dad used to do it, and then,
and then they did it, and I'm
sure the grandkids are in it
because when you drive by there,
you see the facility and the
investment that they've made.
Uh
With their chickens.
And roosters that they
And, and then it, and then it's
bringing, it's brought to our
attention here and, and I'm, I'm
glad you stood up and talked
about your concerns.
It's, it's not always easy to
stand up and talk in, in these
committees.
But
It's, it's also a business.
As we're hearing and, and people
make a living off of it.
And I'm sure
There's some taxes involved for
the state and, and
And stuff, so
Uh, Madam Chair and
representatives have yelled
thought about.
And, and have you had more
More, uh
More people protest.
The cockfighting being in this
bill, Madam Chair, thank you,
Mr. Madam Chair, sorry, um,
Representative, I appreciate the
question. This is literally the
only controversial item so far
in this bill, um, and, and it,
it's, it was taken out and then
it was put back in, um, on the
floor, uh.
But
I mean, let's, let's have a,
have a realistic moment here.
Cockfighting's been illegal in
New Mexico since 2007.
That's 18 years. It's not
recent. It didn't happen
yesterday. It's been illegal for
18 years. It is a misdemeanor,
for the first two offenses.
Then it becomes a felony.
When it would be chargeable
under this is once it became a
felony if the person.
Organizing, remember we're not
going after the people
participating.
We're going after the
organizers. We're going after
the head of the snake. We're
going after the head of the
criminal organization.
Then it could be charged under
here.
But until it's a 3rd offense, it
can't be charged under this law.
Because it has to already be a
felony before you can charge it
under the RICO statute.
So it would have to be someone
that's been actually charged
with it twice, so they'd have
two warnings, basically.
Yes, it's a misdemeanor they get
a slap on the wrist. We know how
you get nothing for
misdemeanors.
Um, and then it would become a
felony.
At that point they'd be able to
be charged under this, um,
myself.
Never been to a cockfight, um,
I've had chickens.
Um, I've ended up with a couple
of roosters on accident, um, and
they filled each other
naturally, so yes, it is
something that happens. Um,
since I didn't raise them to be
cockfighters and didn't organize
an event and have them fighting.
I didn't break any laws, but uh
I did get rid of one of them.
The aggressive one, you know,
that's, that's kind of what you
do when you're raising chickens
as far as raising them and
you're selling them out of the
country. There's nothing illegal
about raising roosters.
Right? So it wouldn't affect his
business at all, because there
is nothing illegal in New Mexico
about raising roosters. There's
nothing illegal in New Mexico
about raising chickens. It's
when you take it that step
further.
I understand when when my
roosters fought each other, it
was natural.
Right
These cockfights aren't natural.
They put blades on their claws.
They put other implements on the
roosters, um, it's not them
fighting naturally like they do
when they're fighting over the
hens in the in the roost.
Um, it's a deplorable sport in
my opinion.
Um, and
In my district.
I'm representing my, my
district.
They don't cockfight and they
don't like cockfighting.
They don't dogfight and they
don't like dog fighting.
Um, big difference, and one of
the reasons it's now on a
separate line is because
dogfighting and cockfighting are
a little bit different in New
Mexico, dogfighting the first
time as a felony.
Cockfighting is not, so we put
it on it, you know, it's number
31 now.
Or 32 and that was done on the
on the Senate floor. I think
there was about 6 people that
voted against it on the Senate
floor.
So, Madam Chair and senator, so
people can still raise their
chickens and their roosters and
still
Maybe, maybe let him fight to
see the competitiveness and how
their bloodlines are going and
how they're
Other, uh, coming together.
Uh, do you know, uh, Madam Chair
and senator.
If cockfighting is is legal in
our neighboring states. You know
what, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
Representative, I don't know.
Um
I don't know if it's illegal in
Texas or not.
I don't know if it's illegal and
I haven't really looked at that.
I just know it's illegal here.
OK. I
That concludes my questions,
Madam Chair and Senator and
Representative, thank you.
Representative, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
believe cockfighting is illegal
in Texas. Um, I just think that
this is, this is good. The only
question I have, Madam chair is,
uh, we're looking at the LOPD,
um, some of the implications.
And um I just wanna make sure
that in adding
What did they say? um.
They argue that racketeering is
the incorrect statute under
which to prosecute sexual
assault.
From which the enterprise
profits.
So I just want to make sure that
we're not lessening any, any law
or, you know, that.
Yeah, I'm not against you
putting it in this, to be quite
honest with you. I think that
does this like enhance that, um.
What happens when, when, when
prosecuting um.
Sexual assault a prosecutor here
with us. I think you might,
if you would.
I'm sure if we could go to my uh
expert witness.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Rob Hart. I'm the
director of the Organized Crime
Commission and the Deputy
District attorney of the 2nd
Berlio District Attorney's
office. So think of it like
this, every enumerated crime in
here is still that crime. It's
still going to be charged as
that crime. Nothing changes
those crimes themselves. This is
for like senator said earlier,
when somebody's making a
business out of it. This is for
the horrendous.
Folks who are actually filming
these types of acts or making
money off of these types of
things, which unfortunately
happens a lot more frequently
than it should. So this is us
just trying to bring
racketeering up to date to match
the horrendous crimes that
people are making money off of
today. So you could think of it
as an enhancement, but the
prosecutor still has to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt.
that there was an enterprise
going on, and that the defendant
was a member of that enterprise
and what their role was in that
enterprise.
Ma'am, thank you, Madam Theresa.
Would this make it like a
compound, uh, charge, or can you
I'm sure. Madam Chair,
Representative, I, I would think
of, it's an additional charge,
right? It's, it's not like
self-enhancing, it's an
additional charge because it was
a criminal enterprise activity.
I thank you and I just thank you
for bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
You Represented a block.
Thank you Madam Chair, I move a
do pass.
And Oreo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
thank you all for bringing this
forward. Um, I still have a
question about just the
definition of racketeering, um,
and it talks in the bill says
any act that is chargeable or
indictable under the law of New
Mexico and punishable by
imprisonment for more than a
year, and then it involves all
those offenses, and when I look
up the definition of
racketeering, it says a set of
illegal activities.
aimed at commercial profit that
may be disguised as legitimate
business deals.
Um, can you comment regarding
that is, is our law.
Sort of following that is a set
of, because it talks about a set
of
Illegal activities and it also
talks about defined by a
coordinated effort by multiple
people.
repeatedly earn a profit.
Um, so I'm just wondering.
In in the, in the New Mexico
law, um, can racketeering be
charged as one individual.
Or a set, a group of
individuals.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
both, right? If you have an
individual and you can show
their role in the enterprise.
You may only have that person
sometimes, let's say I have some
type of fraud or larceny scheme.
I've only been able to identify
as a defendant one individual. I
can have the evidence to show
there's a driver, there's an
accountant, but I haven't been
able to bring those people
forward necessarily, or maybe
the charges have been severed or
something like that. I could
charge just that individual. If
I can show that they've
committed
These enumerated offenses.
As part of an enterprise twice
in a year.
So there's that component of it
too, or I could join them all as
joint defendants. If I have them
all identified and that's how
I'm choosing to prosecute, um,
then maybe I have multiple
defendants and I'm gonna put the
whole enterprise on trial. It
just, it really just is very
fact specific, but I could do
both.
OK, that, that clarifies that
for me then. Um, and I
Just the discussion here, Madam
Chair, with regard to
cockfighting. I honestly don't
know enough about cockfighting,
um, to really, I mean, other
than understanding what is the
law in New Mexico. I don't know
that, and I would like to know
that specifically because it's
been sort of alluded to, but we
haven't really gotten to the
crux of.
Of the, of that discussion,
Madam Chair, um, similar to what
some Senator Brand said. It's,
it starts out as a misdemeanor
charge.
It's two offenses, and then it
becomes a felony, um, so it,
it's never going to get to
racketeering until it becomes a
felony. um.
And you know, it's gonna have to
be, it's that intention as the
senator discussed. There has to
be like the intentional act of
cockfighting, not just roosters
fighting on a
On a farm and so you're gonna,
so for a prosecutor to prove it
beyond a reasonable doubt.
They're gonna have to show
evidence of, of blades of of the
drugs that these chickens get
injected with of of all of that.
The prosecutor's gonna have to
bring that all forward and show
beyond a reasonable doubt.
To even convict them and make.
That they would be guilty of
cockfighting first.
And then, in order to charge
them with racketeering, they
have to show that that happened
twice within a year. So it's not
like you can be convicted of it
5 years ago and be hit with
racketeering, or it's not gonna
be a situation where you're
selling roosters or selling
chickens overseas and then it
just turns out they started
doing that. The farmer doesn't
know that, how can, how can a
prosecutor prove that beyond a
reasonable doubt. They can't.
And Madam Chair and, and, and
witness expert Senator.
Representative, I think I got it
right, um.
So, um,
So
Does the um perpetrator have to
be caught in the act.
To in order to show that they
are committing actual
Cockfighting, illegal activities
regarding cockfighting.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would say so. I mean, it's gonna
be, I don't know how you would
prove it with
That would be a very difficult
one to prove a circumstantial
evidence.
OK. All right. Thank you, Madam
Madam Chair, um, committee
members, I just want to let you
know I did look it up, um,
cockfighting is illegal in all
50 states.
And territories.
Thank you. We have a motion by
Representative Block for DuPass.
Do I have a second?
Vice chair little 2 seconds.
Do we have any opposition to the
motion.
Seeing none, you have a due
pass. Thank you, Senator and
Representative.
And your expert witness.
OK, let's move along to uh house
Bill 312. I see representative
Martinez.
Uh, take your conversation to
the hallway.
Representatives, you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, today
we're bringing you House Bill
312.
Uh, addressing third party
litigation funding transparency.
Third party litigation funding
is a practice for external
investors.
Such as hedge funds, um,
Specialized financing firms
provide capital to plaintiffs or
to law firms to cover legal
expenses in exchange for a
portion of any financial
recovery.
Well, this can help plaintiffs
pursue justice when they lack
resources, it also introduces
significant concerns regarding
transparency, fairness, and an
external influence on the legal
process.
Currently, these arrangements
are largely unregulated and
often undisclosed, leaving
defendants, judges, and even
plaintiffs unaware of the
financial interests influencing
these legal proceedings.
The growth of this industry has
raised ethical concerns,
potential conflicts of interest
and even national security risks
when foreign entities fund
litigation involving US
businesses and institutions.
Uh, this is basically
Uh, this brings up the question,
or is
Is this litigation being pursued
for justice.
Or for investor profit.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
handed over to
Um
My co-sponsor, the chief
sponsor, Representative Marion
Matthews.
Adam Chair, uh, members of the
committee.
Representative Martinez gave a
good overview of what this is
about and our expert today is
Jason Espinoza. So, um, put it
in kind of slightly different
terms.
This is a bill that seeks to
provide some guidelines, some
regulatory framework when this
practice is happening, it's not
to prohibit it, but it is
designed to put some rules
around it. And the reason is
that
What we have happening is some
very wealthy people.
Who
Finance
Litigation, civil litigation in
this country.
And
And
Um, nobody knows that they're
paying for the lawsuit, and they
do it.
And sometimes these are foreign
foreign uh.
folks and in effect, what
happens is you have one of the
parties who has access to
virtually unlimited amount of
money and in a legal system and
in the court system, um, you can
do a lot of harm if you have a
well funded party and
Uh, who's now going against
someone else in order to like
get their patents or other kinds
of things like that and the
other party just can't.
Counter those resources right
now in New Mexico, that can
happen without any knowledge
that there's these outside
funders. And so what what the
bill does is ask for
When this is occurring,
mandatory disclosure.
Um
And that the funders, these
large funders are not in control
of.
The lawyers or the.
Uh, the party in terms of
Uh, telling them the strategy,
what to do or what not to do.
They're just
We want them if they're gonna be
here to be just silent
investors, if you will, without
any control of the litigation.
Because they're not in it.
For justice, they're in it for
money.
Um, and that's essentially what
the bill does is simply says,
look, if these are happening in
New Mexico, we want mandatory
disclosure and we want these
folks with all this all this
money not to control the case.
And with that, um.
Hey, Mr.
Espanola, did you wanna say
anything?
Uh, Madam Chair, I'll just, uh,
add one thing, uh, in terms of
this, you know,
Because litigation financing
really does operate in the
shadows, very few, you know,
states have started moving
towards this disclosure laws,
um, but one of the things too on
a national level that uh
Matthews mentioned and, and
representative.
Martinez as well as the concerns
around national security, um,
Delaware actually has a standing
order requiring disclosure of
litigation funders and in 2023,
they did uh part of that
disclosure, they did find a
Chinese litigation fund, uh,
purple Vine IP financed multiple
patent lawsuits in US courts
against, against Samsung, um,
and so this is a real thing and
and we do believe that shining
some lights, uh, and disclosure
is important both for New
Mexico.
And, and nationally thank you
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those who wish to
speak in support, please raise
your hands. OK, please stand and
one minute, please.
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico as a
center for assisted living. Uh,
we support the legislation
requiring disclosure and
regulation of third-party
litigation financing. The
increasing prevalence of
undisclosed of undisclosed third
party litigation financing
threatens the integrity of our
judicial system by allowing
outside entities, including
foreign investors to secretly
fund lawsuits with no.
transparency or accountability.
Undisclosed third-party
litigation financing raises the
following concerns. It allows
outside entities which can be
hedge funds or foreign investors
to secretly fund lawsuits or
Or their profit without
disclosing their financial
interest. The lack of disclosure
prevents courts and juries and
defendants from understanding
who is truly driving the lawsuit
and whether conflicts.
Whether conflicts of interest
exist.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Debbie
Rodella registered lobbyist on
behalf of the Independent
Community Bankers Association of
New Mexico. I spell 312 requires
basic transparency to ensure
both fairness and consumer
protection, we respectfully urge
to do pass. Thank you. OK, do we
have any comments online. One
minute, please.
OK, for those of you hoping to
make a public comment in support
of the bill, please raise your
hand.
First we have Carla, Carlos
Santag, can you hear us?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's
Larry Sontag here on behalf of
the New Mexico Business
Coalition. The bill sponsors and
the expert articulated well the
need for this legislation.
And it's important to note that
it's not restricting anybody's
ability to file a lawsuits. It's
just bringing a measure of
transparency that is much
needed. We encourage you to
support House Bill 312. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Larry.
OK. Up next we have uh Barbara
Medina. Barbara, can you hear
us?
Sorry, actually, uh.
Barbara, we had a Carry, Kerry
Robin uh Brunner, can you hear
us?
So sorry, Carrie, we're having a
hard time hearing you. I'm just
gonna mute you real quick. Go
ahead and unmute yourself one
more time. Hopefully, that'll
take care of that.
Madam Chair, can you hear me?
Yes, you can. I see my little
face.
Gerry Robin Bruunder with the
New Mexico Medical Society. Uh,
we do support this legislation
as the sponsors clearly said,
this is just a transparency
bill. We think it's important to
be able to uncover where some
litigation is coming from, um,
we think that that would be
helpful in us determining future
moves that we can possibly make
um around reform for litigation
in this state and therefore
we do support the legislation.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, Carrie.
Do we have any comments in
opposition online. OK. Anyone
hoping to make public comment in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
And once
OK, let's go back to the
audience for any opposition.
OK, we have one.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Sherry LaCour. I'm a trial
lawyer.
Trailers represent and uh
promote justice and fairness for
injured people a safeguarding
victims' rights and particularly
the right of a trial by jury of
New Mexicans.
This bill, um,
I uh
The only purpose it serves is to
provide a strategic advantage to
the defendants. It's a corporate
defend if a corporate defendant
knows how resourced victim's
case is that defendant can
decide whether to delay a case
further or to um cause more um
Harm to the victim. The uh
Additionally, mandatory
disclosures without discovery
requests and providing for
possible sanctions to be issued
by a judge or um likely
unconstitutional.
As a legislature cannot, um,
legislate a court processes. Um,
loans to attorneys so they can
continue fighting on behalf of
their clients, um, are necessary
everyday Americans.
Any more opposing comments,
seeing none, committee members,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I'm just going to get into some
of the, the questions from of
the FIR I'm looking at page 4,
if this was to go, this bill
would go to um go into law.
Um, and requiring the court
conduct in camera reviews.
Ross would take up resources who
um
If that's captured in the FIR,
Madam Chair.
Um, but also,
They would also have to develop
methods to enforce and
investigate any possible
violation of, of this, if it
were to become law, who would do
that? Who would enforce and
investigate, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, thank you
for the question of the court
would
The court system and the courts
would enforce this develop rules
and so forth.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
answer. Um, and then going back
to
The rules, the rules, um, it's
noted on page 3 of the FIR.
That there are this if this were
to go into fact that there are
already rules that safeguard
ethical standards avoid
conflicts.
And protect client
confidentiality and interest.
How would this either enhance or
take, if would you see this
taken away from any of those
rules already in place, and I'm.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lu Han, um, I
don't think this, this really
impacts those rules. This is
basically a transparency issue.
Uh, we just wanna make sure that
If, if these outside entities
are investing in these lawsuits.
That everybody is aware,
including the court system.
Um, I think it's important to
keep transparency as the
Basic lens and in which we look
at this bill.
You, I, I, I like it. I like
that we are doing, that we are
looking at the transparency of
what affects, um, these, these
uh levels of, of funding to come
in and, and um
Influence the outcomes of of
cases, Madam Chair, I, I really
like that. I'm just a little,
uh, concerned with the, the
constitutionality of this and.
I would like to see this go into
effect, quite honestly, for my,
for my own opinion, but I'm just
a little concerned with that.
Can you maybe talk about that in
the constitutionality of, of us
addressing, you know, how things
are financed through, through
cases and through other courts,
Madam Chair.
Maner represented uh thank you
for the question. Um, in any
civil litigation, there is a
great amount of discovery.
Uh, that's part of the process
in their office uh
entire rules of civil procedure
which tell you how you do
various things, and it's not at
all uncommon in the process of
discovery to to ask questions
about who's financing, uh, a
plaintiff or, or a defendant.
Um, and so I, I felt that those
I saw that in the fur also, and
I really felt that that was
probably not a, a real problem.
Now you, you know, you have to
write the rules so that they're
fair.
Um, and balanced and I trust the
courts to be able to do that.
Thank you. Oh, sure, go ahead.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
to just, just want to add on
and, and I think some of the
argument that you see in the
fiscal impact report is that it
violates the separation of
powers. When we take a look at
it, you know, while the
judiciary must remain
independent in its decision
making. The legislative branch
is a well established power to
regulate matters of public
policy, especially when it comes
to ensuring fairness,
transparency, and consumer
protection within our state's
legal system and, and the state
Supreme Court has reaffirmed
that the legislature holds the
authority to enact laws.
that established public policy,
even if it influences procedural
or substantive rules of law. And
so again, it's just for
transparency believe it falls
with it. Thank you, man. So
this, so then, and in fact, they
would, they would um adjust
their rules to their rulemaking,
so we don't, they don't lose any
power there. Is that correct,
Madam Chair?
Sure, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I think that's
true. I, when I practiced law, I
was under the rules of civil
procedure Committee.
And um
You know, you're, you're always
looking at what the
legislature's doing and the
statutes and being sure that
your procedures are going to be
compatible and uh but also uh
assure the the interest of the
of the legal system.
You so much. I really appreciate
that. I, again, I like your
bill. I think that we need more
transparency and these, these
sort of things, um, coming
forward to really address these
issues.
I commend you. Thank you.
Madam Fle leader Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representatives.
Um
Have you all met with the
Supreme Court about this
legislation.
Madam Chair, now, uh, we,
I haven't met with him in, and
Miss and Representative Martinez
has not either.
Thank you. Um,
You know, our analysis notes a
bunch of concerns from AOC that
I.
Uh, also feel concerned about,
um,
Specifically.
That this legislation, um,
Violates the Constitution.
Um, because
While the legislature can decide
matters of public policy.
Um, we are not to require the
courts to make specific rules.
And so,
You know, while it's
So
Do you have a comment on that or
have you reviewed
This case, Ammerman v. Hubbard
Broadcasting.
Um, that.
Clearly held that, Madam Chair
Representatives.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I have, I have reviewed the
AOC comments.
Um
I, I think that
Quite frankly, any time when
you're
When you're, you're talking
about something that involves
actual court actions and so
forth.
That the court is is going to
assert it's, it's power, no
doubt, no doubt about that.
Um, but I didn't, as I read
this, um, they raised a concern,
but I think that the way that
this bill is written.
And it's only about
transparency, uh, I think that,
uh,
Uh
I, I didn't see anything in the
court's comments.
That raised a
Well, this is
Wrong. This we can't be doing
this, and what we know is that
this is happening in other
states.
And that other states court
systems are working.
Uh, with legislators and so
forth in order to uh enact these
kinds of laws.
Um, and I see this as a policy.
As opposed to a effort to
tell the court
Uh, they got to do X, Y, or Z as
a policy about disclosure.
Uh, for the legal system.
And
Neither am I.
I would like to add to that.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and representatives.
Um
You know, I guess when I see um.
Sections like what I see page 9.
That are specifically requiring
the court.
To adopt certain processes.
Uh, including as, as
Representative Lujan noted this
in-camera review of the
agreement.
Um
Determining sanctions for the
party.
etc. I, I feel that we're
crossing into.
A place where
We are constitutionally
prohibited from going.
Um, and I, you know, I, I, I
think the consumer protection
piece of this legislation is
important.
Um, I'm not sure this is the
right form to get at it.
Uh, and, and Madam Chair
Representative, let me also ask
you, does this apply to all of
the parties in in the case or is
this only an
A requirement on.
Uh
Plaintiffs or individuals
seeking.
Relief
And to what uh realm of cases is
this applying to, for example,
if you were bringing a civil
rights case or a court Claims
Act or, or can you go into a
little bit of what the scope of
this would be.
Well
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
it's, it's not.
This is not based on the, on the
Relief sought or the cause of
action. It is based on the
funding by a outside.
Entity
Um, that is investing in the
ultimate result.
And it's, they are not the
damaged person.
They are simply um somebody with
a lot of money.
Who
Um, secretly at this point is
allowed to fund someone bringing
a lawsuit.
And
I mean, I, I just don't.
Yeah, I, I can't, I'm, I've been
trying to sort of imagine how
this would look in reality.
Uh, because thankfully, at least
when I practice law, as far as I
know, nobody ever did this,
certainly in any cases I was
involved in, but this this
having a sense and understanding
the financial backing of parties
to a lawsuit is a.
It really makes a lot of
difference in how that lawsuit
is handled.
And what the outcome is likely
to be, we all know that because
we provide free counsel to uh
people who are charged with
crimes, for example, and the
public defender systems and so
forth. We, in many ways, try to
balance so that money isn't the
focus of the lawsuit.
Or the outcome or the justice
and all this is trying to do is
say, look, if you got an
outside.
entity person.
Putting money in.
Uh, the suit.
Let's let everybody know that.
I mean, it really is simply a
disclosure.
Uh, it's not a prohibition.
And it doesn't
It lets everybody know and
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
you know, if I'm representing
somebody and I know the other
side, uh, has got $12 billion
against me.
I mean, that makes a difference
in how I.
Deal with the lawsuit.
And we frequently in many
things, try to balance a little
bit.
The so that, so that not only
the economically powerful have a
right to justice in our country
and that's what we're trying to
do here is be sure.
That undisclosed economic
powerhouses aren't controlling
cases.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
So does this apply to
individuals who get a loan from
a bank.
To pay for
Some kind of lawsuit.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Madam floor
leader, no on page 5, item 4,
under the definition of
financing li litigation
agreement. Uh, we excluded a
financial institution for
repayment of loans. So, Madam
Chair.
Representative, I think.
That is one suggestion I would
have, so we have financial
regulation of loans and other,
you know, short term lending,
etc.
Um, that doesn't involve
Dragging it into the court
process. And so I, I assume that
part of why we are excluding
banks is because they are
already subject to a lot of
restrictions and, and making
sure that they're not taking
advantage of consumers, um, and
it, it seems to me that in the
same way that we have dealt with
all kinds of loans.
tax refund anticipation loans,
um,
short term loans, payday loans,
uh.
All, all kinds of
Lending instruments.
Um
Without
pulling it into
A or or what without enacting
requirements that the courts get
involved.
Um
To this degree, it seems like
that might be a, a better
direction to go into. And, and
Madam Chair, Representative,
does this also apply to the
defense.
Uh
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Floer
leader, uh, this would apply to
anyone that enters into a
litigation finance agreement
that's defined on on page 4.
So, Madam Chair, uh.
And I'm sure, can I add to that
just for a second.
see
The reason that somebody
finances the litigation.
is in part because they hope to
share in the recovery.
And so if you're talking about
the defense.
Um, I mean, I, I could, I could
see a situation where there's a
counterclaim.
And in that case, there might be
a third party.
Thunder, but if it's some
somebody who's simply acting as
a defendant, there's no money to
be recovered.
Uh, back against the
The plaintiff, in most
litigation.
So I, I, I think the answer to
your question is, I can see in a
situation with counterclaims or
whatever that might happen, but
not in a typical plaintiff
defendant situation.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I, uh,
representative, yeah, it's a
good point, I think.
I think that is one of the
public policy interests in this
is understanding the stakes that
someone has in the financing and
understanding.
Who that is, but then going to
the transparency piece. I mean,
we certainly have
Many national organizations that
get interested.
And being part of the fence.
Um, you know, they, they may
fund part of that defense or may
join, um, you know, if, if one
particular type of entity is
targeted, maybe all of the
entities that, that
Do that type of activity, um,
from other states may also join
in some ways and it, it just
feels to me that, that we should
have transparency around all of
that, you know, if you have a
Uh, franchisee.
And they're receiving support
from, you know, the national
franchise organization or, yeah,
I, I, I don't want to go into
hypotheticals, um, cause I
prefer not to do that, but I,
I'm just thinking of some of
these examples where we would
want.
To understand the full scope of
the
Uh, stakeholders in a particular
case, and sometimes you can see
it, Madam Chair and
Representative with briefs that
are filed and things like that.
But it's not always apparent as
to who.
Whose interest, um, in either
being successful in a case or
defeating the case is.
So, um, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll just, uh, I
don't want to go on and on. Um,
I think.
For me, the approach around
I would prefer an approach that
looked at, at the financing
piece specifically, um, and
brought it into some of the ways
that we look at lending and made
that a little more, uh, direct
and
Um, I do think that we need.
Maybe to broaden.
This so that all of the
stakeholders are.
Included. Um, and I'm just, I'm
really uncomfortable with the
constitutional issues. I just,
uh, am very concerned about
that. So, Madam Chair.
I will listen to the rest of the
debate. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Barreco.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, representatives in your
witness, and I appreciate the
comments from our Madam Floor
leader. I, I see what you're
trying to do here, but I also
have questions and I have
concerns. I do have concerns,
um,
About
You know, the courts
Maybe not being at the table. I
think that that's a really
important point. Um, I also have
concerns, Madam Chair and, and
Representatives about um
So let's just say for example,
and I'm trying to follow this in
my mind, um.
it, it includes the government,
which is appropriate, but I'm
just thinking about lawsuits
like um.
In 2009, Pera had a lawsuit, um,
with some investments that we
made, um, when, when the market
fell, um, with regard to
housing.
And the money that we lost with
regard to that.
And um you know,
Hera has many investments, and
so how would
Let's just say
Hypothetical that para or ERB or
or an entity like that, which is
quasi-governmental um and it
doesn't list that
quasi-governmental, but it does
say political subdivisions, so I
don't know if that.
Um, relates to um, first, the
que the question, uh, when you
have quasi-governmental agencies
like uh mortgage Finance
Authority or PAA or E or one of
those, um.
Is that covered under
government, the definition of
government or would we need
another category that talks
about quasi-governmental.
Agencies.
Because there were a number of,
you know,
I mean
Harrow, for example, makes a
number of investments, so would
they have to list every single
investment that they made, um,
because they're, they're filing
a lawsuit.
Uh
Madam Chair, that's complicated,
but Madam Chair Representative
Brigo, um.
Government's not a defined term
within the legislation. I mean,
we do define foreign principle.
To ensure that foreign
government entities or political
subdivisions of other countries
as well as uh foreign entities.
Um, are required to disclose if
they do a part of a litigation
financing agreement, but if a
government entity files a
lawsuit.
Um
They're happy to do that.
They're only disclosure that
would happen is if there is a
litigation financing agreement
entered into by the government
entity with a third party to
fund the litigation, then that
financing agreement would need
to be disclosed. That would be
the only thing that's, and
that's kind of my point is that
when you have a
quasi-governmental agency that
invests in a lot of different.
You know, a lot of different
investments that Kara has, for
example, um, and it's a
quasi-governmental agency.
How is that listed? I mean,
when, when you're using
Um
Um, funding that is part of a
retirement system to file a
lawsuit. How do you disclose
All of those entities that are.
part of that fund and Madam
Chair Representative.
Um
I, I would be surprised the pair
for ERA.
was investing.
In lawsuits.
And
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, they do file lawsuits on a
regular basis if there's a money
manager that is not um complying
or is not up to par with um
their policies, Madam Chair,
Representative, this is not
about.
Any institution or organization
or individual who files a
lawsuit in their name.
And
Uh, proceeds to the lawsuit.
This is when someone who is not
a party to the lawsuit is
providing money to somebody who
is a party to the lawsuit as an
investment.
Not because they have any
particular it's a financial
arrangement for them.
To
Uh, to share in the proceeds of
the litigation, so it involves
Uh, it did, it did, I, I'm, I'm
having some trouble.
Trying to figure out how it
would involve a uh a fund like a
retirement fund. The retirement
fund, if it gets into
litigation, typically finance is
that itself or would take out a
loan and that would appear on
the books and but to to go to a
third party investor like this
would be very understand this,
Madam Chair, so I'm
understanding that if there is
litigants.
Either party can ask for
disclosure of who's involved in
in
You know, they're they're
funding, is that right?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, to go back to your example
of, of ERA that that invests in
funds.
The only under this, the
disclosure that we're asking for
is of the litigation financing
agreement, and under that
definition, those funds have to
be invested into that lawsuit.
That and they are specifically
they have to be contingent on
the outcome of the action or the
outcome of the matter within
that portfolio of lawsuits. So
in your example with ERA that
has investments, those
investments are not being made
specifically for the lawsuit and
are contingent on the outcome of
that. So, those would not,
those, those aren't in or, or
related to the bill. So this
would just be specific
investments that are given, that
are contingent on the outcome. I
would argue and I'm not.
I'm not an attorney, madam
Chair, but this is an important
point. Those investments are
still part of the funding that
may be used in that.
In, in the lawsuit.
So I'm just bringing that issue
up. I think that we need to talk
about that a little bit more.
And I also have questions, Madam
Chair, um.
About uh
If you go to
The last page, I guess page 10,
where
If the judge deems that there
was a violation of the act.
What is the remedy?
And I don't understand that
like,
What, what, what are the
sanctions that would be placed
on that violator, I guess.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
presumably
if there was a violation, it
would be that there was no
disclosure.
That was made and I would
assume, knowing judges.
That what they would do is.
If they found that there was in
fact a
A disclosure that should have
been made would issue a court
order to require that it be
made.
OK, so there's not any, there's
not any fees or anything like
that associated with that.
Um, let me double check. Oh, in
the lawsuit, there's not any.
You know, if I violated this
act.
And the and the judge deemed, I,
I would produce that, but would
I also have to have a remedy. I
mean, a financial remedy, yes,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
in on page 10 section 6B.
A litigation financier that
violates a section of the
litigation financing trans
transparency Act commits an
unlawful act under the unfair
Practices Act.
And that typically the unfair
Practices Act is uh brought by
the state attorney general, but
it can also be a private.
And would that be followed?
By a senator through the chair.
I'm sorry, madam chair. Would
that be Madam Chair and
Representatives would not be
followed by a.
A
Flame at some point in time.
A financial plan.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative, uh.
Um, my, my memory of the unfair
Practices Act is that there can
be penalties imposed financial
penalties imposed for violation
of of the
For
We engaging in an unfair
practice. Yes, and, and Madam
Chair and representatives.
So where in this bill does it
talk about those um
Penalties, chair, uh.
Representative of section 6B on
page 10, it refers to the unfair
Practices Act and
Um
It doesn't, it doesn't set out
all the provisions of the Unfair
Practices Act, but
Yeah
Presumably
I mean, that's
In the law
And available.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Committee members, the
committee. The do pass, ma'am.
Representative Lujan,
did I hear a second by ranking
member block?
Please call Roll.
Representative on.
Representative block, yes.
Representative Borego, yes.
Representative Lu Han? Yes.
Representative Mejia. Yes.
Madam Floor leader.
Oh
Representative Zamora.
Representative Nonu.
No.
Madam Vice Chair.
No
Madam Chair. Yes.
I'm chaired by a vote of 63, the
motion motion passes.
Representatives and Mr.
Espinoza, you have would you
pass?
OK, let's move along. I have um
Senator Compost here, but with
his permission, I'm going to
call on Senator Scherer.
And see if we could move that
through that Senate Bill 7 quick
quickly.
That day,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. You may begin. we
have the Senate Bill 7. It's a
pretty simple bill. It uh, it,
it added stormwater facilities
to the list of utilities that,
that municipalities can run.
Just that simple.
Would you like to introduce your
Expert guests. So I'm gonna let
him.
Introduce themselves. I can't
talk.
Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you. My name is Sarah
Herto. I'm a wildlife biologist
by training with a master's
degree in environmental science
and policy.
Over the course of my nearly 20
years working in conservation,
I've had the pleasure of working
closely with scientists and
technical experts across many
fields, including stormwater
management.
This has given me a unique
perspective that's
Sorry, Quickly, please. Sure.
Um
This, this municipal bill, what
it does is allow towns and and
cities across New Mexico that
are struggling with um meeting
the requirements of
Of stormwater compliance, um,
and are in the need to reduce
their localized flooding and
extend the life of roadways and
other infrastructure that's
damaged frequently by inundation
from stormwater.
And so the simplicity of this
bill is that it allows
municipalities to create a
stormwater utility in charge a
just and reasonable fee for that
service.
Um, this would allow
municipalities, uh, that already
have stormwater, um,
Issues to be able to have a
dedicated funding source for
those to meet those stormwater
needs and work alongside uh
flood controlled districts, um,
that are managing larger scale,
uh, watershed scale, flooding
issues that have been bearing
the burden of localized flooding
that the municipalities should
be managing.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and representatives.
My name's David Cypher. I'm a
civil engineer licensed in 3
states with a master's degree in
engineering management, I'm
nearing the end of my career.
I'm, um, and so I've been
involved with stormwater for
some 30 years. Um, the current
public works director for the
city of Farmer Farmington and uh
a former uh New Mexico water
quality commission.
acting chair for the governor.
Senate Bill 7, the, uh, the new
new New Mexico municipal League
has had this as a high
importance for the last 7 years.
We are proposing to add storm
water to our state's definition
of utility.
This change would allow all New
Mexico to join 47 other states
and the New Mexico charter
cities with the ability to
create a stormwater utility if
desired, it simply provides an
option, it does not mandate uh
anything.
Code cities in New Mexico are
currently relegated to use
scarce and rare street road
funds to address storm water
resulting in some of the worst
street conditions in all the
United States of America.
Over a quarter century ago,
stormwater regulations were
promulgated through the uh
because of the cleanan Water
Act, and EPA is soon
implementing these requirements
in New Mexico.
The rules include water quality
standards testing inspection
permitting at a new level.
Uh, erosion contaminant control,
um, providing waterways and
aquatic life protection, all are
included in this, uh, unfunded
mandate.
I respectfully request we
recognize storm water as a
utility and provide our uh local
cities with a choice with an
optional tool for New Mexico
code cities to address
stormwater requirements. I would
respectfully ask a due pass on
this.
OK, let's go to the audience
real quick. Do we have any
comments and support?
Quickly, let's take 3.
One minute, please.
Sorry. Uh, my name is Robert
Loftus. I'm a landscape
architect that does a lot of
work in the right way. Often we
are designing our school, our,
our roadways and the antiquated
way, not taking full advantage
of the way we can manage
stormwater and other um issues
in the roadway, and that's often
due to funding. So a funding
source that will allow modern
design techniques to.
Serve multiple functions
including stormwater management
would be a real help to this uh
city. So on behalf of the Mexico
chapter of the American Society
of Landscape Architects.
We support this bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Lacon Masia,
and I'm with the Samia Project
and Samia Action. I stand before
you today in strong support of
Senate Bill 7, which will
provide municipalities in New
Mexico with the authority to
establish and operate stormwater
utilities. This legislation is
essential for creating a
sustainable funding mechanism to
address the growing challenges
of stormwater management.
Additionally, this bill follows
National's best practices
aligning New Mexico with over
2000 stormwater utilities across
41 states including Colorado,
Texas, and Minnesota were
dedicated funding has led to
improved infrastructure,
reducing flooding and enhanced
water quality. I urge the
committee to support Senate Bill
7 and build a more resilient
stormwater infrastructure for
just proportionately impacted
communities. Thank you for your
time and consideration.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Alison Nichols
with the New Mexico Municipal
League. The municipal League
supports SB 7. our members have
voted this as one of their
legislative priorities for the
past few years. We know a lot of
municipalities are interested in
establishing stormwater
utilities, um, and as other
speaker said, this is sometimes
an unfunded mandate, and we like
that it provides flexibility but
doesn't require them to set this
up, so it's really up to each
municipality. Thank you.
You. Let's go online. Do we have
any comments? We'll take one.
I was hoping to speak in support
of the bill, please raise your
hand. We have uh Camilla.
Camilla, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
and the sponsors. I'm Camila
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. We also
support the bill. We see
stormwater management as part of
managing our water quality. Look
at the storm water drains. Look
what, look at what's in them,
and by providing municipalities
with a way to raise funds to
manage this water quality issue.
We also give them tools for
creative stormwater man.
like green infrastructure. Thank
you so much.
Thank you so much, Camilla.
Let's stay online. I don't think
we have any opposing comments.
Anyone hoping to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
OK, back to the audience. Any
opposition?
Seeing none, Vice Chair Little.
Madam Chair, move a do pass.
OK, I have a motion for due pass
by your vice chair Little a
second by Representative
Barrago, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, presenters for
bringing this bill forward. I
know.
That, uh, you felt the heartburn
that I had in, in ag and water
when you brought it in front of
us in that committee.
Uh, my concerns, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, presenters.
is from the taxpayers' point of
view.
Uh
We have been taking care of
storm waters.
For ages
And
We still do today, even without
this bill present.
I believe
And, and, and I'm not real up to
date on this, but
Correct me if I'm wrong,
Senator. Uh,
Property taxes, what's been
taking care of the stormwater.
In the past, Madam Chair.
So, um, Madam Chair.
No
Uh
Could be, but property taxes
mostly go to the county and in
this case, we're talking about
municipalities. It's gross
receipts taxes.
Mostly.
OK, and, and Madam Chair, and
sorry I confused those two or
mixed them up.
So
If, if we have a problem with
stormwater,
Why don't we just raise the
grocery receipts tax instead of
adding on another utility,
mature.
So, Madam Chair, I think that's
an excellent question. We can
raise taxes a lot.
Or we can have a fee for
service. So what this does is
allows for a fee for service and
uh typically how it works in the
other 47 states is depending on
how much non-permeable.
Land, you have, depends on how
much you would pay to help deal
with the water that's coming off
of your property in Santa Fe,
who's a home rule city, they're
paying about 50 cents a month to
deal with this.
Uh, as we look around the
nation, it ranges from anywhere
from 25 cents a month.
To maybe as much as $2 depending
on where you are. Certainly
places that have more storms
have more need, and so they pay
for more service.
Or we could raise taxes either
way has to be done.
And, and Madam Chair and
senator, that's exactly what I'm
getting to.
Is that we
It doesn't matter whether you
call it a fee or tax at the end.
The, the homeowner is gonna pay
the monetary.
Part of it, right? So, and, and
you made a statement, uh, Madam
Chair and senator.
That in, in uh Santa Fe.
There's a 50 cents a month fee.
Am I correct in, in that
statement, Madam Chair?
So Madam Chair, uh, that was an
average.
Uh, for homeowners, uh, as per
Uh, the chair of the previous
committee who
Ortiz.
And, and Madam Chair.
And, and Senator, uh, I have a,
an analysis here that says that
the city of Santa Fe imposes a
$5.50 a month fee.
And that's quite a bit, that's
quite a bit more money than
Then 50 cents which.
We don't need to debate that
maybe somebody's off on it, but
either way,
I'm concerned about a fee
whether it's, it's
Minimal or, or, or what it, it's
gonna be. And in the bill,
We don't have a set fee, uh,
Madam Chair and Senator, can,
can you allude to that a little
bit and tell me.
How, how it's gonna be fair.
Uh, all the way from
A place that doesn't get so much
rain, maybe gel, maybe.
Sometimes eastern New Mexico and
Clovis, where I live.
We hardly get any rain.
But then how is it gonna be
fair?
And how are these fees gonna be
imposed in a place like Roswell
where they had the flood or in
Riodoso.
Where they had the flood and
they might think, well, we need
a lot of money for stormwater.
Drainage
And maybe the, maybe the
The people running these cities
impose such a fee that it just
creates
Havoc on, on the property owner,
uh, Madam Chair and Senator. So,
Madam Chair.
A, this is not for catastrophic
100 year floods. This is for
rain.
It rains
Even in New
The, uh, the fee is a municipal
fee, just like if the city is
providing water or sewer, that
fee is decided by the city
council or city commission.
Um,
so the local government is the
one making this, so it's not.
The state government imposing a
fee on anybody if Jow doesn't
want to do it, thenho doesn't
need to do it.
If Farmington needs to do it,
however, the Farmington City
Council then would decide this
fee with the consultation of
the, of the people that actually
are doing it, the engineers that
are actually doing it. What does
it take to make this happen?
And so, in Farmington, for
example, we had a
Nothing like Riodoso, uh, but we
had a pretty serious flood 1012
years ago, they came to the, to
us, we put in capital outlay and
we dealt with some things.
But that was, that was.
major flood.
Versus when it rains.
And so there's really two
different levels here. Uh, if it
is catastrophic, yes, then, uh,
no, there is no fee that could
be raised to fix the Ruidoso
flooding that's currently
happening.
None
You can't raise a fee to, you
know, $100,000 per property to
fix that, and that's what it
would take.
And so the idea that that would
happen, I think, is just bizarre
to even think of because this is
for
Normal rain
Not the catastrophic floods.
So that's why it's
It's sense.
Pennies
To do that
Depending on the size of your
property. I mean, certainly
Walmart will pay more than my
house. They've got a lot more.
Paved spot.
But city council makes the the
the decision.
Just like city council decides
how much water or sewer fee you
pay, not the state government.
So Madam Chair and senator. So
you're saying
That that the stormwater service
has nothing to do with, with
drainage whenever it floods or
we have a catastrophic.
Event
Well, of course it does.
Water coming down is gonna go
somewhere, OK? But if we have a
system, then the, the, the
average kind of water is dealt
with.
But even the catastrophic event,
the water's going to go
somewhere. It's gonna can't stop
it, and Madam Chair and senator,
so we're kind of, we're kinda
just arguing on that because
you're saying that catastrophic,
no, but regular drainage, yes.
And then uh I'll, I'll leave
that alone.
Uh
So in the testimony from your
expert witnesses, Madam Chair
and Senator, uh, they also said
this.
In doing this, uh, they'll be
able to fix the, the roads and,
and take care of some funding
for roads.
And protection of species.
Uh
How far are we going to take
this fee?
And
Is it going to have to do with
protectionist of uh species and,
and funding roads because the
drainage tears up the roads,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representatives, the
reference in, in my discussion
was simply the fact that EPA
will soon be imposing standards
that are high above what the
current standards are.
And this legislation would
provide for, uh, in the future
at the option at the option of
government and a complete public
process, the opportunity to
address those issues which is
currently a federal unfunded
mandate. There is no way to uh
address these future issues, and
this is a pro us 11 aspect of
this is that this is proactive
in that
It'll give a tool to the tool
bag. So what we're looking at is
choice, providing the people in
the location they are at with a
choice, a public process, an
option to discuss.
Uh, with their city council,
with public hearings and give
their input to what they uh may
desire in order to meet federal
mandates. That is one aspect
that is important to me as a
public works director for uh.
25, 30 years. Thank you for that
answer.
And Madame Chair and
I too, as an elected official
and
And uh Senator.
Madam Chair and Senator, I too
can see.
For, for the cities and the
municipalities are in.
On this, on this bill.
And, and I could just imagine
why it's, it faced opposition
for the past 7 years.
And then I think about the
taxpayers and I think about
every New Mexican that has a
hard time making the house
payment.
And even, and, and then I take
it more personally where I see
my daughter coming to me and
asking me for $20 for gas.
And I see another $20 fee being
implemented.
On her because she has drainage
coming off her property.
And, and she's already paying
taxes.
Pain
And, and I just.
I just see this as a growing
government.
Imposing more
costs on, on
The average or, or, or every New
Mexican.
And, and they don't
We don't have him here knocking
down the door because
They don't really know what's
going on up here in Santa Fe.
And they don't know that we're
imposing another fee on them.
And
I can see, I can see the
municipality side of it, but
In the past we've taken care of
the drainage, we've taken care
of the roads, we've taken care
of the species, we've taken care
of all these problems that we're
Mentioning it in this bill.
We, we've, we have spent
millions of dollars in Clovis on
drainage.
And we didn't have this fee
imposed.
But yet now we're gonna impose a
fee.
To do what we've been doing
already.
And I, I just
You know, I had heartburn with
it, uh, madam chair and senator
in the last committee, I voted
for it.
And the more I slept on it, I
thought I should have stood my
ground and, and been in no vote
on it.
And
I can see there's two sides to
this coin.
I, I look forward to the rest of
the debate in the committee and
see where it goes.
I don't like it.
I didn't like it the first time.
I voted against my heart.
And now I'm sitting in this
position and, and having a hard
time with this bill, and having
a hard time digesting it.
Thank you for your presentation.
I think it's a good bill on one
side and on the other side, I
just, I just can't, can't, can't
like let him sure.
We have a motion for a due pass
in a second representative
Barrego, did you have a quick
I did. Thank you so much and I
just wanted to thank uh Senator
Sher for bringing this forward.
Um, I sat on the flood control
board for 6 years and fully
aware of what happens with our
storm water, especially when I
go into my kitchen and I turn on
the tap water and I drink it.
Um, and I know that uh a managed
blood control system is very
important especially when we
have environmental contaminants
that we test for on a regular
basis, um.
In some, in some instances we
test for those E. coli and other
things that go into our rivers,
um, that come back into our, our
drinking water. So I see the
importance of this. I think that
it's invaluable, especially
Madam Chair, um, and senator and
your guests when, when we know
that.
New Mexico is an arid state and
we only have so much water to go
around. So I see the importance
of this, and I think a managed
stormwater system or especially
when I drive through communities
that don't have managed
stormwater, and I, and it rains,
and I'm thinking to myself, you
wonder where that water is
going, you know, it, it just
really um is so important for
our communities. Thank you,
ma'am.
Please call roll for a due pass.
Representative on Nornin.
Representative Block? No.
Representative.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia? No.
Madam Floor leader.
Yeah.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
by a vote of 63, the motion
passes.
Senator.
Thank you. Thank you expert
witnesses.
All right, we are gonna go ahead
in here Senate Bill 113. I know
we have to be on the floor.
We'll go as far as we can and
then we will roll.
Uh house Bill 363 and House Bill
292 for Friday morning.
Brady had senator and
Representative.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, in essence, uh, Senate Bill
113.
Uh, proposes extending the life
of 5 boards for 10 years instead
of 6 years. It's the board of
barbers and cosmetologists,
board of nursing home
administrators, board of uh
landscape architects, water
quality control commission and
coal surface Mining Commission.
And so in terms of that, this
would uh bring these 5
organizations, if you will, to a
new sunset date of July 1st,
2035, and a repeal date of July
1st, 2036, and so in essence,
That's what uh this particular
measure does. This was a
recommendation, uh, and a bill
proposed by the Legislative
Finance Committee, and with
that, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, if I may defer to
my co-sponsor, and then again to
the expert who can also provide
uh a little bit more
information. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, committee, I
just sent in support with
Senator Campos, um, for Senate
Bill 113.
And Madam Chair, if I may, uh,
also have an expert who will go
ahead and identify herself and
then make a short statement.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Madam Chair, I'm Melissa
Salazar. I'm the director of
boards and commissions with
regulation and licensing
department, and we do stand in
support. OK, thank you. Let's go
to the audience. Do we have any
comments and support?
One minute, I will take 22
comments. One minute, please.
Robert Loftus, I'm the chair of
the state board of landscape
architects, landscape architects
work on uh many public uh large
scale public projects including
Capital Outlay projects like
parks, um, plazas, athletic
facilities, trails, outdoor
recreation, college campuses, um
school districts, things like
that. Um, this is a bill that
will just continue our ability
um to be licensed professionals
in the state of New Mexico,
which is really the foundation
of our work, which is improving
the quality of.
life, we ask of the committee's
support and continuing to do
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
members. My name is Abby
Feldman. I'm here representing
the New Mexico, uh, Association
of Landscape Architects. I'm
also a landscape architect. We
stand in support of this bill
for all the reasons that Rob
just said.
OK, let's go online. Do we have
any comments? We'll take one
online comment and support.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
position.
Public a public comment in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
OK, let's go back to the
audience. I don't think we have
any opposing comments, committee
members, Representative Little.
Madame Cherry with the pass.
Representative Zamora.
on
3rd.
Motion for a due passed by Vice
Chair Little, a second by
representative with Zamora. Do
we have any opposition?
Do we have any opposition?
The young man, you have a due
past, senator and senator, thank
you for waiting and thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
Madams of the committee,
appreciate it.
Keeping
