I
I will, before we take a role, I
want to introduce you to my
shadow, uh, today, um, I have a
shadow of George Wells. She is a
13 year old 7th grader from
Desert Ridge Middle School, so
thank you for joining us,
George.
And go ahead, Sasha with the
roll call.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Lara Kadena.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio ranking
member Zamora here. Madam Chair
Keats.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. um.
Could I have, do we have a a a
committee substitute or an
amendment for this bill. Can I
have a motion to accept for
discussion.
We need a second for that?
I just making a move, um, I'm
moving to have the committee sub
be for discussion.
Would you like to second it,
Representative Matthews, thank
you.
you don't need, OK.
All right, then we'll, we'll,
we'll.
Let's uh
Move forward on the
presentation. Thank you.
Oh, OK, are we ready online?
OK, OK,
are we ready?
Are we ready now?
Well
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, members of the
audience, uh, members on Zoom.
I'm here to present today House
Bill 137, the substitute, and
the number on that bill is
0.230329.2, just so that we're
all on the same page.
And um I'm, I'm sorry, have we,
has that been, uh
Distributed. Does everybody have
that substitute?
OK.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I really, I really want to
tell everybody that I kind of
threw out the speech I had
prepared last night, came in at
8 o'clock this morning and wrote
another one.
Um, because people are asking
me, very frankly, Susan, why are
you doing this? You're the one
that led the water Security Act.
You helped with the water
resiliency, you helped with the
water Data Act, you know, you've
been a proponent of, of really
helping, helping define and
change water laws in our state
so that we have, so that we have
better infrastructure and better
systems and a better future. I
mean, I, I live in District 41,
the northern part of the state.
I have, I have
More than 40 asseas, I have more
than 40 mutual domestic water
associations, um.
I, I have really worked.
On water issues, kind of the
whole time I've been here. This
is my 7th year. And, and I have
to say when I, I tell everybody
when I came to the legislature,
I thought I'd be working on
early childhood and education
wrong. 80% of the of the people
who came to me in my district
with problems, it was all about
water.
We're a rural district, lots of
lots of small farming, uh, lots
of ranching, uh, lots of
livestock. So we are a rural
kind of agricultural district
between we have between 20 and
30 million of agricultural
products in our district.
And that's on the
That's on the aboveground
economy. I'm not even talking
about the underground economy.
I, uh, you know, we can just
charge that. So the reason
The reason I'm carrying this
bill.
Is that climate change is real.
I've seen things in the past 5
years that I never thought.
Imaginable.
I've seen burnt forests without
a blade of grass.
As far as the eye can see.
I've seen torrential rains come
down.
It changed the course of a
river.
In one night.
Losing pristine farms.
Pristine little farms that had
been family generations for
years, but been in families for
generations.
Every month
I get a call from some mutual
domestic water asso association
and their system has either been
dried up through drought.
Or it's been uh flooded.
And those and and we, you know,
gather up all the forces and
send the water tanks and people
are then hauling water for them.
Um, I saw a community, um, Aseki
Association that build this
pristine little diversion dam on
the Chama River. They got money
from the Army Corps of Engineers
from, you know, some from
Capital Outlay from me, some
from the water russboard.
And the night before, they were
gonna have their celebration
opening.
That storm came in and wiped the
whole thing out. That was the
feeder in the diversion dam for
500 participants downstream.
Um, so,
I know these people, they're
real.
They are part of my
constituency. They're my
friends.
Summer family
I know these stories personally.
Personally, on a personal level,
I lived on a property for 32
years and then the uh the well
went dry.
I knew it was a matter of time.
Uh, but for 20 years, we had,
well, 32 years, we had great
water.
Christine Wellwater, and it went
dry. So it took me, it was right
before COVID, it took a year and
a half to get a driller out
there to drill that well. It
costs $30,000. Can my
constituents, most of them
afford a well for 30,000. No,
took a hit to my, my pension,
but that, you know, I was able
to have it and I did it.
So I'm very careful about water.
I don't let the water run when I
brush my teeth. I do one load of
wash a day. I do one dishwasher
loaded. I'm very, if you lose
water, you're careful about it.
I think what this has done, this
bill has started a, a bigger
conversation about water and I'm
very grateful for that. I think
we need to have these
conversations. And as we know on
the egg committee.
Whiskeys for drinking and waters
for fighting.
And, and so I get, I get what's
happening here today.
Um
So,
When people ask me why I'm doing
this.
My simple answer really is that
we know that there's gonna be
25% less water in the next 50
years.
In this, in this state.
That's, that's been, that's the
forecast, that's what we're
living with.
This is the only bill we have
before us in this legislature
that is trying to create new
water resources.
It's the only bill we have
before it, and I've know people
have differences, and I, and I'm
fully prepared as with my
experts to um answer these
questions as best we can.
But I think we need to figure
out as, as a legislature, as a
state, as a community, how can
we use?
How can we reuse or use wet
precious little water we have.
And so, um,
I went to the oil fields. I met
with conservationists.
I talked to as many people as I
could.
I really did this summer. Look
at all the things and trying to
factor them in.
This is obviously the governor's
bill. I'm carrying it for the
governor, um, but I think it's a
specific answer. It's the
beginning of an answer for our
future.
And, um
And this is what we all have to
do, set the stage for the
future.
So with that, Madam Chair, I
would like to introduce this uh
panel of experts that I have
today.
Rebecca Ru is the um right here
is the infrastructure advisor
for the Office of the Governor.
We have a deputy Ben Shelton.
He's a general counsel and
deputy secretary at Energy
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department. We have the state
engineer designate, Liz
Anderson. She's with the office
of the State Engineer, and we
have director, uh, Jonas
Armstrong. He's the water
protection, uh, division at the
New Mexico Environment
Department and we'll lead off
with
Rebecca who will give kind of an
overall view of the bill.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Good morning, members of
the committee. Um, it's
wonderful to be here with you
this morning and with, with our
sponsor, um, and member of your
distinguished committee as well.
Uh, I wanna just frame a little
bit about what is in House Bill
137 and and I'll give you a
little bit of that overview of
um what the bill is and what the
proposed strategic water supply
program would, would do, and I
want to provide just some very
brief reasons why we're here
building on what Representative
Herrera just said.
So, um,
put the strategic water supply
into context just about, just a
little over a year ago, the
governor issued her 50 year
water action plan that lays out
11 different priorities for the
state to tackle um on water
conservation, on new water
supplies, on water quality and
watershed protection and the
strategic water supply is one of
those 11 actions. So it's part
of a broader, um, fabric of what
is so important for us to be
doing and
and the funding come that we put
forward as the executive this
year, the request for $75
million for the strategic water
supply in general fund plus uh a
significant, um, increased
investment in the aquifer
monitoring and mapping program
in New Mexico Tech and increased
investment in New Mexico State
University's research around
both brackish water and produced
water treatment, that package of
appropriations is
Um, part of this bill is part of
a larger context of executive
priorities for funding water
projects that comes up to over
270 million across different
pieces of the governor's
executive budget request. So I
wanted to frame that this is one
really important piece of a
bigger puzzle as um the sponsor
just described to you as well.
The bill itself is um different
this year than last year, and
those of you who were following
conversations about the
strategic water supply and the
30 day session, um, might notice
some really significant
differences. Um, we did a lot of
work during the interim session
in 2024, and you'll hear more
about that from other experts to
gather more data, talk to more
experts, uh, and research the
both the market mechanics of
trying to
Do something like a strategic
water supply that advances
brackish water projects and
produce water treatment
projects, um, more research into
the science, into the demand for
these sources and the potential
for what it could mean for New
Mexico. Um, that's informed this
bill that's before you all
today.
It would create a new fund, the
strategic water supply fund with
an initial general fund infusion
that we've requested. And it
also creates a new recurring
revenue stream in the bill that
is a fee on the volume of
produced water that's generated
by the oil and gas sector. That
new fee in this bill is 5 cents
per barrel of produced water
generated and that revenue would
go into the strategic water
supply fund to be used.
to support future strategic
water supply projects.
Another thing that's in the bill
is the program itself and, and
you'll see a number of
provisions around how we could
Uh, execute contracts with
private entities or even a
combination of public and
private entities for uh
advancing produced water
treatment and brackish water
treatment projects, uh, and
there's 3 agencies authorized in
the bill to execute those
contracts. The New Mexico
Environment Department, the
Office of the State Engineer,
and the Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources Department.
Those contracts would be um with
companies that are, uh,
Coming forward with sort of a
complete project of what water
they're proposing to use, where
it's from, what's in it, how are
they going to treat it, and who
are their customers gonna be,
and the, the bill requires that
any such contract align with and
support.
State, tribal, or local economic
development goals, and support a
reduction or a um uh support
protection of our freshwater
resources, reduce reliance on
our demand for freshwater
resources. Uh, there's also
provision in the bill for a
grant program for brackish
projects. That's totally new.
Last year we weren't talking
about any grants, um, the grant
program proposing in the bill is
brackish, only it's not
available for produced water.
That's very
intentional. We don't think that
the state should be giving grant
dollars to um produce water
projects given that those are um
really supported by and um and
advanced by the oil and gas
sector themselves, but on the
brackish side, there's
universities that are doing
brackish water projects and
research local um governments,
counties can get in on
opportunities to develop
brackish water treatment, um,
projects and augment.
There are existing water supply,
um, and, and so this creates
more opportunities to move those
BRCA projects forward. Um,
really wanna just close my
remarks, um, Madam Chair.
with why do anything like this?
Why have the state get involved
in finding and supporting new
projects and new investments in
brackish water treatment and
produce water treatment, and
there, and the simple reason is
that it puts us in the position
of both being able to move some
of these advance advancements in
technology forward faster,
coming back around to the 50
year water plan framing coming
back to the fact that we are
gonna have
25% less water. So we're saying
we, we need to take action now
as a state here where we can
leverage existing technologies,
existing private sector
interests, existing demands and
make these things happen by
putting the state in a position
of giving a really nice nudge
forward on these types of
programs and projects. The other
key reason for why we are
proposing the state move forward
with a program like this is
because frankly, it puts us in
the position of being able to
play.
matchmaker a little bit. The
idea of advancing state, local
and tribal economic development
goals is at the heart of this
bill. We need to diversify our
economy in New Mexico, and a lot
of the manufacturing projects
and renewable energy projects
that we need to be doing for our
clean energy transition and to
diversify our economy, they're
very water intensive. So how do
we get to where we need to go
with new economic investments in
our communities and a clean
energy
transition without further
stressing are already depleted
freshwater. So that's at the
heart of this, and that's why we
think this bill is so important
for the state to bring all of
those pieces together and get
these types of projects moving
all within regulatory
constraints that protect our
water resources, protect
existing water rights holders
and protect water quality in
every, um, underground and above
ground, um, water resource we
have in the state.
adventure that.
With that, um,
We have other experts to make
brief opening remarks if that's
OK with the chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Now we're gonna go to our
experts just for a brief
overview.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. My name is Ben Shelton.
I'm the acting deputy secretary
and general counsel at the
Energy Mineral.
Natural Resources Department.
Uh, in addition to many of the
good reasons that you've heard
I'm so sorry but we can't, you,
yeah, you're gonna have to slow
down and talk in the mic. Thank
you. OK, um, in addition to the
reasons you've already heard,
I'm sort of here to talk about
this from a little bit of the
oil field perspective, uh
speaking directly to the 5 cents
a barrel produced water fee
that's proposed in the bill.
And the impacts that we're
hoping that that will push
forward a little bit uh in the
priming and in the industry
right now of the water that is
used for uh oil development
operations in the, in the oil
field are roughly 60% of that is
recycled or reused from
operations. We have been of the
opinion at OCD and in this
administration that that number
ought to be higher. And um we
have seen that there is um it
sort of partners on the industry
side on this. Uh
I think that number can be
higher, uh, and should be.
We've worked on legislation in
previous years that would direct
that, but we see this fee as
being uh complimentary piece to
start incentivizing some more
reuse of water.
Um, and that is, it really is an
important thing. The, the
challenge.
For us as regulators, the real
threats, uh, in many ways in the
Permian is not hydrocarbons,
it's produced water.
Some of our biggest and most
complicated environmental issues
relate to releases of water and
it makes sense. There are
tremendous amounts of produced
water flowing around in the, in
the oil fields. Um, in 2023, uh
industry as a whole produced
about 2.1 billion barrels of
produced water in 2024, that
number was up to 2.4.
Um, and we are, um, seeing those
numbers track roughly about
there, it's so far in 2025. It's
a tremendous challenge for
industry as it's one of the main
constraints on production. It's
a tremendous challenge for us as
regulators.
So the hope is that this fee and
the good things that it's doing
will also have the effect of
starting a little bit of a
market, um, and creating a
little bit of a flywheel for the
industry to um with our
assistance and, and with our
help start to manage this
problem, um, a little bit more
robustly down in the down in the
Permian.
So I'm excited for your
questions and I'll pass it on to
my colleague here.
Madam Chair, members. Thank you.
Again, I'm Jonastro with the
Environment Department.
Like our partner agencies, NED's
worked, uh, over the last couple
of years to support the
governor's implementation of the
50-year water action plan.
On things like water
infrastructure, protecting our
water supplies, and also on new
water.
Since the governor announced the
strategic water supply in late
2023, NMED has led outreach, uh,
the public experts and really
brought.
Out some expertise and
information on
How this proposal can be
implemented.
And that all led to a
feasibility study that the
department issued last November,
identifying.
Uh, and providing technical
economic insights and
opportunities for water
treatment and read this bill,
House Bill 137.
Explicitly states that any
strategic water supply.
Projects must comply with all
permit requirements. Of course,
that includes NMED permitting.
Relevant to that point
And MED proposed
Some water are being considered
by the water quality Control
Commission currently.
Those proposed rules would
prohibit discharges of treated
or untreated produced water, and
I think that's.
We get hotter and drier in New
Mexico, it's important for us to
be even more vigilant in
protecting our limited
freshwater resources and House
Bill 137 and NMED's proposed
water reuse rules would be
important tools in New Mexico's
tool. Thank you for your time
this morning and look.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Elizabeth Anderson. I'm the
state engineer designate, and,
um, I'm really happy to be here
presenting to you today, um,
brackish water in New Mexico is
a critical resource. Um, the
desalination technologies that
are available are tried and
true. People are doing this
around the world, um, and we
have, we have the ability to do
this here in New Mexico too, and
we need to do it. Historically,
we
used fresh water, which is
easier to get to, the wells are
shallower. It requires less
water treatment, so it's less
expensive, um, but our fresh
water, as we've discussed, is
becoming less available, and we
need to prioritize it for
people, farmers and nature. We
need to really make sure that
we're using that valuable
resource, um, appropriately.
So using brackish water for
industrial development
strengthens and diversifies our
economy while perverse its
preserving that fresh water for
people, farms, and nature.
Our state has a lot of brackish
water experts estimate up to 650
trillion gallons of water
available. That sounds like a
lot of water and it is a lot of
water. We need to make use of
it.
Um, as I said, the desalination
technologies are there. We can
do this, other states have
proven it too.
Um, the surrounding states that.
For our, from our state are
developing brackish aquifers.
They've proven it can be done
safely while protecting the
environment and freshwater
resources.
Um, this strategic water supply
is consistent with the 50-year
water action plan. It supports
funding for aquifer
characterization with funding
for New Mexico Tech, which is a
critical piece of this puzzle,
but not something that has to be
done before we can do the
development of some brackish
projects. We can do these things
in tandem.
Um, this also supports
innovation, research,
monitoring, and technology
development with funding for New
Mexico State University.
Brackish resources are currently
being explored around our state
with potential project projects
waiting in the wings and it's
time to start moving those
forward.
Strategic water supply positions
us to take advantage of brackish
water resources safely,
thoughtfully and proactively
protecting and preserving fresh
water for people, farms, and
nature, while allowing our
economy to grow and diversify.
The time is now to do this. It
provides a better future for New
Mexico, and it a lot, we, people
talk about maybe we should
prioritize things before, um,
before brackish development, but
we really here in New Mexico
need to be doing.
All of the things to preserve
and protect all of our water
resources while still allowing
our state to expand and develop
um our economies. Thank you.
Thank.
That concludes our presentation,
uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and thank you presenters. Uh,
we're going to go to public
comment first from first gonna
go to Zoom.
Um, if you could raise your hand
on Zoom.
If you support this bill.
Yes.
My desk. I look forward to the
vigorous.
People already asked, I'm
wondering if we might have an
explanation reasonable to me
because yeah, I might that might
be helpful. Thank you very much
representative. I think it's an
excellent idea, so please, uh,
presenters, uh let's address the
committee sub.
Madam Chair.
It's so
Representative that issue is
The people on the Zoom, do they
have the committee sub? Is it
not available? So, so it's not
that it's not available from my
perspective, right, we don't get
committee subs with like the in
like, so we have an FIR, we have
a committee analysis, but, you
know, trying to just print in
the sub. It's I'm, I'm worried I
might not catch everything or
might, might not accurately be a
committee subar. I understand we
have't adopted it, we haven't
discussed it, but even if we can
just have a top line of like,
here's what you all brought
today so that
we.
Madam Chair, and thank you for
that representative.
Madam Chair, I think that's a
valid uh request and, uh, I'm
gonna turn it over to Rebecca to
uh answer that.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
and members, um, and so I'll
walk through the committee sub
um version and point out in that
version what is new or different
from the original bill, um, and
just stop me if uh if you have
any questions as I walk through
it.
The first changes appear on
pages 2 and 3.
In section 2.
Starting on line 6 of page 2.
We added the word deep to the
definition of brackish water,
and we added the word deep in
line 22 to the definition of
treated brackish water. That
change is a clarifying change.
The bill already provided in the
definition of brackish water
that we're talking about water
this 2500 ft or deeper.
Given that there is some water
that's generally considered to
be brackish, that's in shallower
wells, we, um, in response to
feedback we'd heard from
stakeholders thought it would be
clearer to define brackish water
and treated brackish water as
deep treated and and deep
brackish water in the context of
the strategic water supply.
Again, clarifying, to be
consistent with the fact that,
um, we've always been talking
about 2500 ft or deeper, and
that is consistent with long
standing water code on which
Waters are not appropriated.
The next changes, um, and so
you'll see there's a couple of
places throughout the bill where
those terms were used and there
are corresponding edits to add
the word deep throughout the
bill every time brackish water
or treated brackish water
appeared. Um, so I won't touch
on every one of those by page
and line.
I'm going to, going to page 5,
line 16.
All right, let me just, the
paragraph F now says when
preparing a request for
proposals pursuant to subsection
C of this section or grant
solicitations pursuant to
subsection D of this section,
the agency shall, um,
The
Subparagraphs there, 1 and 2
were in the original bill. The
only thing that changed here is
the point in the process at
which those state and tribal
collaboration Act activities and
consultation with the Secretary
of Economic Development
happened. In the original bill,
it was phrased that those would
happen when reviewing proposals
in this version, it's when
preparing the request for
proposals, which we determined
was the appropriate time in the
process for these types of
consultations to happen. You
want to be consulting before you
issue.
A request for proposals, not
once you're reviewing proposals,
um through and, and consistent
with the state procurement code.
The next change on the same
page, line 23, paragraph G.
It's brand new paragraph, um,
compared to the original bill.
This, uh, requires any one of
these three agencies moving
forward on a project to notify
the state Investment council.
About
Uh, a new grant opportunity, a
new contracting opportunity or
other, any other engagement with
the public about the strategic
water supply program. The reason
for engaging uh and notifying
the state investment council is
to support uh the technologies
that are being developed and
funded through state Investment
council funds and programs. So
this is a way to connect um
multiple things the state is
doing to build new technologies.
And build out those um uh
expertise and companies in the
state and give those companies
that are
Benefiting from State Investment
council funds and make sure they
hear about these strategic water
supply opportunities when they
become available. So that um
they have an opportunity to
participate.
The next set of changes onto
page 6.
Um, paragraph 8.
is language that was in the
original bill, but it now
appears as its own paragraph. It
used to be a subparagraph, um,
in the original bill, but the,
the substance is unchanged, that
the agency shall evaluate how
projects limit greenhouse gas
emissions. So that is the same
as the original bill just in it
in its own subparagraph now.
Yes.
He
Mine, uh, page 6, line 6.
Page 6, line 6, so it's.
Subsection H.
Substantively.
Page 6, line 10.
Subsection I.
The
Subparagraph number one.
was in the original bill, that
no strategic water supply
program contract shall be
provided pursuant to the
strategic water supply for the
production of treated produced
water except for treated,
produced water uses that are in
accordance with the Water
Quality Act and rules adopted by
the water quality Control
Commission. That was in the
original bill, it now appears in
a different place. The next two
subparagraphs are new.
In the committee sub. So page 6
lines 17 through 22 is new
language. There we have
Explicitly prohibiting any
produced water that includes PAS
from being included in any
strategic water supply project.
Starting on line 20, uh, and
consistent with the governor's
state of the state speech. We
are explicitly making it clear
that regardless of what any
future water quality regulations
might allow under the strategic
water supply, treated produced
water, would never be able to be
used for drinking water or for
agriculture.
But within the confines of the
strategic water supply program.
So those lines 17 through 22 are
new.
Can you go back to the
difference with the addition of
one of 20 through 22.
I think I heard you say.
Can never be used.
As drinking water over.
Agriculture.
I think that was the testimony I
just heard, and so I just want
clarification on that.
That doesn't say it can't be
used for drinking water. It says
it can't be used.
In in the terminology you used
and we can go back and replay
it.
Um
Drinking water over the use for
agriculture. So I'm just trying
to get the dichotomy there. I
know what this says, but that's
not what I heard. Thank you.
If, if I said that
representative um Pettigrew,
Madam Chair, that was a mistake
if the, if I said over, um, the
I was trying to explain it as
written on the page, which is
that treat to produce water for
drinking water or or
agricultural activities is
prohibited for the strategic
water supply.
It's an or, um, manager.
Continuing on page 6, line 23,
paragraph J.
Which continues on to page 7.
Through line 2.
So everything in subsection J is
new in the committee sub.
That entire section sets out.
Produced water, chemical
composition disclosure
requirements.
Such that in the future, if a
strategic water supply contract
involved treated produced water.
the contractor.
That is contracting with the
state agency would be required
to disclose what is in the
produced water. That is new
subsection J that starts on page
6 and concludes on page 7, line
20.
We're almost there, Madam Chair.
In terms of reviewing the
changes, we're gonna jump now to
hold on, make sure I don't miss
any.
Page 22.
The very bottom of page 22, line
25. It says.
Beginning on January 1st, 2026.
That is new in the committee
sub.
So that's change.
Um, like a page 22 line 25.
Beginning on January 1st, 2026.
New language that establishes
the initiation date for the
produced water fee of 5 cents
per barrel, um, that would kick
in January 1st, 2026. The
original bill includes the
language that follows that,
that's a 10 year sunset of the
fee that is unchanged, this
change includes a start date as
well, in addition to the sunset.
On page 23.
Line one, the word operators.
Was changed from
Working interest owners. That
was a technical clarifying edit
agreed upon by the Oil
Conservation division and um uh
taxation revenue Department.
Who will be serving as the
entity that collects the feed.
So the only change there in line
one is the word operators.
In line 8.
We added the word recovery.
That was a typo that we
corrected, uh, it was a missing
word in the original bill, so it
says now used for enhanced or
secondary oil recovery. Recovery
is the addition in the committee
sub.
Madam Chair moving down on page
23 to line 19.
And continuing on to page 24.
Line 5. What you see as
Subsection C and D.
are revised and I and if it's OK
with the chair instead of going
word by word, what's changed I
can explain conceptually, um,
paragraph C and D now reflect a
more uh clear and streamlined
process and timeline for when
reports are made and fees are
remitted.
And when those those due dates
are in relation to when the
produced water is generated and,
and, um, measured and reported.
So the technical edits to create
more efficiencies in how the
produced water fee is reported
and collected. Those are the
changes in
Subsection C on page 23, lines
19 through 25 and subsection D,
page 24, lines 1 through 5. And
Madam Chair, that concludes the
Description of the committee
sub.
Madam Madam Chair.
And I really quick, um, I'm
sorry, it was on page 2.
Um, on section, starting with
the 13 through 15, isn't that
new to the committee sub also?
I don't see that definition in
the original bill.
and which page page 2,
section B.
13 through lines 13 through 15.
You are correct, Madam Chair
Representative Mirabel Moya, I
apologize. That was not
highlighted on, that was an
error on my part, the definition
of PAS is added, um, that's per
or polyfluoralalol substance,
um, lines 13 through 15 on page
2. That is a new edition, um,
given the other change that I
reviewed that required that
bands PAS and produce water, the
drafter added that definition.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you so much. So that
outlines the differences between
the original bill and the
committee sub.
We're going to move to
Public comment now, um.
I ask that your public comment
is one minute or less. Um, I'm
not going to limit the time of
the, the number of people who
want to give public comment, but
please keep it at a minute. We
will stop you at a minute, um,
because I think I suspect that
we have a lot of folks, um, who
want to talk about this bill.
Um, we're going to your
If you support this bill, I'd
like for you to raise your hand.
Both on Zoom and in the room.
Great. OK, so we're gonna go,
we're gonna give you a minute,
uh, the attendant will
Hold the mic
And you will speak into the mic.
OK, we're gonna do the room
first and then zoom.
OK.
Go ahead and raise your hand
again. If you're in support of
this bill.
My name's uh Danny Herrera. I'm
the mayor of the village of
Cuba.
And we are living in this uh
water nightmare we've declared,
I have to declare two
emergencies within the last two
years.
We've, uh, out of water one time
for a week.
Uh, our wells are not producing
what they need to be producing,
and we have for.
Kind of like the hub for the
eastern part of the Navajo
Nation and.
3 or 4 different small
communities in the area. So we
have people that are hauling
water daily because of their
wells going dry and it's, it's,
it's, it's just heartbreaking to
see what goes on in my community
and stuff.
And with the desalination.
Now I'll talk a little bit about
the economic part of it. It
would be very beneficial for the
community. We've been working
with a company they're called uh
Nuco.
And they use an ion exchange
process, and they use the
minerals for fertilizer.
And we have fertilizer plants in
town would create.
35 to 40 more jobs in the area
and help us fix our inner
structure with the revenue of
the village with uh.
What uh gain from from the this
desalinization.
And one last thing we would be
producing.
Thank you, Mayor.
Next.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members on Jim Berle,
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association of Soil and
Water Conservation Districts and
we stand in support of any
measures that would increase our
water supply in the state. We
just like to see the
Reduction of
Fresh water used, we'd also like
to encourage everybody to
consider. I know this says if it
has PFOS, it can't be used for
ag and livestock, but we'd like
this new water source to be able
to be used for that if it could.
We're
Not completely sure that the tax
burden should be borne on the
backs as the producers, but in
general we're always in support
of new water. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room? I think we're bringing in
folks from outside.
In favor
Uh, Marla Schultz, uh,
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Berlio County Water
Utility Authority, and we stand
in support of this legislation.
We want to thank the sponsors,
the state engineer's office, the
departments for collaborating on
this. We stand and support
because it incentivizes the
production of water, produces
another water source which the
state is in dire need of,
provides outside technical
research and evaluation with New
Mexico State University and New
Mexico Tech. Thank you.
Anyone else in favor, uh, in the
room. OK, we're gonna go to Zoom
and I want to remind folks of
this is you're in support of
House Bill 137, please raise
your hand on the zoom and you're
gonna be asked to unmute
yourself and state your name for
the record, please.
Nicholas, uh, meet yourself,
state your name.
Hi, can you hear me?
This is Nicholas C from On
Desert Corporation based in Los
Alamos, New Mexico, and uh thank
you uh for the committee and
Madam Chair, we are in support
of this legislation. I think
we've all experienced these
horrible
Wildfires and we did a study
with Sandia National Lab.
To verify that in fact it's
because our trees are very dry.
So we need to give the water
back to the trees and how can we
get so much water for uh the
well the trees, it's with
desalination and my company has
a desalination technology that
can treat Pfas water can treat
produced water can treat, uh,
just wastewater, salty
underground water. So we'd like
to present this technology to
the state of
Mexico to solve your water
crisis. Thank you.
Thank you.
Steve
You're next, unmute yourself.
I'm sorry, I'm gonna defer for a
second because I'm in opposition
and I raised my hand at the
wrong time. OK. Thank you. Next.
Larry
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Larry Bain, and, uh, we
are in control and own uh about
10,000 acres in Sandoval County,
and we're the proud owner of
56,000 acre feet of brackish
water. That's about 4000 ft
below the surface. We are 100%
in favor of this bill. We are
thrilled that the state is
taking this step. Uh, we hope
it's a fantastic first step.
There's lots to be done, and the
state clearly needs the water.
we, we will build the desal
plant.
In New Mexico and we're excited
about this first step of this
state. So thank you again for
supporting the bill and for
putting it out there.
Thank you, Larry. Anyone else?
Jeannette.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
We can, uh, OK, I'm Jeannette
Linville. I actually work with
the village of Cuba. I'm a
consultant grant writer, and I'm
helping Mayor Herrera on this
project. I just wanted to give
some information regarding uh
the water chemistry in New
Mexico that results in the
production of uh gypsum in the
brackish water, high
concentrations of the gypsum and
the brackish water results in
failure of reverse osmosis
process for desalinization and
the nuco company that we uh
proposed to work with in our
grant application for
desalination planting the
village of Cuba, uses an
ionization process that doesn't
encounter these kinds of
challenges. I just wanted to
give you that information.
Thank you so much. If one more
person on the zoom.
Mr. and Ms. Fallier.
Uh, yes, Robert Fowley.
Uh, can you hear me?
Can
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Robert Fowley. I'm a civil
engineer in Albuquerque.
Um, I just wanted to express my
support for this legislation.
I've worked on numerous water
supply projects in New Mexico,
including desal projects in the
Albuquerque area, Santa Teresa,
and also New Mexico's first
municipal desalination plant.
In Almogordo, these projects
take a while to develop, um,
very familiar with the water
issues in the state and in
wholehearted support of the
state's bill before you today.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you so much. Uh, now
we're gonna move on to
opposition.
In the room
One minute
Let's, um, let's start at the
back and we'll work our way to
the front.
But we're, we're starting at the
back, ma'am.
The, the last row.
Yeah
Good morning, care and members
of the committee. My name is
Michaela Trujillo Hanawalt, and
I'm here on Berca, a
community-based organization on
the south side of Santa Fe, with
thousands of members and
supporters dedicated to
environmental justice and
community well-being. Earthcare
strongly opposes House Bill 137
because produced water is toxic,
unregulated waste, and.
Oh, unregulated waste product
that has no place in New
Mexico's water's future.
I work with families across
Santa Fe, we know how critical
clean water is for community
health, agriculture and daily
life.
Um, many of our members are
already struggling with access
to safe drinking water, and this
bill would in catastrophic
consequences. There's no
scientifically proven treatment
that makes produced water safe
for use beyond end the
industry's push to rebrand this
toxic waste as a water solution
ignores the fact that produced
water contains carcinogens,
heavy metals, radioactive hos.
Even if small amounts of these
contaminants enter our
groundwater. Thank you. Thank
you. We're gonna
Some do one of the attendants
have a.
A timer, and you hear this timer
if we set it up here. Yeah,
let's, we're gonna turn up the
timer so that you can.
You can hear it.
Thank you. One minute. Thank
you.
Madame Chair, good morning.
Members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I'm
a nurse and a school teacher.
The handwriting on the wall has
directed my behavior for years.
I grew up in pollution-ridden,
New Jersey, lived in LA. I saw
the handwriting on the wall in
2000, my well went dry. I had to
drill a new well, and I also
installed a multi-flow in 2005,
which recycles all my household
water. I use this water to plant
trees.
shade the planet and just suck
up to CO2. What are the
applicable state, tribal, and
local standards.
And other provisions of law
which aim to protect health and
environment, will the
demonstration begin before or
after projects begin. If before,
how do you know the projects
will advance goals.
If after, how do you know?
What are the guideposts you'll
be watching for. How is the
evaluation going to be done?
Or the goals being fitted into
purposes?
Madam Chair, my name's Zach
Withers. I'm here with the
Farmers Union. Um, we have some
concerns about this bill. We do
support uh treating brackish
water and increasing water
availability, picking up where
one of the other speakers left
off though, there is not clear
standards that exist to
determine if especially produced
water has been treated to a
level where it's safe to be put
back into the environment. I
don't think that's actually
possible. Uh, we do support, uh,
funding for groundwater mapping
and a lot of the other things in
here. I don't think that the
taxpayers should be footing the
bill.
to clean up the mess from the
oil and gas industry. Um, we
should incentivize them in
recycling that water and not
contaminating more of our water.
Thank you.
I'm Madam Chair and
representatives. My name is
Laron Johnson. I represent the
Center for Biological Diversity,
we agree that water is critical
in this state as climate change
progresses, but HP 137 is not
the answer. doesn't adequately
distinguish between brackish
water and what has come to be
known as produced water, which
is actually to toxic liquid
waste produced in staggering
quantities by oil and gas
production.
The bill lacks sufficient guard
rails for the use of that toxic
waste, which is filled with
toxic and unknown compounds
including numerous carcinogens,
developmental toxicants,
endocrine disruptors,
radioactive materials, and
artificial additives that will
persist in the environment.
Each operator adds its own toxic
crew to the water it injects
underground. Additives interact
in unpredictable ways with each
other and with compacts found in
underground shale.
Science does not show that
today's technology can make this
highly variable toxic waste,
safe for reuse.
Using it outside the oil field
will expose humans and the
environment to numerous known
and unknown hazards. By the time
we understand.
Uh, sorry.
By the time we understand the
damage done by reusing produced
water, it will be too late.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Marie Lanassi. I'm with New
Energy Economy and our 5000
members. I wrote to you last
night about with a long um piece
including science. The science
says there is, we are at the
first step.
We're at a nascent stage, the
science says, and I'm gonna read
to you, and I would like to
tender this.
To properly assess risk.
We must have an a priori
understanding of the
echotoxicity effects of produced
water to different organisms is
necessary, necessary for both
risk management and in helping
to define most toxic components
and necessary treatment
strategies prior.
To produced water discharge and
reuse. The science isn't there.
You've made the laws. The law
says you have to base your
decision making on science.
There is no science that says
that this can be treated safely.
Uh
Mariel, you sent a letter to the
entire committee.
You should probably just send it
to everyone in the committee if
possible because there are folks
who want to see it. Thank you.
Bye.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
We're moving on.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
And committee members, my name
is Daniel Pritchard. I live in
Taos. I am on the executive
board of renewable Tauss and
have the support of our hundreds
of members. I am also the state
licensed water system operator
for a drinking water system for
29 families.
I support the new changes that
prohibit any use of produced
water or derivatives for
drinking water or agriculture,
however, using over $100 million
in public funds to subsidize
research of the oil and gas
industry is unacceptable and a
poor use of public funds.
Brackish water treatment to
drinking water quality is a
relatively mature technology,
and it should be considered
completely apart from produced
water treatment. Don't conflate
the two.
The Nicola barrel fee only
applies to produced water that
is not reused within the oil
fields, so the anticipated
revenue is perhaps not as much
as people think.
Good morning, Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Raluth in Mexico Chamber
of Commerce. And although we
share the goal of protecting
freshwater, the chamber stand
stands in opposition to this
bill.
The stated purpose of this act
is to expand water reuse
opportunities, but the language
of the bill is overly broad.
Without clear scientific and
regulatory guardrails, this
legislation could greenlight
unproven projects.
The Act would commit public
funds to subsidize private
industry ventures, that
feasibility studies already have
indicated are not cost
effective. The contracts can
also last up to 20 years. New
Mexican taxpayers should not
have to shoulder the burden for
projects deemed unviable. I
urged the committee to reject
this bill bill and pursue more
transparent accountable water
policies. Thank you.
Great
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Annedi
Lopez, and I'm here on behalf of
Yucca. We strongly oppose House
Bill 137, because it is nothing
more than an attempt to turn the
oil and gas industry waste
problem and crisis into a public
burden. Let's be clear, produce
water is not new water. It is
toxic waste. There's no prudent
scientific process that could
fully treat, produce water to
make it safe for reuse in the
overwhelming evidence from the
recent rulemaking on reuse from
this wall, confirm this.
Instead of forcing oil and gas
companies to reduce their waste
of our scarce water resources,
their ways and take
responsibility for the damage
they've caused. This bill ask
the people of New Mexico to bear
the risk while industry gets
paid.
We could not let this industry
to use New Mexico as a dumping
ground.
House Bill 137 is not a water
solution. It is an attempt to
disguise a hazardous waste
crisis as an opportunity to
establish a market for private
interest. The state should be
holding oil and gas accountable
for its waste for me with
Doctor Bridge and I mute
yourself for urology. OK, what
are the orders?
We're not gonna repeat what was
said.
Please mute, and then we'll move
on.
Yeah,
go ahead.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Alejandria
Lyons. I represent the New
Mexico no Fase Solutions
Coalition. Uh we also sent the
committee and the aides and
email about our outline concerns
with the bill. We want to thank
the sponsor. Um, we are also
concerned about drought as it
relates to climate, but we've
also been tracking the governor
strategic water supply since the
announcement in Dubai at COP 28,
um, we're concerned that
specifically that we are using
this as a Trojan horse.
for advanced technologies such
as hydrogen, and we disagree
with the fact that we that
aquifer mapping can be done
after, you know, this, this bill
takes place. We think that
there's better measures such as
SB 178 that unties the funding
mechanism, because we do need
this research to be done, but we
don't think that this is the way
that, um, that we should be
trying to save water, so, um, we
hope that you look into funding
aquifer mapping and other
projects and.
them from advanced technologies.
Yeah.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is TJ Chari. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
Occidental Petroleum, uh, we
have an issue with the with the
uh 5 cent tax is is what I'm
gonna call it, but I want to
focus on a very significant
technical issue in the bill.
There's a big difference between
a tax and a fee. Uh, this bill,
if you read the rest of the body
of the bill, it's a produced
water tax, so one of the
requests we'd have is change the
name of it to properly reflected
the the taxes administered by
the tax administration under the
tax administration Act, so that
needs to be changed, number 12,
The, the taxes then uh and I'm
looking at page 24 paragraph.
I'll give you that, the tax.
I then dedicated to a fund, and
what that does is that usurp
your legislative power and the
appropriation process. There's
no need to have a separate fund
completely isolated. Now, if it
was a fee, you would, but this
is a tax, so as a part of the
tax, we would request that
mixture year by year, the
legislature has the ability to
vet it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name's Norm
Gom.
I'm a retired registered water
engineer with almost 50 years of
experience in the state of New
Mexico.
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico water advocates.
Um, and a former director of the
Interstate stream Commission.
One of my colleagues received a
reply from the governor about
this act.
And she said, the governor said
the enemy will continue to rely
on sound science.
It is my professional opinion.
That the sector of the
environment department has not
acted with complete honesty,
objectivity, and
professionalism.
In his marketing.
Of this so-called opportunity.
The problem is the opportunity
costs. The governor is
recommending $270 million for
water, but there's a pittance
for water planning.
else in the room.
Is there anyone else outside of
the room?
OK, we're gonna move to the
zoom, um, raise your hand if you
are in opposition to this bill.
And when I call your name,
you're gonna unmute yourself.
And state your name for the
record. Who's first?
Steve
Hello,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Stephen Conrad. I
have a PhD in groundwater
hydrology from New Mexico Tech
and I worked at Sandia Labs for
26 years. I conducted a
Department of Energy and EPA EPA
funded research during that
time. The cleanup of Permian
Basin produced water is not
technically viable because it,
it contains extremely high salt
concentrations at such high
concentrations, the only way to
remove the
all this distillation.
Distillation requires the
boiling and condensing of the
water, and it requires so much
energy to boil all that water
that is really not even a
remotely viable solution. It's
really just that simple. It's
the extraordinarily high amount
of energy required to boil all
this water. End of story.
There's really nothing more you
need to know than just that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Steve.
Annie Hanna.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Annie Hannah, and I'm a mom and
a well owner in Bernalle County.
We're, we're fixing this. Good
morning. Can you hear me now?
Should I begin again? Go ahead.
OK, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee members. My name
is Annie Hanna, and I'm a well
owner and I'm a mom in Bernao
County, and I'm urging you to
vote no to protect our water
safety and our health. I'm
particularly concerned because
this bill allows reuse of
treated produced water for
aquifer recharge, industrial
purposes, or environmental
restoration, and the bill fails
to define these terms clearly.
This creates loopholes that
could allow widespread
contamination without explicit
restrictions, treated, produced
water could be used in ways that
spread pollutants into
ecosystems and communities, even
with the new chemical disclosure
requirements, treatment does not
guarantee safety. Many
proprietary chemicals remain
unregulated and long-term
environmental impacts are
unknown, as many speakers have
said, the science is not there
yet. Let's rely on the science
to
us. Thank you very much.
Jeff.
the hipa, uh, hello everybody.
My name is Jere Kai. I'm a
member of the Pablo Laguna.
And I'm very concerned just as
the
When it comes to the tribal
consultation.
And as well as the maintenance
of these operations, the future
proposed.
Operations because our utility
authority is already at maximum.
And as well as our capacity to
have hazardous material, um,
capacity treatments as well. Um,
I'm very concerned that my
community has already faced a
lot of that. Um, such as the
Superfund site, the Uranian
Jetpal mine.
Um, that's another example of
claims of economic development
within our community, but even
now we're still facing
Um, repercussions into our water
table.
And
When I mentioned comment before
Whiskeys for drinking water is
for fighting in my community,
water is for praying. So at
least we have to make sure our
water tables are safe and abide
by the first time, first in
right laws for indigenous water
rights.
Thank you.
Julia, please.
Yes, uh, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Julia Bernal. I'm
from Santia Pueblo, and I'm the
executive director of Public
Action Alliance, um, we are, um,
standing in opposition of this
bill as an indigenous
organization, we do not support
the commodification of
groundwater resources. Um, I
think it's important to
understand the complexity and
the conductivity of groundwater
aquifers, and while we do
support robust aquifer.
Napping, we feel like that could
be separate from um the
strategic water supply, which is
also looking to use uh treated
fracking waste for other uses
and as a tribal member, um, and
uh a part of a family that has
some generational agriculture,
um, this is something that is a
concern of me and my community
and other uh public community
members who utilize water um for
agriculture and cultural uses.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Sandy, you're next.
Hi, can you hear me?
You can.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair and to the
committee. My name is Sandra
Stalberg. I'm a member of
Indivisible Albuquerque.
Indivisible Albuquerque along
with other statewide indivisible
strongly opposed HB 137, the
governor's own scientists and
even the folks from Namoga have
testified under oath that the
science doesn't support our
ability to treat produced water
for reuse or discharge.
Uh, HB 137 is at best Folly, and
at worst a catastrophe in the
making.
We ask you to instead fund real
solutions that will work like
implementing the Water Planning
Act of 2019 and the Water Data
Act of 2019 and to modernize our
water agencies so that we will
have the data and the
infrastructure to make the sound
and evidence-based decisions
about our precious water
resources. Thank you so much.
Kathy you're next.
Hello, good morning. I'm Kathy
Wimbley Sanchez with Ta Women
United, Circle of Grandmothers,
and I strongly oppose this.
Due to the fact that our sacred
waters are defined as sacred
waters and not produced water,
the term water is misused, and
it's a toxic mix brew that is
being used when they frack into
it, and then contaminate
aquifers and waters.
And it is very not
scientifically proven.
And we need the scientists to
back up before we start dealing
with revenues, revenues and
money and water do not mix.
Toxicity is in the mix when we
don't have our mind, our hearts
and our spirits together when it
comes to safety of our children,
of our plants or animals, water
is sacred and scarce. Let us be
mindful.
Legislating
To
Because of money revenues is.
Crazy. It's
Melissa, you're next.
Hello, can you hear me all
right?
Can
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Melissa Troutman. I represent
Wild Earth Guardians based in
Santa Fe, and while guardians
agrees that water scarcity must
be addressed. We cannot support
HB 137 for a few reasons.
Um, mostly the state should not
subsidize unproven technology
that creates hazardous waste,
um, other commoners have covered
the lack of scientific evidence
around produced water and
whether it can be treated. I'd
like to comment on the science
that proves it does not, um,
studies and studies from states
like Pennsylvania where
treatment has been happening for
decades, shows that even when
pilot projects seem to work, the
daily long term full com
scale treatment of produced
water has failed.
It has created radioactive
rivers, contaminated land. It's
also injured and killed
treatment plant workers. Um,
Lastly, we oppose this bill
because it doesn't regulate the
waste from produced water
treatments as a new waste stream
that is hazardous. This is not
an oil and gas waste, which is
exempt from hazardous waste law,
and we believe that this new
waste stream.
Patrick.
Patrick, are you there? Can you
meet yourself? Yes, can you hear
me?
We can.
We went out de Dios.
My name is Patrick Jaramillo.
I'm from San Pedro, New Mexico,
and Ria Riba.
I am an irrigator, a farmer.
Anasekiro and I'm also the
co-director of the American
Friend Service Committee.
Uh, the New Mexico program, and
I'm here in strong opposition to
this bill.
Um, for two main reasons that I
will lift up that other folks
have already said, but
environmentally, this is a, this
is a catastrophic, uh, bill, not
addressing the, the science of
acknowledging a problem, but not
acknowledging the science that
this toxicity is um
Beyond what anybody is prepared
for.
Uh, and 2, this is bad
governance.
I, in attempt, I, I went to
every single one of the uh
summits held over the summer to
look to inform myself and I've
come to the conclusion that this
bill is just a bailout for
industry. This seeks to shift
their liability. They produced
this problem. This is toxic.
Terrier next.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole and I'm
president and CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
The chamber supports the goal of
creating a strategic water
supply in order to improve the
state's drought resilience and
for use in developing green
energy. However, we're primarily
concerned about what the funding
mechanism will be and are
concerned it will place a tax on
oil and gas production.
Therefore, we reluctantly must
oppose SB 137 at this time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Eric, you're next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Eric
Schenker Goodrich, and I'm the
executive director of the
Western Environmental Law
Center. I appreciate
Representative Ferrera and the
governor's office work on the
committee substitute. It is a
marked improvement. That said,
I'd like to highlight two
objections. First, we object to
the bills $75 million
appropriation. These public
funds would further subsidize
oil and gas at a time of record
industry profits. Moreover, in
2022 alone, the three largest
state oil and gas subsidies cost
taxpayers $86 million. Oil and
gas subsidies are bad public
policy.
Notably, we do support the
Section 10 ft. Second, we object
to the bill's inclusion of
produced water, which has proven
intensely controversial and
risks public health and our
environment. We recommend that
the strategic water supply be
confined to brackish water.
Thank you.
Oscar, you're next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Oscarson.
Oscar Simpson, I represent the
Rio Grande Indivisible chapter
here in Albuquerque. Based on
all the reasons stated before,
this bill mixes apples and
oranges. The the brackish water
would be suitable to pursue, but
mixing treating and pursuing
subsidizing and treatment of
produced water is infeasible and
very toxic to the environment,
let alone drinking water and
agricultural. You need to strip
if this bill is to proceed, you
need to strip all avenues uh or
references to produce water
treatment out of this spill.
Thank you much.
You ask her
Joanne, you're next.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Joanne
Binnati. I live in Gallup in
McKinley County, like so many
places in the state, we are
grappling with the water
shortage issues, but at the same
time, we deal with decades-long
issue of hazardous waste left
behind by the mining.
industry, especially on the
Navajo Nation. Legacy waste
sites are just miles from mine
and any other homes.
Um, just to ignore the enormous
and potentially extremely
expensive issue of disposal
necessary for the hazardous
residual waste stream produced
when you separate dissolved
salts.
hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and
toxic fracking fluids from
brackish water and fracking
waste during treatment.
Where will this waste get dumped
and who will be responsible.
Thank you.
Thank you. I do find it
fascinating that the uh closed
captions were better for that,
uh, common than any other one.
So it seems to capture robotic
and see you next.
Go ahead and Adam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Missy Carrier, a
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico. I'm gonna have to stop
you, um, yeah, I think we're
having some problems on our
side. I thought it was the
previous.
Zoom person, but I don't think
it is.
Committee, do you want to hear
robotic voice and comments or?
OK.
OK, let's see, go ahead. I can't
really hear you very well.
OK. Is that a little better?
Absolutely not, but go ahead.
Oh, OK. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Missy
Currier, a registered lobbyist
with the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association, NOGA's membership
supports water reuse and
recycling and the science that
proves treated, produced water
may be utilized in appropriate
settings after meeting stringent
standards, despite NAOGA
membership support and practice
of freshwater conservation and
increasing reuse and recycling,
we respectfully oppose House
Bill 137 as written.
As allowed by state regulations,
New Mexico producers already
reuse and recycle millions of
barrels of water per day until
appropriate standards are set to
allow additional reuse and
treatment standards, membership
cannot support a tax that is
unavoidable and unnecessary.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Helga
And Jessica.
Yeah,
yeah.
Yeah, I don't, I think we should
just
Go through it, bear with it.
For just a few more
It's a good question, but I, we
can take a break while we fix it
at.
take
They're, they're apparently
working on it right now.
Let's, um, let's take 2 minutes.
To see if they can fix it, and
if they can't, then we'll just
plow through. Don't go anywhere.
Welcome.
