Representative.
Here.
Representative.
Thanks Chad Johnson.
Care.
We've reached a quorum with nine
thank you welcome everyone we
will get straight to business
and start with house during
resolution for Representative
Rehm
madam chair we need what Diana
loose in as a expert.
L. U. C. E. okay.
Madam chair she's already here
great thank you I also see you
in the attendees to so you might
have a.
Two devices on.
Representative okay madam chair
house joint resolution for is to
address are repeat offenders and
the
the turnstile justice that's
happening at at our bail
hearings are there's a couple
things in this legislation one
is when we passed the
constitutional amendment we said
that those hearings will only be
heard in District Court court of
record and so there are
counties in the state that do
not have a District Court within
their county.
So they're having to transport
those persons quite a distance
to go ahead and I have a bond
hearing.
This allows it to return to the
old way where you can have a
magistrate to the hearing as
well.
There's a handout that I sent I
don't know if we can put it up
on the screen I don't know how
to do that but if we can put
that up that would be helpful
for the public so they can see
what is occurring.
Representative I'm we didn't
have directions to prepare it to
be put on the screen but we did
send it to every member okay
when we unfortunately you know
I'd I didn't want to spend a lot
of time with that
When you look at the page one
the biggest problem is the
Arnold pool and you see that
there are a tool there are three
different categories that are
out of.
Sure that New Jersey who develop
their Arnold pool look at when
they talk about bail bonds in
New Mexico we only look at one
category dangerous in us and
that causes a problem because
we're not looking at whether the
defendants going to reappear in
court or has a history of not
appearing what their past
criminal record is and the
seriousness of the current art.
Them on this document I start
giving examples of different
individuals who have.
rained released and re offended
and I think that
the page to that.
Arnold tool recommendation R. O.
R. that's from the second
judicial district then the next.
The next.
The next several pages from
Bernalillo county
sheriff's department showing
these individuals and you're
looking at individuals that have
multiple routes while they're
out and if you follow the arrest
what you're watching is they
tend to increase their violence.
And so the community is being
very re victimized and we must
get this under control.
And so the only way we're going
to get it under control is to
stop these repeat offenders.
I'm gonna have yeah and like I
said I don't want to read all of
this because it would take about
an hour to go ahead and do that
if we could have I miss loose
don't comment.
Welcome is less.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee I thank you for
allowing me to be able to
address you today on the points
that I'm I wanted to make is
that I'm we often want to think
that when people are are
released are which that is the
right now what is happening on
every person that pre trial
detention motion to stockpile
that maybe they're not you know
doing everything you're supposed
to but they're really not
committing the crimes so I've
listed for you I'm in the
handout you have all of the.
Issues coming out of the second
DA's office for Leo County but I
want you to be aware of you in
the holiday cases from the first
Santa Fe are from the fifth
which is my district I and then
the six which is on that so
we're sitting.
The first day I had an
individual that was charged I'm
with armed robbery.
Pre trial detention motion was
elected it was did not.
And the person committed another
armed robbery then on the second
I'm pretrial detention motion
they were help.
They had another case with the
Steve Cummings for they were
charged with aggravated battery
with a deadly weapon pre trial
detention was to not I and any
committed an aggravated battery
and health so members with a
deadly weapon this is our
commission to release for not to
have a weapon and they committed
another valid from with the
economic.
In my district which some of you
may view as conservative you may
I'm I think that I we get all of
our pre trial detention motions
granted we do not I'm we had a
case of any County I'm which is
Carlsbad on it where can you
spend to restart with purple
sexual penetration the pre trial
detention motion was denied.
He committed another criminal
sexual penetration he right
someone else.
On the second case we were then
able on a pre trial detention
motion to happen help.
The six district attorney's
office had Cody McDonald that
was charged with second degree
murder.
We often think that that the
reason the bail reform started
was that we wanted to keep the
most dangerous the most
dangerous Office streets of our
communities so that we're all
set second degree murder in the
pre trial detention motion was
denied.
He committed another crime and
receiving stolen property
firearms once again knows is to
have a farmer in their
conditions of release pending a
charge of murder and the person
is receiving a stolen are on the
second motion they were held.
We hear a lot about pre trial
detention and I served on that
committee I that we worked on
changing the rules and so some
of you may be thinking why are
we wanting to work it and and
and then again to the
constitution I if you were to
changing the rules what
Representative revisions come
explain to you is that we're
still seeing this revolving door
we're still seeing I do have
people being released and I
prepared my pre trial detention
staff for budget hearing we
present before the house finance
committee this afternoon as
district attorneys I'm.
We felt about I think it's a
hundred and forty five forty six
pretrial detention motions and
the calendar year twenty twenty.
We only had about sixty six
percent of those granted.
Sixty six percent.
And most of you should know
we're extremely conservative in
our part of the state.
And so if you think about the
rest of the state and what that
really means would not make New
Mexico safer and I'll stop there
and I'll let stand for
questions.
Madam chair just to reiterate
Bernalillo county DA was of.
They were running about forty
seven percent the tension or
giving them the of the tension
when they've requested it with
that we'll go ahead and stand
for questions I have one person
who may be in the audience of
Paul if if he wanted to make a
comment but it wasn't sure if he
could make the comment if not
I'll go ahead and read his
comment at at before we begin
questions thank you.
Thank you representative before
we go to public comments we will
go ahead and pull of those in
attendance so if we can get the
pull up if you are for or
against house joint resolution
for the poll is now open.
You have ten more seconds to
participate in the ball.
I.
So the pool is closed we have to
in favor and I against.
So let's go ahead and hear from
the opposition if you would like
to speak in opposition of house
joint resolution.
We will go to Camberley cut
Chavis.
You're now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I did submit
through the committee staff to
hand out that contains really
mindful analysis and so I don't
want to repeat everything that's
in it but you should have access
to that it's the it's the public
defender FIR it's our agency FIR
so that should be available to
you
our primary concern here is the
just the lack of necessity for
any changes what has been shown
through AOC data our own
internal data that we've been
tracking and studies that have
been done by other sources and
reported publicly is that the
existing constitutional
amendment is working the there
was so there were some bumps and
learning curves at the beginning
of the week before there were
official court rules we now have
official court rules and
everyone has sort of figured out
the process I'm told that in
some jurisdictions every single
motion to detain that
prosecutors file is granted in
Albuquerque where it's our view
that they are over utilized the
courts still I Dr grant about
fifty percent of them so they're
granting them when necessary
when dangerous agency has been
shown and the recidivism up for
people who are out on who are
not detained who are released is
extremely low so
our data does show that
additionally about one out of
every five cases in the second
judicial district which is the
Albuquerque area of one out of
five of the cases where the
judge does order the defendant
detained at the state's request
they ultimately are unable to
establish probable cause within
a set time limits and so there
is sort of you know of a serious
concern about the presumption of
innocence running it up against
the the opposing considerations
so our recommendation would be
to to oppose this.
House this joint resolution the
constitutional amendment that
was just put in place is doing
its job and everything is
working the way it's supposed to
now we don't see a need for any
change at this time thank you so
much for your time and for
considering this important
issue.
Thank you we will now go to
Rikki Lee Chavez you're now and
it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association we do stand
in opposition to the joint
resolution we appreciate the
sponsors and advocates interest
and desire to make New Mexico a
more safe place for all of its
citizens however as we have
Representative before this
committee and other committees
that consider criminal justice
reform and tell you take real
reform in the system as a whole
it's unlikely that changes to
the process is going to make our
communities safer before before
we get to that place we do have
to look at the system address
things like behavioral and
mental health we have to look at
collateral consequences of
existing legislation mandatory
minimum sentencing habitual
offender enhancement and so I do
think that that would be a
better place to start when
looking to improve the safety of
communities we also recognize be
the data that is shown by the
defense community as miss Chavez
Cook stated and so for those
reasons and the reason that this
constitutional amendment was
just put in place rules were
established recently we would
ask you to oppose this
legislation and allow the
current process to continue
working and improving thank you
for your time madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you we will now go to
those held Campos you are now
and made it.
My name chair members of the
committee my name is Lucy let
Campos I'm a policy associate
apple futures New Mexico a
nonprofit locally here four
million known as young women
United we stand in opposition of
H. J. R. for
though there have been
challenges with the
implementation of bail reform
New Mexico is moving forward at
a fundamental level people
should not be incarcerated for
the inability to pay fines and
fees and people should not be
held unnecessary this
legislation would be a step
backward instead of a step
forward.
We ask you to oppose H. they are
for today thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
I am the catch your now and
muted.
Good morning committee I'm just
speaking as the mother of a son
who unfortunately has been tied
up with the criminal legal
system for.
Quite some time which is why I
have such an interest in what's
going on here I reiterate like
what has been said before and I
also sent an interim committee
meetings when experts testified
about about this and I just have
to agree with what is previously
been set and I I can't see any
reason to change these at this
point thank you.
Thank you.
So those are all the hands we
have four opposition we will now
hear from support.
Her last on talk you are now and
made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Carlos on tax
president of the New Mexico
business coalition.
Our coalition represents
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans our
focus is to make New Mexico a
better place to do business so
that New Mexicans have jobs and
can't provide for their
families.
We strongly support house joint
resolution for.
Because it aligns with one of
our legislative priority policy
positions dealing with public
safety we publish those
positions and each of you
received a copy one of the
elements of our public safety
position is that New Mexico's
criminal code and judicial
system must be strengthened to
stop the catch and release
policies that enable repeat
offenders to continue their
crime.
This proposed amendment would
allow for a judge to determine
who needs to stay at and who
could be safely released.
Well there has been testimony
that the system needed time to
work we've seen how the system
is working and it's not and
these repeat offenders are
getting more violent and
creating more problems.
Which is a problem for all of us
New Mexicans have a right to
feel safe in their communities
and right now we don't this
crime is a big deterrent to
businesses wanting to say and
new businesses coming to our
state we continue to be at the
top of crime ratings nationwide.
We need this amendment in order
to make that change effective we
strongly urge you to say yes to
this house joint resolution for
thank you.
Thank you Mr next we have a
collar with the name zoom user
please identify yourself by your
full name when you're speaking
otherwise you will be mute it.
You are now and it.
Yes.
Okay so it doesn't look like
there any others.
So we will now go back to the
committee Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
Representative so I'm looking
at.
The house joint resolution and
I'm looking at section eighty C.
so my question is a little
complicated so let me see if I
go because it's really one
question but it's about a C. so
the the current constitutional
provision if I'm reading this
right says bail may be denied by
a quarter record pending trial
for defendants charged with a
felony if the prosecuting
authority request a hearing and
crucify clear and convincing
evidence that no we're lease
conditions were reasonably
protect the safety of other
person or the community.
It looks like what you're doing
your men and this what I want to
ask about is you're taking out
quarter record a defendant
charged with a felony the
prosecuting attorney and proof
so I'm reading this right and
this is either our madam chair
or Representative ring for
either you or your expert so
what that means is you gonna
have a court that's not a record
you gonna have a defendant
charged with a misdemeanor.
Prosecuting attorney don't have
to ask for a the court could do
it on so the defendant has no
way to revive what the court is
thinking and the court could
just say a court not a record
just like this guy and I don't
think he's coming back and so
I'm gonna lock them up for a
while.
And the defendant has no way to
at that moment do anything about
it so he sits or she sits in
jail and chill there's an appeal
and then of course because it's
not a record it starts all over
again it's what lawyers call of
the renewable reviews so you
basically get to start all over
again you could be there with a
misdemeanor and traffic ticket
up there is no way to work but
it because there's no proof
requirement a court could just
say I find by clear and
convincing evidence of this
guy's going to run away I'm
gonna lock him up for a few days
and that just strikes me as
being incredibly arbitrary but I
would like to hear no why are we
a limiting all of these
protections that are now in the
constitution and the I guess the
follow up to that would be
aren't you concerned that this
is a unconstitutional violation
of people's rights so I I don't
need to come on so strong first
in the morning I probably had
too much coffee.
We just started that way and
right out of the box and Madam
chair representative right.
Madam chair representative Ely
of many of my expert comment on.
That that you've touched on part
of it basically this follows the
federal system and you are right
a quarter record which is metro
court remote we are removing
which is the old way we used to
do it instead of taking up
District Court time were you in
essence are having a mini trial
they could now have these
hearings over at metro court or
magistrate court and then move
them forward.
The.
The problem we're trying to
address is that New Mexico is
known as of I believe either the
first or the second most violent
state in the nation and it is
these repeat offenders that
continue to go ahead and hurt
our economic development.
Companies are looking at it and
they're going why do we want to
go here our I have madam chair
after we get done with this I
have a couple letters that
people wanted to have of our
Madam and all I can if you'll
allow me I'd like to read those
in but I'd rather have miss
loose now address some of the
technical questions you ask.
Go ahead miss Lewis.
Madam chair I'm Representative
Eli I'm let me start first
reported record I'm for those of
you that that practice
or appear or live outside of and
the area where you have
metropolitan port I'm we all
have magistrates it see these
individuals first and
magistrates right now had no
authority to act I under the
constitution all they could do
was second ditions of release or
they could send a money bonding
you're being told they're not
allowed to send a money bond and
so basically they could see
someone who they know is out on
conditions of release on the
case and District Court is
committed a violent crime I and
they could do nothing except for
the.
So allowing the people who were
seeing them on a rest first
because that's where they go
first to go to magistrate court
I'm again remember most of our
districts renewal system there
outside of Albuquerque we we do
pre land in a grand jury my
districts one of the few that
doesn't have a single injury.
Ever I I tell you one Chavis
occasionally I and so it's a
matter start it's dealing with
these people I answered the want
to right now they don't have
that authority that's why we're
changing it for the record
that's why it's important the
change with felony that's we're
talking about is that you can
have an individual that commits
a battery in a household member
I'm a crime against also member
with or without a weapon I'm
they have committed some other
form of assault on it at some
and stalking misdemeanor sex
crimes all of these can be
committed by someone and the the
judge can be looking at their
their history and they have no
power to do anything I'm that is
the reason why we're taking it
out do we think every miss more
is going to come up for
magistrates our help now fund
because one of the local small
jobs for not going to hold them
the soccer practice your
extremely fair they were letting
them out before on a loan money
bond before we had this original
constitutional amendment so I
can open the floodgates so I I
really think it's giving them
the tools that they don't have
they see someone it's at risk
and right now they can do
nothing.
It's hard to magistrates around
the state it is very upsetting
to them to see that they can do
anything to protect the
community they can see it coming
seeing it happening I'm really
individual was I'm coming from
trespassing meeting with colonel
trespass they were walking into
your home they were going into a
door into your garage innocence
persons in your home and it was
happening every couple of days
just being released again been
released again police say yes
and they have no ability to do
anything my office filed pre
trial detention you're asking
for trouble detention on a whole
bunch of misdemeanors well the
last time they went into
someone's house I'm they still
twenty dollars they had on their
kitchen table and the person
came in and was completely
elderly man terrified to find
this person is kitchen he he
took pop tarts and twenty
dollars and he finally left
after awhile he he are and call
the police if you still is
kitchen we were able to follow
that would be if she had I know
I think over two years seventeen
promote trespass and he just
getting released and work for a
they had a town hall the
community in Hobbs had a town
hall want to know why something
can be done to protect them from
this person this is why we're
talking about removing in
changing their court records
taking out the felony.
We're not taking out proof the
court still has to provide a
clear and convincing I'm and so
how that proof is given whether
it's the corner of the room
motion looking at the events and
making them their own findings
are or whether they do and are
required at the.
Arraignment for first appearance
that we.
That information we are having
prosecutors and public defenders
appear at almost every
arrangement it setting first
appearance in a magistrates
court as the As and public
defenders have staff throughout
the state right now staffing is
always an issue the boys are
shortage I hope that answers
your question.
You're on mute Representative
Eli.
Sorry you're right it's a
mistake Madam chair
representative miss lose
I I appreciate that answer
here's the here's the concern I
have and I would think you'd
share this concern yes we have a
crime problem no question about
and there are ways to address it
but as you were talking about
the violent offenders I'm
talking about everybody else and
as a prosecutor
I know you think this way and I
I think we agree on this I'm not
worried at this moment about the
violent offenders I'm worried
about the person it isn't a
violent offender that has a
constitutional rights violation
I mean everybody has protections
including the violent offender
but I'm particularly worried
about people to get caught up in
the system that haven't done
anything and this takes away at
least the way I'm seeing it all
the protections and I'm would
like Representative ms loose
free to focus for a minute not a
violent offender but on the
person that isn't
our.
I say this that hasn't committed
a crime.
But is been arrested and the
magistrate just like this
person.
I mean that can happen this is a
human system so where's the
protection for that person
because I'm not seeing your
record not a record the reason
they don't have the ability to
put people in jail is because
they're not of record so there's
no there it's as if the hearing
hasn't happened if it goes to
District Court it starts all
over again so the protections
that are there are to make sure
to record so somebody can
examine to see did the judge do
the right thing is there a
record related to this there
won't be at and if you have a
quorum do it by their own
authority without anybody asking
you have taken out to prove the
court would have to say I mean
again this is almost invisible
court says listen I think this
you know a dangerous guy and
he's going to flee and I'm not
let them out where's the
protection for the person that
is not the violent offender
we're supposed action item for
the person gets caught up in
this in isn't that why we have
these protections built in to
protect everybody's
constitutional rights and not
just you know be tough on crime.
I'm concerned that as we go into
this area of
G. we have violent crime so
therefore we're going to violate
people's constitutional rights
that doesn't strike me as the
answer the answer we we we know
what the answers to put more
money and resources into these
communities but I'm worried
about the rest of the public you
know people may be saying we
need to us until one of their
family members gets caught up in
the system and they're not
guilty and they spend time in
jail what happens to those
people because I you take away
their rights if this thing
passes state they're invisible
in the system and that's the
concern I've got it I would
appreciate a response from their
point of view are the public's
point of view so with that madam
chair Representative ring this
loose I'd like to be focused on
that and get an answer to that
question where the protections
for those people.
Madam chair representative Ely
the our committee they ad hoc
committee that met last year and
I was part of it one of the
things they did change is allow
the first judge the metro judge
or the magistrate to detain the
person without a request from
the DA so now they're detaining
them for one or two days while
the DA makes up his decision to
go ahead and file.
So instead of that when they
would have come to the hearing
the judge what is said Hey we're
going to have a hearing today
I'm not going to hold you for a
couple days while everyone
decides what we're going to do
so
that's one portion of it all
have Miss loose addressed many
of the other issues Sir thank
you.
Madam chair and representative.
I think I think maybe I'm
understanding where you're going
to let me see if I can that can
answer it from this perspective.
You're looking at someone that
is only there for a misdemeanor
I think that's the angle that
you were working at are they can
before the magistrate it they've
been arrested I'm.
Then there's a purely been
probable cause on the committed
a crime to be arrested I'm no
we're in any thing that we're
doing I'm at this point we
currently under pre trial
detention do we have to prove
that we can establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that they will
be guilty of that is clear and
convincing I'm so it's a
different standard already and
the the idea that it's not of
records already know the record
those people that are on
misdemeanors or rest or are you
going before magistrates today
that happens every day in the
magistrate court it sometime
today depending on when they do
their arraignments they already
see the minority consecutive
tions of release they can
article cannons have seen you
before I'm you you you fall
under and therefore three full I
and I'm gonna hold you they they
can already do that today that's
already happening they are
sending money bonds even though
they've they've been told by
that spring Ford not to set cash
bond there are cash funds being
set people are being held on
misdemeanors it doesn't have
anything to do with that the the
things that we're talking about
today.
The protections are that once
they are killed in there's the
funding clear convincing and
there still has to be that funny
or clever convincing even buying
magistrate if if removing that
section I'm it will have to be a
written document there are you
do you written conditions of
release written findings now the
magistrates have the best forms
in the state for doing that
process on criminal cases they
reform for everything Sir
everything is documented so we
always joke about it not being
accorded record even though we
have preliminary hearings
Senator a court record
that day everything is
documented on paper and so I
don't think that anybody is
going to be thrown into the jail
and forgotten I think that may
be happening because this
provision I think that could be
happening right now today on
what are concerned about
misdemeanors because those are
those are going through the
system differently on that are
the felony charges that are
getting the scrutiny and the
protections that we have and
the week rules the Supreme Court
will have to establish rules for
this just as they did before and
I would hope that all the work
that's been done I'm that that
this would go along with it the
important thing that this
legislation at is a
consideration of failure to
appear and right now as you all
know it and it from that hard
committee I'm there are two
appears still you know not a
requirement we are one of the
states that do not have that in
our bail reform I and those are
the people that we're talking
about to repeat offenders and
and that is something so
important that I I don't think
that the concern that you have
that magistrature simply gonna
say they don't like somebody or
to say right now this funding at
current convincing that's not
true I mean it be removed if
they did that I'm I mean they
have to be honest and they have
to they have to follow the
protections there are you there
I'm and I think you not just.
Reprise it how many if you
really look at what's really
happening with misdemeanors
right now around the state.
Madam chair and I I'm almost
done in New Representative
solution I'm just reading the
plain language of the proposed
bill and it doesn't say that
they have to lay it out it's
just court finds by clear and
convincing evidence and no
release conditions will be we're
reasonably sure the appearance
of persons require that's all
they would have to say
if if the Supreme Court required
anything in addition to that a
reformer anything else I'm
looking at the constitutional I
would just say I don't know how
they can do that Matt Stricker
talons and say wait a minute
that's all the constitution says
and I find by clear and
convincing evidence and no
release conditions will
reasonably ensure the appearance
of the person I think you're
gonna catch a lot of people are
in an act that you don't intend
to provide and I am surprised
that we're taking out an
additional officer of the court
to come in and make a
representation and that would be
the prosecuting authority that
would be you so I mean that's
additional protection because
frankly the prosecution action I
think as kind of an arm of
justice it's not just about
convicting people to about
making sure that it's done
fairly and I believe that and I
think you do too and taking
prosecutors out of the match is
one less protection ironically
for the defendant so now you
just have one person in
magistrate judge that might have
an animus towards someone that's
not no on and this person's
gonna be put in jail in
violation of their
constitutional rights I don't
see it I I just I appreciate
very much the motives behind
this but I don't like the idea
of addressing crime by going
after people's constitutional
rights and I I'm sorry but I
will not be supporting this
thank you madam chair thank you
representative.
Representative Eli
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
representative remote and of I
think I many of them.
Representative Eli is comments
resonate with me but there have
been so claims that somehow this
particular constitutional
amendment in practice.
Are you are what is responsible
for high crime rate do have data
to back that up has the LFC done
this study about.
Madam chair I'm not sure of the
LFC instead of study of that
maybe Mr Luce has some
information as well well you do
have some anecdotal data and
we can we can anecdotal data is
powerful but it does it's not as
persuasive so I'm wondering
where we are in evaluating
especially with the new rules
went into effect the court
rules.
Madam chair Representative
Chasey I think all you have to
do is read the Albuquerque
journal I mean the DA is taking
of the cases to the federal
court because they are detained
and of the District Court in
Albuquerque is not detaining
these most violent people are I
mean there's some of the comment
today and I'd like to read some
of Amanda the record year I even
the chamber of commerce was
supposed to
provide public comment in
support of it in this cold
contacted me
but I think there's a lot of
data out there and I think that
we in Albuquerque are very
cognisant of
the the crime rate here I mean
nationally were ranked one or
two in the nation that in and of
itself speaks for itself
The.
That the contacts that we have
impartial judges I just can't
even believe that because they
would be removed from the bench
but all have miss woo's comment
on some of the data she may
know.
And madam chair representative
I'm we I as prosecutors through
AODA are to collect our data on
on a pre trial detention now we
have a new model built it wanted
to place on in February where we
can now collected data showing
when we file our what the result
is I'm hello there are released
I'm as for the people that are
not following I'm and not and
something wasn't done I'm our
and most of the districts do not
have the capability tracked it
down to the second a DH probably
the only one that has the system
set up to track that I'm not
aware of that the courts are and
how we tracked that data overall
bed I think when we talk about
and.
Taking the prosecuting authority
out of this.
You have to think about how many
prosecutors we have they're
going to monitor what crimes
happened overnight in before
they were seen by judging eight
AM magistrates to be released I
are we gonna be able to get pre
trial detention motion prepared
and filed none of our offices in
the state have dedicated people
just to do that we can barely
keep our positions filled and so
often times there's no motion
fall and that person is back
option to that's part of what
we're talking about that the
data that you're referring to I
don't know that anyone other
than the second DA may be able
to capture that data may have
the the ability to track and
captured tried colleges yeah hi
eight it would be great if we
all can have that data so that
it can.
I guess what I'm thinking is
right now we have a lot of
Claims that this is responsible
for our high crime rate there
has to be an nexus between this
constitutional amendment the
practice and the
An increase in crime because
otherwise if and I I ate.
The.
Various district attorneys just
keeping track of the percentage
of motions granted isn't going
to link it in my estimation to
the actual crime rates so I just
wanted to see if we have looked
at that yet and I actually think
we should be looking at it the
LFC does excellent analyses.
All the time of.
Our criminal justice system and
one of the things that we do
know and we have evidence of is
that if people are detained.
I'm necessarily their green
cards rated unnecessarily
awaiting trial it can really.
Actually decreased public safety
because they will lose their
jobs.
Their family may have to go on
public assistance and you are
starting to and create a circle
of
trying so I'm I'm also going to
stand in opposition I also think
it's worth evaluating seriously
evaluating to be able to support
or not support that the claims
that are made here today thank
you.
Thank you Representative Chasey
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Our.
Coming from a early rural
district one of my concerns
initially was the court of
record that you touched on.
Madam chair representative and.
And I just like to know if.
We're counties that do not have.
A quarter of record for a judge
in a court of record that
regularly sits in that county.
How has that complicated are the
the issues.
Of.
These
of Bill B. terminations and the
release in the communities that
do not have courts of record.
Madam chair I have miss Lucy
answer that because she's kind
of in those counties thank you.
Madam chair representative.
Right now all of what is
happening in less a.
On the felony of pre trial
detention motion is filed before
the person is seen by the judge
that day it's been that person
that's been hi I'm rested
they're released on your own the
****.
And so there are a lot of people
just simply being released I'm
only if I pre trial detention
motion is elected it's so that
notice is given to the
magistrate then they have to
detain the person the case is
now under the new rules that
would ensure effective November
it being transferred to District
Court for pre trial detention hi
in preliminary hearing and so
we've shifted our lot of work to
the district courts with them
doing all the preliminary
hearings on her right knee
others being released or I into
every day you can log on to the
Google needs to the magistrate
courts around the state I and
you will see that people charged
with us sometimes on crimes they
re released because I had the
prosecutors were not able to get
together a motion and to top on
to get fall to keep them.
And so madam chair we we often
times.
Quarter figures a to the
Albuquerque metro area and you
know that's where our news
coverage from that's what work
gets all the headlines the.
If if that's the case.
Even in the very remote parts of
the state that particular we we
have a number of counties that
do not have a District Court
judge sitting in that county one
a regular basis it sounds like
there's a there's a gap there
are use this.
Would would solve to provide
protections for those
communities as well you're not
certainly one concern I have
The fact of the matter is madam
chair.
We we continue to to tweet this
and that in New Mexico and until
we substantial we see crime
rates decreasing.
And people sense of safety
increasing our we we have failed
Act The making public policy and
you know we can't we can't
legislate morality we can't
legislate the people get along
and not commit to commit these
crimes but we are responsible
for for the public policy that
that moves forward in the state
and we're responsible for the
for the outcomes and the if if
this doesn't pass the.
Of.
And we continue to see
people getting released and
doing some of the things that
the.
Testified to.
If we continue to see.
Crime rates of.
Go up or or certainly not come
down and I think of this past
month Albuquerque's been
particularly bad month for for
the side
It falls in our lap and you know
we have got to.
figure this stuff out if we're
ever going to advancers say
beyond forty ninth or fiftieth
in the nation of of every
category so with that after.
Reshaped to at least looking at
this issue and are always been
concerned about the effect in
your in the small small counties
that don't have a judge them
effective the of the
constitutional amendment that
would past few years ago and and
I I think that this would would
certainly address that that
issue and I would support thank
you.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Is there anyone else.
Madam chair I move we table.
We have a tabling motion by
Representative Eli and a second
by Representative Chasey.
We will call the roll on that
tabling motion.
Yes to table.
Representative Eli yes the
table.
Representative Gallegos Munoz to
table.
Representative my part.
Noted table the last
representative Cortes yes to
table.
Representative.
Representative some not.
Noted table and I'd like to
explain on both.
Vice chair Johnson.
Yes the table.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative three in
the negative.
And we can go to Representative
Zamora to explain spoke.
Thank you madam chair this this.
Resolution is about public
safety.
And I can't believe that some of
the experts in the committee
didn't step up to the plate that
understand the law well and ask
for some kind of a in men's to
where we can work on this and
and look at public safety in the
state in New Mexico thank you.
Chair.
Representative Rehm yeah I I'm
sorry I tried to say and I want
to make your closing statement
or explain more about
I think the data is real clear I
mean you look at Albuquerque in
January we had fourteen murders
I mean that tied a previous
record of workers in a month our
I had this one individual but I
wanted to read his email
if he wasn't able to comment and
I if I could I'd like to read it
at this point.
Very briefly Representative Rehm
yes.
A son Zachary was murdered by
two felons one was on probation
the other was released as he was
a minor I would like you to note
that between the two felons they
have committed five murders and
are still running the streets of
Albuquerque even now it's I
speak the judge has continued to
release them the travesty of
justice as happened as they
continue to be released whatever
their charge and that's from
all.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative I do appreciate
the intent that you're trying to
achieve I just I'm concerned
with some of the issues that
were brought up especially with
folks being charged without
proving guilty especially during
this pandemic so with that we
will the tabling Maischak motion
has passed it by a vote of six
to table and three against
tabling so that H. J. for HA
resolution house joint
resolution for excuse me has
been table thank you
representative.
Next we will go to a house bill
one fifty eight.
And we're going to get
Representative for Hart and
McLean into the panelists right
now.
Good morning Representative
Fajardo.
Morning madam chair how are you
doing.
Doing well thank you do you know
it Representative McQueen is
going to be joining or do you
have any witnesses or experts
that we need to move of our I'm
not sure what you might be in
the committee right now that he
is that fine.
I can go ahead and president so
we don't have any expert
witnesses today okay great.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Committee I think this is my
first time presenting a bill in
this manner so please be patient
with may have been a committee
but never presented gap so I
want to apologize to everybody
for the length of this bill I am
so sorry it is one page.
I'm but it's very simple so what
we are trying to do is when we
have a task force that is
created by the legislature what
we're asking is that that task
force be subject to the open
meetings act and that this bill
came about during the last sixty
day session we created it was
unanimously
passed by the house and the
Senate task force house joint
memorial ten and the committee
was convened
between and the public and and
stakeholders.
In the past course started and
when it did I went to go visit
to get an update on how the task
force was going and I was
prevented even as a legislator
to somebody who carried the bill
carried the memorial from being
a part of the task force there
are other public members who
wanted to observe to see how the
task force was going and they
were not permitted to observe as
well and so that's basically
where this bill is coming from
we believe that if something is
accepted by the state
legislature we mean what we say
and they should be subject to
the open meetings act everything
that we do is is online every
bill that we do is outline every
vote that we do it is online you
have city councils and and
school boards across cross our
state that are subject to this
and we're just asking that any
other Task Force that is created
by the legislature also be
subject and with that I stand
for questions.
Representative.
And will will ever give you for
the length of that bell.
Right now let's go to the
attendees and we will open the
call for those in favor or
against house bill one fifty
eight.
So the call is now open.
And you have ten more seconds if
you would like to vote.
And the pro is now closed.
We have.
I work for and zero against.
So now we will go to public
comment if you would like to
speak in opposition of health
bill one fifty eight.
Please raise your hand.
Anyone in opposition okay.
Anyone that would like to speak
in support of house bill one
fifty eight please raise your
hand.
Melanie majors you are now and
made it.
Good morning this.
Mr chair good morning members of
the committee appreciate your
allowing us to speak today my
name is Melanie majors I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico location for open
government the open meetings act
was passed in nineteen seventy
eight to ensure that government
operations let every level of
government are transparent.
The public and promote civic
engagement committees committee
created by the legislature and
other bodies to discuss their
business and open meetings if
the originating public bodies
would have to discuss those
issues in public to conclude
otherwise whatever level of
public body to circumvent the
requirements of the open
meetings act merely by assigning
to an advisory body those
questions up its deliberations
of the public's business page
six seeks to shield from proper
public scrutiny the open
meetings laws designed to shine
light on deliberation and
discussion not just on final
decisions we believe that every
step in the decision making
process including the decision
itself is a necessary
preliminary formal action it
follows that each constitutes an
official act an indispensable
requisite to formal action with
the meaning of the act there is
no government by delegation
exception to the open meetings
act and a public board or
commission may not avoid
compliance with law by Dick
delegating it sponsor bility
another group the fact that the
border commission is advisory
possessing only the authority to
make recommendations to the
public agency should not remove
it from the scope of government
and open meetings act we believe
this bill should pass to make
that make sure the law is quite
clear ad hoc advisory board even
if the power is limited to
making recommendations to the
public agency and even if the
possesses no authority to bind
the agency in any way should be
subject to the open meetings act
governmental bodies often use
advisory committees or task
force to provide them with the
device or input before making
decisions on complex matters we
know that making sausages messy
we need to see the mess we need
to see government in action and
we need this bill thank you very
much.
We will next go to.
Jason Espinoza your now
admitted.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Jason
Espinoza on the registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
child first network and we stand
in strong support of this
legislation and thank the
bipartisan group of sponsors for
bringing this forward
You know these legislative task
forces are really about you know
stakeholder engagements and
really discussions and some
really complex issues to find
solutions on how the state can
report we just really believe
that transparency and
accountability to allow the
public to observe is really
important and it just on a
personal now I've been involved
in task force legislative task
forces in the past and I do
believe that one of the reasons
I was involved with the Economic
Development Department I did
their best to comply with the
opens meetings act I'm so I
think really this just sets the
standard so that each agency
knows what they need to do I and
their standardization across the
task force appreciate your time
thank you.
Those are all the folks that we
have for public comment so we
will go to the committee.
And we have Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair the the one question
that I have is yeah probably my
question arises out of my lack
of gender in this body but.
Do we ever create task force or
other interim committees if you
will that deal with particularly
sensitive.
Information that should not be.
Disclosed to the public.
It is not a question is so
that's what I did so that the
quiet so we actually did a CYFD
task force and so when you
dealing with CYFD yes there is
absolutely sensitive information
involved to see what CYFD keep
in mind that when you're dealing
with that that information
that's not supposed to be
disclosed publicly anyway so
when you when your subject them
the open meetings that you are.
Following procedures when it
comes to meetings and things
like that I can't imagine a task
force that would.
In all dealing with those issues
that are
You know that that are sensitive
like that and I would be very
concerned if you had a task
force to disclose that
information
so I that's a question I really
can't answer may madam chair and
representative.
I'm just wondering over the.
You know there's members here
who have served a lot longer
than I.
If we have created task force
that would.
Be dealing with issues data our
information or need to bring on.
People with particular expertise
that would not to participate
yes the information they're
providing would be made public
whether it be confidential or
proprietary war
you know as you indicated for
children youth and families may
be very.
Sensitive information on on
individuals or or whatever that
Should should not be made public
and and if that's the case I was
wondering if there should be an
exception.
I did in this legislation to
deal with any anticipated
efforts in that regard.
Madam chair representative I
believe the open meetings act
takes care of that already it's
within the act so that if you do
have a city councilor Kurt
County commission at that
dealing with human resource
matters already or things like
that they do have the ability to
go into executive session to the
public does not have access to
that so that is already with in
the open to meetings act to
allow those things to.
To not go public and so it's
already been considered and
thought of within the act
itself.
Madam chair representative
I served on the county
commission prior to being
elected to the house and.
There were a number of matters
that come before county
commissions that we purposely
did not get engaged in because
our involvement would have
triggered the open meetings act
and the it to tease with whom we
were dealing or wanting to DO SO
would not have dealt if it were
an issue that was subject to the
open meetings act and usually
those involved matters of
economic development and issues
of of their proprietary.
Data and information that they
did not want to log released and
so as a as a county we have to
figure out ways to accomplish
those things without triggering
the open meetings act and you
can you do that by limiting
representation on those boards
or what have you say you drive
director your performed and
things like that
I'm just wondering if if we
should of you know I have
something here that recognizes
that there could be an occasion
where
The legislature wants to have a
task force but would not be able
to move very far with that task
force yes.
We.
Business entity and yeah and so
that comes to mind in your
community would be faced it is a
Facebook we're looking at New
Mexico and we have a task force
to maybe do that maybe Facebook
wouldn't want to have those
meetings public even though of
we would like to have a task
force that would maybe court
them to your account to your
district and and so I'm just I'm
just trying to anticipate that
there should be some exceptions
built in here
I realize the open meetings act
does provide some mechanisms to
go into executive session and
this and that but I'm not sure
they apply.
Wrongly is is maybe what we may
need that's my only comment the
manager Representative.
Representative Robert.
Committee members.
madam chair I think on the
motions person today.
Pass I second the motion.
Thank you we have a motion by
Representative Eli and a second
by Representative Rehm excuse me
and Kelly before we take that
motion I was just curious.
In looking over
What the Attorney General said.
To include the term public body
I don't have you seen this
within the definition to include
a task force or a similar
advisory body or study group
created at the request of the
house or Senate memorial or
Joint Memorial to be included in
the term public body did you
look at that by any chance or.
How did you go about bringing
coming up with the language for
the bill.
Not.
it's it's in the FIR is that
correct.
it should be but we can send
that to you and you can take a
look at it but overall I agree
in the promise.
One of the things that we did
madam chair when when discussing
that I'm looking at now I'm task
force or simply by one of the
things that we didn't want to do
and I'm I'm definitely available
to to that language is we didn't
want to
have this we want to keep it to
to the legislature and so we
didn't want to over exert are
already too much we do and if
you notice there's no language
in there regarding the governor
credited Task Force.
I'm just me that's something
that we don't want to consider
later but we wanted to kind of
keep going with a little bit
narrow but I wasn't aware of
that but it's something we can
definitely look at before it
goes to the next committee and
let me see what going to Max
I'm.
It's so hard to look at these
things on.
It's just going to your
committee is that correct.
Going next to house Judiciary.
Okay.
So.
You have a chance to look at it
before then thank you how many
members do I have your in house
Judiciary.
Thanks.
So I'm like wow this.
Thank you I has more to read.
The motion right now.
We have a motion for the past
we can take the roll on that
please.
Thank you madam chair
representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative night yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Mr Johnson.
Yes madam chair.
Yes.
I'm sure nine NM formative do
you have a unanimous do pass on
house bill one fifty eight good
luck and Judiciary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members thank you
representative.
So next we have a house bill one
thirty nine representatives
neighbor to and Eli.
Thank you madam chair our
Representative Eli do you want
me to go first yes I I I I don't
care I really don't thank you
madam chair.
Matt madam chair house bill one
thirty nine is a bill that maybe
are precluded in both of our
special session last year
the we thought that that the
issue that has impacted every
New Mexico and for the last ten
months without any.
Legislative real involvement has
been a concern in the obviously
since since you're so I bring
forth
this bill I've been fortunate to
be able to work with
Representative rely on on this
and we have changed our quite a
bit from what we saw on the
bills that I introduced in the
special session services.
The collaborative work of the
two of us.
You know sensitive I can just
provide a brief overview of the
bill
what this does is.
When the governor our.
Issues emergency order.
Except for emergency orders
arising under article four
section two of the constitution
which is basically declaring
martial law that.
With respect to all other
emergencies.
The.
Emergency workers can remain in
effect for up to ninety days.
If the executive wishes to
extend the work beyond ninety
days it's incumbent upon the
executive to call the
legislative branch of government
into special session.
And under the terms of this bill
the legislative branch is
required to.
Taking action
One way or the other.
Allow it don't allow our work or
modify it and if they if the
legislative branch of government
does not take action and then
the governor can continue to
stand that'll work for periods
of time of sixty days.
In then every sixty days
thereafter of the legislative
branch gets called back into
session to.
Have the potential to to deal
with the public policy aspects
in the financial aspects of the
emergency Representative in in
force we've also made it very
clear that the governor can only
declare one emergency for rent
we saw early on that
There were some statements so we
declared a new emergency
therefore we get access to new
sums of money to deal with that
new emergency this makes it
clear you get one of them and
then it triggers all these are
are.
Do you grants time periods as
well as our monetary conditions
so.
In my opinion which is been long
held.
When we have emergencies that
are not that common variety
three day fire you know weeklong
flood what have you that the
executive needs are certainly
wide range of our our to forty
to deal with those things with
emergencies go beyond a a fairly
short period of time I believe
strongly that we as a
legislative branch of government
have a constitutional role to
play in crafting public policy
and the M..
Appropriating appropriate sums
of money to deal with those
emergencies certainly the
legislature is the only body
that has the power of the
treasury the power to
appropriate money
in and so we need to make it
clear.
That we as a legislative branch
We obviously have delegated a
lot of that power to the
executive and we've we've seen
the executive has has utilize
our there's nothing here that is
mapped to to be critical.
It's only my statement that we
as a legislative branch need to
be involved in the public policy
aspects in the financial aspects
of these extended emergencies
and the our this pandemic has
borne out the fact that
legislative branch does not have
really a role to play in the
crafting of public policy and
other than the general our
appropriation bills that we've
seen we've not had any specific
bills dealing with specific
appropriations.
For this this matter and so this
is really a claw back if you
will some delegated power that
was are are granted to the
executive in the existing
statutes.
Our fires are the procedures
secretary deprivations of must
be.
Utilized in having these
extended protracted emergencies
your answer with that I'll turn
it over to the cosponsor for for
any comments and then will be
stand for questions.
Madam chair representative
number thank you so I I'm you
know I'm I'm actually that is
the fun part of being a
legislator is is every year it
seems like Representative Nibert
I work on kind of one built and
so or one subject and it's
usually a major one and in this
case we found kind of common
ground
I I want to be clear and all
just keep saying this that I am
not in any way critical of the
governor and what she's doing
with respect to public health
in our hospitals are full I come
from Arizona originally and they
ignored it at their peril and my
dad got comment is is why god
COVID the fact is is that there
are a at one point Phoenix was
the worst place in the world are
perhaps for comment are we
fortunately have not had that
problem here we certainly had
problems but not like
surrounding states the
governor's done an excellent job
where we agree.
Is it has nothing to do with
whether the governor's done an
excellent job or not it has to
do with the legislature should
have a roll and we have three
branches of government and on a
principal basis we checked
ourselves out that is the
governor's fault it's our fault
when we pass this emergency
powers legislation back in the
early part of this century out
two thousand three two thousand
four
we took ourselves out completely
and so
that that's where Representative
Nighbor tonight C. I. di I I
will say this I just to alert
committee members as to what's
happening there are a number of
different they're actually as I
think about it now there are
four pieces of legislation are
moving their way through the
legislature one is this bill on
then there is a very similar
measure that both Representative
Nibert I propose which is on H.
J. R. six which is a proposed
constitutional amendment they'll
talk about in a minute and then
there are competing finance
bills one in the Senate and one
that you're going to hear later
today
so you're saying I I I won't
talk about the finance bill yeah
because that's coming up later
today but Representative numbers
right we were the ones
appropriate we should have some
measure of control over what's
happening in we've given up the
control of the governor's fault
that's our full and so we need
to kind of and I I agree with
the term claw back in this
situation I think that's the
actor we've got a clawback our
power when I told my colleagues
on my side of the aisle is black
regardless of who the governor
is a Democrat or Republican our
system works better with all
three branches of government are
involved in an issue so the one
thing that I want to explore
with you that I would add to
what Representative Nibert said
is the difference between H. J.
R. six and this bill and the
reason I want to alert you to
that is because.
What Representative Fajardo
alluded to a minute ago that
we're kind of little Judiciary
the R. both H. J. R. six and
this bill if they get past our
initial committees will end up
and House Judiciary and they are
very similar except for two
things one of the vote that
would rid the require so in the
bill
in order to suspend on then or
even if we decided to approve of
what the governor's doing
although that's not required
it's a majority vote in the bill
the reason it's a majority vote
is is because constitutionally
we cannot bind future
legislators by anything other
than a major about which makes
sense and we can't say what we
like this so what we're required
ninety percent for a future
legislature to say that we were
wrong we can't do that it's
always got to be a major so in
order to increase the vote count
we have to do it by
constitutional amendment so
everything that Representative
Nighbor described is true both
of the bill and the house joint
resolution except for the fact
that the house joint resolution
a constitutional amendment it
could increase the vote count
and we've increased it in the
constitutional limit to three
fifths which not coincidentally
is the exact percentage required
to call us back into
extraordinary session so the
idea of being you know from my
point of view you would need a
bipartisan group of legislators
in both chambers to say that the
governor's done something wrong
or overstepped his for forty odd
as opposed to just a simple
majority I don't want it to be a
partisan measure but I also
think that the discussion is in
many members as we can get at
before it hits the floor and I
suspect one of the other will
hit the floor I'd like as many
members to touch this is
possible and I I would like to
Judiciary to see both of these
because I think that discussion
would be helpful.
I I preferred the house joint
resolution but I am asking the
committee for it to pass and the
other reason that I think a
constitutional amendment is
purple but I'll give you
Representative Nibert quick
argument is is that it's locked
in stone it's it's not something
the future legislature could say
well we're just gonna change it
back because we control
everything now so we're going to
we're going to get rid of that
law we put it hard wired in the
constitution but Representative
diver would surely say listen
this pandemic going on right now
and we want to dress it right
now and that is a legitimate
point of you
but on the finance bills really
separate and I I'm I know I'm
kind of ramble little bit but I
appreciate madam chair you're
letting me talk and and I have I
think we will stand for
questions thank you.
Representative.
Where we take public comments we
will do the poll for house bill
one fifty nine if you are for or
against and your an attendee you
now have the opportunity to
vote.
Madam chair that was one thirty
nine.
Okay one thirty nine house bill
one thirty nine is now up.
So the vote now and and we have
three in favor and zero against.
That's take comments from anyone
that would like to speak in
opposition of House Bill.
One thirty nine correct
Representative never.
Yes.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition okay
seeing then is there anyone that
would like to speak and support.
We have Frank.
However to you oops he's gone.
Brenda boatman.
You are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on brain
development a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico we support
house bill one thirty nine and
appreciate the bipartisan effort
to bring the legislature back
into the decision making process
regarding emergencies we would
like to see the ninety day time
frame restricted to thirty days
or even less but other than that
we support this this legislation
and we hope that you will move
it forward and yes thank you.
We now have Frank Hagrid Mexico
I believe.
You are now and it hi madam
chair members the committee and
we can hear me I'm if you could
speak a little louder that would
be helpful
hi my name is Frank Parker co I
know it's a tricky name
I'm with the Rio Grande
foundation and we stand in
strong support of this bill I
just want to echo some things
that are Representative Nighbor
and Eli have said that I think
this this is a question goes far
beyond just our current pandemic
and whether or not the governor
has been handling it correctly I
think that's a completely
separate issue I think this
really addresses an issue that
goes for right back to the
nature of American federalism in
the checks and balances that are
built into our system and I
think this bill helps return
some of the proper power to the
legislative the legislative body
that they should have and we
agree that it be possible to see
it the ninety days restricted
the further but
one where the other we are in
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you seeing no other hands
that we will go to the committee
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative night
Representative Eli.
So.
Share this with you would
Representative Eli and I just I
haven't spoken Representative
Nibert about it.
But I really don't think we have
the legislative.
Structure.
To accomplish what we need to do
our constitution in the state
has been very weak.
We are a citizen legislature.
We rarely meet.
Nobody gets paid except for per
diem.
And frankly.
How we deal.
Competently.
With our story to appropriate in
this kind of a pandemic and I
think the right way to address
it is with a constitutional
amendment.
As well as legislation where we
become.
And it will branch of government
instead of us subsidiary.
So I think that is a huge issue
I mean I don't know really what
we would have done otherwise as
as Representative Eli said I
think the governor has done a
good job on I endorse that also.
And the mechanisms currently
available to us to call
ourselves into special session
are
It cumbersome.
In my and I have been around a
long time that I think we have
done it twice in my twenty two
years.
once was to do a veto override
during the
The Johnson administration and
everybody voted to override the
particular video when we came
into the special session.
And
So.
So there's that issue that we.
We may have the function and I
think we probably do have that
function we just don't have the
structure in the field of
biology looks at it organization
in terms of structure and
function and what I I told
Representative realize we've got
that we've got the function we
don't have a structure.
And we absolutely need to have
that to weigh in properly in
these kinds of emergencies at
first I was also a little
concerned too because House Bill
one.
Thirty nine is that.
What thirty nine was sent to
state government and judiciary
and not to the health committee
because the law that it seeks to
Act was passed at.
To set up procedures in a public
health emergency which is
interesting it was Senator
Feldman who was the chair of the
Senate Public Affairs Committee
who cosponsored that with our
representative John Hume for
Representative John Heaton of
crosspad who is a pharmacist and
they traveled all over the state
and had hearings.
Before they they
put forth a bill and they had a
very good public response to the
current law and I spoke with
representative Armstrong Mr
chair of our health committee
and she said because this is
directed more at a mechanism to
call the legislature and she
thought it was.
Reasonable not to have a hearing
in health
so I'll concede that point.
But it it really worries me
because we we.
Although we should have this we
don't have the
Authority we should we
That at the legislative branch
should have at its core and and
that's just wrong.
And I know there are views about
whether we should be a
professional legislature I think
we should at least be semi
professional and
Have a mechanism in place so
that we can actually help.
The executive and the judiciary
was struggling to during this
pandemic.
I know because
I we get orders because I have
Every single judicial district
was under strict orders about
how to carry things out in the
in the
In the courthouses and then in
the chair in the court rooms and
and what kind of virtual
hearings could be held so all
three branches of government
really do.
Have an important role in this
kind of the situation and we
can't simply talk about well the
executive did this and left the
legislature out because we we
should not we should play a much
stronger role all the time.
So with that let me just ask
good questions now but I it is
with my soapbox.
What the bill seems to
contemplate is that the.
Call
has to convene this special
session no later than the
ninetieth day after the initial
declaration of the state of
emergency.
So how much lead time is
required of the executive in
deciding that this needs to come
together because I worry.
When we suddenly have this
resurgence at the end of October
and early November in me just
how do we just basically had to
say stop hope everything on hold
and then we did get called in
respectful session as fast as
possible but it still was two
and a half weeks three weeks.
But it seems like that deadline
of the ninety days has to be met
here and I I worry about the
actual mechanics.
the whole situation so if the
Sanchez would like to address.
All of my concerns.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam chair of the mechanism
in the bill is that the
executive has.
Pretty broad range of forty two
to bring us and the special
session the the mechanism here
is that the water can't be
extended beyond ninety days
unless you called us in the
special session and we convene
water before that ninety if that
if if I recall correctly so.
Hopefully the executive would
recognize you know weeks out the
the issue is one that needs
extend beyond the ninety days.
That the legislature needs being
engaged and would.
Provide appropriate notice to
the legislative branch to come
into that special session before
that ninety day a lapses.
I hope that answers your
question.
Madam chair representative limit
let me and to the first point
with respect to
a more professional legislature
I totally agree with that
I have no conflict saying that
the legislature should be paid
and that we should have staff
but only their solution I I
think that we have to move in it
we have to move in concert with
because just because we're right
now not paid and don't have
staff we should be giving away
our four
I think both of those are coming
on us and so I don't think
they're mutually exclusive I
think they work together and I
in fact Representative McQueen
actually reached out to me to
see if there was some kind of
mechanism to start getting to
the voters the idea of getting
legislature
to be on a more professional
footing I haven't seen that I
don't know if there is one with
the five bill limit I couldn't
do civil so I'm a little bit not
restricted in terms of what I
can do but I don't disagree
Madam chair madam chair with
that assessment I just don't
think that because we don't have
a professional staff we say okay
we're going to give up our
authority to the governor that
that's the concern I've got I
don't think we can do that thank
you madam chair.
What I'm concerned about is the
actual madam chair
Representative neighbor about
the ninety date no later than
this this is
Page two it's subsection the
eight lines eight through
fourteen that
Okay.
It's
It's great that the.
Legislature has to convene no
later than the ninetieth day and
that's on same page but lines
five six and seven.
What I worry about is.
Is this scenario that we had in
October November where suddenly.
You know we were starting to
open up and.
What that does because I I I
really don't want to
We have become one ended up in
Los Angeles where you know
California done really well
early on and then they were
really lightning out and then
they got their their Serge I
just would not want that and I I
I just.
I I would feel much more
comfortable supporting this if
we had.
If we were actually making the
case to the public at the same
time that if you want us to be
able to do this which we really
should be able to do this is our
job we are the appropriating
authority we are the budget we
have the budget to the executive
and
I would just feel so much better
about.
Exerting authority if we
actually held.
In in structure.
So with that I will just yield
the floor.
Representative Chasey
Representative bagels.
Thank you madam chair and
You know I I just wanted to see
I don't know that I necessarily
have a question I just wanted to
also agree with chairwoman KCA I
think that we do need to have
that structure so we can
effectively govern.
I also believe you know I sit on
the Legislative Council I know
some people on this committee do
as well and I I think that we
had many circular meetings
because we didn't have a passing
gauge and I think that this bill
gives us a path and I eight I
really
You know it like you I think it
was already sent is this is no
criticism to that to the
governor but I also believe that
we have a responsibility to our
constituents to be part of the
some of that decision making
process and for us to not have
that path to engage
it left us out.
And when we when we are
responsible for appropriations
and then we are also responsible
to see how that money was spent
and I know that was a big sore
issue we know people were
wanting to know how things were
spent but once again not a
criticism but we are responsible
and so so to be responsible and
not have the
Governing authority to to exert
some of that
it is in a in a position that
maybe our hands are tied and so
this is been an experience that
you know we've never experienced
before and
so we've got to learn from it
and and make sure that we don't
find ourselves in this position
again so we we need to make
those additional changes in my
opinion thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative I don't
see anyone's.
Hand of the so I'm just going to
make a couple of comments
because I I agree with a lot of
what's been said
especially that this how should
have gone to the health
committee as well I thank you
even in our analysis we have
that you know this could hinder
some of the things that the
department of health was trying
to do and I'm of the I'm the
attorney for one of the Pablo's
so as a tribal government we
were also dealing with COVID and
when you have the federal
government said in hard and fast
deadline we were scrambling to
meet those deadlines because we
could potentially lose out on
funding and other resources so
that's my concern especially as
a part time legislature were all
volunteers.
When we come into session or
when we come into special
session we're also scrambling to
get our staff in place.
And it has become incredibly
hard to function this way.
So I just wanted to.
President my opinion especially
working as a center for a tribal
government and really trying to
get everything to the budget
that they needed I remember us
on the weekend
on a Saturday trying to get them
everything they needed to meet
deadlines for funding.
So I would not want to.
Tie the hands of our department
of health or any other state
entities that are trying to meet
deadlines.
And with that what is the will
of the committee.
Madam chair I move to do past.
We have a motion for the past by
Representative Rehm.
Also if you want.
And we have a second by
Representative Nibert.
Okay we can take that to a
motion.
Representative Chasey.
This.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative also yes.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative.
That's.
Representative.
Yes.
Mr Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
No.
Madam chair with that we have
eight in the affirmative one in
the negative.
Thank you Representative
neighbors and
I never cast a vote.
I passed.
Oh sorry Representative Chasey.
So I'm.
Did you wanted to record it down
madam chair G. one of.
Yeah let's go ahead and take
care of and then we can call the
call about okay I'm I'm gonna
vote no and it I already
explained why but that doesn't
necessarily mean forever.
Madam chair with that there are
seven in the affirmative to in
the negative.
Thank you and representatives to
have a due pass by seven in the
affirmative into in the
negative.
Thank you madam chair.
And next we have the house bill
one fifty nine we will get to
representatives Pettigrew and
Scott into the panelists mode.
Welcome Representative
Pettigrew.
Good morning madam chair and
committee thank you very much we
also.
We also have a expert witness
Jason Espinoza that should be in
the gallery as well.
Right we can get him moved over
to panelists mode and we don't
see Representative Scott he's
not joining today
he may be in another community
I think mistrust with us and I
can handle it.
Please proceed and just to start
off with a bit of level levity
with the with the way the last
two bills have gone can we just
take an average and go forward
and and will take a H. one but
now.
Nice try well you know it's
that's that's worth giving it a
go.
Thank you very much madam chair
this will be my first
presentation or
for House Bills so hopefully
hopefully you guys go easy on
me.
With that being said.
I'll start off and then I'll
turn it over to.
The expert witness.
Twenty twenty was a year of hard
lessons for New Mexico.
New Mexico as a whole had
learned how to adapt in ways
that we've never predicted.
No The New Mexico was left
unaffected from the youngest to
the oldest our lives changed.
Their personal lives change.
So was the way the business was
done in our state.
Our businesses had to adapt.
This bill addresses commerce in
New Mexico to be specific the
lifeblood of New Mexico our
economy.
That's what the pandemic this
bill is a nonpartisan bill.
the pandemic didn't care about
who you are.
And this bill doesn't care about
who are chief chief executive of
this bill is is not about any
one person it's about any chief
executive actions going forward.
Still doesn't have a sunset on
it.
Specifically because it doesn't
focus on a particular
administration.
Are the public health emergency
rule making.
Rural issues were regular
activity.
In this current setting of
unquantifiable in certain
uncertainties with frequent
rulemaking.
Need to be curtailed for the
businesses can focus instead
viable.
Therefore I propose to an act of
a legislation the.
Would only allow rulemaking
supersede under an executive
order.
That outlines the impact of that
that's propose rules to the
public house bill one fifty nine
states that the governor's
executive order shows up for how
the proposed rules.
Propose rule changes the impact
the price.
Impact the prices of goods and
services for New Mexico
consumers the increase or
decrease the cost of business
operations on impacted
industries impact on the overall
regulated regulatory climate in
the state this is looking to
grow.
Or establish in or relocate to
our state.
And to look at are the least
restrictive means to achieve the
intended public health and
safety objectives of the
proposed rules.
This is about transparency we
believe that.
It is important and necessary
and that important and necessary
tasks to help the public
understand.
Both effective and decision
making process rulemakings
during a public health
emergency.
We do not believe that this
disclosure requirement would
create additional.
And unnecessary tasks as stated
in the FIR.
Because the governor's and
powered.
By Sarah bear with the to
declare a public health
emergency it is unlikely that an
executive agency would issue
rules for regulations responding
to the emergency without the
governor's authorization.
Given the executive agency would
most likely already be
authorizing and working closely
with these individual agencies
the only requirement is the
addition of public transparency
regarding how the proposed rules
impact business.
Consumer goods.
We believe the.
This would lastly we do not
believe that this would be a
burden.
In the in the FIR.
The New Mexico environment
department stated that staff
will need to be pro will need to
prepare additional paperwork
identifying and addressing
factors listed in H. B. one
fifty nine.
To be honest madam chair.
I would have to I would have I
would have assumed.
That the individual agencies in
the rulemaking during the
pandemic we're already
considering these impacts to
businesses the prices of goods
and the overall regulatory
environment for from getting
these rules are given the
statement in the FIR it seems I
have not and that is why the
passage of HB one fifteen on
some forty.
With that madam chair all I'll
turn it over to.
Jason Espinoza.
Thank you Jason.
Madam chair members of the
committee a case has been as a
registered lobbyists and state
director with the national
federation of independent
business I'm and thank
Representative Pettigrew
Scott and others for bringing
this forward really what this
bill is about is about
transparency I'm and and
understanding and making sure
that the impacts of regulations
that are promulgated during the
public health order take into
consideration
the effect on consumer goods the
impact on the regulatory
environment and the cost of
doing business here in New
Mexico and this is great
concerned NFIB since last March
and if ideas been conducting
regular COVID nineteen surveys
of its members to assess the
impact of the public health
crisis on small business
operations.
One of the most concerning
findings is that one in for
small business owners report
that they will have to
permanently closed their doors
in the next six months of
current economic conditions do
not improve as the
representative said small
business is the backbone of our
economy and so when things that
we just want to make sure that
is taken into consideration
during the public health order
is that rules are promulgated
really do have a review of the
impact on goods to consumers to
businesses and the regulatory
environments moving forward so
that businesses can really focus
on stand by apple I keep in
their employees employed of
important health pandemic thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
And so we will go ahead and go
to the audience.
To conduct a poll for those in
support or opposition of health
bill one fifty nine.
The call is now open.
The poll will close in ten
seconds.
Hey the poll is now closed we
have three attendees in favor
and zero against so let's go to
the audience again and if anyone
would like to speak and support
please raise your hand.
Brenda boatman you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee brain development
registered lobbyists for
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico we support this bill and
I just like to reiterate
something that Jason Espinoza
said about transparency we
believe that the government that
is for the people should be
transparent and accountable to
the people so we like to ask you
to vote yes on this legislation
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
I don't see any other hands does
anyone want to speak in
opposition.
Okay committee members.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair I think this is very
similar to the last bill that we
just heard and I'm wondering if
we shouldn't send this bill up
to do Judiciary and start to
merry the similar bills together
that would be my comment in you
know and I would make a motion
as to that.
At the appropriate time thank
you.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Pettigrew.
I'm wondering about the
rulemaking process and
Is it not required now that when
a new role as complicated
there's public comment public
comment period.
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative can you repeat
your question.
I'm wondering if there is not a
public comment period now
required when that there's a new
rule promulgated.
Madam chair Mister and I went
over to my experts okay.
Madam chair
manager Tracy as well under the
under the state rules act the
traditional process does require
public comment in a public
hearing however a lot during the
public health emergency since
they do require sort of swifter
action emergency rules can be
implemented in those do not
require the public process.
And so what you're proposing to
do is that.
Restricted agency from probably
getting a new role unless the
governor president.
Yes madam chair.
And.
Then the governor's office also
required to issue an executive
order setting forth the
criteria on.
Is subsection B..
How will it impact prices how
will increase or decrease the
cost of business operations.
Regulatory climate in least
restrictive meetings the
governor must also
Issue an executive order
authorizing the role in stated
all of those things.
Thank you.
Madam chair
Representative that that's
exactly what we're doing the the
intent here.
is this to make sure the as is
any public health order goes
through any.
That we acknowledge what's
happening to our state with
respect to business and industry
and and how that impacts us in
yes I and you know you go
through many of the different
agency reports and it talks
about the need for
The potential need for
additional time to finalize the
the the regulations the whole
the whole thought process behind
this is to make sure that those
thoughts are put into place and
that every aspect.
Is is taking into account not
just the specifics potentially
with the public health order or
an order for an issue from an
agency out there we we need to
start getting to a point where
we have that transparency and
it's communicated to the to the
people just like what we talked
about you all discussed in a
previous bill.
With the with the open up with
the open meetings we that that
information needs to be after
the public needs to be able see
it.
In in all pass it on to to Jason
if he has anything else you
would like that.
Madam chair there was a madam
chair Chasey all members of the
committee the representatives
right so it has to be proposed
rule our before proposed rules
can be promulgated the governor
but would be required to issue
an executive order authorizing
it and part of the authorization
would be the disclosure of those
items and and paragraph B. one
two three and four
and and my understanding
is that really those there
should be already be part of the
discussions when you can see is
promulgate rules are when these
discussions are happening so
what we're asking for is just
for those to be disclosed to the
public and transparent.
Madam chair representative.
You're not just asking for
something to be made transparent
you're asking for.
A large body of evidence to be
examined to be
evaluated to be articulated and
you're essentially.
Undercutting the delegation on
rulemaking authority that exist
in virtually every executive
agencies authorizing statute.
This is not just a let's talk
about let's make sure
everything's transparent I don't
think this.
It is manageable and a public
health emergency.
It doesn't you you have not.
Distinguish between emergency
rules and permanent roles.
You haven't specified when the
exact order must be issued.
And you know one of the
criticisms we often hear about
proposed legislation this of
this is just opening up avenues
for increased litigation.
This this is really doing
because.
First of all you're asking the.
Governor's office are being and
it's executive branch but I mean
the the department of health
needs to implement a rule and it
doesn't it's not being evaluated
based on its public health
implications it's all based on
business.
And I guess I just want to say I
don't think.
Anyone on either side of the
issue that's been the divide
that's been created where some
help.
Is viewed as a response to a
public health emergency is
designed deliberately and
tentatively to to hurt
businesses I don't think anybody
ever wanted to do that and no
one takes delight in it it's
perceived as an absolute health
emergency.
And the way we.
Resurrect businesses and save
them as we provide that with a
that is needed up from the
federal government from as much
as we can provide and I wish we
could be more responsive are
tentative.
But.
When we have bank which the
virus or achieved a certain
level of vaccination and
immunity that we are able to.
Return to normal.
That's how we resurrect business
we don't start creating more
burdens for the executive in
dealing with the
health emergency.
Creating standards that might
later be challenged in court as
well it wasn't a sufficient
funding of least restrictive
Intervention so I I don't see
this as.
As workable in a pandemic and so
for that reason I will not be
voting in favor of it thank you.
Representative Chasey
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair in in you
know the.
I don't.
I don't think that any of these
bills are as strict criticism of
the current governor Andrew this
legislation authorizing
the emergency orders were passed
what they really envisioned and
when you look at the statute
have they been used in the past
is to deal with of forest fires
riot such as that and I think
that this legislation you know
we can tweak it some and
judiciary is meant to go ahead
and deal with
a different realm that was not
thought about when they
originally passed the statute
and that is my comment on it
anyway thank you madam chair.
Representative Representative
Ortez.
I thank you madam chair
Representative group I have a
couple of questions I'd like to
know if this bill would apply to
all agencies every agency.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives and I will leave
this open to Jason to respond as
well but.
That that is the intent of the
bill and and yes
we do need to get to a point
where we are completely
transparent.
in in my in my opinion the
legislative body gives too much
power to the agencies to much
our in other areas and and due
process and do decision due
diligence is as critical to
ensuring that
the decisions that we're making
are actually the best for New
Mexico and and that that
information is put out there in
such a way that
people who can openly debate
that you know yesterday one of
the committee meetings that I
sat through
Representative Eli made a
statement at to a question of
money.
that sometimes litigation is
necessary to be able to insure
the business is done correctly.
And and now that's in New pardon
me representative Ely for
paraphrasing it but if this
opens things up to some
litigation that that the poll
any agency or
Our chief executive.
to task and that's a good thing.
And in and with that I'll yield
to
mistrust for those of.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee I.
Representative predators correct
so it's it's any agency that has
to follow state rules at.
Thank you madam chair
representative group what if
rulemaking is already happening
it's already under way or about
to about to happen and the
public health order is you know
is put into place what happens
then does the
you know does the governor's
office have to.
Act even for.
That forced all these questions
that are you know that are in
the bill right now.
Particularly of you know
entered or New Mexico
Environment Department that is
you're going through rule
making.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
yes it does with the it does but
the chief executive's office to
test to make sure that we are
considering very specific items
when we are putting together
This rule I am so at the end of
the day how how how does this
impact
our commerce and and and I as I
said on a different side of the
aisle with respect to you know
rely the need to rely on the
federal government for funding
we're we're we're our own state
we're sovereign and and and our
constitution defines that and so
I think I think every state in
the union should rely less on
the federal government except
for the things that the
constitution United States hold
for and so with that I I I do
believe that each decision that
we make needs to be
Very clearly that it.
And this is this is an aspect of
of
What we've learned in two
thousand and twenty where I feel
very strongly that.
we've learned some areas where
maybe we aren't betting
everything to the depth that we
need to.
And and again I'm not being
critical this is looking for.
What's happened this happened.
Looking forward are we willing
to continue just as discussions
that have happened in the last
two bills are we willing to move
forward without placing to stop
gaps in place that ensure that
We're protecting our state.
And with that I yield to the
mistrustful those again do you
would you like to add anything
Sir.
Madam chair representative
workers and members of the
committee.
Include your question if a
agency is in the midst of a
proposed rule making
the bill states that the rules
cannot be promulgated so they're
not finalized and published in
the register as of yet the it
would require the executive
order from the governor outlined
the the items in the statute.
Thank you madam chair support
and representative
And.
Thank you representative.
What is the will of the
committee.
I move it do passed madam chair.
Substitute motion to table.
So.
We have a motion to table and a
second let's call the roll on
the tabling motion place.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey.
Yes to table.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos Munoz to
table.
Representative my part.
noted table.
Representative Ortez yes to
table.
Representative every noted
table.
Representative Zamora.
No tape.
Mr Johnson.
Yes the table.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative three in
a negative to table.
Thank you and thank you
Representative your bill has
been tabled.
We look forward to seeing you
next time.
Thank thank you committee.
And with that we are moving on
to house bill one sixty five.
Representative Anderson.
And Representative Sweetser we
will get them and the.
Analysts mode.
Good morning madam chair.
Good morning welcome.
Madam chair thank you very much
this morning Representative
Sweetser is tied up in the
Education Committee and this is
asked me if I will present the
bill alone.
Thank you and do you have any
experts that will be joining
you.
Thank you madam chair yes I do
from the legislative finance
committee we will have Allison
Nichols Allison is facing is the
senior fiscal analyst and also
will be Charles so we are deputy
director of the legislative
finance committee.
Thank you representative we do
have Allison Nichols we don't
see Charles solely.
Well madam chair I bet you Mr
Nichols will do just fine on
this bill I'm sure she will.
Go ahead and begin your
presentation Representative.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair house bill one sixty five.
Is a bill sponsored through the
legislative finance committee
and it deals with of.
New Mexico's budgeting process
as you know we we currently are
working on a seven point three
billion dollar budget.
For the next fiscal year we
budget year to year and this
bill is a pilot project that
creates a four year.
For your project.
Of two budgets of of two budget
cycles to determine if the
biennial budgeting makes any
sense and produces a better
outcome.
Thank you madam chair of so what
we have in the bill is is
three agencies participating
that being course LFC and DFA
department of finance
ministration and the R. L. D.
regulation and licensing.
Division the state in and we're
dealing with thirty nine state
agencies that have.
Budgets less than five million
dollars so those those agencies
tend the Y. E. and the purview
of our L. D. and it would go
forward with the idea that these
agencies would now be required
to submit a biennial budget.
A request in September of even
numbered years and the operate
the and the operating budgets
would be submitted in may of the
odd numbered years for that's
that's a real money dander
however.
In its simplest form we're we're
shifting from an annual
budgeting process for these
small agencies and letting them
slide into a two year budget
process these.
Agencies by and large do not
require general fund.
Appropriation of pick one of the
architects the architects charge
these are and in other charges
too their architect memberships
in those funds Fund that board
of architects and when you add
it all up it's it's below five
million dollars
when we look at the budget
recommendations in the house
appropriations and finance
committee we're Representative
Sweetser and I both serve
you see virtually.
No difference between of the the
budget recommendations the R.
members of the board often have
to spend the day attending a
budget hearing that turns out to
be quite short and
and under the old format it
required them to travel under
the new format certainly not so
much so we think of as does the
chair Lundstrom she is also.
On this bill is really for her.
Her idea that this would be a
way of producing a better House
Bill to each year allowing last
time on some of the small
agency budgets I think let's see
that's going to be thirty nine
of them and that if everything
works right in this pilot
project should allow
more time on the high ticket
agencies and probation for
discussion and consideration.
with that I would madam chair
ask Miss Nichols if she could
Keirstead introduce ourselves
and add anything that I have
overlooked.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Anderson and
I think that was a really good
explanation I would just add
just to clarify that there would
be thirty nine agencies
including the pilot that's DFA
R. L. D. LFC and others with
budgets of less than five
million per year and then in
addition you have all the boards
and commissions under R. O. D.
so those aren't standalone
agencies their budget to our
anti but you know it kind of
expands the pool entities that
would fall under this biennial
budget project and also note
this bill was first introduced a
few years ago so it's kind of
been kicking around for L..
LFC and I'm available for any
other questions thank you.
Thank you miss Nichols and the
certainly for that clarification
as well as this committee is our
first outing on the biennial
budget pilot project madam chair
I stand for questions.
Representative we will go to the
attendees and take a break poll.
So those that would like to vote
in favor or against house bill
one sixty five.
The poll is now open.
Then you have twenty seconds to
vote.
And you have ten seconds to
that.
The poll is now closed we have
one individual in the attendees
that voted for and zero against.
So we will go to
the public to see if anyone
would like to speak and support.
Or opposition of house bill one
sixty five.
So it doesn't look like anyone
wants to speak we will go to the
committee Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I will
never hear the end of this and
Roswell I don't make the
following statement that that
presentation was one of the most
outstanding presentations that
have been delivered to this
committee and I'd like to
commend the Representative for
for doing such a fantastic job
and I hope that that might bein
me a bit of race when we get
back home.
That said.
I do have a couple questions the
first question is if I read the
bill correctly there's nothing
in the bill that would prohibit
The Appropriations Committee of
going in and yeah maybe
modifying the budget on a case
by case basis if needed our
during the other year is that an
accurate statement.
I'm Madam chair representative
present would you like me to
respond.
Yes I I believe that's the case
but.
In the middle of the vice M. the
HSD current come back to the
legislature to request a
supplemental or deficiency
appropriations so that would be
a chance to modify the budget if
necessary.
Representative thank you madam
chair and and thank you miss
Nichols one related question I
think I heard the testimony that
there are of Bill the chairman
of appropriations was also on
this bill or at least to
indicated her support for act
is my understanding that there.
madam chair representative yes
the chair is not a sponsor but
yes the I believe I want to
speak for my understanding she
supports.
Madam chair and miss Nichols so
the the effort here is related
to allow all the budgeting
process for the small
agencies to get them handled so
that maybe it frees up some more
time to deal with the more of.
The the the larger agency
budgets that
Need more time and effort
applied to those is that the
purpose of this legislation.
Madam chair representative yes I
think there's a few potential
budget one is that it allows IT
staff on LFC in DFA side to you
know spend more time kind of on
oversight and policy issues and
less time on preparing budgets
for small agencies agency budget
may not change much from year to
year and then on the agency side
the potential benefit is is some
more you know less time spent on
kind of.
Documents and meetings and kind
of those procedural things more
spent time spent on you know
operations and and serving the
public in and you know what what
you have it and
you know we also see potentially
some cost reductions from
decrease staff time decreased
you know materials for this
meeting time and then I guess is
also two things one is that you
know it's important Senate to
emphasize the pilot so the point
is to kind of see if we do
realize some of these benefits
and then secondly the bill also
establishes AT and evaluation
committee composed of LFC and
DFA staff members that would be
kind of monitor and and track
this pilot and submit a report
at the end of the pilot to see
how it went and how we realize
some of this budget that we we
think we may realize.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miss Nichols up it sounds to me
like
this is a good piece of
legislation and I hope that the
pilot generates the response
that that I think you're looking
for in that it does maybe allow.
Some cleanup of time so that it
can be spent on some of the
larger agencies on on a more
regular basis thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Anderson I'm I
don't want to sound like I'm
echoing Representative night but
but I just think this is a great
idea I really do I think it
makes it so difficult for so
many people that we just have
the one year budgeting hello and
I used to be the director of a
nonprofit and we had some state
funds and this is just a great
idea I really think it's worth a
try.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Representative Eli yeah madam
chair in I given what
Representative nine percent
about the excellent presentation
I I think I'm compelled to have
a motion I do pass.
Thank thank you Representative
we have a motion for a day pass.
Is there a second I better
seconded that motion.
Or I may get driven out of
Rossell.
Great thank you let's go ahead
and call the roll on the do
passed motion by Representative
Eli and second and seconded by
Representative part you madam
chair Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative
yes.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Right yes.
Eyes Chad Johnson.
Yes.
Chair.
Thank you madam chair with that
we have nine in the affirmative.
Great thank you thank you
Representative Anderson you have
a do pass on house bill one
sixty five thank you.
She issue here.
And I'm we have one more bill on
the committee's agenda which is
house bill one eighty I just
sent a text to Representative
click and he asked that we roll
it.
So that concludes our agenda for
today.
I thank the members of the
public that joined us as well as
our committee members and I will
see everyone on Friday.
Thank you.
