Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Mr chairman Alcon.
And Representative Hernandez
actually just left my office and
he is walking to the capitol
north and will log on shortly
hello K. we have a quorum Sir
located in I believe our first
Representative today is
Representative Rubio.
You are correct.
Representative you really you
know how to use this so whenever
you're ready thank you Mr chair
I do have one
expert if I can bring him and
his name's James but we want and
then just for translation
purposes Sir we do have a
translator if we could just find
some and some instructions if
any.
If the interpreter may interject
at could be host her co host
please make as interpreters we
have not been assigned.
yes let me do that right now.
And I missed the name of your
expert witness Representative
it's James hope you want and
he's in the attendees right now.
I'm not.
I'm not flying.
You're in the waiting room can
you please raise your hand
please.
It's should be at center for
civic policy.
No hands up I'm gonna work on
the interpreters right now but I
don't.
We have Representative.
I just text you so.
Is that.
Okay.
So the track the interpreters
should be okay and I'm still
looking for your expert witness
and I am not seeing him your
chair yet well I'll go ahead and
get started because I don't want
to waste too much more time.
So and just for folks but alas
personas because then we in the
Audi that I don't Lobel Akyab
awful this will cause you on
what they are I said that last
night that in depth with the
issue on C. Mississippi though
you landed but this one.
So care committee members house
bill two ninety seven is a work
in progress will there will be
progress but now this is here we
are
Representative Alcon I don't
know if you remember I'm sure
okay chairman that a few years
back in two thousand nineteen
it's been a while I introduce
legislation to
work on a study to of the to
have the department of workforce
solutions as well as
A researcher talk an interview
with
people from all over the state
to to hear from them and see a
particularly frontline workers
to hear and see to see how
transitioning towards a greener
economy and the sustainable and
economic future would look like
for them.
I'm especially as we talk about
transitioning away from from
struct of industry and really
diversifier diversifying our
economy outside of just energy
issues and so when we ended up
having these conversations
that we weren't able to the
committee people walked out of
the committee actually and so we
didn't actually have I would
think we just passed the the
bill out but because a junior
money I was able to pay for the
legislation for the work study
and so that work study took took
place that we're study was
completed last summer and the
framework of that study is now
in house bill two ninety seven
so we split so you the
University of New Mexico in
conjunction with the department
of workforce solutions spoke
with over eighteen hundred
people from all over the state
who work in industry related to
coal oil and gas and other
industries.
And a lot of what you see here
in house bill two ninety seven
comes directly from the the
countless people that we were
able that the that the study was
able to talk to there is an
amendment Mr chair that we were
able to that we submitted it
mostly cleans up language I'm
and also clarifies that the work
study is actually was already
conducted in the previous draft
it's it's it's stated that
people are interpreting as it
was a study that need to needed
to happen still but no that
study has already been completed
so the amendment actually
addresses that I could find a I.
all of all your lead and how you
want me to handle that.
I'm the amendment but as of now
House Bill to ninety seven if if
we can address the amendment and
then I can also answer questions
but essentially the bills house
bill two ninety seven I'm really
provides we were able to take
recommendations from the study
to implement statewide outreach
programs to educate the
population on a timeline for
transitioning to a cleaner
economy and so many of the
recommendations were to look at
how we could proactively
have our state be better
equipped to create incentives to
bring jobs and clean energy
industries into our communities
but also to provide some
alignment with training programs
and ensuring that training eight
to clear employment
opportunities what we have
developed here is that the
state's leadership is very much
critical to ensuring that New
Mexico's New Mexico workers do
you have the tools
we recommend that
within this legislation to have
a council that looks at that is
is rooted in people who are
directly impacted to have that
they're working to make on the
decisions necessary to move us
forward and so I'm happy to
answer questions and and and and
let me know how you want to
proceed with the amendment.
I'll go ahead and the it for
discussion purposes Sir I just
want to let Representative Rubio
know that
your expert witness is reached
out to me and I just
resentencing so I'm hoping he
should be joining me in very
soon.
Thank you.
Okay so go ahead let's assume
the amendment for discussion
purposes and I'll make the
motion and explain the amendment
and tell us what what what what
you're talking about here.
Yes the amendment is let me I'm
pulling it up.
so the amendment on page two
between lines nineteen and
twenty we we inserted the the
following subsection which is
subsection II New Mexico clean
energy workforce development
study means that the study
titled The New Mexico clean
energy workforce development
study.
That was commissioned by the
workforce solutions department
and published in June of twenty
twenty so that is basically
explains that
that we because there is some
confusion in in the legislation
the people were assuming that
the the study still needed to be
done this clarifies that the
study was already conducted and
so
that section addresses that
everything else was just re
lettering the succeeding
subsections accordingly and then
and then just incorporating some
some striking and some inserts
for a little bit of of
terminology one of the few what
some of the feedback that we got
last week in our first Committee
was representation from tribal
communities and so we were asked
to include not just one person
from all of the tribes but that
we included a representation
from each of the tribes across
the state so we've done that and
then again
it's all just striking and
removing a couple of words
and punctuation for the rest of
the amendment as just clean.
Okay there any questions on the
amendment.
None I have a okay I just want
you're saying that you're are
including one man on the tribal
issue you are including one
member from each tribe that we
enjoyed member reach fibro and
then the impact she and the and
the Navajo Nation.
Yes Sir.
You already have a the members
of the task force.
And then you including and
another thirteen fourteen
fifteen maybe.
Hello Sir.
Okay December.
We have a problem with anybody
it is
they have a motion to accept
amendment.
I had to accept the amendment
I'll second that Mr chair do I
have any opposition to the
motion.
State your amendment accepted
and now we can go.
All the meals on the bill as
amended.
So.
The.
Real are you ready to.
Those incidents even when you
want to speak on your behalf
Mr chair.
J. at this time
if anybody wants to speak for
against this legislation you
have basically a one minute to
do so and we do it or not I do
you so
We'll start the.
Is up Mr chair Senator.
My name is Tom Smith I am the
impact the director of the Holy
Cross retreat center in the C.
part and I believe that we need
to make sure that support those
in the lower part of our
economic structure received good
training.
Many older other people get it
as part of their jobs they do
not I think that this real is
especially interesting because
it allows for sustainable in
gross and for a way to to
respond to the it's Act climate
needs and this ecological needs
of the state so I would
certainly like to support it and
I think that in each of our
businesses where I'm a director
retreat center we can do that I
would hope that other people
would be able to give this
opportunity for the training
that that they're poor and rural
people in the very much thank
you.
Thank you.
We'll go to the body as the let
it.
When is the new president that
you know the committee the
number you so you really only
know maybe going to see that
Mexico but US you must choose in
the list of the problematic on
the and that if I look at the
list of good for you it's just
but the thing I noticed yes us
west of here active in those
moments they see a physical man
second you can't do not ask you
guess what is a year our
incoming lateral but I can Mr
school money that is with one
income you thank you madam
Dennis that'll where we should
be able to go for this is that
late action middle moment they
see it they know they don't come
before you but I it is several
yield a little Missy guns if I
look into that I'm going to be
seven million the Fernandes is a
lot that a definitive human we
might cause us when I went to
Columbia but I missed a
committee that is.
You can it will not let me that
in New Delhi India set up with
emphasis on income as the less
you'll you need those records
the unit cost is the the
heaters.
Thank you.
That is so Senator.
When.
The number is still say the same
members someone sexy ET wanted
on the other the county and city
state spaniels.
One that okay we've been having
to stand on the economic mask
pointed that they have a whole
but again more capacity Gimple
there most days then we can
just.
No.
In the Commons do not always you
know there still remain on its
balance on the oil and yelling
yeah.
Maximize your down this time
mostly because.
That does not mean they see it
they come in that eight buses
I don't have to introduce your
host for but I've gone that only
thank you know I mean when done
yes what is so I think we can
get the most yep it'll maximize
solar
just a single the asinine you
yeah and we got I.
It
this what if you don't think
that employers that does not
mean this yet that the present
United on the main page much of
the best things you.
The committee I'm Emily well
Dallas New Mexico voices for
children and we're here to stand
in support of this legislation
so often when it comes to
economic development we rarely
ask the workers and the
communities for being impacted
this legislation is focused on
the workers their needs their
training and their
recommendations with the
inevitable changes coming to our
economy we applaud the
representatives review on
Stansbury for looking for
solutions from the communities
involving the workers and the
communities impacted thank you
no good idea ladies.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Carla
creating Halford and we stand in
support of H. B. two ninety
seven on behalf of the centre
for state policy we applaud the
efforts through this legislation
to create a council that would
be tasked with implementing the
New Mexico clean economy study
which was commissioned by DWS we
will be that these kind of
forward thinking initiatives
ensure that New Mexico has a
strategic plan for economic
diversification in as well
involves investment in New
Mexican families directly
impacted with that we urge you
to support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you and now we'll go to
Stephanie Welch.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty in the
center strongly supports this
bill our communities need an
economy where the of them that
is comprised of sustainable
injuries provides jobs with
living wages and good benefits
and is equitable and inclusive
this bill will move us toward
that goal an economy that works
for everyone and that reflects
our values and needs it will
help ensure that
disproportionately impacted
communities have a voice in
economic development decisions
we urge your support thank you.
Thank you.
And now we'll go to address so
no.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee my name is
address that on on the executive
director of a let most attention
ation New Mexican and you know
as our people are the stewards
of this land in order to build a
strong diverse economy we want
to make sure that historically
disadvantaged communities have a
seat at the table to envision a
stronger and healthier New
Mexico I'm it's the best way
that we move forward together
and we think the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you and we will go to in
June.
My name is you.
And I live in Rio Rancho
honorable chairman and
representatives each bill two
nine seven workforce and
economic prosperity Act
recognizes that both industry
and Wall Street are quickly
moving forward to sourcing clean
energy with the vision that sees
clean energy is our and healthy
economic future we only need to
look to GM's visionary decision
for all electric vehicles by
twenty twenty five Google's plan
to match clean energy generation
to their consumption by twenty
thirty and the move for battery
power storage within the western
and eastern electrical grids in
the United States we need our
New Mexico legislators to act
quickly instituting policies
that promote a diverse and
prosperous economic future for
New Mexicans with the training
and education framework that
provides more opportunities for
New Mexican talent to develop
themselves in support of a
vibrant and diverse economic
future for New Mexico I urge you
to be visionary for New Mexico
by supporting and voting for H.
B. two nine seven thank you.
Thank you.
I have the NM navy voted and
then.
So I'm hi thank you Mr chairman
committee no uncle at the my
name is Chloe Jake and I am a
citizen of the Pawnee nation of
Oklahoma and the going to Pueblo
the lifelong resident of
Albuquerque I am speaking today
on my own behalf I am affiliated
with and in need of but I am
speaking on my own behalf today
as an indigenous woman who is
alarmed by the climate crisis
the consequences of which I hoc
in lowincome communities already
indoor and will continue to pair
the bear the brunt of if urgent
in sweeping actions are not
taken immediately I'm proud of
the actions that the state and
this body have taken to address
the climate crisis and initiate
the transition to clean energy
but the work is far from over
and this transition must be just
and equitable to all of New
Mexico citizens a just
transition must redress the harm
is inflicted upon traditionally
disadvantaged communities by
giving them the power and where
with all to determine how they
will succeed in a green economy
I believe H. B. two ninety seven
weeks to accomplish the
fundamentals of a just
transition and I would urge the
committee to build three D.
backs thank you.
Thank you Joan brown.
Yes good afternoon sharing
committee and bill sponsor thank
you so much for this bill just
be up to ninety seven.
I'm not a Franciscan sister time
with interfaith power and light
we were called the state with
faith communities to address
climate change care for god's
creation and care of our
communities we support this bill
because it it really does
address human dignity and
respect as well as caring for
creation it's very important
that our frontline communities
who are really do need to move
forward with into the future
with a just transition are
included in this transition and
we feel that this process
proposed in this bill is very
equitable and will move us
towards economic diversity and
just transition which is talked
about very often in the state
but we are not moving very
quickly in that arena and we
really need to so we're very
supportive because this will
take another very important step
towards economic justice
intergenerational justice and a
future for all of our people
thank you.
Thank you
So then I would then of in this.
Good afternoon Mister chair
committee members
representatives that are
assessed my name is nana Bennett
B. this and the community
organizer for cafe axion in
Grant County.
My community is represented
represented by district thirty
nine.
Several times I've heard my
representatives speak on jobs
and businesses in our community
we like many others across the
state have been deeply
negatively impacted once again
by our reliance on a single
industry for the sustainability
and survival of our communities.
Thank urge those here to C. H.
B. two ninety seven as a pathway
out of the cycle for a single
industry dependence that has
periodically negatively impacted
New Mexicans for generations I
strongly urge your support of HB
to ninety seven for all New
Mexicans it's not about being
anti image extraction industries
it's about being true to your
word this is about being pro
jobs pro business and pro people
campaign words that we were all
heard now is the time to put
your words to action and support
these things by supporting H. B.
two ninety seven thank you thank
you thank you demi was perfect.
K. lease to.
Thank you.
Committee and Billsponsored my
name is Kayla issue I live in
Carlsbad and a leader with
citizens caring for the future
which supports HB two ninety
seven eight seven insurers a
communities at the forefront of
oil and gas production have a
seat at the table to help
diversify our economy as I say
this sort of inevitable clean
energy future and Carlsbad the
possible loss of jobs and income
that could come with that the
transition can be scary oil this
local state and national leaders
harnesses fear which causes the
paralysis and their ability to
effectively lead here at this
moment in time as a young person
living in the Permian I often
wonder what my future and so
many others will look like well
that include disease caused by
an address pollution in my
community well that created
meaningful new jobs and training
in this bill record the has
begun to do the work of
addressing these problems by
setting a framework for a just
transition.
I was pleased to be with her on
the policy are concerns and
creative ideas on how that a
person by the economy and
harness young creative talent we
don't have to be in the future
if we work together to face
reality and address these issues
this bill offers new roads to
the future and I ask that you
support H. B. two ninety seven
thank you thank you.
Yes.
Hello good afternoon when I
started this Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm here in
support of H. B. two ninety
seven because it's an
opportunity to create a path to
recovery that place is focused
on modeling environmentally
conscience and resilient
economic development which will
result in more fair economy for
all New Mexicans to prosper
while tackling the threat of
climate change also per claimant
NASA dot gov we have only seven
years before we reversible
damage to our everyday.
To everything going not three
degrees in Fahrenheit will cause
sea levels to rise our desserts
will get bigger
stores will grow more violence
and they're working on.
What will.
Thank you thank you
Yeah I think what's the Mr chair
committee membership a up to
Chavis you checked the network
for Kewa Pueblo the EDD of NM
nativo and a member of power for
New Mexico HB two ninety seven
addresses a racial justice issue
with meaningful career
opportunities will diversifying
our on our economy it is vital
to put indigenous black people
of color and other frontline
communities at the decision
making table to our important
our transition to an energy
economy that will address the
climate crisis our communities
are facing every day children
from our communities have
written in to ask you to support
H. B. two ninety seven because
they know what's good for the
environment it will help reduce
pollution and because it ensures
a level livable future for the
mall we owe them a chance at
that future we want the power to
move towards a just transition
to diversify our economy to
dictate the future for our
children in New Mexico for these
reasons and those stated
previously we ask that you
please pass HB to ninety seven
thank you to the sponsor Mr
chair and members of the
committee he had now at.
Thank you
The court allows.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is
vacant adult estimate food
center based in dynamic County
we strongly support H. B. two
ninety seven because we work to
cultivate and equitable and
sustainable food systems that
exist in harmony with artistic
ecosystem not extracting from it
this means growing our food for
community well paying living
wage and centering the
experiences and expertise of
people most affected by lack of
safe dignified jobs fair pay and
are disproportionately impacted
by environmental racism and the
range of disparities that exist
well our state invests in
industries that harm our health
and our land our state is in
dire need of economic
diversification and
transitioning our workforce into
clean safe and well paying jobs
that are good for our health and
features and Economic Security
jobs in oil and gas are
dangerous and temporary without
a plan in place will be left in
an even worse economic position
in the state is already in the
support H. B. two ninety seven
for clean energy workforce
development and equitable and
inclusive economic transition
thank you.
Thank you yes I'm just on the
line.
He.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of the committee I'm working on
this on the web with the center
for civic policy and also a
member of the power for New
Mexico coalition I urge the
committee members today so
please pass HB to ninety seven
this bill begins to set forth
the route the right foundation
for the bold long term work New
Mexico needs to do to make sure
our communities across the state
have a say in what they need to
successfully be part of the new
clean energy economy and
importantly it also ensures the
starkly marginalized communities
across the state especially
rural communities and
communities of color can
diversify their local economy
and guarantees the Mexicans are
first in line to prepare for
higher jobs and clean energy
thank you.
Thank you Ruiz.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman members committee my
name is these are a little
legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter representing
thirty five thousand members and
supporters across our state I'm
also a long set representing the
NRDC and the environmental
defense fund and we strongly
support H. between ninety seven
we're crucial moments in our
fight against climate change we
must also not forget the New
Mexico is a very diverse state
and we must include all
communities regardless of age
gender color of skin and
everything that makes the
students this is our state's
opportunity to be a leader in
innovating and economic model
that will create high quality
jobs makes full use of New
Mexicos abundant renewable
potential and protects our
precious limited water resources
for present and future
generations I want to thank
sponsor Representative Rubio for
her hard work on this issue and
thank you very much to the
committee for your time please
vote yes on page B. three ninety
seven.
Thank you.
Joseph.
Yeah.
Mr chair.
Hello members of this because of
this committee I am the
disconnect Energy organizer for
neighbor education project I
live in Shiprock New Mexico I
have spoken to numerous chapter
officials in education
institutions who have mentioned
the need to bring job training
and technical education for
tribal community members House
Bill to ninety seven will help
schools like Navajo tech in
Crown Point and and also
Bondeson tech center in
currently in New Mexico it also
through the work force and
economic prosperity Act this it
will truly bring high quality
careers to our communities as
you know we we need to move
beyond the fossil fuel
extraction industries and this
bill will help us make sure that
tribal communities there's a.
Thank to.
Access will be be part of the
clean energy economy thank you.
Thank you
The seventy.
Hello.
Good afternoon members.
I'm a community.
from committee election and
patients.
And I'm here to support
education ninety seven is needed
to strengthen our economy
certification.
Depending on the structure is
essential not guarantees
sustainable future for us and
this bill will help all of us by
creating your new job
opportunities for New Mexicans
while also helping our
environment and as a mother I
want a better future for my
children as a support HB two
ninety seven thank you very
much.
Thank you
so then the.
Hi you.
Thank you committee members Mr
chair my name is Samantha cal
the climate energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico we
stand in full support of house
bill twenty seven in the
communities it will benefit with
the inevitable transition from
oil and gas so carbon free
energy system we want to make
sure that this economic
transition and diversification
is inclusive and beneficial to
all of New Mexicos communities
and this bill will do just that
for that and all the previous
reasons mentioned by the
proponents we just see the and
that would be Emily support this
bill and encourage this
committee to do the same thanks
for your time.
Thank you.
We have the Alex.
Hi.
We met with Alex wood and I'll
be reading a statement prepared
by a leader by the name on it
and has a company at a long time
member and proud citizen of her
The New Mexico and a member of
cafe axion you know and right
now we have the potential and
becoming a leader in order to
stay in building a sustainable
economy given the abundance that
that our people are ready to
work and the natural resources
that we have I truly believe
that we can build a strong
sustainable local economy based
on this and steer away from
fossil fuel production that
cause harm to our environment
and affects our schools which
has proven to be unreliable
funding resources time and time
again we can be we can be a true
example for the state that is
that is working hard to secure
workers rights the livelihoods
as an economy is shifting to
sustainable productions
primarily combating climate
change and protecting our
biodiversity we have the raw
materials let us do the work and
to put them to good use and
building a future for our for
the many generations to come
and the future of our New Mexico
our New Mexico family so we
please do all the past HB two
nine seven thank you.
and
Chair and members of the
committee my name is on what I'm
I'm an organizer with the New
Mexico working families party we
urge the committee to pass each
B. two ninety seven our
organization along with the five
thousand members across the
state urban and rural
communities are multiracial
movement of working people who
care about the future of our
planet and the viability of a
good quality of life for money
and future generations we work
in an outside of elections to
shift the conversation to what
working families need and want
you work long many side many of
these groups and people present
to build an economy that will
work for everyday people not
just the folks at the top and
this bill helps to do just that
and it's New Mexico's first step
towards a strong and diverse
economy for every New Mexican
regardless of class or
background having a fair chance
to be part of a new clean energy
economy and then the twenty
twenty election I spoke with
hundred of voters in rural and
frontier communities who have
been left out of many decisions
continue to be under resource we
must ensure that are
historically marginalized
communities across the state
especially rural communities and
communities of color can
diversify their local economy
and guarantee that New Mexicans
are first in line to prepare for
the high quality jobs in clean
energy I stand with thousands of
our members United in our
commitment for a just transition
within its sustainable economy
that shift away from oil and gas
dependency we support local
policies that create dignity to
dignified jobs for New Mexicans
in the million more around the
country who face job housing and
food insecurity in this
challenging moment aids.
Joseph was.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Justin Mexico was in our
office as some section I would
like to thank you in advance for
allowing me this opportunity to
speak to you about house but two
ninety seven we need to take
immediate action against climate
change and this bill will be or
stepping stone climate change is
already affecting our health
care land water the passing of
this bill will not only help but
managing to also ensure a just
transition for our New Mexicans
to be successful in a clean
energy economy I just incision
in New Mexico would benefit our
communities in Texas and clean
energy energy dust right every
surprised us and providing more
opportunities for people H. B.
twenty two ninety seven one for
the argument that can benefit
from an increased high quality
StandWithUs reduced and
reincarnate it will also expand
roads than the artists States
economy we have to take action
please vote yes on house bill
two ninety seven thank you.
Thank you and then we have a
Charles.
Jason Thompson.
Mr Chairman can hear this.
I think which chairman members
committee my name is chase
Thompson here that register
lobbyist for western resource
advocates we thank the sponsors
for taking this issue bringing
this forward to this committee
and on behalf of a all the same
there previously made they
spelled it out.
Great so we're here to stand in
full support of the bill and we
urge the committee to do this
thank thanks for time.
Thank you.
Charles
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for the options speak in support
of H. B. two ninety seven arms I
am the treasurer of the New
Mexico voices for children
action fund I am speaking in
this case on behalf of myself
and my family.
The transition of our economy is
happening it's ongoing it's
constant this bill helps us take
bold action on climate change
but helping us to create a
workforce and economic
development opportunities for
our families first.
We have to include historically
disadvantaged communities by
giving them a seat at the table
and I would actually say you
know the phrase historically
disadvantaged there are
currently disadvantaged
communities that need a seat at
the table thank you very much
please court HB two ninety
seven.
Thank you.
so.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Tom Solomon I am co coordinator
with the New Mexico chapter of
three fifty dot org and I'd like
to support the all of the
comments that were made today
and maybe just add one
additional quote this is from
Volvo's chief technology officer
pertinent to their announcements
yesterday that they were going
to make only electric vehicles
by twenty thirty quote there is
no long term future for cars
with internal combustion engine
I was recruiting so that lays
out the situation pretty clearly
for the future of oil and gas in
our state and we need a just
transition to a sustainable
economy that works for all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you.
Was that we.
Sir we have a call in chili
Yazdi he's calling and so that's
why you can't see him for public
comments okay good.
Shelly.
Mr Ghazi.
Your muted.
Yes Mister chairman and
committee members thank you very
much for this opportunity I just
speak is in support of our H. B.
two nine seven to me it is a
monster killer it provides
opportunity for farmers it
provides
a voice in the energy
development discussions for
marginalized communities it
certainly will make headway with
our greatest one of our greatest
need on cut the climate crisis
Mr chairman and committee
welding and respectfully request
that you support H. B. two nine
seven thank you very much.
Thank you yes well we have one
more really I'm not gonna steal.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is lily
Anacostia deputy director with
Cobb
and we strongly stand in support
of house bill two ninety seven
for all the reasons previously
stated and we just want to thank
Representative and help the
Rubio and all the committee
members who are here today to
share their stories mentally
this work that's how we know
that is what we understand to be
a very critical important part
of making sure that we
transition the right way and so
we we urge the committee to
support house bill twenty seven.
Thank you okay now all I do is I
can go back to the committee.
Representative Rubio.
If you have anything else to
add.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
know
I think everyone in the audience
has said everything that needs
to be set so I'll open it up to
the committee I did want to just
save James will be wise here to
answer any technical or
mechanical questions and I know
representative Stansbury join us
as well if there's time at the
end to provide any comments.
Okay so.
Committee but any questions from
the committee.
Just woke up.
Yes Sir well as having a trouble
hearing Sir and and I just got
your Albuquerque such so it
thank you Mr.
Eight my wife not I think you
believe me now that I have
trouble hearing that and but
anyway.
Couple questions because I
cannot was in and out with what
was going on Mr chair
representative.
Explain to me how exactly.
This bill will transition.
New Mexico if I understood right
and please correct me again I
was in and out because of the of
all this the sound in here
how this is going to transition
and actually.
Yes.
Give me give me a quick synopsis
of it make sure that I
understand right actually before
I ask my question.
Mr chair representative thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative so house bill two
ninety seven all it does right
now is creates the workforce and
economic prosperity Act and it's
creating the council which we
believe that in conjunction with
the department of economic
development and
the secretaries who will co
chair economic development and
workforce solutions would
utilize the framework from the
study that was just completed
this last summer and this
council would be required to
develop a store that that
statewide utilizing this
framework to really push through
ideas around clean energy
workforce but also ideas around
sustainable economy by including
more people that have normally
been left out of these
conversations so what we're
trying to uplift is that through
this council we're actually
looking at of the
recommendations that came out of
the study and and utilizing
state government to help lead in
those efforts.
can you still hear me.
So Mr chair representative
so can you give me a quick
synopsis of the study being that
I was amended legislators.
Make sure that I understand
that.
so in two thousand nineteen we
introduced legislation by we I
mean myself and the coalition
that I've been working with over
the course of the last two years
to work on the study that would
look at and would interview
people from all around the state
particularly frontline workers
to better understand what their
thoughts are are moving towards
a green economy but also just
very much.
In general what a diverse part
of Kanemi would look like for
state and so in twenty nineteen
we were able to find the money
that due to junior junior money
we paid for that study
department workforce solutions
in conjunction with the
University of New Mexico they
did the study that study was
completed at the end of last
summer and what some of the
significant recommendations from
the study specifically was that
we needed to really implement a
statewide statewide outreach
programming to educate the
population.
On a timeline for transition so
some of these ideas were around
clean energy through a
diversified economy the jobs
that would be created through
this transition and the skills
and certification that we needed
for people to be able to access
those jobs over eighteen hundred
frontline workers were
interviewed and that's a really
an amazing number considering
that it was in at the the the
the study the interviews were
actually conducted at the start
of the call the pandemic as well
as the collapse of oil and gas
here in New Mexico and so to see
that much energy from community
members involved wanting to be
involved in this process.
they were able to find what we
now see is this framework which
would be this us as legislators
and working alongside of the
administration proactively
following recommendations to
better equip our communities in
in in ensuring that the training
that is needed for cleaner and
better jobs in the future of the
future employment opportunities
that and that they were the
first in line to access those
jobs especially when we're
talking about a market
marginalized communities that
they would be out front and
center making sure that they had
opportunities in the in their
local communities.
Thank you for that Mr chair
representative so
this is a big big very very
broad bill you're trying to
Employment is that would that be
fair to say.
Actually Mr chair representative
it's it's actually unfair to say
because it's really just
creating a council that's all
the bill really does at this
point and with and and the
council like I said is is
working in a long side with
state part it would be led by
two departments who would co
chair and that would make sure
that as we move forward on
looking at these opportunities
at looking at what ideas come
about that our communities are
front and center.
Okay I'm in Mr chair
representative I mean your point
is you're just trying to give up
other people opportunity to find
other ways in case the oil
whenever the oil and gas
industry goes away would that be
fair to say so Representative Mr
chair representative what I
would say is I in and you might
and I think it really chance to
talk about it earlier but I was
born and raised in the Permian
basin I was born just north I
was born in Russell grew up just
north of artesian the town
public or third my parents still
live there the major my family
still lives there and many of
them are still either directly
or indirectly
Depending on the oil and gas
industry in part of what I've
learned being in the legislation
legislature the last few years
is that there's a constant up
and down when it comes to just
our own budget here in the state
you've seen it over the course
of the last few weeks in your in
your experience in the
legislature is that it's really
hard for the state to really
think ahead and prepare ahead
because we never know where
the money's gonna come or if
there will be enough because we
were so dependent on the oil and
gas industry the same can be
said about our families who are
on the front lines working in
these industries that they
depend so heavily on these
industries as well for their
livelihood that I think we owe
it to them and to the
communities around our state to
figure out that we we know oil
and gas is going to leave
overnight like it's still going
to be an industry that will
remain here for a while but it's
how do we incorporate other
opportunities so that we are
truly diversifying our economy I
say this also because
we are in a position right now
where many of our communities
When I was serving in energy for
example in the committee for
energy one side was the
environmentalists who were just
talking about climate and how do
we protect our environment and
then you had industry who was
just talking about how do we
protect the oil and gas and the
bottom line but there was never
any conversation about how
workers were going to be
impacted nobody was ever talking
about workers this legislation
really puts workers at the
center to say that we have we
have a responsibility to make
sure that it's not an either or
yes we can still protect the
climate and the environment but
we have to do it in a way that
sustainable and that it's up
lives our communities
economically and this is what I
believe this framework that was
led and developed by people who
are directly impacted this is
really what's going to help us
move forward I do come up with
this bill
countless thousands of people
across the state came up with
this legislation I just have the
great honor of getting to be the
one that gets to sponsor it but.
this is really a framework that
is being led by community and
and I think it's one that we
should certainly take into
consideration.
And you myself okay so
You know I guess you know first
of all I mean I'm not I pulled
over but why why Flores we're
getting or to the airport I was
like I listen so that's what
lower but so Mr chair
representative.
You know I'm I'm not in the oil
and gas industry or any of that
but I live in something similar
to it is and then I would say
where the mining business and or
or I'm not but I mean in our and
the community is vastly employed
my miners are mining companies
and and have been all my life.
As a young man
everyone that we're connected to
do the work there has a family
member they're retired they're
some so
so I can understand what you're
going I mean that there are
there are these sometimes these
these
ups and downs but
Mr chair representative that's
economy altogether I mean I I
know that can be real all told
there with oil and gas it's
biester famine I get that.
But I also I I I'm I'm glad that
you recognize that it's not
something that's going to go
away and and in just a few years
I mean this is something that's
going to take years to
transition as much as we want to
find something that can sustain
us and give us the.
The same energy that is is this
year's by you know that is
provided by it we're just not
there yet and so we will get
there
I I truly believe that that are
Economy will evolve but it's
going to take some time.
We Mr chair representative we
saw first hand
what happened in Texas just a
few weeks ago and and and so it
gives us a good understanding of
what
what with.
Can you.
What.
And so gives good understanding
of.
The problem is that we're.
Only to the music of the week
what what I I it's I'm.
We we just see that that even
that industry because of what we
just experienced Austin did we
have family there it it showed
you know people passed away
it was a it was a tremendous
impact to that to that community
which who is who is definitely
it danced in comparison to what
we're where we're at and and in
trying to find renewable energy
that and provided to their
communities.
I I'm I always think that it's a
good idea Mr chair
representative to to diversify
our economy I'm a hundred
percent with you
and as a businessman I I you
know starting from nothing I
understand that if you just do
one thing you will at times have
ups and downs in that particular
industry or our business all
caught that business and so I
always try to diversify money so
when once maybe taking out a
quite period another one comes
up and and of bills in that gap
and so I I see Mr chair
representative that
that is where the future is
going it's evident I mean if if
if we all sit here and pretend
that sticker in the Senate
believe that are our future is
is going to be oil and gas for
ever
I believe that it's going to
change now I don't think we're
at this point Mr chair
representative or even in the
next ten fifteen years as much
as we want to try I don't think
we can do without that
that industry because a lot of
the parts that are being used to
build those.
Turbines and.
How they're lubricated and the
the the copper that's used to
provide all the energy all those
are are are
Are so we we need you know and
and and will need
so.
Mr chair representative
I do want to actually.
bring.
Like to what oil and gas has
done for whether we agree with
that or not we have to agree
that that.
It does provide about eighty
five percent of our
The state
Educational budget.
And they have put tens of
billions of dollars and in that
in that fund over.
Over the lifetime of that
indictment.
And so
Mr chair representative.
Do you are you.
Is your is your goal here to
completely.
Eliminate oil and gas all
together is that your intention
was to your attention to look to
see how we can in the future how
how we could maybe.
Transition is that
is that fair to ask.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
and thank you Representative I
wish I had that much power but I
don't so I will just say that
that this is a framework that
really is trying to give our
communities a chance to be part
of the conversation
I think that both sides
environmentalists and the oil
and gas industry I think have
been at the forefront of really
not listening to the people on
the ground my my my nephews our
are are are proud next like they
have a lot of pride in working
out in the field in the
southeastern part of the state
and I think when we're talking
about.
So many of these issues whether
it's climate or economic
development there are people who
are just completely left out of
this conversation and I think we
owe it to our communities to
allow them to actually state
what they think
their future should look like
and this framework which is this
this this legislation and this
and this council allows for them
to be able to to make their
voices heard.
That doesn't mean that what does
it doesn't have anything to do
you want to around what
industries will get to be
priority or not it's really
about a both and if oil and gas
is still going to be around
which in my opinion and what
we've seen over the course of
the last year it's not I mean
it's economically it's not gonna
be very financially viable for
state if we continue to sustain
ourselves just solely on this
industry we have to look at
other opportunities and I'm even
talking about industry outside
of energy like it doesn't we
don't have to be just an energy
focused state we can be a number
of different things the problem
is and you probably experienced
this is a new legislator and and
this is why I've been really
committed to this work is that I
get tired of coming to the
legislature every year and
legislators talking about all we
need to diversify our economy we
need to diversify our economy
yet nobody ever does anything
about it this is actually our
community telling us the moment
is now the moment isn't to just
say let's get rid of industry
the issue is how are would be
creating a roadmap on on what is
our strategic plan is to get us
to a place where if and when the
oil and gas industry or any
other industry is no longer part
of available part of our of our
economy that we're we will be
prepared because we have this
road map that has been
constructed by our own
communities who are directly
impacted.
So you mentioned Mr chair
representative that you're your
own family are rough next say
they they're in there they're in
there
They're out there on the feels
are working and so explain to me
how this legislation will help
them.
Mr chair representative I think
this legislation is more.
Just enter appear for thank you
as we above and beyond the
legislation the legislation is
nothing more than a study just
out of this.
Your bill is not over.
Wait a magic wand and other
guests will be disappearing
tomorrow all this is a state
study how this is going to help.
It's going to help them by may
be if this group study gets
together there will be something
available for those people in
the oil and industry go away but
this is about this is about the
legislation the legislation is a
study and it is not a way to
stop oil and gas from producing
that is okay so let's keep it to
the to the legislation itself.
The.
Make it easy on everybody okay
we're not in a two hour three
hour debate.
Or let's just keep it to the
legislation.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative please I wasn't
trying to make it are under I
just was actually wanting to
understand how the study what
direction the study was going to
because I do believe that we do
need to diversify into.
Chair representative just it
just it just to clear things up
the study was already conducted
so there is no study this
framework this will this cap
this this legislation is
strictly to create a council a
council of people that is
representative from people of
all of the state Representative
from my communities that would
be facilitated by two
departments the department of
workforce solutions and the
department of economic
development who would co chair
this council that's all that
this
does and that the council would
be required to utilize the
framework of the recommendations
that came out of the department
of workforce solutions study
that was conducted last summer.
Okay thank you for clearing that
up that that was a little
confusing
Mr chair representative because
I I was I think there's people
that are thinking that this is
going to completely transform
and change everything and I'm
like that's not what I read and
so thank you for clearing that
up that does help both the
Cherry yourself so I guess the
reason I was asking that
question was basically because I
wanted to understand how this
this will change the the bill
The council themselves we're
going to implement that and I
know that you're trying to do
that I I also believe Mr chair
representative that we should we
should be diversifying our
economy in in the point money is
is the environment that we live
and we have a beautiful
landscape that I believe could
bring a lot of tourism and and
we could bring in
and and leverage ourselves that
way I mean I do believe that
I guess I guess really what I
was trying to to see just how
what communities I guess I'm
gonna switch real quick which
communities did you feel were
left out or you mentioned if I
heard you right on this you you
want to correct me where the
groups or were there
particular group for.
Areas of the state that were
left out I believe is what you
mentioned or or a red.
Is that which areas where those
and which were not left.
Mr chair representative when I
talk about people who are
excluded from the conversation
I'm talking about.
People I think that you and I
can agree that a lot of times
policies when they're written
they're written by legislators
who are very much disconnected
from their communities and so we
implement these policies a lot
of times communities don't
actually get a state what I'm
wanting to include is a more
inclusive community of people
that actually helped draft this
legislation so I'm talking about
the eighteen hundred people who
were randomly asked to
participate in the study they
are very much representative of
communities living in Farmington
and Gallup Carlsbad
Jaleel places in Silver City
like they're from all over the
state who are reflective of
people who have felt that well
we have this much larger
conversation.
I'm in New the economy that it's
only people who have sort of
their own self interest.
That when it's their own self
interest it's not they're not
taking into consideration
people's lives and so that's
where that's who I'm talking
about some talking about in this
is part of that council is that
the council will be people who
are actually representative from
folks from mine communities
verses your random like county
commissioner.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chair representative again it
wasn't my intention doing I
actually have to I have an
appointment I've to be at right
now and I just wanted to kind of
get your perspective on that and
so I appreciate and thank you
for I mean I think everyone's
just trying to the best they can
but Mr chair thank you very much
were were given the information
and input the you have so I'll
have to actually have to leave
right now but thank you so much
god bless you okay thank you all
very.
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I move
that the best recommendation.
I have a property do but New I
that says do I have a I still
has some discussion.
So before we go to I will have
a by two Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and just
briefly I wanted to and I don't
know if you still on but for the
sake of the discussion I just
wanted to emphasize Mr chair
members of the committee that I
come from the school of
community economic development
which is very different from the
school of economic development
and the reason it's
distinguished is because
community means just that that
is community driven it's
Community decided a hundred
percent and so my training
always came from as a community
organizer and in community
economic development from the
premise that those that
can best decide what's best for
their communities is the
committee themselves so it's
incredibly important that we
have this type of approach and
all that we do in order to
ensure and secure that our
policies are actually
structured and institutionalized
in a manner in which we're not
dictating those policies from
the legislators down or from any
higher Arky but that in fact the
communities themselves are
determining and defining on
their own futures whatever that
may be and we're there just to
Mr chairman members of the
committee to supplement to
assist to facilitate to all of
those and I came from that
training on as an organizer
originally just on my own as a
teenager and then I was honored
and and to be able to be trained
by the development training
institute out of the northeast
part of the country and this was
just the basic premise so it's
nothing new on it may be new to
the way decisions are made Mr
chairman members of the
committee and have been
traditionally hierarchically
maybe however it is a basic
principle and the basic value of
community organizing and
community economic development
and I applied
the Sanchez and for this this
approach and I'm really happy
that it's taken the steps that
it's taken because in our world
it appears we have to legitimize
all that we do and so having the
study incorporate what those
voices are wanting to articulate
and express to us in this manner
is the best way we could have
come.
Sen and again I applaud the
sponsor for having taken the
steps in getting us to this
point and I just I just needed
to say that because it's it's
not anything you in this world
I've been doing this for more
than fifty years later revealing
my age so it's not a new
approach it may be you for some
individuals but certainly it's
one that's worked and there's
countless case studies around
the nation to prove
that the most effective way in
which to create change on is by
the change makers who are
directly involved in those
decisions and so I think the the
the Sanchez again and if it's
appropriate I'll second that
motion thank you Mr chair.
Thank you so I do have a proper
using your phone for second I
just want to that one.
Madam basically you know we hear
about the General Motors logo
not electric
motors and will have not doing
this because they want to.
Doing this because this is what
the people are asking for.
The people that buy automobiles
are asking for this kind of
automobile.
The General Motors they have a
market for electric automobiles
they will do what they're doing
in personally tell you like I
said though is we see this
before right now I'm reading a
really pretty modest at building
must be a little a tree our
water would cause my daughter
and others that in the shop and
the only car that was available
for rental this is not available
for sale is the one at the Ford
dealership so yes so that he.
That is driving this thing is
awesome that's all I can tell
you the only thing I'm missing
the revenue Mustang Mr zero zero
one but other than that there is
power is.
Is that the so with that in mind
the only thing the only thing
that the only one problem that I
have is having to wait thirty to
forty five minutes to targeted
charging spaces that is the one
thing that bothers me but other
than that the caller is perfect.
So I have a problem promotion
and proper second hi Sir Sir.
Can I just for my purposes can
we clarified what the motion is
to the two new classes amended
due process amended and the most
made by by Representative
Garcia.
The second vice chair yes Sir
okay so that being the case
would you call the roll please
yes Sir.
Representative bash yes.
Representative black.
No.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez.
No.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr chairman Alcon yes.
Representative Stapleton.
She's.
Okay we have five in the
affirmative to in the negative.
We'll.
Yes Sir of.
The
Members.
Senate bill thirty five.
Senator Steinborn in the house.
let him know can I send a quick
text will I was supposed to let
him know Mr chair.
I got caught up with the.
With the bill.
Okay when I'm letting him.
He should be signing
Signing on.
You see him yet.
No ma'am I'm looking for him
right now and I don't see okay I
am so sorry and he he did ask if
I could let him know
And then I.
Got involved with this so I'm
letting him know again many call
him now okay hold on the system
while you're searching for him
is going to Senate bill fifty
two.
Okay if you're not in the queue
just like when you're at the
rodeo and they're not ready to
get on that level then you go to
the next writer.
Senate bill fifty two is
Whose function built into that
Senator o'neill and I do not see
him either Sir we have senator
Byrd okay well he's you know
what it is there on the floor
right now on a vote but Senator
Steinborn said he's on now did
you do you see on I think what
they were on the floor with a
vote right now.
I'm looking for Senator
Steinborn I do not see him yeah.
That's where all the senators
are right now.
From what I understand the only
Senator I see as senator Neville
Burt.
Emergence of Bill.
I'm yes bill is SB one forty
six.
Welcome to panelists or see if
he's ready to go.
Hi you Senator.
Hi you Senator Burt.
Hi how are you thank you.
And on the floor so I'm going to
step off the floor that's okay
Mister chairman.
You have to do.
Well we appreciate it the
gentleman who was a pleasure to.
Come visit your that committee
there so
can you tell me the name of your
expert witnesses Representative
two major.
Can it's not a direct test.
General.
General yeah he's the New Mexico
National Guard tag I promoted
him to have another one Sir and
and that's all okay so.
Can you prove what is above the
general
I don't that's that's about.
You know I probably would be a
but but I I don't think I have
the authority to do that okay
doesn't want.
Okay.
Yes we were the review the house
you just years.
Bill yeah well the general
he's coming back from.
A quick trip I think went down
this morning.
He should be back actually
anytime if he hasn't if he's not
online as yet but I can
certainly start the process Mr
chairman if that's okay.
The staff okay.
Mr chairman and committee thank
you for allowing me to bring the
bill before you SB one forty
six.
Is is assumed it's just it's a
fix it bill basically in twenty
nineteen the national National
Guard organization updated
policies and procedures.
And what this bill does is it
brings the New Mexico National
Guard up to those policies and
procedures.
Ending in a nut shell the.
Mr chairman that's basically
what this does.
It passed through both of the
committees in the Senate I think
a with no dissenting votes and
it came off the floor with no
dissenting votes.
So.
I think the I got a note here
that the general is.
I think online or or shifting to
Is in the interest of time okay
yeah we may be able you already
told us what your bill is about
yes one of the ideas real
fashion to there's anybody in
support or opposition of the
bill.
So one of the attendees and see
if there's anybody there that
would like to speak in favor or
against the bill they do this
like to raise your hand.
I don't see anybody.
Although I do have one one hand
and that.
Ages.
Thanks speak you got a minute.
Mr.
Great thank you very much can
you hear me you hear you.
Great good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name's Aid major
agent Robert NASA the New Mexico
state defense force I serve in
the jag corps volunteers of the
SDF have served the state for
many decades in times of crisis
the current statute which needs
to be updated restricts the
activation of the XDS to only
win total strength of national
guards depleted SB one forty six
will out STF members more easily
certain limits to terminus sorry
by the governor for example
during the pandemic the medical
course can be activated to
augment the guard even though
the rest of the guards not to
depleted in spite of this
restriction members of the
national this STF have served on
the front lines of the pandemic
including major to million
lieutenant colonel during both
medical doctors working no words
to help guide the state agency
response as well as staff
sergeant the hill and she
Padilla who have run the
warehouses for the state and we
have a
various other contributions
during this time of crisis this
will just assistant governor and
the adjutant general.
In dealing with times prices and
and augment their toolbox thank
you very much.
Transparency bills.
Your muted Sir.
Still me as
soon as.
Okay with that I will go to the
committee and see if anybody has
any questions on this bill.
Anybody on the committee.
I basically understand what's
happening here.
Anybody in the committee what is
a pleasure to committee.
But do passed.
The second part.
All.
Yes Representative bash in the
second or two seconds.
First the art Representative
vice chair Roybal Caballero.
In that case by first vice chair
Roybal Caballero go ahead any
opposition to that motion.
The city none show all members
present voting in the
affirmative Senator all.
Thank you.
We'll go ahead Representative.
I'm moving on but.
Okay well I just want to say
thank you to the chairman and to
the committee members for your
vote of confidence this is a
good bill for the state of New
Mexico thank you very much Sir
thank you I'm in the room.
Senator Steinborn.
Hello you are Senate bill thirty
to thirty five thirty five
rural.
That we were we were thirty two
only first started certainly go
to Mr chairman but we can all
but hate thank you.
Your thirty do get older than
you a little younger thank you
Mr chairman thank you committee
for your time this afternoon
Senate bill thirty five
it's a bill that eliminates ace.
Minimum wage that we created
when we extent when we are
increase the minimum wage
several years ago which just
went up to ten fifty an hour in
that law we created a sub
minimum wage for secondary
students high school high school
students that they only have to
be paid eight fifty an hour and
that wage does not go up it said
eight fifty it's eight fifty now
and that.
And then you know as the minimum
wage for everyone else continues
to go up to twelve dollars an
hour over the next two years
this way for maybe a fifteen
hour this is hugely problematic
number one Mr chair committee
because we're we're not paying
equal pay for equal work and
it's just a fundamental lack of
fundamental matter fairness for
a group of people who are.
Just like everybody else trying
to provide for their families in
many cases trying to save for
the future and they're doing
hard work number two Mister
chair if we do not fix this
problem as our minimum wage
continues to go up for everyone
else will that actually be
encouraging employers to lay off
I fear older workers for cheaper
labor and so it's it's kind of
is this subway age is very anti
worker so that's all this bill
does Mr chair committee it
eliminates the subway age of
eight fifty an hour for
secondary students it just
treats them as everyone else
I do have an amendment as well
but I'm okay I'll stop right
there Mr chairman.
Sir you're muted.
Have an amendment to our.
So Sir we received that the
amendment via email about and
thirty minutes ago maybe forty
five minutes ago I can check the
timestamp.
At two fifty nine the amendment
was forwarded to me it was.
So two fifty nine yes Mister
chair I apologize if the
amendment is very simple and
short and I we got a I got an
email this morning from the
committee analyst with that a
little issue that I think we
want to fix and so I can.
Thank you crack at it if you
feel like it's it's literally
like one sentence we have Mr.
Senator.
What's hard fast rule in labor.
Twenty four hours.
No matter where they like you or
not.
So we can go to the next
committee Mr.
Rescheduling for next for their.
Nope Mr chair Rep rather move
the bill on and then I can just
fix this it's not a problem with
the bill it's just it's just
something that well a lot of
strength in it but
what are you going next.
I should I should know the
answer to that I do not.
If someone else has at the front
of I'm I'm sorry I did not have
that for me.
And
you put in your pocket.
Okay.
So.
I understand you will want to
ninety and you explained it very
well
the ideas at this time into
there's anybody wants to speak
in support of this legislation.
And the.
Speaking as a board
one moment and I knew time you.
So we'll start with that every
day in New Mexico.
Whenever you're ready.
That afternoon.
Members of the committee my name
is Eric code Abel's policy
director at or late.
We stand in favor of Senate bill
thirty five and we view it as a
racial justice issue poverty
disproportionately affects black
indigenous and people of color
and I don't believe we have
countless members whose children
contribute to household income
not providing minimum wage
protections to minors simply
keeps hard working families in
poverty we urge the committee
members to vote in favor of
Senate bill thirty five thank
you.
Thank you and I have Emily you
will will do need now.
Well that yes Mr chair thank you
at in good afternoon to the
members of the committee as well
and Emily will Dallas New Mexico
voices for children and how we
stand in support of SB thirty
five I want to thank Senator
Steinborn for bringing this bill
and I think we all know how much
families are struggling right
now but we also know that New
Mexico has a lot of kids in high
school who are working part time
to contribute to their families
income and their work has value
not just to their family and who
they're helping to support but
it has real value to their
employer and the employer should
not be able to take unfair
advantage of them their work has
value their work is not
worthless and their work is not
worth less we urge your support
of this legislation today thank
you.
Thank you and we'll go to Jamie
Matthews.
No Sir Stephanie Welch I'm sorry
Stetson wells thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is for the legislative I'm
speaking on behalf of Stephanie
Welch I am an attorney if you
Mexico Center.
All workers regardless of age is
our New Mexico's minimum wage of
ten fifty per hour currently New
Mexico law allows employers a
secondary student workers a
our employees take advantage of
this new program and families
with low incomes in twenty
twenty in in COPD the small
survey with secondary student
workers in Albuquerque regarding
wages of the participants an
overwhelming ninety seven which
represents stated that they
worked in part to help provide
for their families while many
misses regarding secondary
student workers is not a
rational basis some of those
minimum wage simply because
they're secondary student work
for the more the student workers
do the same quality of work is
every other work I pass this
bill New Mexico diminished seven
which we strongly support
spelunkers Committee to pass
thank thank you.
Thank you Sir.
J. D. Matthews.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Judy
Matthews I'm with New Mexico
working families party we stand
in song strong support of this
legislation we don't think
anyone should be exempted from
the work they do and from the
minimum wage statutes we feel it
was honestly a mistake for this
to be added when we made the
right decision to increase our
minimum wage
last year or the year before and
we urge strong support of the
committee and and moving forward
thank you to the Sanchez and
thank you Mr chair for your time
and committee members.
Thank you Sir we'll go to June
June July and August.
This is to inform Rio Rancho I
just want to offer my own
personal story that had it not
been and this is been some years
ago in Colorado where I was
originally born and raised on a
ranch.
If it had not been for equal
wages at the time
I wanted to go to the local
community college and then later
on to university I would not
have been able based on my
family situation to have gone to
college so I stand in strong
support of equal pay for equal
work.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
Is the end of that product and
we will go to the committee I
have a gentleman here Sierra
I don't know why you would be
forced.
Your is yes.
Thank you.
Is chairman thank you senator
for bringing this legislation
forward
You know Senator.
Steinborn is the only one that
kinda gets my jokes you know.
When when the when this because
because of one of my bills and I
think I see must be can you get
me to that power point Senator
Steinberg get sent he knows what
we're talking about.
And I make little consisting of
the chairman I.
At first you don't succeed
right the rosary and try again.
Where where there is a where
there's a will there's a will
not.
You know.
Senator is the name of my side
kick on the house so that's what
we kind it off because he knows
he knows where I'm coming from
and I know where he's coming
from
you madam chairman that this
around for piece of legislation.
this is one element that was
negotiated in the twenty
nineteen just at your house
state minimum wage up which I
was caring the house portion for
the longest time until it
crossed over to the Senate.
And there it kind of went
through a turbulent process and
basically
white Taos.
For the Senate bill and
naturally in our house bill that
really had all the right
components we have the CD I.
We tied the minimum wage to the
CPI we had no student exemption.
Because we know what that does
in terms of devastating
families.
we had a elimination of a that
minimum wage where all.
wage earners including tipped
employees were Opry lane minimum
wage so that means that all
service workers we're not only
came for brief any minimum wage
but also their steps.
And actually that didn't go far
and and use up terminal that
that issue kind of raised with
the the service industry but
this issue of
The student exemption.
Is really careless in terms of
one of the negotiator items that
we had in twenty nineteen but it
stayed in there.
And the only the only S. as in
mock chairman the only really
sound.
A point that the house bill's
was able to see to see to in
terms of it to its fruition was
a twelve dollar cab.
And us so that was that was a
partial victory but we do we did
lose this other elements
Brussels we have strong for the
program are and that's what
we're getting twenty twenty
three forty one.
Not just the must be fair I mean
some of the chairman and Senator
Steinborn.
a lot of our a lot of our high
school students.
Do not think in in today's
reality in New Mexico it's not
chair do not meet the
stereotypical notion of one
nuclear family type high school
kids.
You know and the clear family
typical high school kid middle
class white.
you know raise with all the
amenities all the modernization
all of the
you know everything and and and
his or her disposal many because
the family was capable of
producing.
That will that well and that
that meant does that material
elements you know in in raising
kids the fact of the matter is
just the most chairman is that
the majority of high school
students
basically dominantly students of
color.
Many come from low income
families.
A large percentage come from
single mothers.
And in that single mother
category theme out here we have
these high school students that
basically contribute to a big
chunk of the family income.
We downplay their income by
doing this.
The student exemption we're
really downplaying you know the
the the ability of that family
to kind of make make ends meet.
And further owning them down
into the hole of desperation.
It's not chairman so definitely
this is a plus in the movie Ford
and I and I applaud the senator
in terms of bringing this
forward and and making that
correction in terms of what we
fail to do in twenty nineteen
thank you are still not chair
Senator Steinborn.
Anybody else.
It
well as the two bass but I'll
second that
Jay's brother do but as the
proper second I will choose a
long Madam to make a little.
The minimum wage two years ago.
I mean it it just killed me that
this part of the bill was in
there I mean I just could not
believe in making here to
sponsor on the Senate side just
said it was being done for this
yes he had to make sure that
could have survived.
As we.
Was not important to me the kids
were supposed to be important to
young men and women that were
working.
And over and over again I hear
Sanchez.
If we don't do this because that
would.
Well I could say was wow all
this down and they can pay these
young men and women that kind of
money I mean the the date and
the so wage so.
When you're finished I didn't
think of something sorry okay go
ahead only to learn last year
real fast thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you senator and I I absolutely
really stand in support and I
really needed to emphasize that
we did make some
The significant progress in
twenty nineteen however this was
one of those areas and I agree
with Mr chair absolutely and in
fact I just want to recall this
committee that we had a minimum
wage bill before this committee
which was a bill that I was
sponsoring and it sort of has
not found the political will to
move anything any further
although this committee moved it
and I stripped all of the
exemptions and because I feel so
strongly that anyone who steps
up to work it doesn't matter
what that work is and in this
case we're meeting our our legal
obligations for age but they
should be paid.
Excuse me
equal pay for equal work all
waste and and we should respect
and dignify that work in it
doesn't matter if you're sixteen
or your the person with
disabilities or any of the our
farm worker in any other
classification to employee if
you're working you merit the
dignity of being paid for that
so I appreciate Senator you
bringing this up and thank you
Mr chair for bringing that point
up until very important thank
you.
Thank you.
Jerry would you call the.
The.
Yes Sir.
Representative bash yes.
Representative black.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr Chairman Alcorn excuse me I
Representative Hernandez.
Mr chairman Alcon.
Yes.
We have five in the affirmative.
Three no votes are.
Thank you Mr chairman think they
registered as a vote so it's
five in the affirmative from
what I understand.
Yes yes.
I was.
The.
Zero yearUnder waiter Connors
or.
Amendment over there thank you
Mr chairman great to see you all
and thanks for the discussion.
Thank
you.
Being in for Senator o'neill.
Loan.
I don't look like Senator
o'neill but.
No other state senator o'neill.
Neil used to be my.
Let's see my cell mate.
We were down at the when we
first got elected.
Right shared offices through
here there.
Okay.
Okay Senate bill fifty two
correct are right and Senate
bill fifty two has to do with
unemployment compensation and
extending benefits.
and I believe secretary mccamley
is in the attendees and we may
want to promote him so he can
explain the bill better
promoting right now.
Secretary mccamley.
I want to this man was in my
seat at one time we couldn't cut
it so you want to work somewhere
else.
What.
Secretary.
Mr thank you so I'll make it
real quick Senate bill fifty two
is rather like the one senator
Byrd brought up a couple of
bills ago we have an extended
unemployment program that was
put in after the Great Recession
and at that time the dates of
the Great Recession we're
currently in place we are
currently funding about twenty
one thousand New Mexicans
through this program the deal
well has basically informed us
if we don't update the dates
they're not going to provide
federal funding for this program
so all we need to do is get this
language change to its and
accordance with what they want
and we keep signing these folks
Mr chair that's pretty much it
I'd be happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you.
I guess.
To go to the audience and see
there's anybody who is this for
you for or against this bill.
Anybody.
Thank you go over.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and I want to
thank our Senator o'neill for
bringing this forward it's
really important that we provide
the necessary changes so that
New Mexico can be compliant with
the federal state and protected
on point budget for New Mexico
thank you so much.
Thank you.
We'll do the the committee and
Committee how is your pleasure.
Chair
for due process.
Yes I am.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia for
bringing basically all this is
the only the the biggest year
realism page three
What age date and that's about
it am I correct Mr that's
correct that this bill was put
in after the Great Recession for
folks that run out of their
standard unemployment benefits
and making sure that they were
kind of long term unemployed so
they have to work for twenty
consecutive weeks shown over
more than twenty hours work that
sort of thing like I said we had
and I have the exact number
right now we have twenty one
thousand four hundred and two
people on this program the
federal government is fully
funding this program I think
they're going to continue it
moving forward you know for the
foreseeable future if the next
bill passes in the Senate but we
can't continue to work this
thing forward until we change
these dates to make it up
basically modernize and that's
what we really need this passes
the oil doesn't cut the money
off of these twenty one thousand
Mexicans.
Thank you.
From a motion for a second do I
have any opposition to the
motion.
Show all members present voting
in the affirmative.
As always I do appreciate time
very much thank you very much no
I see why you left my job in two
years I'll do this change order
to.
It gets harder than the service.
That
we're living with and and do
your.
J. we will go to where are we
going next.
So.
That's it we're done we have a
all I'm sorry madam we're we're
done on this vote great.
Okay I would Sir okay let's go
to Senate bill one forty six
there we we already did that one
we have to switch as senator
Byrd for Senator Steinborn
because.
Wasn't so we're we're finished
Sir you're telling me we're done
we're done.
That was.
I'm trying to give you guys
working here for the rest of the
evening.
We'll go ahead and take a break
because you got to go back to
work at four thirty anyway.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
That is the other by.
