Representative Vincent.
OK.
Uh, vice chair.
hear it
Here
Chairman
Here we do have.
All right. Morning again, folks,
uh, Urola on House Bill 200,
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning committee. Thank you for
um letting us here today with
this bill. House Bill 200
proposes changes to um
But adjusting program units to
better support students with
diverse learning needs.
This bill aims to enhance equal
equity and resource allocation
while ensuring long-term
sustainability in education
funding.
We create a salary differentials
for bilingual endorsed licensed
called personnel, and teachers
who have earned that and with
me, uh, I'm gonna let my expert
witness to introduce herself.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
committee, good morning. My name
is Annie Armitage and I'm a
senior policy analyst for LASC.
And it was stand for questions.
Thank you. All right. Thank you
so much. So we will go to our
audience, folks on Zoom, if you
are here to speak in favor of
House Bill 200. Would you please
indicate by raising your hand,
please. I'll let that populate.
Um, folks in the room, is there
anybody here in support of House
Bill 200. I wish to speak,
please raise your hand.
I saw a flash of hands if you
would please stand behind our
presenters if you wish to speak.
As always, you'll have up to 2
minutes.
Chairman,
good morning. Stan Ros with the
school superintendents, we
support the concept of this bill
and we support this bill. We
would remind the committee that
HAFC or House 2 and 3 does not
include any appropriation for
this matter, we score this with
about, I think it's a $32
million cost.
In the long haul and so Mr.
Chairman, we would ask that the
committee review uh this matter
carefully. This is proper to do.
We just need to put money with
it. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Others in the
committee that wish to speak?
In favor, all right, so we'll go
to our person on Zoom. Ellen,
good morning. You have up to 2
minutes, please.
Excuse me. Good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Ellen Bernstein,
president of the Albuquerque
Teachers Federation. I want to
start by thanking Representative
Grola for this bill. Credential
differentials are a way of
acknowledging, and I
incentivizing specialized
knowledge and skills above
initial licener credential
differentials will help us
recruit and retain a diverse
workforce and our students
deserve and need that.
The New Mexico legislature has
already recognized that
additional credentialing like
national board certification is
valuable in our schools and
provides a differentials, a
differential for those
educators. It's clear from the
Martinez Yazi ruling that
additional credentials such as
TESO and bilingual are very
valuable in our schools and for
our students.
Um, this bill would incentivize
getting a T-cell endorsement and
over 15% of our student
population in New Mexico are
English language learners. In
fact, in APS there are over 80
languages spoken by students in
our schools.
In a in addition, research about
bilingualism shows that
bilingualism helps students make
executive functioning skills
stronger and can also increase
math and reading performance.
This bill will go a long way
towards attracting and retaining
the teachers who are bilingual
and who have a TESOL credential.
This is very good for the
students in New Mexico. I hope
we can pass this bill and we can
work to fund it this year. Thank
you very much.
Great. Thank you.
Right.
Oh I'll go to opposition. Is
there any opposition on Zoom to
House Bill 200, oops.
All right, so we're on
opposition with that populate.
Is there any opposition to House
Bill 200 in our audience.
Here today, right, so we have
Amy.
Good morning, Amy. You have up
to 2 minutes, please.
Good morning. Um, I first want
to say that my opinions
represent myself and not my
employer. Um, I am not opposed
to this bill per se. I am
opposed to us considering
additional program units, um,
for one class of students and
teachers when we did not
consider that for CTE. So I'm
going to bring that up again,
um, CTE was just added to House
Bill 63 as a suggestion, and now
we were talking about adding
program units.
For um another group and um I
don't think that's OK. Thank
you.
OK. Thank you.
Right, so you don't have any
others that are in opposition,
so go to our committee or
represent color.
Chair.
I, I wanna thank you for um
bringing this forward. However,
um, my concern is the funding
mechanism for this and that I
know we just had another bill
that we had concerns with with
the funding, um, and so we ended
up tabling bill because of that,
so this for me, I think this is
something that would have to be
worked in and looking at.
it
Um, so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, other folks that have
questions.
It was in Baca.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for bringing this forward.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, in that, you know,
uh, Representative Collin did
bring up a big issue about the
budget, budget. Now, we just had
a SCG study that was done over
the last 2 years, Mr. Chairman
and Annie, was this a
recommendation of that LESC.
Study and endorsed legislation
for this committee.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, uh, it was not.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for um
For that answer.
The, uh, and again, and I, Mr.
Chairman and Representing
Gurola, uh, I do, do, do we have
an idea about the number of
Um, bilingual programs
statewide.
Uh, is, is that number
increasing? Is that Andy said
she probably has that number,
um.
I know, Mr. Chairman, in my own
district that at one point we
had 10 bilingual programs.
We're now down to one. So is,
are we seeing the same trend
across the state of New Mexico.
to share representative we are
seeing that trend is decreasing.
Do you have?
Go ahead.
Representative backca is
currently 504 by BMEPs in the
state.
504.
Yeah
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for that answer. Um,
Now I will say um.
That I, I definitely support
bilingual.
Education, um.
Uh, I guess it is concerning
that we're seeing a decrease of
that and so, um,
Which is why, uh, Mr. Chairman,
I think that, you know, or
something that is
Like this
It is
My preference that we go through
the interim process to actually
see how things are going to be
funded. So, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I also want to
talk about TESOL cause this
addresses Tiesel.
Um, and so, uh, Mr. Chairman.
One of the
My question with the T so.
is by having that certification
alone.
Does it make me eligible for
that stipend?
Do I have to serve?
Uh, uh, in a program.
And if so, what are the minimum
number of students.
That I
Have to have in my my class.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
uh, right now as it is for
bilingual endorsed teachers they
need to be in a bilingual
program teaching in a bilingual
program for T T so indoors, who
is a lower um unit value is
having the endorsement.
Right
Yes.
Mr. Topresentative, um, I wanted
to answer just or add just a
couple of things, um, in
response to your question, um,
and, and also your earlier
question. One is that although
in this past in, we weren't, um,
looking at this in the prior
intern, we actually did study
bilingual teacher, uh.
Stipends, who did not look at
Teel, uh, and we did make a
recommendation for that. It did
