Representative Syriana here.
Vice chair Stansbury.
Thank you.
In Chairman the green hair we
have a quorum.
Okay
welcome everyone we've got
attendees logging on
thank you for joining us on a
Saturday I'm told that the FY
are for the first bill.
Was just posted a that she'll be
to send out an email the person
also have Shelby to manage the
The public public testimony so
hopefully we can get that out to
everyone.
shall we when you say it just
because it is available on the
legislative website or just in
our Citrix file it's been up
loaded to Citrix okay so that's
on Citrix.
we do of course have a committee
seven will move that in once we
start.
We're gonna have public
testimony today and the way
we're going to do it is Rio
start with the whole and see if
that works we haven't used that
before it has seems to work in
other committees and then we
will do forty five minutes for
the opposition.
and then forty five minutes for
sport.
Forty five minutes is a maximum
of it's not a minimum it's not a
goal so if we get done in less
time that's great.
Each participant will be given
two minutes to speak.
And at the end of two minutes
the local just be cut off
you know muted mid sentence if
that's necessary I apologize
about that but it's just the
easiest way to get through thank
and allow the most people to
speak there will be a timer
visible on the screen so if
you're on the phone you might
not be able to see the timer but
if you're log in in watching a
video you should be able to see
the timer so you'll know
how much time you have left.
And then afterward of course
after we're done with public
testimony we'll go to the
committee are the are there any
questions about the process from
the committee.
Okay so seen done our first bill
today in House Energy
Environment and natural
resources is house bill nine the
climate solutions act in we have
Representative Stansbury and
less Representative Rubio is
also co sponsored a bill
Representative Stansbury
whenever you're ready.
In our.
Sorry Mr chair I move that bill
substitute.
With the two oh two number of
two one nine four eight six
point three.
Okay so removing the bill
substitute for discussion their
second.
Second.
There any objection that.
Okay great thank you
Representative Ortez
Representative Stansbury.
Okay thank you we're good
morning everyone thank you so
much for coming out on this
beautiful Saturday morning this
bill is its purpose is to
address climate change and build
a more sustainable just and
equitable future for New Mexico
that number one addresses our
carbon footprint and setting
standards that are in alignment
with the overall agreements at
the Paris accords and New
Mexico's goals under the
governor's executive orders now
in statute it directs our state
agencies to help support our
communities to become more
resilient to the impacts of
climate change including things
like drought catastrophic fires
and third and most importantly
it helps to support and empower
communities to reimagine and
rebuild economies that are just
and equitable and helps to help
New Mexico to diversify its
economy so the bill is
structured to do that by
adopting the greenhouse gas
standards that are in the
governor's executive order by
studying and overall carbon cap
for the economy with the goal of
getting to net zero carbon by
twenty fifty it directs the
agencies to undertake process
these to develop policies and
rulemaking state that those
standards and to help with
supporting and building tools
for climate resilience and it
creates a new sub Council under
the climate task force which the
governor has already said that
to help empower and bring our
communities the table to help
chart a more sustainable future
across our economy and with that
Mr chairman I'd like to process
my co sponsor representative on
how it would be up.
Thank you representative
Stansbury thank you all for of
allowing us to present on this
bill this morning I come to you
all with this bill as I'm really
a work of what so many people
from across the state have been
working on for the last two
years in two thousand nine two
thousand nineteen at the height
of the conversation and dialogue
around the ETA on there was a
little bill House Bill five
forty seven that was making its
way through the legislature and
unfortunately while I didn't
make it it was we were able to
fund the study which was this
workforce solutions study and it
was conducted by the by the
department workforce solutions
and the University of New Mexico
which was completed this past
summer and it it was a study
that was that interviewed over
eighteen hundred people all
across the state particularly
from communities that were
direct that are directly
impacted by half by extractive
industries but also how all what
this transition to a green
economy looks like moving
forward and this study is that
is really what is the framework
of what it has been included in
this legislation around
including many communities who
will be impacted but also
providing a lot of insight on
how we can actually do it when
it's rooted in community and so
with that I am I'm really
excited to share more details on
this legislation as we move
forward and I encourage you all
to support this legislation
because as I can tell you right
now it is probably the most home
grown piece of legislation that
New Mexico has ever seen when it
comes to issues related to
climate change and as well as
looking towards transitioning to
when you are did not only agreed
our economy but to when your
economy here in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman we have a
couple of experts who I think
are one of whom is trying to get
into and the main rambut here
which is James both the way
shall be have you been able to
bring him in.
I'm I think that he is misnamed
as Isaac to Luna also from the
center for civic policies so I
just promoted the person named
Isaac on Salem which I do
believe is James so.
Okay.
Is and thank you Secretary James
if you're on can you and then.
There that is their your music
your muted on your end.
Area Mr chair and members of the
committee I am here representing
the center for civic policy but
I am not the expert okay yeah.
Sorry go ahead.
We do we do we have anyone else
who fits that description or
should we just move on I don't
see changes on this call is
there a chance that he's calling
in via phone.
He says he is in the waiting
room.
Perhaps what we could do you Mr
chairman is wrap up our
introductory remarks and then
circle back once and James is
able to get on.
That's fine okay so with that
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee I just want to say
that this is a truly exciting
piece of legislation we are
leading the nation in addressing
climate change and bringing a
just transition to our economy
at the same time it's
comprehensive it's grassroots
it's based in work that's been
done across our state from
chapter houses on the Navajo
Nation to the oil fields down on
the border this is really and
truly incredible collaboration
that has brought together tons
of different organizations
across the state green groups
and citizens and so we're truly
excited today to present this
bill to you and with that I
think we'd like to turn it to
public comment.
Okay before we do public comment
we're still are you still
looking for James.
James if you can raise your hand
that might help us provide you.
Yes I'm not seeing it so before
you the public comment a lot of
two more nouns men's and then
The.
The whole city now since our we
do have an interpreter
available
Us Spanish speaking interpreter
we haven't used that function
before.
I don't know exactly how it
works but it is available there
is the bottom of my screen
there's an interpretation icon
yeah I guess if you.
We would like to assistance of
an interpreter you click on that
and we have interpreters
available.
The second announcement is we
have to members who are doing
double duty today they're also
in Egypt see the house
appropriations and finance
committee they will be bouncing
back and forth.
Eventually if we get to vote we
will wait for them to join us
before we take a vote.
so those are the announcements
and Shelby are ready to do that
all.
Yes.
All goes up on the screen the
panelists cannot participate in
the cultures for the attendees
of will hold a vote for thirty
seconds you can click in favor
or in opposition of the bill and
then we'll announce.
The results.
So it about five seconds left on
the pole.
And the polls closed we have.
One hundred and three attendees
and support at eating and that's
eating are present in thirteen
in opposition.
Which is eleven percent.
Thank you for that that's the
first time we've done that
that's interesting
Now I'm trying to make it go
away in I see we have a
panelists from the center for
strategic policy is that James.
Yes Mr chair apologies I have
the wrong wing to get into the
meeting okay and if you'd like
to make some brief comments
before we go the public
testimony now would be the time
absolutely thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is James Kobe one and I am the
policy director for the center
for so the policy I am happy to
be here in support of climate
solutions act H. B. line we
think our champions on this
legislation legislation
including speaker Egolf
Representative Rubio
Representative strands Stansbury
and their hard work to address
not only the significant claim
issues that our state faces but
also the equally significant
economic needs of
disproportionately impacted
communities across our state as
Representative Rubio mentioned
back in twenty nineteen with her
support we were able to get
language the mandate for DWS and
a in the funding to conduct a
study on the impacts of
renewable energy on rural
economies throughout the state
that study is entitled to the
New Mexico clean energy
workforce development study so
one of the most important
reasons why we support this bill
is because it is included in
this in the act the climate
solutions act and we believe
that the bill also includes
important definitions that focus
the needs of disproportionately
impacted communities for high
road employment and long term
economic inclusion in a
sustainable economy I will note
that we also convene this power
for New Mexico coalition many of
the members are community
members that we rarely hear from
and the groups that organized in
these communities include some
awesome Pueblo needle New Mexico
Coffina Neva E. P. O. ACV NM and
on the policy side policy
solutions institute and ccps
we're excited to have those
numbers speak in public comment
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak I stand for
your questions alongside the
Sanchez.
Thank you for that we're sorry
for public comment we're gonna
do opposition first so if you
would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand now if you're on the phone
you can press star nine and I
understand that has the effect
of raising your hand.
And please keep in mind we're
doing opposition first and we'll
do those in support after so if
you're into port now would be
the time to put your hand down
and we'll give you an
opportunity to raise it later.
The timers on the screen our
first speaker is Tiffany Rivera.
Your chairman committee members
my name is Tiffany Rivera and
I'm the director of government
affairs and registered lobbyists
for New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau.
Today stand before you in
opposition to house bill nine
the legislation looks to create
sweeping regulatory changes to
meet greenhouse gas emission
reduction targets in order to
combat climate change.
Our members are directly opposed
to the enactment of any
legislation that seeks to
dictate how the state addresses
climate change instead we
recommend that these types of
policies and recommendations be
implemented on a voluntary basis
with incentives for the
individuals and businesses.
In twenty twenty the American
farm bureau federation of which
New Mexico is a member of formed
and co chairs the food and
agriculture climate alliance the
alliance has developed a report
with forty recommendations based
on three principles and we
recommend that the state follow
similar approach the principles
which drive the recommendations
are as follows any climate
policies must be built on upon a
voluntary incentive based
programs and market driven
opportunities.
These policies must promote
resilience and adoption in rural
communities and the policies
must be science based.
Further we request that any
actions or recommendations for
state climate change strategy
are developed with an
overarching goal to do no harm.
These types of climate policies
will affect farmers ranchers
role and limited resource
communities the state's wildlife
and natural resources and must
be thoughtfully created to
account for any potential
inequities consequences and
trade offs thank you to the
Sanchez and thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning.
Thank you for that our next
speaker is Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Ashley Wagner
the director of public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and I represent
businesses and industries all
across the state yesterday
representative Stansbury was
very generous and spoke to me
about house bill nine and what
she on the other Sanchez hope to
accomplish I am so appreciative
of that courtesy and look
forward to working with all the
bill Sanchez more however as a
four fifteen last night the
committee substitute had not
been posted to NM Legislature
gov and the fiscal impact report
just out posted this morning the
public will not have had twenty
four hours to analyze this
legislation before this hearing
today a complicated bill such as
this should be thoroughly vetted
and not rush through the
committee process because I do
not know the full implications
of this bill and have not had
the opportunity to that it was
our member businesses I am
forced to respectfully oppose at
this time thank you.
Thank you for that and just a
clarification on the committee
said.
The committee so that is
considered a draft until it's
moved in by the committees so we
don't have a process for posting
that ahead of time and it's not
ideal but it's
you know it's also not new so I
apologize
The committee so that you might
agree that the committee so it
is it covers the same
substantive topics.
Some of the language has been
fine so it's pretty close to us
I think it's pretty close to
what was introduced originally
yes Jim Winchester.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee of Jim
Winchester from the independent
petroleum association we stand
opposed to H. B. line for
several important reasons
first this bill at best is
highly duplicated and at worst
it upends to years of
collaborative work between the
industry NGOs and the
administration to produce to
comprehensive methane rules the
first through the oil
conservation division targets
methane waste reduction and the
second through the New Mexico
Environment Department targets
ozone precursor reduction rules
the language in this bill really
negates thousands of work hours
from at least one hundred
different people who have worked
hard on a good faith effort on
methane rules and so that's why
primarily we have major concerns
with this bill we have a lot of
other concerns but I'll just
briefly say their major
questions surrounding baseline
data data collection data
analysis
there numerous terms that are
not defined and therefore open
to wide interpretation
this bill would give regulatory
authority to introduce our
boards that are not qualified to
make important science based
decisions
and finally in this bill only
the oil and gas industry
targeted for missions and we
certainly know that there are
emissions generated by much more
than just oil and gas so for
these in in many other regions
we do stand opposed thank you.
Thank you for that.
Next up we have already Romero
you cover I think and Mister
Rivera the cover please be
reminded that we're on a
position right now.
Yes I'm speaking and support I
can speak now I can we'll come
back to you when we're doing
support okay thank you.
We have Deanna Archuleta.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is dean
Archuleta I am the government
relations manager for XTO energy
Exxon Mobil I'd like to thank
all the Sanchez this morning for
their work and dedication to
creating a new economy and a new
and focus on industry in Indiana
and New Mexico I do want to say
that we have worked extremely
hard as an industry to help
bring fruition to new Clemente
work and our staff has spent
endless hours working with the
agencies to get to that place
many of the playing much of the
language in this bill the gates
all of that work and all of that
time there are if you take some
time to look at the FY are I
think that actually shows that
it's very disconcerting to know
that many of the authors on this
bill actually were in the room
in those conversations and to
see all of that work the gated
and expected to just flip.
The industry I'm hoping that the
committee take some time hold on
the bill and actually work with
industry and work with all of
the stakeholders in this not
just one sided and with that Mr
chair thank you for your time.
Thank you for that next up we
have.
Email Verity.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I too would
like to thank the sponsors for
the outreach with our industry
as this bill has evolved over
the past week or so I'm in the
opening comments.
Representative Stansbury and
knowledge the executive order
the work at the executive on the
methane rules and I won't repeat
what everybody else is already
set I'm in agreement with those
who have testified so far but
there have been tens of
thousands of dollars and over
two years of collaboration
between the executive industry
the NGOs everybody has been at
the table so I'm you know that
at this point.
Is in opposition to moving
forward with this bill and the
attempt to subvert the process
that's already in place in
addition to what everybody
else's side and I know that
wanting knowledge the F. I. R.
it is alarming and should
because highs for the
legislature as the appropriators
for our state in moving forward
with this bill thank you very
much for your time this morning.
Thank you for that next up we
have joined a small yeah.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jonas
more yeah I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico.
Categories association and the
New Mexico will growers
incorporated at this time we
oppose house bill nine
although the intent of the bill
is good we still think there
should be a little more input
from the ag community as to may
have some negative effects on
how our cattle producers and she
producers operate throughout the
state a different.
And different measures to this
bill we also has a membership
have still.
Quite a few questions on the
bill and would left in like to
have a conversation to regard
those to try to get to the
answers some of those questions
we do acknowledge of
Representative Stansbury has
always been a good champion for
food security and in agriculture
and we look forward to visiting
with her and the rest of the
bill Sanchez and thank you
Mr chair and members of the
committee for the opportunity
comment on this bill.
Thank you
Next we had Mike Bonin.
In China you can start the timer
when they start speaking there
you go.
This phone I believe you are
muted on your end.
There you go and you can hear me
now yes thank you Sir my name is
Mike Boeing on the executive
director of the New Mexico
mining association and I won't
repeat what the other speakers
at directed to we have the same
same objections and additionally
we're very concerned about the
overall expansion of rule making
authority contained in this
legislation so for those reasons
are we stand.
Thank you thank you for that the
next step
Michael Miller I believe.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Mike Miller
Permian basin petroleum
association I believe the
between Jim Winchester Indiana
and Amy they've a.
Voiced the concerns that we have
that this bill please understand
that we are very supportive of
continuing to improve the
environment but this bill has a
lot of issues and without proper
funding we feel that
This bill will not accomplish
what it set set up to do that
for those reasons that have
already been stated that we
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have early came.
You're still muted on your end.
There you go thank you chair.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name's really
came with Americans for
prosperity stay director
registered lobbyist on behalf of
our activist across New Mexico
we stand in opposition to the
bill Representative many of the
concerns previously cited and
appreciate the time to speak to
you today thank you.
Thank you for that we have
coming grown all.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee hi can you hear
me yes.
Role on the CEO of the New
Mexico rule like trick coop
Association and we have to
respectfully
Stand opposition this bill two
years ago we had sweeping
energy policy reform the state
with the energy transition act
coops the greed to go along with
was the forty percent renewable
portfolio standard in twenty
twenty five and.
Fifty percent standard in twenty
thirty with targets of
C. O. to elimination or
greenhouse gas zero emissions by
twenty fifty with the cabbie ads
said it would be
feasible reliable and
affordable.
I'm happy to tell you that
A two generation transmission
cooperatives that supply the
energy of the electricity to all
my members.
Western farmers will be fifty
percent renewable by twenty
twenty to try C. will reach that
by twenty twenty for several
years in advance of the
requirements
I think this kind of move the
goal line and yo yo upsets our
plants are just starting in the
in the state of New
along with that we're looking at
beneficial expectation for
electrifying the transportation
sector would you be good for my
members and every
rural New Mexico so I I believe
we should go pause right now
and we should let the energy
transition act work and come
back and visit some of these
things in the future thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you for that do we have
anyone else who would like to
speak in opposition.
Okay seeing that we're gonna
we're gonna switch to support
I'd like to remind the members
of the publications and this at
the beginning of the public
testimony
You know that the we welcome the
public comments it's it's not a
quality thing it's a quality
thing us to the extent to the
extent that you have inside on
into the effect of the bill or
something it's missing from the
bill or an unintended
consequence of the bill.
Would love to hear that.
I do encourage people to keep
their comments short more people
will be able to speak if your
comments are short and as always
attacks on members of this
committee.
Are neither of warranted or
appropriate.
So first we have on the Porter.
Good morning.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Tony Porter
and I'm the founder emeritus and
clean energy for prosperity
works I appear before you today
as a representative of low
income people in New Mexico for
more than forty years and an
intervenor before the pier R. C.
on their behalf we C. H. B. line
through the lens of climate
justice climate change is a
public health greatest challenge
while all of us will experience
the health impact of climate
change certain groups like
children the elderly and the
underserved minority communities
are less climate resilient and
as a result are more vulnerable
to the Natick negative health
effects of climate change.
I'm a change affects influencing
help it include extreme heat
drought wildfires air quality
allergens C. level rise storms
flooding nutrition and food
security carbon pollution from
power plants in our nation's
biggest driver of climate change
and threatens what matters most
the health of our kids the
safety of our neighborhoods and
the ability of New Mexicans to
earn a living our push for
climate justice can truly
identify and address the
intersections between economic
environmental and social issues
in the transition to a carbon
Free State with the climate
solutions act we can confront
the social economic health
impacts of climate disruption
harms experience most deeply by
marginalized populations and
collaborate towards a carbon
free
environment that benefits the
benefits with with of which will
be shared by all we ask for your
consideration and passage and
thank the sponsors.
Thank you for that.
We had David Hermio.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes thank you for the
opportunity to speak I'm David
economy on a registered lobbyist
for the Energy action foundation
and we've heard in opposition
that there is a need to take a
pause in to recognize the
thousands of hours that have
been put into this process well
science tells us all that the
energy the existential energy
and climate crisis well that
that all citizens especially
appy at risk community faces is
not going to take a pause and we
do not have the luxury of
thousands and thousands of more
hours to take a pause every hour
of every day certainly every
hour of every legislative day
should be dedicated to working
with energy providers or oil and
gas at risk communities
of environmental activists
everybody all hands on deck to
address this crisis in a
collaborative way.
This solution is exactly that is
a step in the right direction
towards a solution that is an
existential imperative and we
look forward to this committee
passing this bill we look
forward to good faith
participation with those who
recognize the need to act we
heard that we look forward to
their good faith comments as to
what steps they are willing to
take up toward at least moving
forward towards a resolution of
this existential crisis thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you for that next up we've
already Romero Lee Carter.
Good morning chair Senators my
name is our commissioner merrily
cover and here's a spokesperson
for yucca youth United for
climate crisis action I've been
organizing is a common activist
for about two years now and it's
been a kind of education seems
like every day I landed the
comic Crisis is a greater threat
than I imagined the day before
and H. B. line I see a small
glimmer of hope that I thought I
couldn't afford to feel anymore
we've been glad to see that
through the come solutions I can
Mexico's political leadership
has began to and so much in
iterations call for a plan to
transition to carbon neutrality
within the timeline set by
science specifically we want to
thank Representative and helical
will be and many people see that
or X. for working so that
impacted communities can have a
seat at the table for more
inclusive process that begins to
acknowledge the urgent need to
transition and diversify our
economy away from dependence on
oil and gas HB nine is a
necessary first step in the
right direction we ask that you
vote to pass at the same time we
commit to continue to organize
to build the people power to
make sure that the planning
process is accountable equitable
and centering of justice because
with due respect this is not
about government agencies it is
about the needs of our community
and the lives of our people just
be sure that this process
centers the voice of indigenous
Latin acts and black communities
alongside other frontline
communities were borne the brunt
of energy extraction we plan to
be president to continue to push
and to continue to raise the
call of our generation and our
communities we appreciate the
progress.
Thank you for that.
John looks it's.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO we represent
tens of thousands of workers
throughout the state of New
Mexico including a number of
which are work within our
building trades
areas and how we would support
this bill are certainly for the
great work that it is going to
be doing for our environment but
also to help create jobs for
workers as well so we really
hope that this committee will
support the legislation as well
thank you very much.
Thank you for that the next
build mid cap.
Good morning and thank you
Representative McQueen and
members of the committee for
allowing me to testify this
morning in support of you know.
No Metcalfe I live in Santa Fe
and I work for Rocky Mount
farmers.
The farmers you represent
farmers and ranchers in Wyoming
so New Mexico.
Last fall our membership
approved a special order of
business on family farming and
climate change we know that
farmers and ranchers work at the
front lines of climate change as
if uncertain weather conditions
with extreme droughts floods
rising temperatures shifts in
cropping crop yields and
changing customer disease
pressures.
Many land management practices
will reduce greenhouse gases
these practices Ms carbon lever
levels in our soils stewards of
the land and and our natural
resources.
Teachers hold a unique position
to sequester carbon and take
advantage of advanced carbon
markets.
Bill line will help farmers and
ranchers in New Mexico and
provide them with the resources
needed wrist to see quest Carmen
into our soils we do
respectfully requests that
agriculture has a seat at the
table as an important
stakeholder when propagating
rules for this important issue.
Representative Stan Stansbury
and the other Sanchez for
bringing this bill forward thank
you for.
Thank you for that we have
Robert Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman I support
the bill for all the reasons
stated by Representative
Stansbury and the other comment
you so far New Mexico needs this
legislation on so many levels I
have represented injured workers
I am internet workers comp
attorney and in Representative
injured workers for close to
thirty years now one thing I
missed in the bill and I think
should be included R. two
representatives representing you
workers and non union workers I
ask that you vote to pass thank
you so much.
Thank you for that next step we
have David to what.
Thank you chairman McQueen and
members of this committee my
name is David law the state
climatologist for New Mexico
live in Los crucis this morning
I am here not speaking on behalf
of my employer and I miss you I
speak as a citizen of New Mexico
with nearly thirty years working
in the field air quality
climatology I see the impacts of
climate change every day with
increasing temperatures hotter
droughts variable snowpacks
earlier mailed out in the trees
water storage in our reservoirs
we can't afford to be in the
mode of business as usual with
these observations in mind
therefore I am here here in
support of HB line and the
climate solutions act this bill
sets a path to address not only
mitigating climate change in
improving our public health but
also a path forward for
continuing to build a resilient
economy I support the bold
renounce gas emissions
reductions in in section six we
do need this not only as good
stewards of our land doing our
part in mitigating climate
change but also for reducing the
impacts of air pollution that
will benefit our health and four
children's we need this most
well most of the US enjoyed
decreases in ground level ozone
over the past decade it wasn't
concentrations in Carlsbad have
trended upward even after
adjusting for the impacts of
weather reading through the bill
I support the creation of the
climate leadership council
especially that includes members
of disproportionately impacted
communities and members from
industry I was encouraged to
read the strategies to stimulate
New Mexico's economy through
creating a high road employment
I see many of our students
finding jobs out of state due to
lack of opportunities I also
really hope that this council
also strives to be transparent
as we as the public like to hear
about the successes there's a
lot of talk about adding
sustainable jobs and I think
this bill provides a good start
to achieving that I really hope
that our paths forward for New
Mexico foster's new job creation
and further development of the
commercial market for clean
energy technologies that
includes manufacturing jobs in
summary I support H. B. line and
the work that it brings to New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have Christian to CS.
Mr chair committee members thank
you very much my name is
Christian can see just on the
director of policy and research
for the coalition sustainable
communities New Mexico we're
coalition that currently
represents the cities of
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
in Santa Fe County which account
for forty percent of New
Mexico's population our members
support the passage of HB nine
our member cities and county are
working hard to reduce emissions
and create economic
opportunities especially for the
most vulnerable households
having clear statewide emission
reduction mandates set in
statute and therefore not easily
roll back along with state
agencies working to set rules
and develop cohesive
economically beneficial
strategies will greatly support
technician is that our members
are already doing in areas of
energy efficiency transportation
procurement water conservation.
In addition we help that
allocation of future money from
the clean energy grants fund
will lead to expansion of the
dedicated worker members are
already doing while also
creating opportunities for new
initiatives to develop more
resilient and equitable
communities.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for that we have Bob
Wesley.
Mr chairman of members of the
committee thank you my name is
Bob Wesley on past president of
the Middle Rio Grande water
advocates.
All of which would like to say
is that the water paragraph
seventy and seventy eight are
great but a small stores
addressing New Mexico's water
scarcity that will significantly
worsen over time.
We need to work we also need to
recognize the cost of not taking
these mitigating an adaptation
steps will surely far exceed the
costs of implementing the bill
we support the bill and thank
you.
Thank you for that we need a
common.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my
names Judy common and I'm The
New Mexico policy director for
the Audubon society we're in
strong support of H. B. line
recent comprehensive studies
show that two thirds of American
bird species are at grave risk
from climate change with almost
four hundred species on the
brink of extinction in the near
future we also know that certain
communities bear greater burden
than others from climate change
and so we appreciate that this
bill begins to address that
issue too Mexico is been a
leader on climate and this bill
presents a great opportunity for
it to be a leader again and we
strongly urge you to support it
thank you.
Thank you for that we have Tina
the straw that.
Good morning my name is Tina
Estrada and I live in Grant
County I'm working with an
organization called affects you
on and supporting H. B. line we
are strongly in favor of this
bill because not only will it
help in repairing New Mexico's
economic losses will also help
in reducing the damage done to
local environments and prevent
further environment
environmental damage there are
many negative ways in which
extractive industries damage our
communities these effects
include exhaustion of local
resources some of which are
ready becoming dangerously
depleted such as water the
environmental impact of these
industries can also lead to
contamination of food and water
supplies additionally these
ended industry to often create
dangerous and at times toxic
working environments is it just
a few of the environmental
reasons that New Mexico must
push forward with the climate
solutions act in addition to the
positive impact HB line will
have for the state's ecology it
will also positively impact the
economy it is more than possible
to have a sustainable and
diverse economy any more
environmentally sustainable New
Mexico renewable energy industry
creates many jobs in engineering
manufacturing installation in
other areas well many New
Mexicans do currently rely on
extractive industries for
employment these jobs can always
provide the stability and
security needed by workers for
example here in Grant County has
seen many laughs from the money
as a result of variable prices
of and demand for the to the
minerals extracted here another
positive impact of renewable
energy.
Is the stability of energy
prices which is an important
factor for Mexican families
currently see variation of
prices which sometimes leads to
extra financial hardship for
residents.
The scenery began the transition
into a cleaner and greener
economy and do better for our
land global resources and
communities the more positively
we can feel about the state
we're leaving to our children
and all future generations will
inherit the world we leave
behind thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have great petty.
Hello my name is Greg petty I'm
from Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm individual member of the
climate reality project.
I was raised here but my career
and finance took me away from
New Mexico for twenty four years
and I move back last September I
was shocked by two things I was
shocked by the methane cloud in
both the San Juan in the Permian
basin.
And also by the lack of the
water resources that I can
remember in my youth.
And I'm just looking just today
at the reservoir levels in New
Mexico and it's it's frightening
so I am totally in support of
this bill for all of the after
mentioned reasons but we have to
protect our precious water most
especially and I would just like
to say in fairness to I listen
to all all of the comments for
the people that were opposed to
this and there were significant
comments about there being
duplication of efforts so I
would hope that the Sanchez
and you Mr chairman would take
those into account so that we
don't have duplication of effort
and that they don't feel like
they were not listen to this is
a great deal I totally supported
New Mexico needs to move towards
transition for sustainability
and resilience thank you for
your time.
Thank you for that except we
have Louise Guerrero.
Yes hello good morning
chair and members of the
committee my name is good at all
I am the legislative and
political organizer with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter.
As a Sierra Club chapter
represent more than thirty five
thousand members across the
whole state of New Mexico we
strongly support H. B. line this
bill is very personal to me as
someone that as a kid when I was
here the message that if we
don't act soon there will be
record sessions were planned it
always felt like it was
something that was going to be
way far in the future now I'm
thirty five years old and the
climate crisis this year now we
don't take action we will have a
future we are at a crucial
moment but we must also not
forget the New Mexico is a very
that for say we must include all
communities regardless of age
gender color of skin and
everything that makes us unique
the bill ensures that
historically disadvantaged and
most impact the communities have
a seat in the table in
implementing a more diverse of a
diversified and resilient
economy as we move to a net zero
carbon future the bill built on
the results of the Energy
transitioned Act and take screen
house guests reductions to other
polluters in the state and make
sure that no community is left
behind during our state's
transformation into a stronger
and healthier in New Mexico it
is important that we do
something now we are running out
of time please vote yes on each
screen thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you for that except we
have lorries the.
Hello can you hear me yes.
My name is Laurie Center and I'm
a homeowner and live in
Albuquerque New Mexico and I
urge you all to please vote yes
on H. B. line the climate
solutions that are which will
diversify and stabilize the New
Mexico economy while ensuring
that the most
disproportionately impact the
communities are included and our
your water land and wildlife are
protected.
Thank you Mr chair and members.
Thank you for that next up we
have Tom Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is Tom
Solomon I am the co coordinator
for three fifty dot org New
Mexico and on behalf of the
eight thousand members here in
our state we strongly support
this bill which takes urgently
needed action on climate and
provides a path to a just
transition to a sustainable
economy we offer just one
personal anecdotes this last
fall my daughter who lives in
San Francisco was literally
Clemente refuge G. because of
the choking wildfire smoke from
the wildfires that blanketed the
western states and the she could
not live in the city and had to
leave for six weeks traveling
around that staying with friends
and family so climate changes
here we need urgent action thank
you.
Thank you for that next step we
have Charlie to Salem.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the commission can I
just use me the committee my
name is Charlie to Salem and I'm
staff attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
and I want to thank you for the
opportunity to speak today in
favor of house bill nine we
strongly support this bill the
climate crisis is the most
serious the most dire
environmental challenge that you
then it is ever face three years
ago in twenty eighteen the
intergovernmental panel on
climate change issued a report
warning that if we are to avoid
the most disastrous effects of
climate change we need to cut
our greenhouse emissions in half
within twelve years.
At twelve year window has
already been whittled down to
nine years house bill nine the
climate solutions act includes a
comprehensive away array of
measures to address the climate
crisis house bill nine would set
a goal of fifty percent
reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions from two thousand and
five levels by twenty thirty and
it would set a goal of net zero
emissions by twenty fifty.
House bill nine would require
that steps be taken to protect
vulnerable communities from the
impacts of greenhouse gas
pollution and to assist
vulnerable communities in
mitigating the effects of
climate change house bill nine
would require measures to be
taken to protect our precious
water resources from the effects
of climate change the most
substantively house bill nine
would require legislative
agencies adopt regulations to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
these regulations would include
regulations of emissions from
stationary sources from motor
vehicles and from new buildings.
Finally the bill would not
negative negate that the work
that the the method by very
panelists done I would
potentially complement that
effort we encourage you to pass
House Bill number nine thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you for that next up we
have Andres Serrano.
Good morning Mr chair members of
committee my name is Andrea
Serrano I'm the executive
director of a lady and we're
power a member of power for New
Mexico I indigenous in
communities of color in New
Mexico have since time
immemorial been the stewards of
this land and house bill nine
ensures that not only will I
communities have a voice and
strategies to mitigate climate
change but will be leaders and
establishing policies that will
benefit our communities
economically as well as you know
creating sustainable climate
change for generations to come
contrary to what we hear from
opposition you know this is not
legislation that it's rushed
it's actually we can't wait we
can't wait for this kind of
legislation we think the
sponsors of for bringing this
legislation forward and urged
the passing of House Bill nine
thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Erica.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica data from the policy
director at only and we stand in
favor of house bill nine and you
it as a racial justice issue in
order to have a just transition
to renewable energy communities
of color need to be part of the
planning process and have access
to the training they need
especially in tribal and rural
communities to benefit from the
job opportunities that come from
this transformation for this
reason we urge members of the
committee to vote in favor of
health for money to ensure that
black indigenous and people of
color at the table when
decisions are being made for
them and their families thank
you.
Thank you next up we have or Ana
Santa.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
already on us on the land and
the CEO of the center for civic
policy and a member of power for
New Mexico we stand in strong
support of each means that of HB
nine this morning as
Representative Rubio mentioned
in her testimony this morning
age being nine codifies
recommendations from the WSD on
how New Mexico can build out a
road map for a diversified
workforce and take into
consideration frontline
communities will be experiencing
the economic transition of
our energy here in New Mexico
and will help to build out a
twenty first century economy
that works for all of us here in
the state we must prioritize and
etcetera a real workforce has
New Mexico's clean energy
economy continues to grow and
also like to thank the bill's
sponsors for their work in
partnership with the communities
across the state on this
important legislation this is
been years of development of
just policy and careful
deliberation and inclusion of
communities across the state and
particularly those who are on
the front lines of this
transition and impairments arms
so thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you for that next up with
Camilla Development.
Hi I'm Camilla I amend today
speaking on behalf of myself as
a mom I have a four year old son
and an eighteen year old step
stepdaughter who stand to live
the worst effects of climate
change and join each day and
acting urgent change to solve
this global problem and
innovation that can be driven by
New Mexico workers and industry
COVID has posed as challenges
but it's also been a mark of.
That we're being vaccinated
within a year of the emergence
of a global pandemic.
Our kids will either be the
beneficiaries of our innovation
and stepping up to the challenge
or our failure to act will be on
their shoulders are and their
legacy is at risk please vote
yes for H. B. line thank you.
Thank you next up we have Austin
we need.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Austin
we aqui I'm very happy and it
inmate of both and we support H.
B. line because we believe that
it is important to have a just
transition that we are decades
past you on our legislation that
prioritizes the health and
safety of our communities and
that this is an important step
towards making sure that our
dachshund of the new economy our
is equitable and fair for
everyone who's been affected
distracted we by the industry of
of the past so we stand in full
support and we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward.
Thank you for that I do my best
on the name pronunciations are
lost to wrong.
The each night.
Hi good morning Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Paige knight and I am here
representing New Mexico voices
for children to stand in strong
support of house bill nine I
want to thank the sponsors for
this legislation and all the
time thought and community
involvement that went into
developing this bill H. three
line is needed now for equitable
economic development and
diversification environmental
and climate justice and to help
ensure that New Mexico's
children and families can thrive
in a claim just and healthy
environment now and for
generations to come so I
strongly urge your support for
the climate solutions act thank
you very much.
Thank you we have John Brown.
Good morning thank you committee
chair and committee and sponsors
of this bill H. B. line my name
is John Brown a Franciscan
sister and the director of New
Mexico interfaith power and
light we work with state
communities all over the state
in rural and also the some of
the frontline communities and
we're very much in support of
this climate change is the
greatest ethical and moral issue
of our time and people are face
no this they've been working
hard to create changes in to
work alongside for just
transitions were very excited
about the just transition part
of this bill and we ask that you
support this and faith
communities are certainly behind
and will continue to work
because we work with those who
are most vulnerable those who
are left behind oftentimes in
assisting with waste forward and
help so thank you very much
blessings.
Thank you next Grace Kelly
should.
Thank you to chairman McQueen in
the committee for your time my
name is Kelly issue I'm a member
of citizens caring for the
future and I live in Carlsbad I
am in favor of HB nine because
the young person living in the
Permian I have already seen more
of my friends and family deal
with devastating diseases such
as cancer in my eighty year old
grandmother has seen in her
entire lifetime reducing
emissions and protecting our
water supplies will no doubt
have a positive effect on public
health for too long the state's
economic prosperity has come at
the expense of health and
quality of life and frontline
communities such as Carlsbad
it's time we were to change that
and H. B. line is a beautiful
start to the important work
thank you.
Thank you next up we have just
and at the.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jessica mess I mean educator
in Hidalgo county as well as a
board member and volunteer of
cap ex you and I hope that
you'll offer my partner Atticus
Wallace who is here next to me
time to speak after my testimony
I'm I'd like to the lend my
support to this bill both for
the aggressive timelines and
science driven emission
reductions that are present in
it.
As well as for the
prioritization of training and
access to education for our most
affected communities
I appreciate that it knowledge
meant that opposition in these
communities isn't necessarily
opposition to climate reform but
is just fear of loss of
livelihood so having access to
training programs having access
to education can help to ease
that transition for people who
have served in these extraction
economies for generations I also
urge the committee to reconsider
the cap on education grants
money for public institutions
and universities as public
education systems are great
contributors to culture and a
sustainable culture mindset what
can only help us to further our
goals on climate change children
also are strong sway years of
ensuring held opinions and
teaching them about the climate
science teaching them about
sustainable practices can only
help our rural and most affected
communities to create
sustainable implementation of.
Transition to green energy thank
you so much for your time.
If you'd like to turn over the
other because we can here for
from an.
Go ahead okay we lost them.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and committee my name is Wallace
and representing myself echoing
support of HB nine great job
great bill you mention
unintended consequences so I
would also like to just like to
draw your attention to section
eight subsection D. item for the
cap on state agencies and public
schools I think.
This does institutions provide
some of the best infrastructure
especially in some of the under
represented communities laid out
and other sections of the bill
to achieve the clean energy
technologies and clean energy
education and track technical
assistance and training programs
laid out in section subsection
B. of section so great job great
work thank you so much
That's it thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
acutely aching.
Thank you chairman McQueen and
committee members I'm testifying
in favor of HB nine my name is
Judy leading off Los Alamos.
Being a grandmother of six I'm
very concerned about the
stability of the environment my
grandchildren will be
inheriting.
H. B. line is essential not only
to consolidate and accelerate
governor Lujan Heiser Grisham's
bold climate strategy but also
to allow my grand children and
all New Mexicans to look forward
to a safe just healthy
prosperous and sustainable
future environment and society
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
renamed Beltran.
Good morning Mr chair and
community members my name is
Renee Beltrame and the community
member from the C. in New Mexico
and the coordinator of the
southern New Mexico civic
engagement table I am here today
to speak in support of HB nine
The New Mexico climate solutions
act as a parent and teacher I
feel we need H. B. line now so
that we can address the threat
of climate change and work
toward greater economic
resiliency and equity as well as
issue a strong call for a just
transition to support and
include community.
As a lifelong New Mexican and
someone who has lived in both
rural and urban areas of our
state I recognize the necessity
of protecting our natural
resources while offering a seat
at the table for those
communities that are most deeply
impacted and yet also
historically disenfranchised.
I also have experience the
difficulty of living in a rural
location that is economically
depressed I think of my hometown
Carrizozo where the youth
essentially all leave as soon as
they can my rural small scale
ranching family who struggle to
provide local jobs to help make
ends meet in today's economy not
to mention their challenges with
drought just as confronts the
farmers of the Misia valley
where I live now.
For all these people H. B. line
will both reduce emissions and
pollution while creating needed
jobs aiding local economies and
bringing all New Mexicans
forward toward a bright future
for my own children and all the
children of our state we need
this now please vote yes on H.
B. line thank you to the Sanchez
and communities that we have
worked on this bill and thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today.
Thank you for that we have about
ten minutes left in public
comment and we have twenty eight
people on the list so please be
aware that we're not going to
get to everyone.
Except we have Chloe Jake.
No I go I do hope good morning
and thank you Mr chairman and
committee allowing me to speak
today my name is Chloe Jake I'm
of the condemnation of Oklahoma
and we're going to Pueblo I live
in Albuquerque and I'm
representing and in need of bill
I urge the members of this
committee to support this bill
not only for the way this
legislation is an urgent step in
ensuring that New Mexicans.
Are able to do their part to a
great waste affects others
Clemente basis while having
access to a green economy but
also for the critical way in
which this bill is inclusive of
the low income in native
American communities that I
belong to and which have been
historically marginalized thank
you.
Thank you for that next up we
have.
GNR quest Mr Chairman may I just
make a quick request
Representative Stansbury I'm we
have several of folks on the
line who have been in the queue
who am I going to be using the
translation feature and I wonder
if we could reserve five minutes
at the end to make sure that
those folks can give their
testimony with translation.
As people come up if they want
to use a translation they're
welcome to we're just going
through the list and in the
order that they raise their
hands and we haven't found
anyone yet that needs the
translation service.
Okay thank you Mr speaker I
guess I'm F. participants could
make sure to keep their comments
brief so we can get through
everyone thanks.
Next up I think we're still in
Regina and request.
You know my name Regina Nord
quest I want to thank you
chairman and all of the
committee members and the the
representatives to put this bill
forward I support the bill for
all the reasons that have been
named no time to go through them
but I strongly urge that you
support the bill and
pass it through for legislation
thank you so much.
Thank you next that that's the
Chavez.
Going to help a young okay it
Bennett J. are Chavis initiative
good morning my name is off to a
Chavis it didn't born for Kewa
Pueblo and the executive
director of NMED vote and a
member of power in New Mexico it
is vital to put indigenous black
people of color and other
frontline communities that the
decision making table so former
transition to an energy economy
that will address the climate
crisis our communities are
facing today the just transition
in H. B. line allows us to move
in this direction the task
simple we must act now the
people most affected by the
plummeting Revenue hazardous
environment and ecological
destruction perpetrated by the
extractive industries in our
state must be prioritized and
heard and exactly and and heard
and how exactly are energy
transition should be carried out
to ensure that no community is
left behind now and Mr chair and
members of this committee for
allowing me to provide public
comment and asking you to
support HB night.
Thank you next up we have
Christopher then.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thanks to you and
the bill sponsored sport
Instagram of COVID.
My name's Chris then I live in
Santa Fe and I'm here on behalf
of three fifty cents state to
express our strong support
worsened for House Bill.
Fifteen House Bill nine excuse.
A thirty year career in our
government and philanthropy
working to protect our land
water and.
I I see that progress that we've
made over that jeopardized by
the existential threat of the
climate crisis this bill
provides much needed framework
to build on the progress of New
Mexico has made to you need a.
Are organized tional efforts
under consideration by the
legislature this session.
Set goals provide a mechanism
for the state government to meet
them and ensure that that
transition is done and it's just
and equitable they.
As possible so I urge you very
much to support legislation
thank.
Thank you next up we have John
casement.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I won't repeat the
many excellent comments made by
my colleagues in support of
house bill nine I am here in
great support of the bill.
I am a professor emeritus at the
university of New Mexico enters
and planetary sciences past
president of the geological
society of America but I'm
speaking as simply a citizen of
New Mexico and citizens this
amazing planet on which we live
on.
In the context of the last sixty
six million years of earth's
history we're in the midst of an
unprecedented experiment.
At present we are emitting more
carbon based at at the present
rate we are emitting more carbon
based Malik.
Namely carbon dioxide and
methane into the earth's
atmosphere Madam has ever
happened in the last sixty six
million years that are current
rate of emissions is.
Exceeds order of magnitude a ten
fold increase in the rate of the
emissions this is been going on
since the mid eighteen hundreds
but of course it's been
accelerating over the last two
decades and speaking of the last
two decades this the climate
scientists have told us very
very well what we're looking at
at present in terms of climate
perturbations on the uncertain
weather conditions those are in
response to what we have already
done to the earth's atmosphere a
response the may represent
something fifteen to twenty
years ago so I will close thank
you very much for listening to
me I'm in strong support of this
bill and I think all of the
individuals who have spoken in
favor of it.
We are doing Yazzie.
Thank you Mr chairman and
honorable Committee members my
name is the Wayne County all the
from Shiprock.
I'm a grandpa.
More more defender and I am a
community leader.
O. H. P. line is a matter of
justice.
Not only a matter of justice for
barb or smother but for our
grandchildren.
The argument that.
The pro energy.
For always have is the economy.
Finance the money part I have to
ask them that
is your bank account more
important in the future and the
lives of our grandchildren.
I.
Are listening all those within
the realm of a our discussion
here what will your great
grand children say about you in
the far future well thank you
for trying to say is world your
lawyers or will they would be
disappointed and sad thank you
help destroyed their and
their environment thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you for that and our our
last the public comment will
come from Norman Gol.
In your muted on your and.
Thank you chairman the queen by
turn sponsor Stansbury and
members of the committee.
Thank you for your leadership.
My name is norm Gaume I'm
retired licensed water engineer
and a former director The New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission.
I speak for myself and for my
children and grandchildren.
I advocate for the values of
scientific integrity facing our
problems rather than ignoring
them.
And reducing inequities
including the gross it's been my
point yeah I would be.
My generation in our society are
posing in general.
H. B. line is aligned with these
values thank you our beloved
state needs H. P. line to become
law.
Temperatures have increased
since the nineteen seventies no
matter what we do temperatures
will continue to increase
science shows temperature has
and will dramatically reduce our
surface water supplies putting
even more pressure on our over
used groundwater.
In urgent reason to pass this
bill is that it requires state
agencies to address existential
matters including adaptation to
water scarcity.
The Rio Grande will in my
opinion experience extreme crime
this year including through
Albuquerque.
One section of the bill contains
rules to address water.
These rules must.
Address improving the resilience
water supplies including by
reducing water consumption
improving water efficiencies
implementing resilient water
management strategies promoting
water re use and ensuring that
climate change impacts and risks
are fully considered in state
water management decisions.
Please go to do past for H. B.
line it provides a broader
approach.
Specifically including
rulemaking to address New
Mexico's existential threats
thank you.
Okay thank you for that.
Told that there was some
confusion among those who needed
translation about how to get on
the board which of course I
explained in English
so we're trying to figure out.
Who those people are and would
like to give a couple of them
the opportunity to speak.
Mr chair if I may maybe a
suggestion to those trying to
speak if we could put down their
hand if you're not requiring
language interpretation and that
should hopefully limit
Focus in who we're trying to
elevate.
So that's a good suggestion
hints are going down.
So we'd like you to raise your
hand if you say that again in
English so I'm not sure how much
that helps if you need
translation please raise your
hand.
Mr chair would you like me to
translate.
Sure.
Senator Ortiz bundle see get in
that I would just in one you'll
but I ordered a month in the
month only most of those offices
okay but I can then level twenty
that but most men of those but
are.
Okay so first we have just of
Hernandez.
And I think the process is he
will speak and then the
translator will come on and
repeat with the just that.
I'm sorry Mr chair actually if
you all attendees and panelists
at the bottom of your screen
there is a small global that
says interpretation Billy the
needs that if there's someone
speaking in Spanish you can
select the English Channel to
hear what they're saying in
English
so that's.
How the interpretation function
works thank you Mr chair members
of the committee.
Okay so I've selected that I
clicked on the globe and that
click on English so hopefully I
hear.
The translation and somewhat
real time us.
You will Mr Chairman you'll hear
translation lifetime over the
Spanish speaker in the English
Channel then for any Spanish
speakers they can use the
Spanish channel here
simultaneous English
translation.
Okay I think that was that from
explaining at so.
Mr Hernandez can go ahead.
Mr chair this is Joseph
Fernandez I do not need a
translation services I am
welcome to unready to the public
comment.
Okay very briefly please.
Good morning I am the here
representing amendment native of
vote I am from Shiprock New
Mexico I want to thank you Mr
chair for in this committee to
allow me to provide public
comment in support of H. B. line
Mother Earth has a soul thank
you.
The the chili for at elevating
that H. B. line will go beyond
providing workforce training and
community investments to our
community H. P. line will make a
just transition to localize our
energy systems and we'll develop
a concept of energy democracy I
I urge this committee to support
H. B. line.
Thank you right now I well next
we have the.
Another Mr handprint and the
this it I'm not gonna pronounce
the first name correctly.
Yes.
We'll review the week yes.
Just.
Your muted on your and well I
out please proceed.
And we can't go and see what
does this mean number as to the
cause and then this is a member
of the some sex you up while
you're allowed to been moving
most economical total loss of it
that is an issue that thing no
matter what I did get a speed
at you will get a hundred but
just in those tests no not a
must in effect are you gathered
minorities are less are losing
their mistrust for medius
yeah I mean just get things done
and just starting to staff I'm
more in just as soon as Bennett
when an infant NM info in which
doesn't affect me that it's just
be that that is internist a
program for last year it right
a late two been reverent knows
that and decide what this one
does it that I want to do.
For the D. N. in contrast.
I'm in contact with the doctor
who number into my son which is
glass container president.
Thank you for that the step we
have a form of those.
I believe she's muted.
On her at.
but I want to see what they but
it's up and then we go from
there yes studies about at okay.
One of the is busy in the
members of the committee we know
it is what I'm in those so you
know that is almost empty on
well when for real magical if we
the key role in Medical Board
thank thank you the Emmy those
vehicles in this morning that.
Thank you those musical kind of
the idea of a key thank you
Senator with yes hello people
will just I news.
No I am which is a disincentive
psyche.
Initially noodle emotionally
regal you must control from
through we'll are going on yeah
okay going on this that the M.
import ban was the result hi T.
A. enormity yes yes senior
preceded.
Okay we're gonna do a couple
more and these are people who
are using the translation
service Mario Atencio.
Hello my name is Mario Atencio I
am
A representative for my mother
and father who and myself.
we are the net from northwest
New Mexico.
Well I'm northwestern Mexico in
the San Juan basin has a
gigantic methane cloud.
And methane is
is a greenhouse gas that is
eighty times more potent that
because that.
More potent than carbon dioxide
so these climate solutions are
very much needed Ford's very
purpose that the communities out
in northwestern Mexico or some
of the cool cool poorest
communities in terms of money.
Climate change is going to
adversely affect indigenous
peoples and poor and poor people
bye bye and they're not based
basically poor by it by any
other sense by the money.
They are going to require
they're gonna most affected and
climbing inequity is is a fast
becoming of a true reality.
Water springs the springs the
artesian springs and are
starting to dry up fracking is
now in in a certain sense.
Has.
United groundwater even though
the spills record from enemy do
site that groundwater is not
being contaminated the serious
issues with the with the the
structure of New Mexico
regulatory authority in this
bill is very much needed.
For the record we have sued the
fire federal the bureau of land
management federal court with
regards to greenhouse gases and
water resources our suit claims
that the national by middle
policy act is not being followed
by oil and gas operators in
northwest New Mexico oil and gas
operators in northwest Mexico
are on the record I'm on the
regulatory authority of NMED and
OCD.
Thank you for that and I believe
this will be our final speaker
Gladys substantive.
Gladys yep
lapse.
One of the New York in the
members of the committee that.
I'm you know basically said
always embraced almost exceed it
by one for New Mexico even small
maybe go.
Daniels it could mean that me
and expect me that.
Well you'll be amended actually
been women working with dental
money that this listing and then
we'll.
A long winded that **** but one
that I have a home no social no
tenemos since when doing that
I'm gonna spell I'm just so
glad.
I'm given all the fees economic
I'm Mandy what is so good okay
good then it'll just with the
time I hope you.
Hello this is Mrs Clinton I do
that in which I was just I mean
yes.
Nine.
The same adjustment data
when I get back and we can
assist our highly.
Yes.
I'm I'm not.
I'm about as a PC and the person
that is going to have that that
I.
Yes.
Speaker one million upper looks
young Kennel give you send is
that that yes I know this will.
Hello it is yes we put them in
different them yeah I guess
we'll just done that maybe that
when Banyuls almeno journal so
that
it'll be a local mall also
missed about a hundred conflict
but don't you think that one
must get split up last year it
and then went in math is
accident on my.
Very much think that it would
add yet been we've been done
mystical me that that a most
people because in many of these
million dollar projects on that
are you yes yes I'm a young
adult that's what amount that
that.
Good morning thank you means
more you know just give them a
very and then we struggle money
that came up that if you got
that and then was there and we
need to act you know
this is funny yes equipment and
also note that these young.
Most.
Okay thank you that concludes
our public testimony for today
I'd like to thank.
The one that participated and
everyone that
listen and I think the politics
for the to those who didn't get
a chance to speak I thought the
comments we did here were very
good and we just need to move on
and have the opportunity to
discuss the bill on the
committee so before we do that
let's go back to Representative
stands for and Rubio see if
you'd like to add anything.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I'd
like to make a couple of remarks
in response to the testimony
that we heard this morning first
and foremost I just want to say
thank you to everyone who
who called in this morning I got
so emotional listening to people
from all over the state from
literally every corner of the
state and talk about this bill
from Shiprock to Hobbes less
crucis to Santa Fe truly thank
you for having your voices heard
and thank you Mr chairman for
making sure that are Spanish
speakers could have opportunity
to have their voices heard and
part of why I just think that is
so profound is that this bill is
about bringing those voices into
the process of planning for our
economy diversifying our economy
and addressing our climate
crisis I want to respond to a
couple of the specific comments
that we heard this morning I
want to also say thank you
actually to know Moga and to our
oil and gas producer's I met
with about twenty five of you
last week to talk about the bill
and I really appreciate you
making the time to do that we
continue to have a completely
open door we want to hear from
you we are not trying to saddle
industry with regulatory burdens
we're trying to help New Mexico
build its future and do so and I
just and sustainable and
equitable manner so the door
remains open and we look forward
to continuing to work with
industry I'm grateful for the
opportunity to talk to the New
Mexico chamber of commerce
yesterday I hope that you heard
in the testimony today this is
actually good for our economy
because will diversify our
economy and that's why thirty
nine labor organizations are
standing behind this bill
because it is a bill about
economic development and for our
rural electric co ops I want to
say I think there may have been
some misunderstanding and I'm
sorry that we didn't get the
chance to discuss in advance
this bill actually advances the
goals that are in the ETA and
makes the commendations for.
The standards that were set in
it it will not disrupt the ETA
and in fact by setting an
overall net zero and standard
for the economy it provides
flexibility to hit those goals
through carbon sequestration
reforestation carbon capture so
there's lots of opportunities
for us that will not disrupt the
electricity sector's current
approaches to getting to net
zero under the ETA and the
renewable portfolio standard to
our farmers and ranchers I
regret that we don't get to talk
about this bill earlier this
week I had some offline
conversation with some of you
over the last several minutes I
think that hopefully as you dig
deeper into this bill and we
continue the conversation you'll
see that this bill is actually
for everybody who's on the front
lines and hopefully by providing
more science more tools more
data and collaboration with our
act communities this will
actually help our farmers and
ranchers and R. AG industries
whether the very difficult
challenges that are coming with
climate change because you're on
the front lines to so we look
forward to working with the Act
community.
Finally one and just make a
couple of final comments
about funding we just received
the F. I. R. and there was a lot
of confusion this week and we've
been working extremely closely
to in conversation with the
agencies in the governor's
office over the last several
days to clear up some confusion
that happened
we also have been working for
weeks with the agencies with the
cabinet secretaries on a special
appropriation through the
speaker's office to fund the
work of this bill so I want to
assure the committee and our
members that we are working
through the house bill two
process to obtain a special
appropriation to fund the work
at this spell finally I want to
say this is absolutely
collaborative policymaking as
it's passed through the
workforce study almost two
thousand New Mexican voices were
heard maybe even more through
focus groups and community
meetings hundreds of hands and
eyes were involved in the
drafting of this bill and as you
can see today you know probably
the largest committee hearing
we've had to date in this
committee we need climate action
now for New Mexico we need to
build a durable sustainable
framework to do that work that
works for industries that works
for our economy in that most
importantly that works for
people and works for our
communities and that's what this
bill is about to address our
carbon footprint to build more
resilient future and to build
and diversify our economy so
that it's just equitable
resilient and empowers our
people to have a seat at the
table it's the time for New
Mexico to lead it's time for
communities to lead and we can
lead the nation in passing this
bill so I think you Mr chairman
for your hearing this bill this
morning and look forward to the
conversation.
And Mr chair if I could just
within it in Spanish just muted
the only agency provide honor
kind of folks that they planned
to that I this on.
And and some and C. L. V. I
think is not needed so you might
want to meet her
if I could just translate real
quick about the interpretation
interpretation globe because it
wasn't clear early on but I lost
his family and all how do you
think done I global I enough
often enough because number from
water improvements so but again
but it will you let others see
on just enough without when the
COVID some assistance just you
on you wouldn't know you thought
of thousands you Espanol you
done minimum this gotta get it
addresses border of the State
body put enough oil they say
this W. site you know musket
thing I'm top us into commercial
does but again the liberty medal
of us on his laptop
Seles also because units
including billion the last
either that that that'll see on
so again we just ask yes equipe
estimates we are I see this
because I'm not guilty that is
coming in yes yes.
Okay thank you for that yes it
is.
So.
the interpretation of service I
think it's great and I think
that that that's still good
okay.
She keeps on meeting her and I'm
not like I should be able to
hear her when we're talking
I think Mr chair that the church
Spanish translation translator
is on the wrong channel.
Okay and I don't know how to fix
that it is my understanding that
the interpreters will be
interpreting art Committee
discussion for the Spanish you
continue to listen to.
but
on channel on the Gabby are
different can help fix that.
Mr chair and members of the
committee we are fixing it right
now okay.
Thank you for that
it with that we're going to
we're gonna move on to the
committee
the.
We give him a message to make
sure that's taken care of I I.
Not it's.
Okay well I apologize for that
disruption I think that it
interpretation service.
Is a really nice feature that we
can we can offer in this virtual
setting.
and I'd like to thank the
interpreters for their service.
So on the committee first up we
have Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
I do have a couple of questions
for the the the sponsor and.
I hope you give me a little bit
of a
Brett discussion here because of
us in the comments that were
that were brought up today but
Mr chairman and Representative
Stansbury I'm a little confused
with one of your statements
they're at the very end and that
is about carbon sequestration
two days ago we voted on carbon
sequestration you voted against
it so I'm trying to figure out
what your actual position on
carbon sequestration is could
you elaborate.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Mr Montoya the bill that we
took a vote on the other day
which we are not hearing today
was about eighty I'm reduction
in severance tax fees for carbon
sequestration for the purposes
of doing enhanced oil recovery
and my concern about that bill
was that it was reducing a
severance tax on sequestering
carbon that is not been shown to
monster Billy yet through the
scientific and technical
technical process and different
geologic formations to
permanently sequester carbon as
I noted in that committee I make
huge I I advocate for carbon
sequestration if we can
demonstrate that it has than
that budget to and reducing our
carbon so and this bill is
agnostic about how we retired
net zero goals so if we can
reach it through a combination
of carbon capture through carbon
sequestration in you know
sustainable ag through and
reforestation and this bill
would support any of those
things.
So thank you for that
Mr chairman and and
Representative it's still
confusing there and I don't know
how we can prove the science if
we don't allow the science to
move forward if we're going to
say that we support something
and we go against it I just I
don't understand.
thank you Mr chairman
there there's been a lot of talk
and this is.
And mention this before in
previous years and I just have a
a huge ideological difference
when it comes to the concept of
green energy jobs.
and and it's very hard to
explain so I'm gonna take a
chance to to explain the jobs
with green energy real quick.
And then I have a follow up
question to to the presenter
Mr chairman.
Green energy jobs are very much
like those of road construction.
That road that was built between
format Farmington and in
Bernalillo was a massive
production and there was a lot
of work associated with that a
lot of jobs.
But now the jobs to maintain it
are intermittent there's just
not very much and so calling in
an economy.
It is hard to do unless we're
building new projects continuing
and we're talking about
electricity you buildup you
build a project for the number
of people that you service.
but outside of that once those
jobs are gone once that project
is completed.
The jobs to to maintain
our minimal at best I have two
examples here in San Juan County
Summit County it's a pretty bad
name for being a big polluter
I in reality if you just want
you know what to the American
lung association that is not the
information they have but we
have to projects under that are
moving forward to solar projects
and the jobs that are going to
come from that are all in
construction once there's done
once they're done between the
two
between the two sites.
We're talking about less than
ten jobs to maintain it.
so we keep on talking about
changing our economy but there's
no severance that comes from
that.
There are no jobs that come from
that in the end all we're
talking about and I and I just
think it's a bait and switch and
I don't I think we're better
than that I think we're gonna
have an honest discussion let's
have an honest discussion there
are jobs up front and we cover
those jobs in San Juan County
those construction jobs are
great but in the end we're gonna
be losing we will have lost when
this is all said and done well
over two thousand permanent jobs
for ten.
That's not economy.
that is I mean I actually did
well in math not as well as a
representative Scott but I did
well and now that does not
compute.
So.
That for me is a real problem
there's a second problem with
this new green economy.
And that is tax base.
We get severance tax and we get.
G. R. T. from the continual cost
is to protect to
Continue to work at a coal power
plant and to a lesser degree to
a.
To a natural gas power plant.
But there are but at the very
least there is a severance tax
because it's being severed from
the earth goes into our
severance tax permanent fund and
then we have
the tax base that goes from in
for improvement and.
Bill that we passed out of this
committee just the other day is
to anything to to to reduce the
tax burden property tax burden
that's the last thing that's
left we're talking about energy
construction jobs when completed
the only thing that's left is
the property tax and we're
trying to lessen that burden
there is no way that this is
diversifying our economy less
within less what we're doing is
diversifying our economy from a
profitable one to one of
poverty.
And up.
I would like to ask in that from
the standpoint I'd like to ask
sponsor from the standpoint of
once the construction is
completed.
Is it or is it not true.
That there are very few
maintenance jobs that exist
going forward is that would you
say that's correct
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya I just
want to you know encourage you
to really dig in on the bill
section five of the bill really
it lays out what we mean by
economic diversification it
talks about expanding and
diversifying the economy by
creating new employment
opportunities empowering
communities to come up with new
and as the state of a local
economic development to create
new employment to diversify
revenue and our tax
stabilization and and to improve
the stability and resilience of
the economy overall so you know
not withstanding specific
industries and sectors this bill
is really about expanding
diversifying an opinion powering
communities at the local level.
Thank you I and I part of the
local elected group of folks who
are trying to deal with this you
opportunity we've been given the
opportunity to lose over two
thousand jobs from beginning of
of what setting going on here
and if we go actually do this
the oil and gas industry the
ability to then have the
opportunity as you suggested to
deal with literally tens of
thousands of jobs at that point
and
I think my local folks would say
thank you but no thank you.
That is not an opportunity
that's the type of opportunity
you get in a third world country
and
If you if we're just talking
about the Navajo Nation.
The Navajo Nation owns major
questions matter fact there just
now in the process of buying out
PNM the rest of PNM.
The capacity at the four corners
generating station.
And.
PNM.
It is is getting out of here and
we're we were we are left with
those job losses in the Navajo
Nation just can't afford it they
and one of the reasons this the
four corners generating stations
powered by what is called the
Navajo coal mine Navajo coal
mine where I worked for almost
twenty years
is about eighty five percent
Navajo employees.
also there's the Navajo Nation
oil and gas company that also
employs people in the oil and
gas industry up here then
there's the Navajo transmission
and utility authority the ones
who actually put the power lines
and get the electricity to the
people who actually have
electricity.
I'm.
Now I've mentioned this before
but every year I think it it it
bears at least once or twice to
repeat I'm married into my wife
and children and adult.
My my my my mother in law is now
the people that I work with for
years are now my best friends
are now.
Their concern is not.
Being paternalistic ly taken
care of.
They want jobs because the real
problem the Navajo Nation is
poverty.
Fifty percent unemployment
unemployment on the Navajo
Nation which by the way fifty
percent is also the number of
households on the Navajo Nation
who have electricity and running
water.
The idea that that this most
affects in most.
Will affect people of color is
true.
The poor and people of color
will most be affected by what we
continue to do.
But not in a good way.
What's going to go up on the
Navajo Nation is the lack of
electricity bill and we and they
can't that's going down from
fifty percent is awful the lack
of jobs lack of ability to
provide for themselves then
affect these are I'm these are.
Some cities these are all
subsidiaries of the Navajo
Nation this is how they provide
for that fifty percent
unemployed the the money that
goes to the chapter houses the
money that that that doesn't
come from government that they
can self direct is this these
for companies that I just
mentioned they also have a nap
Navajo agricultural products but
the men the bulk of their income
comes from the for entities that
I just.
Again you.
And there are a lot of people I
heard today Mr chairman.
talked on behalf of the poor and
minorities.
I'm gonna take the liberty at
this point to talk on behalf of
the poor and minorities that I
know.
Because there's another story
here.
The other story is poverty is
the problem the lack of jobs
lack of opportunity is the
problem and as these and and and
the and the lack of good
education is a problem we we've
had we've heard the at the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit going on
forever but in the shutting down
of these entities.
There there are less than five
percent of the people who are in
central consolidated schools on
property.
Property that provides tax to
central consolidated schools the
Navajo the four corners Navajo
school district.
Is the two power plants and the
two points provide ninety five
percent of the taxes that go to
that school.
Now obviously the SCG will kick
in for in school money's but how
are they going to be able to
bond when they need improvements
they're not there's no tax base
when we get rid of these and the
and the solar companies that
have come in have all asked for
Arby's so they can be taxless
the property tax.
So I I listened there for yeah I
don't know that it was quite
forty five minutes but I listen
there for people one group after
another talking on behalf of
minority groups interestingly
enough probably eighty percent
or more we're not minorities
themselves.
so I I'm speaking on behalf of
my family.
And the people that I know
personally.
The problem is poverty.
And they're less concerned about
greenhouse gases and what
they're gonna do thirty years
from now then what poverty and a
lack of able to being able to
provide for their family
tomorrow.
That concern that's a bigger
concern.
That we're willing to address.
Quite frankly I heard terms
today that the climate justice
and racial justice.
If you go to a third world
country.
The biggest problem that exists
there.
Is poverty it you know there
there's they don't have clean
water and you don't have a four
double electricity.
So the food that you buy is day
to day that's very expensive to
keep.
And as a matter of fact on the
reservation here in San Juan
County fifty percent of the
people have to find another way
to keep their their their their
food call in store but.
Or when the rates go up or if
there is a inadequate
reliability and their their
electricity were to be shut off
like we've seen some rolling
brownouts and blackouts in
California the poor least likely
to be able to afford to purchase
new food.
The wealthy and middle class
don't throw away that milk to
throw away that meet that was in
the refrigerator and freezer
that sought out for however long
and then electricity came back
on the poor can't do that the
poor gonna take a chance the
poor gonna eat food that maybe
that.
So.
I'm just having a hard time
with what in my mind.
Is.
And agrees gregis.
Effort to racially appropriate
here to progressively paternal
lies.
People of color that's that's
frustrating the people of color
in my family one jobs they want
to be able to provide for
themselves they do want clean
water that they do want clean
air and doing all of those
things is is very important.
But clean clean water and clean
air without the ability provide
for yourself that's not an
answer.
And so that's why.
I'm having this this major
problem the continual.
No willingness to discuss the
fact that there are no jobs at
the end of that rainbow you get
to the end of that rainbow and
that pot of gold is empty there
are no permanent jobs so I'm
just wondering on behalf of my
family and my friends my wife's
family who lives throughout the
reservation here in San Juan
County who either work
in the energy industry in some
way whether it's oil and gas or
the or the power plants of the
coal mines.
Hi with the I would agree to
this why would they want this
why would they want.
District temperature
paternalistic government.
Your it would help us in this
committee.
I would ask you to be respectful
of the representatives.
I'm asking I am really I'm
asking a question why would they
trade for that Representative
Montoya I I've checked your
language.
I would ask you to be more
respectful of the committee
members presenting this bill.
I'm you know what Mr Mr
chairman.
Today we had one group after
another talking on behalf of
minorities.
I'm talking on behalf of
minorities and I'm talking on
behalf of will spoke on behalf
of minorities for up listing
minorities without tearing
anyone they are.
What
do the same so I'm helpless
minorities here real quick Mr
Chairman may I please just
respond because I.
Has the floor.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The minorities.
In my family the ones that treat
that taught me the once that the
family I grew up in in the folks
that I work with want the
opportunity to provide for
themselves.
So to focus the question I'll
focus the question here.
How do we address the fact that
there are no jobs
after construction what do we do
I don't need a the opportunity
for the communities to diversify
I need and and the actual
concrete solution.
What did they do for work.
And and and with that Mr
chairman I I do ask that
Representative Stansbury what do
they do to provide for their
families when their jobs go
away.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Montoya first
I just want to say that I
actually really deeply
appreciate the place that you're
coming from and I think you in
particular because you and I've
had this conversation as well as
others on this committee and
members of the public who heard
my story before no this but Mr
Chairman representative Montoya
I'll just adds more three
Keating I was born in Farmington
New Mexico.
My mom was a machine operator
who helped build the San Juan
power plant.
She worked in the very power
plant you're talking about my
dad worked for Halliburton as
well during the oil fields
apartment.
So this is a very personal issue
for me as well.
And what I can tell you about
what you heard today the voices
that you heard today we're real
people across our state people
from every single community
every ethnic background tribal
communities people who are
immigrants and our state people
who are long time residents
people who've been here since
time immemorial.
So we're not appropriating
voices of people we're providing
a space for those voices to be
heard in the public process and
this bill is about providing a
space for those voices to have a
seat at the table exactly on the
issue that you're bringing up
because the question you're
asking is the question how do we
diversify our economy how do we
empower communities to actually
have a sustainable job and
source of income.
As our economy is transitioning
you know if you're in a rural in
a community that could be
selling your art or your wall
using the internet who knows
what it is but the whole point
of this bill is not to and to
say or to dictate or to try to
make the economy be a certain
thing and if you read the
details of the bill which I
really really encourage you to
do it is about creating a seat
at the table for our communities
to be empowered with tools
resources and the opportunity to
actually define what the future
of our economy will look like so
Representative Montoya you're
asking exactly the right
questions and that is what this
bill is trying to do.
Mr chairman and Representative
Stansbury I know I'm asking the
right questions but there are no
answers.
Actually there are no answers
it's it is platitudes I'm we're
talking about empowerment if the
if the the Navajo Nation is
forced to shut down.
Four corners generate station
Navajo call nine Navajo oil and
gas company Navajo a
transmission utility authority
think they're forced to shut
them down.
Where do they have the ability
to have a seat at the table
you've taken their seat from the
table we're moving people see
from the table I heard that
there were eighteen hundred
people who work holes and we
went way out in the in the state
in the state and pulled people I
guarantee you.
All from the Navajo Nation who
have who are worried about
providing jobs and employment
and funds for their people we're
not at that table not the not
the not the folks who when the
rubber hits the road have to
have an answer.
And and as as I look today no
one who is an advocate of this
is nothing more than an advocate
there's no one here from a local
economic development group four
corners economic development
we're dealing with the ETA we're
dealing with the shut down of
work here and if and if we could
just plug in if it was just
solar is the answer well then we
got these two power plants
coming in that would be the
answer it's not the answer it's
not the answer for our tax base
it's not the answer for jobs so
as you stated I am asking the
right questions.
The answers are not there and
it's in and anytime I ask a
straightforward answer you know
it's always to a planet to.
For racial justice for climate
justice for economic diversity
the only diversity is taking
place economically is from
prosperity to poverty that is
our diversity and I and I I
cannot see here and not to send
the people that I know my
neighbors my friends the people
that were my co workers for over
thirty two years my wife's
family who lives on the
reservation who was looking at
things going from bad to worse
trump from miserable to maybe
unsustainable.
That is my problem if if there
if if we could do this in a way
that took them into
consideration.
They're they're not in
consideration and they're not
being given a seat at the table
and they are all minorities.
So I'm I'm going to going
forward.
Representative continue to
advocate for the minorities that
I know.
Who are completely against this
and are tired of having.
The other folks tell them what's
best for them you don't know
what's best for yourself we know
what's best for you.
That to me is insulting.
And and if I somehow should
about this because I am
passionate about this and with
that I'll listen to the the rest
of the of the conversation but I
I just couldn't see here today
and and and let those people
that I know go on Representative
to those families who don't just
provide for themselves from the
reservation that one job may
provide for two other families
brother a sister a parent or
parents that's where those
dollars go and what they're
given is.
Yeah we're saving the
environment you get to have less
running water and less
electricity but look at the
amazing great thing we did today
they don't see it just so
amazing and I don't either thank
you Mr chairman.
If you Representative tell yet
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me.
Yes a little we cannot see you.
Mr Chairman.
With two issues here cross
screen spent walking.
So I'm gonna leave my video all
sh if.
Will be appropriate.
Was technical issues.
Please proceed okay thank you Mr
chairman Representative
Stansbury.
I heard.
Research.
This.
Our public policy.
Should be.
With.
Through the through the lens of
climate change do you recall our
conversation.
Yes of course.
Mr chair representative
Stansbury.
Hi.
Public Service rules bit
different plans which at.
The prosperity.
The opportunities for
educational advancement health
and welfare.
Constituents.
A difficult time.
So for this particular piece of
legislation
You.
What.
Question Mr conversation and
what I would lie is.
Yes or no answer this bill.
Sh.
Dress.
Since climate change properly.
Shrews the.
It is a.
Okay.
Yes reductions.
Well.
Please a yes answer.
Do you believe.
That any public policies can be
developed.
Mexico.
All.
Course.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Mr Scott and since
I've heard you speak on this at
issue in your perspective many
times I think I know where
you're headed in terms of global
climate change which is it's a
collective action problem so
everybody has to do their part
and the answer is yes we do have
to address our carbon footprint
but I also want to say that this
bill does not just address
greenhouse gases and I really
want to encourage all the
commend committee members to dig
in and read it carefully because
this bill is about economic
prosperity and it is about
empowering our communities to
have tools and resources to plan
their own future and to be more
resilient to the impacts of
climate change which are already
here and on their way so I
really really encourage everyone
to take a close look at that
thanks chair representative
Stansbury let me ask the
question again all up here yes
yes or no.
Eight Representative Scott yes
Sir yes.
We're free to request a yes or
no answer and once you ask the
question she is free to give an
answer that's appropriate.
Mr chairman I appreciate that
all will.
At the conclusion of the server
whether it was yes or no.
Okay.
Okay Mr chair and representative
Stansbury do you believe that
any policy can be developed in
the state of New Mexico.
Will alter the course.
Change.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Scott I believe I did answer
your question yes because we are
part of the global climate
action that needs to happen
while our contribution to
overall carbon emissions may not
make up the whole of our planet
every single sector in place on
the planet must take action in
order to address global climate
change so the answer to your
question is yes.
Mr Chairman representative
Stansbury.
There is where you and I have
the fundamental difference of
opinion.
Because.
Chills right if we.
Eliminate and impoverish the
citizens of the state.
Great submission.
What are the consequences of
that action.
All the chair of the planet.
Mr Chairman representative
Stansbury answer to that
question is thank.
Because one thousand years sh.
We would.
Eight point zero zero zero one
percent difference.
Mr of the planet.
So.
Mr Chairman representative.
And treasure.
We spent.
At the state level.
Trying to mitigate.
Change.
Is completely wasted.
Okay we.
One will be.
What it will be.
Fifty years from now Mr Chairman
representative regardless.
What.
We do with this legislation.
Could you agree with.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Scott you know I have great
respect I know you're in numbers
then and and and engineer but
the science does not agree with
you I'm sorry and that is why
including many of our oil
producers that operate in the
state have taken the Paris
accord  pledge because reduction
in greenhouse gas does affect
our overall I'm at Clemente and
that is why it everywhere on the
planet we have to take climate
action so now the science does
not agree I'm sorry.
Mr chair.
Representative stands for you
could not be more wrong.
This this.
Change sure.
Not.
Be addressed at the state level.
What.
Other reasons why.
Because we're going to eliminate
all of our.
All of our greenhouse gas
emissions by twenty fifteen
we're going to zero.
If we don't take it to zero that
will have to sequester whatever
we do generate we will.
If if today's numbers are any
indication.
We will.
Forty nine mission.
Metric tons of CO two annually.
Mr Chairman representative would
you agree with that number.
Mr chairman Mr Scott I don't
have the numbers in front of me
that you're looking at but I
work on and Clemente issues
every single day in my life and
look at climate models and the
science is clear answer from up
for market greenhouse gases are
driving global climate change
and everywhere on the planet we
have to take action to reduce
our greenhouse gases to address
climate change and that is what
the science shows Mr Chairman
representative Stansbury you
don't have any control over the
rest of the planet.
You control we only have can
you.
Is what is that New Mexico.
So the question becomes.
Whether these policies Mr
Chairman representative the
question becomes whether these
policies.
Which all.
Home.
With with.
Accommodations for what's going
on on the rest of the planet
these policies will cost Mexico
citizens real dollars today.
Is significant concern may.
Representative toria Mr
Chairman.
Representative stands for
Representative toria I believe
for the foreman to community.
squawk.
Shuddering that.
San Juan generating station.
Sh.
Say.
Four million times specter
tones.
CO two emissions every year.
It is.
I want to really need.
Metric tons of CO two in the
atmosphere twelve million metric
tons is.
It's not even.
Around the area error.
What we do.
Was impoverished that community.
Mr Chairman representative
of climate change.
We did not.
To it it's.
Or hold.
The course is climate change.
On the plan.
All.
Because all we control Mexico.
All we did.
Was impoverished community.
Yes.
Not.
To the extent that this
legislation.
To the extent this legislation
for each for more of the same
policies.
Support but.
It doesn't contribute.
It makes no contribution to the.
Robert prosperity of my
community to the educational
advancement of my community or
to the health and welfare of my
community.
The.
This that New Mexico.
Yeah hi solution.
Can't make any difference on the
planet is just plain wrong.
And it is for that reason.
I cannot support this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative stay in person.
Thank you Representative Scott
next up we have Representative
Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Stansbury and
Rubio I have a couple of
questions specifically about the
bill.
First what kinds of job
opportunities are are we looking
at across the state can you
address that please.
Thank you Representative Ortez
I'm gonna am asking
Representative Rubio to address
just because she's really been
the leader on all of this just
transition work.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative for
your question
I one of the things that I would
really encourage folks to
read in this is something that
we can share with the committee
is the WSD so as I mentioned in
my opening statement
the WSD was funded by the
legislature back in two thousand
and nineteen which was conducted
by the department workforce
solutions as well as by
the University of New Mexico and
it is the framework in which we
are now
Basing a lot of the work that
we're doing so you'll you'll see
that it within the bill itself
the the the committees the the
task forces subcommittees that
are involved in the in the work
that will be part of this
process will work to address a
lot of of the the issue so in
terms of specific
jobs I think we one thing that
folks need to really move away
from is that they're not all
just energy specific I mean this
is a very broad opportunity for
New Mexico to really look at
things just beyond energy and
and I recognize that there's a
lot of people are very
passionate about energy in this
committee this bill actually
enhances our ability to think
beyond
just energy one to one of the
jobs and so again I would really
direct folks to look at the WSD
which we can certainly share
with the committee and which has
been the the framework for this
legislation moving forward.
Thank you Mr chair at
Representative Rubio that is
very helpful I know that I would
really like to see on that study
You know I know that there are
costs for implementation
And you have we have we seen the
costs in other states and what
does it look like you know here
in New Mexico for us if we want
to implement this pretty
comprehensive climate policy.
I'm sorry Representative Ortez
are you asking about this sort
of economic economy wide
implications.
Yes the implementation costs of
of this bill climate policy
yeah.
So I have to implement this in
particular yes so and as we
talked about this bill is a
comprehensive framework so it
includes these three different
major pieces including the
pieces that are about dealing
with our carbon footprint and I
just want to emphasize here that
how we deal with our carbon
footprint is not specified in
this bill it just sets the
overall goal similar terror
renewable portfolio standard so
it's going to be through
partnerships with industry it's
going to be through
reforestation it's going to be
through act it's going to be
through all of the creative
solutions that we come up with
as a state over the next thirty
years to address our carbon
footprint so there are costs
associated with doing that
because we have to put into
place the governance mechanisms
to help support that work then
secondly these resilience things
drought and water and fire
impacts of climate change are
already here the cost to our
state are on the order of tens
to hundreds of millions of
dollars from catastrophic fires
and frankly the drought that's
headed our way this year so it
will cost money to implement
this bill but it will be offset
by avoiding catastrophic impacts
of climate change by taking
action now and the pay back the
third part of the bill is about
building an economy that works
for our communities that builds
prosperity that lift up the
voices of our community and that
alternately will help lift
everyone in the state so yes
they're always costs for taking
action but we can't afford not
to take action.
Thank you Mr chair
representative sampling review.
Thank you Representative Ortez
next up we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Stansbury and and Representative
Rubio.
You know I've I've got to.
I don't really know where to
begin I think Representative
Scott Representative Montoya
Mason some excellent points to
here in San Juan County we're
You know it we're we're fighting
for jobs and good paying jobs
and I I just don't see the
you know the the so we're.
Jobs are filling in much of a
gap so you know we're gonna have
some more job losses in our
community and we're trying to
diversify our economy up here
or local economic development
outfit is is working on rail
city of Farmington and in a
chain energy's working on the
carbon capture project that has
real merit has some good
viability that that'll be a game
changer not only for our
community but
you know for the world really
it sure would be nice to China
with all their ramping up their
call production there your
electrical generation that they
would use
implemented a carbon capture for
their facilities that would
really be a game changer
and I and I I think I
I'm having a hard time
understanding you know New
Mexico is a small stay small
population two point one million
you know we're like an ant you
know like we're like one a at on
ten acres of land may we just
it's just hard for us to move
the table and
the cost of this bill to
implement corny F. R. that we
just recently got is eighteen
million dollars for the first
year thirty five million dollars
for the second year in in fifty
eight million dollars.
Of three year total cost there.
Representative Stansbury do do
we have that lined up is the
Appropriations Committee
This and to our budget I mean
this is a big capital
expenditure and and I'm not.
You know I just don't know.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
and Representative Strickler so
I am and I have been in close
communication as I said in my
closing with the agencies over
the last several days and I am
just seen the FIR this morning
along with all of you but I did
see some of HSD analysis and
it's very clear looking at the
agency analysis that there was a
misunderstanding and at a the
analysis that was done was not
accurate what I can tell you is
that we've been in conversation
with agencies for weeks and our
understanding is the
implementation of this bill
during the scoring period the
three year screen pay period is
ten million dollars so it's
about three and a half a year
and we are working through the
H. B. to process with the
speaker's office and leadership
and in conversation with the
administration to ensure that
the implementation dollars to
end up in the budget so the
answer to your question is yes.
So the the F. are you in your
opinion is is overstated.
I'm that fire does not match any
of our agency discussions so
yeah.
I think you know M. it may have
been that the bill was sent for
analysis and you all know how
this works bills get sent out to
agencies they review them and
sometimes as things come back
and were to happen things are
happening in real time there's
errors and and things happen so
I think that's what occurred.
The
and I I think it's it's telling
that the
Of business and industry from
you know from the chamber of
commerce agriculture
the only gas industry they they
all have serious concerns with
this bill and again is pretty
complex the.
The economic benefits of it is
is no
the checks and balances in this
bill or lacking I have got a
couple of
amendments that that we've
worked up we're trying to get
them out to you as quickly as
possible we're kind of
scrambling on time for this
hearing and I've got a couple of
I don't know if it's appropriate
to to bring up these issues now
Mr Chairman to you can kind of
guide me on this
the the two members can make
this a little
Make sure some checks and
balances I think with
job losses in and
Economic impact and have some
variance
opportunities in this bill I
think at
can I get some guidance from you
Mr chairman president Strickler
we we received
one of your members last night
it came out the mail from Shelby
yes she tells me there to in
Citrix I I personally haven't
seen the second one.
so I don't know what the second
one is the first one you know
we're not within that twenty
four hours but I think it's
pretty straightforward and I'm
willing to have you offer it and
haven't discussed a motive on
yeah I'm I appreciate that
chairman.
We we tried we tried to move as
quickly as we could we we can
had to scramble
the the first amendment I think
at that you might have.
Is a and I'd like to a like to
present to this the Sanchez if I
may it's
listed this point two one nine
six six six point one.
It is to house bill nine I don't
know if that's the one you that
you that we sent out earlier
that is not the one that was
sent out okay well give a let me
go though we go the first one
that was sent out it's a point
two one nine six seven nine
point one.
Did you get that one.
We have to one nine six seven
one point one.
One I have.
Is
Is point two one nine six seven
nine point one and it you know
have that one.
This is a this is providing a
variance.
To the agency's rules adopted
pursuant to this act.
And it just allows business and
industry to to
A point out there are concerns
where this this bill might
affect them of their industry
and I'm sorry you don't have it.
That's the one that was sent out
deals with the small business
regulatory relief act that that
that's the two point two one
nine six six six point one is
what I have so.
That's not the to to number on
the draft that was sent out.
Okay.
Very short to make sure it
matches what you have.
Would that be okay.
The same one it's the same.
I believe it's a that's all I
have it's on page twenty between
lines fourteen fifteen is that
what you have yeah it's is the
gist of it is the same there are
some technical differences.
Google do you have the two one
nine six seven one point one
amendment.
The no Sir I don't the one I
have is six six east is point
two one nine six six six one
point one just when I have some
members if you're if you're at
your computer in this virtual
world and you go into Citrix
there are four amendments.
at least two of them seem to be
comparable there's that the six
six six amendment.
And the six seven one amendment
pulls deal with the small
business regulatory relief act I
think that six seven one
amendment is.
A little more detail in just
language of.
Representative Strickler if you
want to present the the concept
in this the six six one I think
we can go ahead and discuss that
I appreciate that I'm sorry I
don't know have the.
Of that particular amendment
That's the that's the fun of
doing all this virtually
what this what this amendment
does is it gives a little up it
kind of ties into the small
business regulatory relief act I
think that's an important
element to to any big major rule
change and it says to
if a state agency has failed to
comply with the periodic review
of the rules is required by the
small business regulatory relief
act as specifically set forth in
section fourteen dash four nine
dash six NMAA in nineteen
seventy eight the state agency
shall not proceed with
rulemaking present to this
section until the peer periodic
review of this rule is completed
and this this a regulatory
relief act which I believe
example might it implemented
one two thousand ten and it's a
Pretty pretty handy
Checks and balances because this
is a major this is a major rule
change and initiatives of
business and industry a little a
little comfort and that's really
all that all this amendment does
it ties it into existing.
existing law.
Representative Stansbury are you
familiar no with what the
amendment is proposing to
address.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I do
have the amendment in front of
me with the two two number two
one nine six seven one point one
which seems to comport with the
language set and Representative
Strickler is reading and
Certainly what we're trying to
do in this bill is create as
much flexibility as possible so
that they agencies can use their
existing policy making
apparatuses to you know create
policies that help to advance
the goals of this bill so
creating a separate sort of
regime which would undermine the
agency's existing authorities
isn't it is not enough and not a
friendly amendment I'm sorry.
But I appreciate it.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you.
Representative this was brought
to my attention to make this
bill better and to make it more
more workable with the with the
business and industry again a
aware that you that they're the
ones that
Have I have a lot of jobs at
stake you want to make sure this
is an operate so I'm sorry don't
consider this a friendly
amendment
we
Appreciate your consideration
and have up.
Let me know what what you want
to do from here on a.
The Mr Chairman.
So therefore amendments in the
shared file
and it looks like it's it's two
versions of the same amendment
one is addressed to the bill and
one is dressed to the committee
substitute right so it sounds
like Kate they did when they got
committee substitute the updated
the amendments.
the the six six six the is
interested bill the six seven
one is addressed the committee
substitute which would be the
appropriate amendment yeah the
six seven one as well and I'm
sorry I don't have it I do I do
remember they recounted juggling
at Legislative Council Service
Trying to a man what was I guess
the the to the two point two
version and and I think you're
correct to we need to use the.
The the version that applies to
this point three version so
there may be for amendments but
they're really they're really
should just be to.
Senator Strickler you've
described the amendment
the Representative Stansbury has
said it's not friendly do you
wish to move the amendment
anyway.
Yes I would like to do that it
just it just gives gives a bill
a lot better
workability thank you this bill
is so massive and in its scope
that it you know and love for it
to to get really go through the
interim committee lacks like
some of these bills and I think
this is a good safe guard I love
love to to present the.
The.
This amendment to the bill in.
It's going to be the difference
is going to be the the other
version of that I don't have it
I'm sorry.
Are you are you moving adoption
or discussion.
Discussion let's discuss it.
Okay it is there further
discussion on the amendment.
so I'm it didn't take before it
before take that motion is there
further discussion I never sent
Townsend has his handout I
believe that's on the bill if
you want discuss the amendment
please wait it.
Okay so this so seeing no
discussion on the amendment
Representative Ferrary
You have a substitute motion to
table yes I do need to take I
can't.
should be can you take a vote on
the substitute motion to table
this is a two one nine six seven
one point one.
Dealing with the small business
regulatory relief act.
Thank you I'm Representative
Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No table.
Representative Ortez.
Yes to table.
Representative Sariñana yes to
table.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Vice chair Stansbury yes the
table please.
Chairman the queen.
Yes.
As a vote of seven to four do
table.
So that's tabling the the
amendment two one nine six seven
one which is functionally
similar to two one nine six six
six Representative Strickler you
still for thank you Mr chairman
I've got I've got one more
amendment to for your
consideration Representative and
it's up.
Again I'm I'm may have the wrong
number
this point two one nine six
seven nine point one and in this
case of variance.
for business and industry if
they have a special
circumstances wants us you know
it is I guess is trying to to.
Insure that one size doesn't fit
all and and I I know that this
really helps
to to have a variance mechanism
so it's not you know not too
onerous on business and industry
and so
Chairman you might give me in
the you might give me the
correct
number.
Representative Strickler I I
think that when you do have the
correct number it's two okay so
a point two one nine six six
seven nine point one does does a
tie in with this version three
that's correct okay well
especially in its allows a
person to request a variance.
From the state agencies rules
adopted pursuant to this
agreement this Act in requesting
a variance at a minimum the
person shall present sufficient
evidence to establish that a
failure to grant a variance
would pose an undue economic
burden of potion and regional
burden on any businesses
occupational activity and that
granting the variance will not
result in a significant threat
to human health public safety or
the environment so I think it's
pretty good.
Safeguarding
I'm open for questions.
Mr
copy the amendment.
I I I am having trouble finding
it in my email I'm sorry so it's
but I found it in the shared
file can you access that.
I'm is it possible to have the
committee assistant I email it
to the committee quickly my
apologies Gabby should be
sending all of the amendments
that were sent to me last night
out I do not have access to my
distribution list from home but
it should be coming from
Gabrielle Schultz.
There there's emails from Gabby
in us on it.
Gabby can you hear me.
I don't believe she's on the
call anymore let me go ahead and
give her a call really quick
okay let's just let's just hold
on this for a second.
Mr chairman and and
Representative thank you for
your.
Thank you for your facility
here.
Mr Chairman I'm if I may ask a
question.
Sure.
Representative Townsend is they
amendment short enough that you
could just read it out loud well
we're I can I can read to you.
Mr Chairman would that be okay
that would be fine okay.
Okay says on page eleven line
twenty five striking and on page
twelve one six after Matt insert
the following and I did briefly
rated teria um allowed person.
To request a variance from the
state agencies rules adopted
pursuant to the climate
solutions act in requesting a
variance at a minimum the person
shall present sufficient
evidence to establish that a
failure to grant a variance
would pose an undue economic
burden are posed
and then regional burden on any
businesses occupation or
activity and that granting the
variance will not result in a
significant threat to human
health public safety or the
environment.
I can kind of give you an
example of where this would
apply in on the the methane rule
that's being worked on now with
industry and if I may.
Mr Chairman representative.
Representative Stansbury or do
you understand the.
Okay so
it has been emailed out if
anyone wants to look at the.
The language but but let's just
let's just proceed
as best we can with with that
having been read to the
committee.
Go ahead Representative
Strickler thank thank you Mr
chairman a good example of this
to that where the variance role
really comes it comes in handy
is a in the only gas sector you
know we have a lot of Marshall
wells at I think there's like in
San Juan basin we have twenty
thousand active wells for
example in two thousand wells a
have been plugged and abandoned
of those twenty thousand wells
up probably eighty percent are
considered marginal wells in so
they're low volume low producers
and and so if you have some new
regulations
on those picture well she want
to you want to be able to have a
little flexibility
If the wells produce less than
that a hundred MCF a day for
example that G. E. you know the
rules and rags would you you
would get a little
a grandfathering on those
stripper wells because.
If you put more costs on them
you you would have to
prematurely plug in and then
those wells and that would that
would cost waste you want to be
able to you know capture those
research and and that that's
that's kind of a good example
that we're facing right now with
the with our marginal well
inventory in our state in the
southeast I'd have to I'd have
to referred to Larry Scott he
knows he knows that that emit
toward more than I do so these
wells you know they come in
strong and in a
they they they declined seventy
percent the first year for
example and and law the wells we
have up here were drilled in the
fifties and sixties and are
quite old and the most a lot of
them produced lesson hundred M.
C. F. A. so that's just that's
just to kind of a local example
we're you know various would be
would be needed under the under
you know under those
circumstances so.
Just a.
This additional example there.
Is there further discussion on
the amendment.
So
Representative Strickler you
presented the amendment I'd.
Resistance for delaski if it was
friendly or not.
I yes but I would love the
opportunity to respond please.
Great thank you Mr chairman
thank you and Representative
Strickler I'm having heard it
thank you for reading it and
being patient the committee
process I understand that the
concerns about the impacts
industry and the way the bill is
structured when you read it it
really differs to the agency
regulatory process and as I know
you are very familiar with and
the HSD regulatory process is a
big public process that include
hearings that includes
collaboration with industry and
each rule is developed with the
science technology industry and
economics than mine and so to
grant a broad variants but for
those rulemaking processes had
ever occurred I'm just isn't in
line with the right we do state
regulatory process these so I
appreciate what you're trying to
accomplish but it is an
unfriendly amendment.
Thank you for that reason
Strickler I guessing questions
last time do you do you still
want to.
Move the amendment yes yes I
would like I would like to if
it's okay Mr chairman and I I
think I think this is a regional
approach yeah the the regulatory
process is quite quite intense
but this is a there's a big
departure with the comp
combining three agencies the
barman Department Eugene
minerals naturist.
Thank
did some out Mr chair I'd like
to move to table okay.
Well I I I was actually needed
just.
So and in when you are muted did
you move adoption of the
amendment yes place.
Session of a of
One hundred point two one nine
six seven nine point one.
allowing
variance provision the one
someone's talking about not sure
who yeah this is a
Representative Montoya and I
second it okay and
Representative Ferrary I need to
take all and is that a
substitute motion to table.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes it's a substitute motion to
table think they're second to
the substitute motion second.
Jody Lee please take the vote.
The substitute motion.
So this is we're voting on the
motion to table.
Thank you Representative
Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No table.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana yes the
table.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Vice chair Stansbury yes the
table.
German McQueen yes.
I'm and that is a do table with
a vote of seven to four.
Okay Representative Strickler
you still up for thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative and I I guess
just wanted can ramp up my
thoughts here you know we're
we're a small state with small
population you know we we border
Texas Oklahoma Colorado Utah on
Arizona and I'm not aware of
any.
Similar legislation and now
station and we course we have
the large neighbor to the south
New Mexico and you know we need
to we need to let the energy
transition act to take its
course
we've heard a positive results
from the the electric coop set
there there had a schedule on
their on their renewable
portfolio standards yeah and and
I'm you know a mention to the
committee and to the to the
sponsor.
That the the two solar projects
that are on the drawing the
drawing board here in San Juan
county is is pretty exciting up
here because of those
construction jobs that we look
forward to other temporary but
those projects you're gonna cost
probably hundred million dollars
apiece maybe up to two hundred
million dollars apiece which is
a
much needed I can economic
activity up in our community and
then the carbon capture process
project is a more costlier
project you want to point two
billion dollars so anyway I
appreciate everybody's time and
effort and and I yield my time.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next up we have
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Stansbury
very briefly.
the evidence that we have before
us.
Makes
Pretty stark.
Representation
Representative Stansbury can you
explain to me.
one I we should.
We should vote on.
Then why should we vote on that
we're on the evidence before us.
And.
And if I understood you your
testimony you say that is not
in line with what the agencies
and the administration say is
applicable is am I wrong there
is is that right understand
figure out what data point I
should go to to base my decision
on.
I'm sorry I am Mr Chairman
representative towns and Kunj
could you clarify the question.
Do you believe the F. I. R. is
is correct.
I'm Mr Chairman leader Townsend
as I mentioned a few moments ago
wearing continuing conversations
with the agencies regarding
their budgetary needs to
implement this bill as they know
you know we moved us up this
morning that also and added and
and restructured things slightly
so and Mr chairman and leader
Townsend I'm I have not had the
opportunity to fully review they
have fire because I received it
at the same time you did this
morning so I can't really speak
to its accuracy or not accuracy
all I know is that we have had
ongoing discussions with the
administration about their
budgetary needs and we are
working to get those budgetary
needs and the House Bill to.
So Representative what number
are you putting in the budget to
address your budgetary needs.
I'm maybe Mr chairman and leader
Townsend as I mentioned a moment
ago we're looking at about ten
million over three years.
And
Mr Chairman representative.
So is that the number that
you're presenting to the
committee decided that we should
I mean that.
If I understand your right
number that that it will not
exceed ten million dollars over
three years is that what you're
telling us or.
I'm just trying to figure out
what I'm supposed about on.
Thank you Representative
Townsend are Mr chairman and
leader Townsend so as you can
see the bill does not have an
appropriation actually in the
bill so we're only voting on the
bill but what we are doing is
working with the agencies and
through the budget process to
try to get money put into house
bill two so what we're voting on
hearing the committee is the
policy of the actual bill that's
before us.
Representative.
Chairman representative voting
on.
No this is not something I feel
very comfortable in the I think
it is
One of the problems with our
budgeting process.
This that you come before us and
sometimes I do too I mean it's
not just you and I don't mean
that but we have we have a
process that we have a bill that
we're bringing to the committee
asking him to vote on that we
don't know what the impact is
and that is a.
That's real troubling.
I also have seen data that tells
me that this
The proposed legislation would
significantly increase
electrical costs to consumers in
New Mexico to the tune of about
thirty percent can you Mr
chairman and representative can
you do you believe it will
increase electrical cost or not.
I'm Mr chairman and leader
Townsend I am I do not know
where those numbers came from
and I'm not sure what you what
information you're citing but as
I said in my closing statement
we work to try to make sure that
this language dove tailed with
the energy transition act and
the goals and the renewable
portfolio standard and of course
all the other legislation that
already exists in the
electrification secretary so my
understanding from a technical
standpoint is that this bill
comports with our existing
electrification policy is and so
it is certainly not the intent
of this bill to increase
anyone's rates.
So Mr chairman and
representative
Are you telling me that you do
not believe this bill will
increase electrical costs.
I'm maybe Mr chairman and rather
leader Townsend and I've
actually just received some
information from one of our
technical experts that they
believe the energy costs could
go down under this bill Senator
well I think you are the to
share that of with the members
but because the I don't believe
that to be true
Mr Chairman representative I
think this will increase a
lexical costs to New Mexicans
just like the EPA did matter of
fact
and and I guess that is in line
with the ETA because it did
increase electrical costs and
the and this will to the you
mentioned the renewable
portfolio do you think the the
legislature has
Do you believe the legislature
or the PRC.
Takes the lowest cost option
when they are
implementing the renewable
portfolio standard.
I'm thank you Mr chairman thank
you later Townsend that's
outside the scope and at the
bill and my knowledge about how
they I'm that PRC operates but
my understanding of the
processes that we as the
Legislature has that in the
renewable portfolio standard our
overall goal for emissions and
then it is up to the actual
electricity producers to put
forward their resource
management plans to the PRC and
the PRC is the oversight body
reviews those to make sure
they're in line with the public
interest so there's a very
robust public process to ensure
that it's done with public
interest in ratepayers in mind.
Well I appreciate that Mr
Chairman and the only reason I
brought it up is because in your
answer you.
He discussed the renewable
portfolio standard and it's so
one of my favorite topics in in
one of I believe one of the
biggest mistakes that the
legislature has maybe not in
invoking renewables but not
mandating that the PRC take the
lowest cost option in invoking
renewable so that the.
A citizens of New Mexico and
their businesses aren't harmed
and we didn't do that and it's
not happening and I would tell
you that that's prove
in in my district now we're
looking at a rate increase of
ten percent just to pay for one
of the so renewable
Projects in I don't believe
that's in the best interest of
New Mexicans
so I'm not going to belabor the
point of.
Mr Chairman representative
I don't think this bill is ready
for prime time I don't think
this bill and I think that is
is.
By comments that have been made
to date that we don't have a
factual FIR.
We don't know what the agencies
really think about it.
We don't know how it's going to
affect jobs.
We do know that.
will increase I believe we know
that it's going to increase the
cost of electricity it's going
to cause a process in New Mexico
to be less competitive with our
neighbors.
I think it's in is as we lose
jobs we're gonna lose equity
we're gonna have the increased
cost our citizens are gonna have
a loss of opportunity.
and overall it's going to be a
huge burden on New Mexicans.
I appreciate what you're trying
to do.
But with Representative Scott's
testimony.
We're putting a huge burden on
the backs of the poor state.
With the.
With the thought that we're
gonna change the world.
And you know as well as I do.
That a state of two point one
plus million people.
that is impoverished already.
It's going to have a terrible
time trying to make a difference
in global warming.
I would also say that
Mr chairman and Representative
Seth.
I would encourage the members
to.
Remember
The example set Representative.
Montoya.
Brought forced about.
The.
San Juan generating station and
that we had an opportunity to
capture.
Twenty plus percent of all the
CO emitted from electrical
generation in New Mexico.
And save jobs.
And we didn't do.
And I think that is a great
service to.
Our state as a whole certainly
to.
The consolidated school
district.
Certainly to.
Of the Navajo Nation.
And so I can't support this
because I do not believe it's
good for New Mexico.
And the data that's before us
today.
That we're being asked to.
The
supports my thoughts and
decisions that we do not have
clear evidence.
To proceed because it's not good
for New Mexico so Mr Chairman
representative thank you for
your time if you have comments
I'd I'd welcome
But the facts are what have been
present.
Representative Stansbury
president Townsend invited you
to respond you would you like
same thing before I say
something.
Thank you Mr chairman and leader
Townsend just that I have great
respect for you and I appreciate
you sharing your perspectives.
Thank you for that is there any
further discussion from the
committee before I make
statement.
So usually do it.
It's.
The price the chair to go last
sometimes a sort of missed out
sometimes are run out of time.
Sometimes my questions or
comments or early maybe.
What what I want to say it was I
think we have.
It we've heard today
Debate we've heard today we have
a cause and effect.
The problem.
In the because the issue is is
on the jobs.
In this those coal jobs are
going away.
And the oil and gas jobs are not
far behind.
In the reason the call jobs have
gone the way it is not because a
regulation but because of
economics.
And the renewable energy is
coming on strong and
It's more cost effective and
they can call out the ground.
In burning.
It also happens to be better for
the environment.
In I think the the oil and gas
jobs.
I mean another five years ten
years maybe fifteen not that
long planning horizons those are
those are gonna be right behind
those coal jobs.
And so we can either pretend
that's not happening.
And blame others in other.
Factors or whatever we want to
do.
But their heads in the sand and
just say no we want the jobs we
have.
And then when those jobs are
gone will have nothing.
There will be no replacement.
There will be no economy they'll
there will be a transition.
Or we can see what's coming.
And we can plan for the future.
And we can develop new industry.
And we can work to create new
jobs many jobs will be the same
jobs.
It will be a one the one
replacement.
But we will try to bring jobs as
best we can to these communities
because it's something we
believe it and that's what
that's what they mean when they
say just transition that it's
just and fair to try to
diversify the economy.
In communities they're overly
reliant on fossil fuel
extraction because we know that
also fuel extraction.
Is in its waiting this.
And that's what I'm gonna vote
for this bill because it's
looking to the future.
And what we can bring to the
state in the future.
Senator do you
have anything to say before we
accepts a motion.
Thank you Mr chairman actually
I'd love to offer the
opportunity for I co sponsored
to also say something if that's
okay.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Mr chair you know
house bill nine is the
culmination of work done by
community members all across the
state years in the making and
the foundation on which we
should base our efforts to
diversify our economy and
provide opportunities for
communities are far more
expensive than what energy
industry will ever be able to do
for our state so I urge you to
all of re imagine the
possibilities Trust those on the
front lines working towards this
vision and support this
legislation but finally Mr
chairman I can't leave without
actually saying some words but
they were comments made earlier
discounting all of the voices of
communities of color who spoke
in support of house bill nine it
is the most the up most of
silencing and erasure public
comments for New Mexicans from
all over the state including
constituents of those serving on
this committee today or or or
maybe based on their own lived
experiences New Mexicans
watching this hearing should not
and will not tolerate what was
blatant silencing of communities
that already have experienced a
dark history in our state I
would appreciate it if the
members of this committee that
while you are passionately
opposed to this policy that you
absolutely do not diminish the
communities who have
courageously shared their
experiences and spoken today in
support of house bill nine you
ask for transparency and opening
of the roundhouse yet when the
public shows up to address
legislation that will affect
them and their future their
voices are silenced and then
there raced virtual or in person
our communities are here and
they are making their demands
pretty largely I encourage you
to listen to them thank you Mr
chair.
Thank thank it's worth noting
that we have a long list of.
people who want to speak in
support of the bill that we did
not get to so they were more
more voices we didn't reach
what's the what's the
Yeah stand for you are you done
I just want to say one final
statement which is that I just
so greatly appreciate the
conversation today and that
passion that everyone brought to
the table there is nothing more
important than addressing our
global climate crisis and
fundamentally reimagining our
economy for the health and well
being and the resilience of our
future and I urge you all to
pass house bill nine and I thank
you for all of the amazing
people across the state who lent
their voices their time and
they're hard to this effort and
thank you Mr chairman.
What is the will of the
committee.
Mr Chairman the past.
Representative Ortez who was the
second I was percent Ferrary
seconded the motion.
The sure we can you take a vote.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Know what I like to explain my
vote.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Syriana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Vice chair Stansbury.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Chairman Matthew McQueen yes.
That is a two passed with a vote
of seven to four.
Thank you you do pass
Representative Montoya to
briefly expects plans vote.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman I do not disagree
that.
That if us if there's a car if
there's a big truck on the road
and then there's a little
previous on the road it's less
expensive to operate the
previous.
I invested in that big truck and
I have paid off and then I'm
forced.
To give it away because I can't
sell it it's just being shot or
and then I am forced to buy a
previous.
That is not less expensive and
that's the situation we're in
I do too legislation not due to
economics all of these what
we're looking at doing is
shutting down the money that
provides for the poor for
schools for all of our for all
of our institutions so I I come
I completely disagree with the
idea that this is economic is or
economic to people who are in
business would be doing this on
their own that is not the case
they're being forced to do this
not of their will in the people
who are losing their jobs are
also losing and not of their
will.
Representative Stansbury to
briefly explain her vote thank
you Mr chairman of course I
voted in the affirmative for
this bill because it empowers
our communities it gives them a
voice and it will enable New
Mexico to not only lead in a
just transition but lead the
nation and so I think you all
today for your incredible
support so thank you.
Thank you for that so that's a
we've been here for three hours
we have another bill is is
everyone good to go or do we
need to take a short break.
I'm I'm inclined as it has a
short break you would not be
opposed okay so it is one nine
will reconvene at twelve twenty
so please be back at twelve
twenty.
Okay it's twelve twenty Shelby
are you with us.
I am thank you so very.
Our next bill is house bill
fifteen sustainable building tax
credit.
Representative Ortez whenever
you're ready please present the
bill.
I'd like to make sure that at
ten the fifth wheel corner
Herald who are moved over.
Herald should be coming right
now.
Here but it is.
Great thank you so much good
afternoon Houston take a little
breast second
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee H. B. fifteen
replaces the sustainable
buildings tax credit from twenty
fifteen that credit has been
instrumental in transforming the
market for new buildings in New
Mexico but now because our New
Mexico energy conservation code
was recently updated we need a
new twenty twenty one
sustainable buildings tax credit
to be adopted so that we can
ensure that the tax credit is
given to those who go over and
above the new building code.
This bill does two things first
it raises the requirement for
the tax credit for these new
buildings so that only the most
efficient sustainable buildings
being built will qualify and
secondly which is what I'm
really really excited about it
allows for existing homes that
improve energy efficiency also
qualify for tax credits.
Further low income homes will be
real receive double credits
since the energy savings on
utility bills are needed most by
low income families.
Tax credits of this type are the
really the best way to move the
market for the very best energy
efficiency and sustainable
technologies in building science
we're doing a really great job
here in the state on increasing
that baseline efficiency for all
new buildings so now is the time
to increase the levels that
qualify for that tax credit over
and above those building code
requirements and the time is now
to give middle income and lower
income New Mexicans the tools to
make their existing homes more
efficient cozy safe and help
lower utility bills.
We talked a lot in this
committee about energy
affordability and this bill
addresses that issue by reducing
utility bills for those who most
need it this bill provides jobs
for those installers of energy
efficient products like doors
windows insulation and water
heaters heat pumps and this bill
gives all New Mexicans a path to
lower their demand for energy
which helps us meet our carbon
reduction goals this bill has an
annual cap a sunset and includes
annual reporting requirements so
with that I'll stand for
questions from the committee I
have my expert witness County
people chord with southwest
energy efficiency project and
our technical adviser Mr hell
tribute Karen Trujillo from the
energy conservation management
division at and are here today
to answer any questions from the
committee thank you so much.
Your tend as you want to give
your experts an opportunity to
statement or just use them to
answer questions.
I can give them an opportunity
right now I'd like.
Missed field court R. Mr
Trujillo if you had a brief
statement the.
Now in support of our explaining
the bill that's that's welcome
it's not necessary.
Mr Chairman this is Carol
Trujillo with the energy and
minerals department I'm an
engineer professional
engineering that provides
support to this program in our
department thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
C. will car do you have anything
that Mr chair no no thank you
I'm just here to answer any
questions that may come up
perfect.
so we will go to the audience.
You know as always members of
the audience we appreciate your
input.
Please be brief and respectful
our first speaker is a year of
although.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak I am the co
chair of the American institute
of architects.
Committee on the environment New
Mexico chapter.
I stand in support of SB fifteen
I would members are design
professionals your new best to
do it educators and
manufacturing representatives
committed to provide healthy and
safe environments for New
Mexicans.
We congratulate noted.
Gration and the construction
industry.
Commission for moving from the
two thousand nine two okay two
thousand nineteen international
energy conservation code for the
state.
Tax credits right should apply
the construction that goes
beyond call it an incentivized
this type of healthy building
for owners investors and
developers we particularly
favored incentives for low
income New Mexicans an existing
building retrofits thank you
again for the opportunity to
participate in these wonderful
democratic prospects.
Thank you next up we have
Camilla I will then.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Camilla I will then I'm
speaking on behalf of the real
granted chapter of the Sierra
Club.
Representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in support.
Of House Bill fifteen thank you
so much to the sponsor we
support this bill because
providing tax credits for
installation of efficient
products in existing homes and
small commercial buildings will
help average New Mexicans lower
their monthly energy burden by
lowering their utility bills
help fight climate change by
reducing the emissions from
operating the buildings or home
and improve community health
through reduced health impacts
from emissions we especially
want to highlight the low income
provisions that are included
double credits that are
refundable for low income New
Mexicans or affordable housing
thank you and once again we hope
you'll support each be fifteen.
Thank you for that we can use.
Thank you Mr chair Mrs can use.
With the coalition of
sustainable communities Mexico
which is comprised of ostracism
Albuquerque Santa Fe sitting
County.
I also want to say that I work
with Errol Trujillo for she's
over ten years to manage the
residential side of the building
engine cut tax credit at energy
conservation division I'm so
proud to have helped transform
the building administrative to
our knowledge outrageously plays
a major role.
And.
With the adoption of the new
building code it's really more
important to revise the tax
credit program otherwise you're
going to get tax because frankly
for the code so we do better
that with public policy that
really incentivized going deeper
and particularly helping the
poor thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have been
Chilton.
Thank you Mr.
Needed yourself.
Our.
The bill everybody logged on to
testify.
So.
Okay good want to start anymore.
Chairman of budget also
conservation voters New Mexico
thank you for the opportunity to
testify we support this bill I
think one thing that really
separates this tax credit out
for many others to sort of
paraphrase Representative Harper
well when he's to speak on the
your tax credit is that this tax
credit is a proven winner we
know that this one works we have
an on record so that really sets
our partner Marissa yes okay
thank you very much.
Thank you it sounds like seat
supported as well.
next up we have.
Jennifer can be.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer can be and I am the US
green building council state
local advocacy manager he was to
be season nonprofit organization
dedicated transforming the way
buildings and communities are
designed built and operated our
flagship rebuilding system
leadership in energy and
environmental design or LEED
it's been embraced across the
world including in New Mexico
sustainable building tax credit
which would echo the last
speaker that it is eight proven
and successful tax credit
however U. S. U. B. C. as
opposed to House Bill fifteen as
written we have some specific
edits to recommend that I will
also provide in writing that we
think would strengthen the bill
and also prevents unintended
consequences USGBC is supported
updating this tax credit and we
applaud the state for the
distance to expand incentives
for affordability in housing the
additional targeted conservation
program and the bonus for net
zero buildings however we do not
agree that the current program
incentivizes buildings built
only to code we are opposed to
removing the Lee silver and the
gold certification from the tax
credit which represent seventy
five percent of the current tax
credit recipients according to
the FIR the updates The New
Mexico energy code adopted
twenty twenty we're good and
unnecessary improvement but that
energy coat is not equivalent to
LEED silver or the gold
certification energy
conservation is a core component
of sustainability but it
dressing energy conservation
alone in a silo is not
sustainability eight
certification is a holistic
approach to high performing
buildings includes above code
energy performance requirements
as well as requirements to
address transportation site
water efficiency materials
indoor environment quality more
for than ever as well as
rewarding innovation and
addressing regional parties we
also have some specific comments
to be included in that year and
what maybe some unattended
language there I would reach out
directly to the bill Sanchez
with my contact information and
we would love to work with you
on amendment to remove some
unintended consequences and
ensure a strong tax bill thank
you.
Thank you for that it's worth
noting that we didn't.
Unlike last we did segregate
opposition and support because
we were imposing global time
limits we still do have the two
minute timer which everyone
could see which I think is so
helpful so thank you for your
comments next up we have Randy
trainer.
Mr chairman and committee
members can you hear me yes
thank you my name is Randy
trainer registered lobbyist
representing the New Mexico home
builders association thank you
for the opportunity to testify
today I stated opposition to
house bill fifteen has written.
This is stable billing tax
credit has been a very
successful program for
residential residential
construction it was designed to
encourage builders to reach
beyond the code to achieve
greater energy efficiency it
encourages innovation and
creativity.
Our principal concern that house
bill fifteen is that establishes
a level of certification that
would not encourage a builder to
build to that higher standard
except for very expensive homes
for wealthy buyers the result is
fewer built in this energy
concert.
One of the most difficult issues
we struggled with in the
adoption of the sustainable
building tax credit was where is
the sweet spot how do we
encourage construction beyond
the code anymore without going
too far.
The term should we spot we used
by then state representative
Wirth the original sponsor of
the sustainable building tax
credit the point here is just
because there are higher
standards doesn't automatically
mean that is the sweet spot just
because your car can go a
hundred and forty miles an hour
participate you drive that fast.
By the sweet spot we can
continue to drive the market
towards more more energy
efficient homes in the
encouraging innovation and
creativity I want to thank
Representative Ortiz for time we
have been very up front with our
concerns it will continue to
work to find the sweet spot
going forward thank you.
Thank you for that next with
mark Duran.
Thank you Mr chairman of market
Rasen are represented New Mexico
manufactured housing industry of
like to think Representative of
Martinez for bringing forward of
the legislation we have been
involved Mr chairman and members
of the committee can you hear me
Mr chairman.
Yes okay the time clock and
started coach wonder of thank
you Mr chairman we've been
involved in manufactured housing
industry in in all the versions
of this legislation back even be
four twenty thirteen
and we have had a different
versions along the way I think
the regional idea of of the
legislation which we supported
of was to have average disease
taking at bandage of energy
efficient ideas products six
center of in their housing on
their we are to get anywhere
successfully included in the
bill that that the people who I
am and live in manufactured
homes are exactly those average
citizens and should be provided
access
to sustainable building
sustainable building tax credits
except for it has taken us all
up a little bit longer to be
able to take advantage of the
tax credits in the programs but
we built an industry quite
frankly around it and have been
successful at it we still want
to work with the sponsor on of
some provisions of the bill what
some language in the bill but
overall support concept the idea
as we always have and want to
continue to work on the
legislation.
The Sanchez in regard to some
specific concerns that we have
with the legislation but overall
support the concept as we always
have thank you Mr chairman.
For that except we have Amy
Miller.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I
am calling from Albuquerque
representing the southwest
energy efficiency project
encouraging you to vote in
support of house bill fifteen
house bill fifteen is not only
about protecting the environment
it's about helping New Mexicans
save on energy bills as the
representative stated earlier
this bill builds upon something
that New Mexico has done really
well in the past and that's
transforming the market for
energy efficient buildings but
this bill again encourages
builders to meet a higher bar in
building the most efficient
buildings possible also for the
first time in includes work on
existing homes and buildings
something that is so critical
here in New Mexico thank you for
your consideration of this
important piece of legislation.
Thank you for that we have
Joseph Hernandez.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Joseph
Hernandez I'm here as
individual and I'm also here as
our of the New Mexican president
of us should brought the R. I
support
House Bill fifteen the
sustainable building tax credit
because under this new incentive
energy efficiency requirements
for new homes and commercial
buildings and.
The new requirements include
including the broadband access
and electrical V. vehicle extra
credits are offered for fully
electric buildings and those
that use net zero water and
waste of energy
more importantly of the
buildings provide nearly forty
percent greenhouse gas emissions
that's why we we need a house
bill fifteen the substrate oval
building tax credit which also
supports low income families and
I could tell you that there's a
a lot of a Navajo
relatives who who are builders
who are contractors who you know
who who work it in the building
trade industry and this will
help those Navajo workers a
Navajo business owners.
Thank you for that next up we
have no along.
Hello thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes right hi am no along with
entries there's defense counsel
here to stand in support of SB
fifteen I'm I would just note
all the reasons already
mentioned and in addition I'd
say SB fifteen in this sort of
incentive is exactly the sort of
incentive that it needs to bring
about the emissions reductions
are discussed in the previous
bill debate and also note that
there is a huge economic
opportunity here with
retrofitting buildings we can
increase the workforce most
clean energy jobs are in energy
efficiency we can produce huge
economic activity by supporting
construction construction trades
and energy efficiency appliance
investments and I can also
increase revenues to the state
even though it's a tax credit
all of Economic additional
economic activity and
construction and building
improvement actually improved
increased revenues the state I
think it's a net positive in
every possible direction and
I urge you to pass it thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have June he.
Your.
We much chairman and everyone
attending.
I am wanting to provide some
information from our.
Electronic information agency
which is at energy dot go can
you introduce yourself please
you Parsons.
He retired structural engineer
and retired deployment.
The building sector accounts for
about seventy six percent of
energy use in the United States.
Think about that.
It has been said before forty
percent of all US primary energy
use and associated gag
greenhouse gas emissions in the
US is from our buildings.
That's forty percent of our
emissions contributing to the
climate crisis.
Comes from our buildings.
This makes it essential to
reduce energy consumption in
buildings.
Green non bio energy.
Reduces the costs to building
owners and tenants making
opportunities for improved
efficiency normais.
The savings.
Is particularly relevant for low
income people.
Instead of hiking energy costs
to our people it lowers our
energy costs.
The eight voluntary system that
was mentioned before is a great
benefit for big money projects
maybe five percent of the
buildings in the US but it's
voluntary it does not help.
Medium and low income people in
ninety five percent of the
buildings in our country that
are again producing forty
percent of our greenhouse gases
and in conclusion it is worth
noting that New Mexico
contributes one percent of the
total greenhouse gas emissions
in the United States every year
thank you.
Thank you for that next up with
Tom Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee and Tom
Solomon co coordinator of three
fifty dot org Mexico and the
behalf of our eight thousand
members of the state to stand in
support of this bill
as it's been said buildings
supply about forty percent of
all greenhouse gas emissions in
the country according to the
global alliance for buildings
and construction and
yes sustainable buildings tax
credit is an excellent way to
provide a reduction in those
greenhouse gas emissions
and assisting with building with
the good energy efficiency and
insulation is also a lower cost
building a so important low
income income families so for
all those reasons we stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have.
We.
okay.
Hello.
My name chair and members of the
committee my name is Lisa Lowe
rock on the sustainability
officer for the city of Los
crucis and I would like to focus
on a critical benefit of the
sustainable building tax credit
addressing health and safety for
our low and moderate income
households Los crucis has a
backlog of LMI homes in need of
rector fits these homes do not
provide safe ambient
temperatures.
New construction continues to
side step quality thermal
infrastructure for LMI homes
because of the cost STTC makes
it possible to do the right
thing and have a lasting impact
last summer less crucis broke
heat records instead of our
average twelve days of
temperatures over a hundred
degrees Fahrenheit we had forty
two sixteen of those days were
actually over a hundred and five
degrees Fahrenheit which was
also a record according to a
local poll in our city seventy
two percent of people were
unable to complete normal daily
activities due to extreme heat
these residents are at risk
vapid coolers are not capable of
lowering the ambient temperature
of the house is adequately and
because of the pandemic.
Could not leave their homes for
cooling centers or other
facilities so ladies and they
still cannot pay their utility
bills STTC is a critical tool in
helping our communities be
prepared physically in their
homes and financially in their
pocket books for the changes
that we are and will be facing
some of the city of Los crucis
encourages you to support HB
fifteen thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for that we have each
night.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Paige I and
I am here representing New
Mexico voices for children to
stand in support of house bill
fifteen I want to thank the
sponsor for this legislation
which makes some much needed
updates and improvements to the
sustainable building tax credit
and we believe offers the right
incentives to create a market
for more energy and water
efficiencies and reduce
emissions which we know is so
important to protect our
environment and improve
community health we also
appreciate the increased credits
for New Mexicans with lower
incomes so that more families
can benefit from this credit and
have energy efficient homes so I
urge your support for H. B.
fifteen thank you.
Thank you next up we have Crisco
Lori.
Hello I'm Chris glory the lead
fellow architect you're very
you're very faint and she could
get closer to the Mike perhaps
sure thing.
Can you hear me better now that
is a little better.
Okay my name is Corey Lee fellow
an architect and owner of a
sustainable building consultancy
in Albuquerque Culbert Essie I'm
also president elect for the
American institute of architects
New Mexico chapter Dan speaking
on behalf of myself as a private
citizen.
New Mexico has been recognized
nationally for the benefits that
this bill offers it's an
important incentive that
stimulates the development of
energy efficient buildings in
New Mexico as a sustainable
building consultant I've seen
first hand over the years how
this tax credit has supported a
healthy economy that is good for
both our environment and our
people I'm excited that the
bills being upgraded to reflect
current codes and expand two
existing building retrofits as
well as offer benefits for low
income families I agree with the
others that have previously
spoken that there are a few
issues with the bill that as it
currently reads that must be
addressed one concern is that
the definition of sustainable
commercial buildings be expanded
to include all commercial
building types beyond
multifamily residential
including industrial retail and
offices so that the bill can
adequately serve all New
Mexicans.
It's my hope that this bill
continues to inspire all
building owners designers
constructors and operators to
move towards more sustainable
buildings in New Mexico continue
to lower carbon emissions
contribute to better air quality
and reduce energy costs as well
as improve our quality of life
overall I support the concept of
moving this bill forward with
adjustments thank you.
Thank you for that next with can
hi is.
You're needed on your and.
Continuing to meet yourself.
So should we we we even use the
ten right that's that's on this
end.
Yes that's correct.
Okay can if you want to speak in
economic yourself you can raise
your hand up there it goes.
Are you there yes sorry what was
the question.
Well we hearing out so please be
in.
I already spoke testified you
are muted the entire time Jeez
sorry about that well as I was
saying.
This is Mr chair I'm with the
collisional sustainable
communities and we're of state
strongly support the bill.
I help there'll tree a run the
program get over two years he
can yes you know we we you know
your name is spelled differently
it's ten highs and I thought it
might be a different person not
can Hughes and you impacted
testified and I recall your
testimony so thank you for that
okay good your hands different
spelling so it was sorry okay we
have the center for civic policy
with their hands let's see if
they have comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak in support
of HB fifteen the sustainable
building tax credit as you know
my name is James both the wine
and the policy director for the
center for civic policy we think
the sponsor Representative Ortez
for her work on this bill and
CCP supports this legislation
especially for its potential to
help lower energy bills for low
to moderate income New Mexicans
so again I thank you for the
opportunity to speak and urged a
vote yes to do pass on this
legislation.
Thank you for that Matt Higgins.
Hello you can hear me okay yes
thank you I'm a consulting
engineer in Albuquerque and have
been working in the energy and
sustainable building space in
New Mexico for last thirteen
years and have seen the strides
that efforts like this have made
in making private sector
commercial building developers
and owners take that initial
step and then explore things
like so we're and
other opportunities are to make
their buildings last longer
because the program better and
they're following the standards
and then they're healthier
I'm speaking in favor of this
bill but I'm also
one point out that because our
energy codes have changed you
know compliance with the tax
credit as is is almost immediate
there's really no incentive to
do anything above and beyond the
current code since it has
thankfully been upgraded so just
like to ask that that's taken
into consideration and that this
bill is for thank you.
Thank you for that we have Steve
Hale.
Yes hello this is Steve help can
you hear me.
Yes.
Yes my name is Steve Hale I am a
green builder of for custom
homes and I'm also the program
director for building green New
Mexico and we've certified about
eight thousand of homes single
family dwellings of over the
last thirteen or so years this
last year we
we certified about a thousand
homes and of those nine we're
certified at the M. level so
with what you're trying to do
with this tax credit.
Is raise to one tenth of one
percent.
Of the available.
Greenbuild homes I talked also
with
people that are doing eight
certifications and they said yes
it's virtually identical the
immoral the platinum level for
lead in single family dwellings
is very very low and of the
probably the most important
point these are really expensive
homes there are a few exceptions
we have certified one home for
habitat for humanity but those
are heavily subsidized by my
other issues so one of the
biggest issues with the
sustainable building as it's
going to kill the good work that
the more affordable homes will
offer and the only give money to
the people that really don't
need it anyways so I'm not quite
sure where we're going there
I see I'm running out of time
shortly.
You have some also high hurdles
to jump if you're trying to do
of incentives for the retrofit
part two so it does need some
work and we are willing to help
on that.
Thank you Mr L. we have Jason
Thompson.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman the
committee members my name's
Jason Thompson I'm here on
behalf of a western resources
western resource advocates on
the registered lobbyist I will
we're standing in strong support
of this bill and we urge the
committee to pass this bill and
for the reasons previously
stated we appreciate the Sanchez
taking this up
and that we stand strong support
thank you.
Thank you except we object will
are.
Mr Chairman the subject lark and
with New Mexico home builders
association we're the state
level association for the
construction industry.
The assistant will building tax
credit program has been a very
successful is a very successful
program which relies on
incentives to gain participation
by builders and home buyers and
this is a very important point
the kind seps addressed by the
changes proposed in the bill do
have merit however the way the
changes are written in this bill
will likely kill incentives to
participate in this program
their number of details in the
bill that we object to but the
problem the basic problem that
Steve addressed minutes ago was
it this bill goes too far in
raising the standards of
participation and will kill the
incentives.
To do it we all want them to do
so instead of helping the
concept be more successful we
believe this bill will actually
ruin the program is.
Many other prominent stated we
are willing to continue working
with a sponsor in the proponents
to make the bill better but in
the present form we are required
to oppose the bill thank you.
Thank you for that we have Laura
Vassar.
Yes thank you Mr chairman my
name is Laura Vassar and I am a
remodeler in the Albuquerque
area
I also sit on the condition for
building board that oversees the
bill green New Mexico program is
one of the program steep hills
director on that.
On the bill I love the idea
chairman McQueen you know that
I'm all about existing homes we
we have talked about setting the
bar to be able to allow existing
homes to capture some of the tax
credits that are out there
one of the things on on the
prior bill that we're looking at
is performance based where as in
this bill unfortunately the
existing home credited the
things that are available for
the existing homes are based on
product driven tax credits
instead of performance based
which is where we can get the
real benefits from it we love
the idea we love love being able
to incentivize improving our
infrastructure of the homes
however I fear that this bill
maybe a little twisted like some
of the other opponents is that
there's there's there's it feels
encumbered perhaps if it were
divided out and we could deal
with.
The new standards set by the way
are already being developed by
bill green New Mexico they're
working through the final
details but that that's been a
process that they've been
working on for gosh I think
since mid summer we realize that
with the new coat we need to
raise the standards so.
This is a good bill is doing a
lot of great things but if we
could divide it up and and make
it a little more realty and and
and a little more sense of some
of the areas like this USGBC
spoke about early on about it I
think it would be better served
for our community but I think
the sponsor for bringing this
bill up and present the light on
energy efficiency thank you.
Thank you for that and that
concludes our public testimony.
Representative Ortez do you have
anything you'd like to add
before we get to the committee.
Yes thank you Mr chair and thank
you for all of you who have
given eloquent comments both in
opposition in support of this
bill I'd like to just take a
moment and engage this people
Cornyn Mr Trujillo in answering
some of the issues that were
raised by home builders
association bill green New
Mexico USGBC are you know some
details that you know that they
asked about and and I want you
all know that we have we have
engage these are these folks and
I really look forward to a
detailed comments and changes
that that they would like to
make so with that I'll turn over
to Tammy.
Thank you Mr chair I'll just
briefly respond to a few of the
Issues that were brought us the
first wanted to talk about the
existing building retrofits that
are allowed under this bill I to
agree with this Masser that you
know and this system where in
the full system benefits can
come from doing a whole house
approach is best but that is not
option for most New Mexicans so
we don't want to have this tax
credit be for folks that can
afford to have a hers raider
come out to their home David do
instead do tax credits and then
or do improvements and then have
another hers rater come out and
what if they find out that they
did not reach the required level
of savings for their home
retrofit they would not get a
tax credit we wanted to make
sure that these tax credits for
certain particularly for low and
middle income New Mexicans and
so what we did was model off of
existing utility programs that
are product driven knowing that
those products being installed
will result in energy savings
for the home and so that is the
reason for having that system
and that we have laid out in the
bill as it is
don't want to incentivize anyone
to to do things that that won't
reach that level will get them
that tax credit and then on the
eight standard levels I think
I'll turn it over to Mister
Trujillo to go over the levels
and and the rationale for that
in the bill.
Mr Chairman.
The but I'd like to at least
that provide is that according
to the data that we have in our
database we do have people
participating at high levels for
example twenty six percent in
twenty twenty were participating
at the higher platinum level in
the credit in addition if you
look at our data for twenty
twenty Silver applications where
sixty one percent of the
applications we received so I
mean that may be helpful to you
know described the situation
that once the twenty eighteen
code is implemented
if you look at that sixty one
percent those people would be
getting an incentive for
basically meeting the the
current energy code.
Your mute that else
Representative Ortez.
That's it so.
We're gonna go to the committee
we're done with public testimony
thank you all thank you to all
who spoke.
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for us Representative Ortez for
bringing this forward I
appreciate that the city of Los
crucis is supporting us and I
was speaking to a city
councillor and
he was very much interested in
this bill and how this is going
to change thanks for all of the
new homes that we're building
especially in my area and
Representative Smalls we have
big huge developments that are
going in and one of the builders
was commenting that he thought
this was a really good idea that
you know we do need to have more
insulated more protective you
know homes because of the heat
that we're seeing but I really
appreciate how this bill has the
tax credits for the new homes
and then also adding for the
existing homes and how it
doubles the tax credit
of for people in lower income
levels if there so they can
reduce their utility costs and
also the opportunity for
broadband to be incorporated
into the home and also is we're
moving forward on electric
vehicles that could include plus
for that but my question is.
So if we don't do this if we
don't act this bill what
what are some of the things that
will not I mean will happen.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Ferrary
What what what happened is that
we won't have those tax credits
or the doubling of tax credits
for existing homes and for lower
income New Mexicans you know I
think that that's a that's a
really wonderful part of this
bill is that we're addressing
utility affordability for all
New Mexicans so I think that is
is definitely an issue and and
and and I'd like to invite
missed field corn to to respond
to this as well.
Thank you Representative
chairman of the Representative
Ferrary I think the major thing
that would happen is that
getting budget out to people
that live in existing homes but
I would also add that we will
continue if if we don't pass
this bill we will continue to
incentivize good new buildings
and I think that as a public
policy we want to incentivize
great you buildings and so the
market has evolved the buildings
that we're getting the tax
credit work great at the time
but our market is transformed
and we now need to make sure
that we're incentivizing only
the best in building and so with
this bill we're doing that for
the existing for the new
buildings and we're providing
some relief to existing
homeowners and business owners.
I thank you I I agree that Mr
chair and representative that
this is something it's really
important to
not only just get people to a
certain level but to incentivise
builders to build build better
so thank you I'm in support of
your bill.
Thank you for that we have
Representative Strickler.
Thank you.
Mr chairman thank you
representative.
Or to just and and I remember
this bill back in twenty fifteen
and I think it had bipartisan
support and I know this is a tax
credit so need to go to taxed
Rav and and
I think
if if I understand this your
broader your your your your
adding new elements to the bill
from the original and
In the building folks would
would like to
do some fine tuning have you
have you vision with them on
their on their concerns is kind
of unusual that the building
folks would you know have a
problem with with your
amendments.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Strickler but we
we have met with a number of
those folks on and I am looking
forward to hearing some pretty
specific details comments in
amendments to it to the bill so
that we can make it better on so
I'm open to it so working with
them in the future and and
whatever they they would like to
see you know we're we're open to
that but we do need to see it on
and and that's kind of what
we're we're waiting for it and
thank you for that that answers
your question I thank you Mr Mr
chairman and I and I really
appreciate that Representative
because there county front lines
and and when they have some
problems with it they can raise
red flag for me NMSA also.
The current bill is has a five
million a year cap and your bill
increases that so that'll be
is that right.
Mr chair representative for that
that is correct okay so you're
kind of broadening the
categories in reading
additional credit to the bill
and of course that you know that
that has to be addressed you
know force budget is concerned
so my recommendation to you is
to really sit down and and a
hammer out some of these
changes
because I'm familiar with those
three three gentleman the two
gentleman the lady
they put appear before this
committee before they do really
good work and I'm working with
the
with the remodeler here in town
and and he just sent me a
picture of a house that was
built in nineteen I guess fifty
nine.
And it had very little
insulation and the I advised him
to please put in our thirty year
our our thirty five
any showed me a picture where
you stand that is it's going to
really help sell that house and
I don't know if he's eligible
for this credit but you need to
look into it but.
Attic insulation is is certainly
the cheapest thing you can do
and
a local course she did it in
self and he did it at a cost of
six hundred dollars and if we
form if he had a farm that out
to to the provider would cost
two thousand dollars so these do
it yourselfers are are great and
that's going to really help help
this particular project he's got
single pane windows initiation
those out too and I think
that'll help sell the house so
my recommendation is is you just
sit down with those folks get
some good amendments put
together you may want to.
Lower the
Keep the cap of the sign to five
million because with our tight
budget it would it would
probably sell right through so
just another thought there I
mean I don't I don't mind you
asking for more money issues it
the thanks for kind of tight so
you might be able to cop show
all your goals and just live
within a five million dollar a
year threshold so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next up we have
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative our test for
bringing this bill I'm I have
just one or two questions
First is regarding that cap do
we have a sense of the break
down what is the likely to be a
the breakdown between existing
sort of retrofitting existing
buildings as compared to new
buildings thank.
Mr chair representative sent
thank you for that question I am
I am but you look at the S. I.
R. has a lot of information on
that and I think this is where
miss miss corn would
be best served to to answer this
question.
Mr chair representative so in
that legislation there is annual
caps for each of the following
categories for the new
commercial there's one million
dollars for new residential
there's two and a half million
dollars for mobile homes there's
a hundred fifty thousand dollars
and then for the existing
buildings for small commercial
and residential that's and one
pot it's three million and for
large commercial it's one
million I do want to note that
we may need to change that
around a little bit we've heard
from the home that manufactured
home folks that that hundred
fifty thousand is not enough so
we may juggle that there is
language in the bill that allows
energy and minerals to move that
money around if it's not all
used by St new commercial
buildings they can use some of
that to the flow over.
Thank you that actually that was
perfect I had sort of mis
understood as I was reading the
materials but that helps
immensely and then Mr chair and
representative which has
you know I think I just wanted
to well first say that you know
I appreciate.
Us having different tools in our
tool market to fight climate
change but also you know have
programs that really help
consumers and lower income a New
Mexicans and also create jobs so
thank you very much appreciate
each of those assets my last
question is are there federal
match is that people.
Can additionally that will
additionally incentivized.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Texan.
I'm not sure so I'm going to ask
me to the court to to respond to
that as well thank you Chairman
representative I'm not aware of
any federal funds that are
available for matching for the
provision specifically in this
bill there are some utility
programs that might be able that
might work in conjunction with
this but that's only if you live
in that service territory but
I'm not aware of any federal
ones I let Mr Trujillo jump in
if there are some that I'm not
aware of.
Does it look like there are so I
I think that that's you know I
would love to see more of those
but we we need to do some stuff
at the state level two.
Thank you very much thank you
Mr.
Is there any further discussion
from the committee.
So I'm Representative artists
are the question on the on the
caps the caps work.
If you Sir also if you have a
cap in one year in you do your
project later in the year and
when the cats are you that are
you first in line the next year
or you're out of luck.
Thank you Mr chair I'm going to
ask Mr Trujillo to answer that
he is very familiar with these
details.
Thank you Mr chair for that
question
We have the ability to keep that
application in the queue for
future years and we are actually
we already have a lot of
applications for twenty two and
twenty three.
So the program is so popular is
that it has created the caps
that we have so we have to
push into future years.
So that's just
The.
Comes up in the tax rates are
kept by year and what can and
that happening is if you have a
ten year program you can use up
the available funds in the first
you know for five six years
just because it's popular and
that gets paid out over time
which probably levels out the
impact on the state treasury
but that's just Sir one of the
little
Issues that comes up in these
programs.
Representative Ortez I I care to
build a couple years ago.
To do the renewable
sustainable billing tax rates
are remodels I had the help of a
rainy trainer Laura Vassar.
It was well received it took a
while to get out of the house
taxation revenue and by the time
we did would we really just are
right out time to get it.
Across the slide which is
unfortunate but I do I do like
to see the low income tax
credits especially the refund
ability so people so lower
income people can't participate.
Because they will receive that
money back rather than just
getting a tax credit that they
can't use.
Also like to see that it sounds
like you're willing to continue
working with the various
industry representatives the
fine fine tune the bill if they
will provide you some some
detailed comments so I'm happy
to see that.
What is the will of the
committee Mr chair I knew for
the past.
Related to pass Representative
Ferrary in the second set Dixon.
can you take the vote.
Representative Chandler yes we.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Syriana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend not.
Representative Montoya at.
Now.
Representative Scott.
Vice chair Stansbury.
Yes.
Chairman the queen.
Yes.
And that is a two passed with a
vote of eight to to
and then I don't know do you
want me to mark Representative
Scott as absent absent we need
to to we'll deal with that
committee report later thank you
shall be thank you
Representative Ortez you do with
the past thank you to the
committee.
A new claim was that for five
hours
I appreciate you coming in on
Sunday thank you also to the
staff she'll be in our analysts
and Gabby and Dever.
She does all and we will see you
next week we are adjourned.
Thanks everyone.
Thank you thank you for.
