would like to add to turn it
over to my co sponsor to explain
this amendment thank you and
you know it's it's a two page
amendment it's it's pretty
detail was specifics.
But I do not want you to do a
technical presentation on the
amendment.
I'd like you to present a sub
standard of presentation in
terms of what the amendment does
in general or where it touches
on specific elements that the
committee needs to know but I do
not need you to go item by item
in terms of what the amendment
does.
Thank you Mr chair and it's
pretty straightforward so the
first Representative Rubio I
move the amendment for
discussion purposes okay thank
you Mister speaker I mean Mr
chair
so the amendment is pretty
straightforward it's the Human
Rights Act currently uses the
terms handicap which we believe
is very much outdated and
actually pretty offensive
and so we we've we're we're
asking for every area in which
the word handicap is in the
legislation that it be
removed and replaced with the
word disability instead and so
that's the first one and so
you'll see the multiple times in
which it's done I'm and then the
second is that there are certain
programs and state agencies that
are charged with specific
population community focuses for
the sake of equity and so this
amendment just makes it clear
that those departments or
agencies or programs don't
suddenly have to serve
individuals or people who aren't
there program programmatic focus
so in the case of department of
aging for example they weren't
they will not then suddenly have
to serve college students for
example so that that is towards
the bottom of the amendment
makes that clarification and and
that is all with the amendment
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Rubio
I'll go to the committee in
terms of questions on the
amendment.
Members of questions on the
amendment.
seen none.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment.
I see none.
The amendment is adopted you
have the.
A of of an amended bill.
Representative about us.
Is that it on your presentation
Representative about us
Yes Mr chairman and I will stand
for any other questions thank
you thank you
Now we'll go to the audience.
Audience
Well before I before I go to the
audience.
If there are if there are people
in the audience.
On house bill two two nine.
And grant natural resource
protection.
Representative Castellano.
Montoya Sanchez this these are
the sponsor Representative
Castellano asked that we kind of
rolled this over.
Not that the bill needs any
fixing it just that that in
terms of preparation
and trying to kind of a phone in
on the
the specific elements they felt
they needed more time so we're
going to kind of roll that over
to the appropriate time
Representative because they are
not feels are
that it that he has that that
the
situation where you can kind of
bring it forth.
In a fully confident manner so
that there's if there aren't.
We're still on the I'm
Representative but it is bill
correct.
Yes.
I'm sorry I in that we we were
not going to hear your bill
today okay okay I I I lost on
site I know what you're doing
now you're forming got its on
site in the audience so those of
you in the audience are are here
on House Bill to nine
go back to our.
And duties as we're not going to
hear it.
So if you've got a goal kind of
our the cattle and milk the cow
and then of begin the eggs from
the from the from the house
Or start but.
Right those fields in terms of
the planning.
You're free to go after.
Thank you is this so we'll go to
the audience but before I go to
the audience in support and
opposition of house bill one
ninety two as amended.
We're going to take a full.
And I'll give you folks twenty
minutes to respond to the pole
that are here on house bill one
ninety two so what's your
preference whether you're in
opposition or you're in support
twenty seconds.
Five seconds.
It is.
Our poll shows that the.
present.
Are in support of the
legislation.
And zero percent are in
opposition of those people that
are in the audience on house
bill one ninety two.
For those of you in support.
That wish to
address the committee.
You don't necessarily have to
but if you if you with you wish
you have two minutes.
To address the committee
and you need to go to the bottom
of your screen and hit the raise
and icon.
And those of you that will be
speaking
B. succinct.
Do not be repetitive.
And speak exclusively to the
merits of the legislation.
We have first on the screen I
remasters.
I remember ask us on mute
yourself.
There you go Irene on mute
yourself.
We can hear you two minutes I
mean okay this is a doctor Ivey
buscas and shared you're gonna
need some studies at the
university of New Mexico and I
wholeheartedly support this bill
and the amendment I think it's
long overdue we have to attend
to any type of discriminatory
structure that exists at the
state or local level
not only because it's the right
and just thing to do because we
keep we cannot live in a fully
dignified society without
attending to racism's and
discriminate discriminations of
all forms and in particular
discrimination that might occur
against a disabled folks or
L. G. P. T. Q. I. A. so I urge
your committee to both
affirmative on this bill it will
also protect the state from any
lawsuits in the future but more
importantly we need to hold all
public bodies accountable and we
need to work forty healthier
society thank you.
Thank you doctor LESC this yes
we have a Linda Siegel.
Yourself Linda there you go.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee want to see all
and I've been a long time
lobbyist for the Human M. and
all the successor organizations
and of course we stand in strong
support of this I stand in
strong support of this we made
these major amendments to add
sexual orientation and gender
identity finally after fourteen
years in two thousand three and
I think Mr to.
Share you were in the
legislature then weren't you and
so you may have experienced the
the debates that went on about
these these issues so we always
start that we should add
education particularly to the
Human Rights Act and gradually
over the years in fact in two
thousand nineteen we added a
pregnancy to the Human Rights
Act so this addition of public
entities public bodies is very
important because that's where
the service provision is
delivered I've been a long time
member of the Santa Fe Community
College Board and.
It we now if this act passes we
will be able to assure that all
colleges public schools other
entities that provide services
to our state do not discriminate
on any for any reason whatsoever
so this is an incredibly
important piece of legislation
to to pass to expand the Human
Rights Act to make sure that all
the services in New Mexico
people are protected thank you
Mr chair members.
Thank you Missy go
next though we have Ellen pines.
Alan
There we go Ellen I need your
cell.
and merry up before I go to Alan
remove the the individuals that
have spoken remove them from the
panelists list going back to the
attendee list.
Ellen.
You're free to address the
committee two minute limit.
Thank you Mr chair I wanted
anywhere close to that amount my
name is Ellen pines and I
represent the disability
coalition which advocates for
the interest of persons with
disabilities of all types in New
Mexico just for this afternoon
I'm also speaking on behalf of
disability rights Mexico because
your Jackson who was here the
first two times bill was
scheduled to be heard he is not
able to be with us today so he
asked me to express disability
rights New Mexico support as
well we do stand in support of
this bill and we particularly
want to thank the sponsors for
updating the antiquated language
related to disability to bring
it into line with of how we
currently talk about disability
on our society thank you.
Thank you.
mistimes next we have
Ellie rush forth.
Ellie you're free to address the
committee.
Two minutes.
Representative L. we rushed for.
Third on the attendee list he.
I am.
Thank you so much good afternoon
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Ellie
rushed I am a civil rights
attorney at the ACLU of New
Mexico I'm gonna share a story
of one of our clients that has
some pretty shocking language in
it and so I wanted to make sure
that I I slacked that for for
everybody listening.
We represent a native American
student who was called a bloody
Indian by her teacher in an
incident that truly shocks the
conscience.
Our client arrived at her dance
placement class and found her
teacher dressed as a historical
due to which during the class
her teacher approached another
female native American student
with a box cutter the student
had a long cold here and it was
in braids the teacher asked if
she like to rates the student
responded that yes of course she
does.
Ultimately the teacher took a
pair of scissors and cut
approximately three inches of
the student's hair from her head
and then sprinkled on the desk
in front of her.
Soon after that shocking events
the teacher turned for a client
who had fake blood on her cheek
because she was dressed like
Little Red Riding Hood.
Staring directly at her she
inquired what are you supposed
to be a bloody Indian.
In response to the collective
gasps from her students the
teacher double down and stated
what she is a bloody she is
bloody and she hasn and she
trailed off she stopped short of
finishing her sentence and
allowed her racist comments to
linger.
We assert that public schools
are squarely within the
definition of public
accommodation and the Human
Rights Act and that this
important law protects students
however the public school system
has argued that it's not a
public accommodation for its
students.
We are awaiting a decision from
the court on whether or not we
can proceed and whether or not
our client can get that justice
she deserves supporting in
passing H. B. one ninety two
would make make it explicitly
clear that students like our
client do not have to fight to
simply have their human rights
recognized when they are
violated schools please support
house bill one ninety two to
protect the human rights of our
friends families and communities
we are so grateful to the
sponsors for bringing this
important piece of legislation
forward and we hope that the
committee will support it thank
you.
Thank you next the to speak we
have
Kim Davis.
Mr Chairman I if I could just.
For just one second I believe my
my expert witness and my
cosponsored we're moved over
into a attendees they're they're
kind of like my safety blanket
so we come along back over thank
you.
I'm very.
Ring ring Tim Davis on board and
then after you bring them on
board then.
the.
Address that concern.
Representative I just I just
alluded to there you are.
I'm.
Two minutes.
Thank you Mr chair this is Tim
Davis with the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty as to Sanchez
and many other commenters have
already explained this is
important bill and it provides a
very important clarification and
modernization to our Human
Rights Act and the serum on
poverty supports this bill.
Thank you.
That's that we have
I miss group this group.
Very she's Chief Justice that S.
K. O. O. B..
It will be yes.
Hi Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Julie
on a coop and I'm the registered
lobbyist for Planned Parenthood
of the Rocky Mountains which
includes New Mexico I appreciate
so much the Sanchez
representative but Addis and
Representative Rubio bringing
this bill forward this is
incredibly important and we
stand in full support thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Mr but and lastly in terms of
the is it we have Erica Sanchez.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm with New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by the foster care and
juvenile justice systems to
improve their transition to
adulthood and for all all of the
reasons I already discussed we
stand in full support this bill
thank you.
Thank you
The next act.
We have.
Get Sanchez.
I mean yourself get.
Two minutes get.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name is Cat Sanchez
policy associate with both
futures and the Los crucis
residents as a queer women of
color I stand in support of each
the one ninety two as amended
this bill updates the Human
Rights Act to ensure that all
New Mexicans like myself my
partner and the LGBTQ friends of
our two teenage daughters are
protected for too long LGBTQ
individuals have had to fight
tooth and nail for disability or
equity for protection as the
previous presidential
administration has shown
protection at the federal level
can't always be guaranteed and
this is where we need to our
legislators to be forward
thinking and forward moving I
want to thank the sponsors
freshman representative let us
and representative from my neck
of the desert Representative
Rubio for the your **** we urge
the committee to support H. B.
one ninety two and ensure
further protection of
constituents across New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you get.
Also we have
And.
Senator.
All right.
There you are there two minutes
please thank you good afternoon
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Andrés I
know I'm the executive director
of a lady we have we have a huge
membership of folks from lots of
different backgrounds mainly
work early educators yeah and
you know people who are very
communities and how this.
You know really rely on these
protections that the humans
right the Human Rights Act is is
is offering in this
well that you know close the
loop hill.
NorthJersey really really.
So is vital to.
Action of
members of a lady and folks
across our state every single
person of our state.
And.
During this bill forward thank
the community folks were working
on this bill and stand in strong
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Andrea and that does
it for of those individuals
insurance being.
And Representative black we were
getting some background.
Some background noises but I see
you muted so I don't know why we
were picking that up but done
now will go to a committee
member's questions and
discussion.
Mr Chairman.
Representative because they I
know.
If I may please in order to
general I just wanna.
Representative about us for
bringing this forward but she
said there was some loopholes
that might be needed to be
filled and you know I'm very
are.
I'm very happy that she brought
that forward and those two bills
have been filled
just you know we all have family
members that have been
discriminated against in.
In schools and public areas and
and I just feel that this bill
will give our families.
This the.
The peace of mind that they need
knowing that this can happen any
longer and I I really want to
thank.
Representative about us and
representative R.
Lee.
I know I'm sorry Representative
Rubio excuse me miss
Representative Rubio for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of members further questions
Representative Montoya
yes I I have been I'm fully here
now I've been on another as a
sign that in Health Human
Services but I've been listening
intently I to commend
Representative but as for her
courage in bringing this piece
of legislation forward as an
openly queer then the first ever
to be elected to the house of
representatives and decidedly
from a different era at sixty
years old I remember my
childhood.
So troubled ends so much fear
that I I walked in public
schools and just missed
misunderstood and watching so
much discrimination this is
leveling the playing field it is
indeed cleaning up the law in a
way that particularly for rural
northern New Mexicans.
What I have seen for thirty
years the destructive potential
of laws that don't address this
in a full and fair and equitable
way so on that I I
also want want to think very
much Representative Rubio for
her.
Wavering support of human rights
in the state of New Mexico I'm
in awe of all of my colleagues
but especially Representative
Rubio you carry a certain
elegance and fire which is in my
dress yes you'll back to the
German.
Thank you Representative Montoya
and next we have a
Representative Cook.
Thank you Mr chairman I think I
answered my own question I was
trying to figure out.
based on the example that was
given earlier about the.
Let me Indian or whatever how is
triggered in public schools I
had read the bill and I was just
sitting here scam scam and it.
I think I answered my own
question at the very bottom on
the very last.
After and some get thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Cook connects we
have Representative of black.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I'm sorry I'm I'm
trying I'm president of bill and
another committee so if this is
what I don't miss one of the
others this is kind of crazy
today
I just had a couple of
Questions I guess my my first
question is why would this and
I'm sorry like I'm I'm trying to
do to me that once so you may
have already addresses so please
forgive me if you have I'm why
are we looking at eight full
time employees to be added to
CYFD.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think you Representative Black I
don't think I've made yet so
it's it's nice to meet you I'm
going to lead to some light
Marshall Martinez my expert
witness to this question for you
thank you representative.
Marshall I feel free to address
the question.
Thank you Mr chairman and think
representative black for the
question so I believe that was
in the analysis provided by the
department of workforce
solutions that we actually have
had a couple of conversations
with some folks over there I
think that the the the
assumption was was maybe maybe
early on that what we were doing
was.
was really expanding all of the
places right and and and to be
clear this law already covers
employment housing and public
accommodations right and so all
we were all we're adding this
basis is those public bodies and
so I think and I'm since we
don't think we have anybody from
the part of workforce solutions
is here this afternoon but I
think that that analysis was
maybe thinking that we were sort
of really drastically expanding
all of those categories and we
don't believe that that would be
necessary we don't think that
there are that many cases
there's only a handful where
where the situation would arise
hopefully that answers your
question Mr chairman and
Representative.
I thank you for that.
This is a mess.
I just actually saw
Representative birds get on the
other meeting that.
This is crazy I just have to
share that with you guys
thank you Mr Chairman
representative in your and your
expert witness I'm and I guess
my other my only other question
is I guess why do we need to
muddy the waters when the steps
already have a by the EEOC and
the Human Rights Commission hi
is there it to me it just almost
seems like remaining in a
little.
Representative about us
The the free to address the
question or.
Your expert.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Black that's it
it's a really good question and
I'm going to let Marshall
Martinez also answers questions
thank you.
Marshall we address the question
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Black so the
short answer is that the the EOC
at the federal level
is not as strong in their
protections as New Mexico is so
that's the first you know the
the first pieces that in New
Mexico we have extended
protections to LGBTQ people on
the basis of sexual orientation
or gender identity and that's
not yet done at the federal
level and what we're doing here
in in respect to the Human
Rights Commission is we're just
making it clear that public
schools public entities are also
covered and and I know you were
in another committee Mr chairman
and Representative black and so
the example that was shared
earlier is that we have this
case in New Mexico right now
being heard in District Court
about a student who was we
believe very clearly
discriminated against based on
their race and the court isn't
even hearing a question of
whether or not the
discrimination occurred because
the school district is set has
already said in the hearing of
Mr Chairman representative
lacked the hearing is currently
happening is just to determine
whether or not schools are
prohibited from discriminating
in New Mexico because they
believe they're not covered by
public accommodations so what
we're what we're doing is is is
not I I would say not minding
but actually clear clearing up
the water a little bit and the
administrative office of the
court in their analysis Mr
Chairman representative black
specifically said that this law
would provide clarity that they
have not yet had excuse me that
they have not yet had making it
clear that they are in fact
prohibited from discrimination
without having to argue whether
or not they qualify as a public
accommodation Mr Chairman
representative like hopefully
that answers your question thank
you Marshall Representative
black you still have the floor
thank you Adam thank you Mr
Chairman representative those
are the only questions I had
thank you thank you
Representative Black next we'll
go.
to represent us at apple.
Mr Chairman if it's the time I
move that do pass on H. B. one
ninety two as amended.
We have a do pass recommendation
make a second ice.
By Representative etcetera.
Second by Representative
Webster.
Our Mr what spot.
By Representative does right now
I'm is there further questions
discussion members.
Seen done before I go to the
vote.
I'd like to
Ask Representative about us if
she wishes to both of her kids
as a member.
Thank you Mr chair on thank you
so much members of this
committee for for hearing our
our testimony in our bill today
this is this is something that
that is very close to my heart
and means a lot to me so I
really appreciate the support
and that is all Mr chair thank
you.
Thank you resent the but address
our.
is there a we're in a do pass
recommendation on house bill one
ninety two as amended is there
any opposition to that do pass
recommendation.
Let the record reflect that all
those present voted in the
affirmative Representative about
us that do pass recommendation
health bill one ninety two as
amended.
Regulations thank you so much.
Up to.
Members we'll go on to our next
bill
So to twenty seven if the
studies definition
Representative Roybal Caballero
to put on your bill.
Mr Chairman think that's the
question.
Yes and just to be clear we were
acting as a committee we did
have a quorum correct we were
not acting as an additive or we
have a quorum on the screen
great thank you so much.
Merry you need to bring the
Representative there about
coming out all over to the as
chairman of the Palestine and
then she can tell us who are
what experts are.
More on board pass.
Okay.
Representative Robert go ahead
on you yourself.
Can you tell us can you tell us
who your experts are.
I'm Mr chair first off I I do
need to let you know that
senator Linda Lopez who's a co
sponsor is also joining us so if
she can be allowed in she's in
the waiting room as well.
Okay a merry bring for senator
Linda Lopez on board.
And then I'll what I'll go one
by one once merry.
Or where you want to do this
these aren't who else okay here
we go so then we have doctor
Irene Vasquez.
All right she's on behalf Dr
hall said we said Ronald.
We have not Dr Timothy E.
Nelson.
And finally we have me chat bit
see any.
How do you spell the first name
I am I C. H. A. E..
She's on she's on so.
Representative
a Roybal Caballero to put on
your house.
Two seven thanks the mission.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
I will chair members of the
committee that we've been
senator Linda Lopez and I have
been co sponsoring this bill for
many years and we hope to be
able to successfully.
were long journey and seeing
this bill forward so H. B. two
two seven Mr chair members of
the committee requires ethnic
studies instruction for
kindergarten through twelfth
grade.
And then the high school
graduation requirements and also
I think it's important to note
that it's incredibly important
that the bill also moved to
define further ethnic studies.
And this particular bill as it's
been evolving through the years
actually creates an ethnic
studies council so that the
council and its full
Representative capacity and we
have as many of you have seen in
the text of the legislation
identified and recommended who
should comprise this council so
that they them can as the
experts in the field
can identify the next steps in
developing the ethnic studies
curricula in the public schools
and then report its findings to
the legislative education study
group and Mr chairman members of
the committee again because this
bill as throughout the years of
it being presented has evolved
and improved
so is the the the research and
so is the so are the many
studies and so it's in a very
timely manner that we
Come to you today Mr chair in
recommending passage of this
bill with the council because we
think that we believe actually
that the council through its
collaborative and collective
approach.
And involving all of the
research experts in the various
fields together with
representatives that directly
are involved in teaching
administering and working with
our public education department
can come up with in ethnic
studies.
Framework that will
institutionalize ethnic studies
in our
public schools and will also
serve as a model.
for other states in the nation
although I will say Mr chair
that our state exemplifies all
the models period because of the
diverse populations that we
serve so Mr chair at this point
I'd like
senator Linda Lopez as the
co sponsor co primary sponsor to
say a few words.
It will thank you Representative
Roybal Caballero for that
and Representative etcetera
Linda Lopez on mute yourself.
And feel free to address the
committee on the significance of
the legislation and it's always
an honor Senator Lopez
to have you come before our
committee and congratulations on
your majority whip position over
on the Senate.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
when asked about this at the
Los.
the as a my colleague our
colleagues Representative
governor has mentioned ethnic
studies legislation has come
over I think it has evolved over
several years we started off as
a memorial way back when and
just kind of trying to move it
through are both chambers and of
course here we are of if you can
notice also won the legislation
Mr chairman members of the
committee we received the
endorsement of the legislative
education study committee this
year which I think was just a
wonderful development for those
who serve on the committee as we
continue to move forward with
ethnic studies and Mr chairman
members of the committee I know
that some of the persons will be
testifying also as witnesses for
this bill will example I show
you tell the committee about how
important and what contributions
ethnic studies can do for our
communities Mr Chairman I'll
just briefly say that your
ethnic studies will help to
produce critical knowledge about
the history that includes the
struggles and successes here in
our own state of New Mexico it
also educates about the power in
any quality in within our
systems that are structures that
we have here in the state and I
know in listening to many of the
students in my district which I
know that you and I of course to
share some as well as
Representative go by at all it's
an issue about identity and and
realizing and seeing who we are
once you know a little bit more
about where and when we come
from it instills even more
knowledge that pride about how
we can continue to further
ourselves as a person as an
individual but also as a
collective group of people in
our state New Mexico of course
is a very diverse community we
have representation of many many
different cultures here in the
state and with ethnic studies I
know in the classes that are
offered in the Albuquerque
public school district.
At atrisk heritage academy of
Albuquerque high school highland
high school I mean the list is
long Los crucis also has some of
programs some of our charter
schools Mr chairman members of
the committee of if they show
and have information that shows
given in Tucson where we've had
many different times of
information shared through the
media that of shows that a
hundred percent of students in
the two sides will districts
specifically that show that
those who participated in the
Mexican American studies classes
graduated.
And I think that's what we're
looking for is to how we can
encourage our young people to
look inside who we are.
the state also look inside their
own ethnicity and realize how
strong we are with that Mr
Chairman I will stand for any
questions thank you.
Thank you senator
Representative Roybal Caballero
are you.
ready to go to your experts
yes but yes Mr chair just light
up before that though I don't
know if the senator mentioned
that
all she did never mind Mr chair
yes I am in the first the first
expert witness would be doctor
ho said we someone America.
Dr Serrano appropriate address
the committee.
I could
afternoon thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Dr city said I know and
I'm an assistant professor of
Chicana and Chicano studies at
UNM this bill provides the
institutional framework for
statewide implementation of
ethnic studies in K. through
twelve schools in addition the
bill will establish a statewide
ethnic studies council I speak
in support of H. B. two two
seven today given my
understanding of the positive
effects of ethnic studies on
student outcomes in the K.
through twelve system programs
like these can contribute to
raising graduation rates
especially among students of
color SS Senator Lopez already
mentioned in Tucson Arizona.
Excuse me my screen just one out
of that area
before the program Mr animated
students participating in the
Mexican American studies program
demonstrated a ninety three
percent high school graduation
rate the program consisted
consisted of predominantly
students of color its largest
ethnic group was that the know
which nationwide has
historically had some of the
lowest graduation rates moreover
ethnic studies programs
encourage higher college
enrollment for historically
underrepresented students the
CCS program at UNM is already
inspiring more New Mexico high
school and community college
students to seek a higher
education as such implementation
of ethnic studies can help
graduation rates and college
enrollment rates in New Mexico
also as you can education
scholars have demonstrated the
positive impact of culturally
relevant teaching on the success
of diverse student populations
in United States this work stems
from examples established by
ethnic studies scholars stating
back to the civil rights era
within the with ethnic studies
young New Mexicans would bet be
better able to as you navigate
puts it use cultural knowledge
prior experiences frames of
reference performance thousand
ethnically diverse students to
make learning more relevant and
effective and I can personally
attest to that as formally
creating curriculum and teaching
ethnic studies to high school
students in a state like New
Mexico while the population is
remain ethnically diverse since
early the other foundations of
the state the statewide
implementation of ethnic studies
research pedagogy and curriculum
K. through stop K. through
twelve schools could help
position the state as a national
model ready for the twenty first
and twenty second century's what
I think we diverse populations
will be the norm in the entire
United States as such with the
input of the ethnic studies
council to make the New Mexico
public education department can
develop a model that best
prepares young New Mexicans to
critically understand the past
present and future significance
of ethnically diverse
populations thank you for your
time.
Mr chair on one of the
Things that doctor who said we
Sariñana hit a did not mention
and I did not mention in the
introduction as that he brings a
wealth of experience and having
tried and ethnic studies in the
Long Beach unified school
district prior to joining us at
UNM so we're we're glad to
welcome that welcome them
knowledge so Mr chairman I
proceed to the next express.
Thank you our next step expert
witness is Dr Timothy E. Nelson
and Dr Timothy E. Nelson
graduated from NMSU and UTEP's.
He was racial justice director
at the YWCA and I'll pass on.
And as work is actually
fundamental and addresses
foundational issues in African
American US.
Western borderlands an African
diasporas in New Mexico history
so he also can give expert
testimony on the importance of
us HB two two seven Dr Nelson
please.
After now so feel free to
address the committee.
I don't see them on the.
On the panelists this.
Timothy Nelson.
There you go.
I see it now.
Okay thank we address the
committee okay thank you for
having me
I'm gonna depend historian
educator New Mexico residents
for over twenty years of the
lack of a comprehensive
curriculum and instruction feeds
the violence of on going
intellectual genocide.
And continues to silence the
liberating voices.
To stop the perpetual
racialization taking place in
these borderlands most vicious
our children are subsidies acted
to intellectual displacement the
Rascher and oversimplification
of their humanity I think
studies will provide the
necessary space and time for
students to explore their on to
lodges cool cells here is a
warning.
The lack of ethnic studies is
currently doing serious damage
the void of knowledge is
replaced by poor
representations of cultural of
culture and it is infused with
stereo types of quick service
Santa Fe public schools social
studies textbooks reveals the
deliberate silence if not for
altruistic reasons consider
Disney Netflix and all the other
major companies that are in dire
need of new content.
Without it the ethnic studies
New Mexico will lose the soul
that makes it profitable
profitable in the intellectual
economy.
Without ethnic studies New
Mexico will lose the soul aside
from the perpetual devaluing of
ethnic people when.
The oil and gas company's and
and and that money no longer
pays the bills in New Mexico
cultural production and value.
Will also be reduced to cheap
imitations of itself at the
studies is an investment in the
new economy that is
revolutionizing this new digital
aids that we're on right now
with soon.
The Yazzie Martinez began the
conversation about of career and
and college readiness as we can
see as we have seen with the
public infection of conspiracy
theories we also need to prepare
our children for world filled
with kids in cages and
alternative facts that may come
from elected leaders sadly the
books the curriculum and
instruction supports continued
need to slavery and you have the
chance to do something about it
and that's why I'm in support of
it and and I hope you are too
thank you for my time.
Thank you doctor Nelson in the
lastly or you know you still
have two more individuals
Representative Roybal Caballero
we have Mr chair we just have
one expert and then drive I I
reinvest kisses available for
questions okay great we have
meet daisy but Sydney.
And I'll begin with the
introduction she's from she is
that may and from monument
valley Utah she received her BA
and master's degrees in native
American studies from UNM and
she was part of the first cohort
for the native American studies
master's program and she
teachers now indigenous history
and the native American
Community Academy and we're
privileged to have her with us
today Mr chair.
Go ahead miss thank.
Feel free to address the
committee and the.
yeah death benefit
thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
I'm sharing the U. N. M. native
American studies endorsement so
I have years of teaching
experience and local indigenous
studies global indigenous
studies social justice academic
writing and social studies I
personally seem to
transformational effects of
ethnic studies courses and
content ethnic studies directly
correlates to positive student
outcomes ethnic studies inspire
and challenge the minds of
students and also in rich
traditional school subjects
through unique pedagogies that
draw in social and cultural
capital.
And these approach develops
necessary critical thinking and
civic engagement that benefits
local and wider communities
using a strength makes based
approach is necessary in public
education because they help
recover and nourish committees
communities from the unilateral
and education that is addressed
our rich diverse New Mexico
communities and the studies we
embed students back into local
communities in ways that restore
local ways of learning
transmission of knowledge and
sense of belonging and that
makes it is classes students and
their communities are viewed as
sources of knowledge in our
local schools colleges and
universities.
They are in effect the
foundation for greater learning
in addition ethnic studies
teachers collaborate with local
community and stakeholders to
collectively support student
learning and development.
Finally ethnic studies
curriculum and programming is
rooted in real world issues
experiences and problem solving
students will have relationships
with New Mexico and they feel
they belong to the places Landen
people they're learning from and
when we care for something we
want to take care of it and help
it grow thank you.
Thank you Mr
Representative Roybal Caballero
that doesn't on your experts yes
it doesn't on the presentation
I'll go to the audience.
I'm.
And so those of you that are
you're on.
House Bill.
Two two seven.
You have the opportunity to
Address a Paul.
That'll go up on your screen in
terms of those and support and
those in opposition.
so this feel free to kind of
direct your your answer on the
phone whether in support or in
opposition.
And we'll give it the
one more minutes.
It's.
And I are so.
Sorry for the committee okay
we're done with the ball the
poll basically shows that those
in attendance.
On house bill two to seven under
present are in support and zero
in opposition so those in
support
that wish to address the
committee.
Please set the the race hand
icon at the bottom of your
screen and I will call you in
order as you're showing up on
our screen.
And
and so those in support I would
like to address the committee
Limit yourself to two minutes
and do not be repetitive in
terms of those that have gone
before you.
we have that being no Noriega we
know.
Bring your bring him over very.
He's the second one on the
screen under attendees.
Merry are you having problems
getting them over as it a
technical issue with them.
Because we'll go to the second
one and that there is I mean on
yourself and feel free to
address the committee intensive
support for the legislation
Mexico in two minutes.
Thank you madam chair Garcia
good afternoon chair and
distinguished members of the
house local government land
grants and cultural affairs
committee my name is that we
don't know the exact and I'm an
educator in Albuquerque public
schools career management center
or see you see you guys may know
it as and PhD candidate in the
UNM college of education I also
an educator at university in
Mexico in the Chicana and
Chicano studies department.
And the college of education I
support the ethnic studies bill
H. B. two two seven because it
provides our students with the
much needed curriculum and
content which both coach both
both are culturally relevant and
culturally sustaining the
ability to hear their people's
histories and narratives as
crucial to our students lives
and learning and addresses the
need to change the narrative of
the dominant culture and uses
ethnic studies as a vehicle of
change.
Some of the others have stated
ethnic studies provides
opportunities for students to
perform better academically as
well as acquired twenty first
century skills like critical
thinking and so SO communicated
skills needed to be productive
in the twenty first century
economy as well as technology
technological skills and access
in their to their navigation
skills these skills at an
academic make advancement
brought up in various
educational these these skills
and and and academic achievement
are brought up in in various
forms of educational provided
such as no child left behind and
race to the top however these
endeavors of education reform
have not provided students of
color with opportunities to
acquire the skills as well as
the opportunities to have
culturally relevant insisting he
curriculum in their classes
ethnic studies programs have
again and again provided many of
the skills and opportunities to
students of color and that is
why the should be a focus within
our education system many of the
courses provided students many
of these calls to provide
students with due credit
opportunities as well and this
pushes students to be able to
join in in higher ed and be able
to go and have the confidence
and have the skills to be able
to access to navigate the
educational the hire its system
and you know earn degrees and
become part of the work force
and and and meet the needs that
are that are are are needed in
our global society noted global
economies
And so the also meet the the
needs of of of high school
graduates and things like that
and and hopefully in the future
we see kids use this more the
case through through eight
system as well it's also
important because it provides
students with opportunities to
learn how to navigate this print
systems whether it be school
whether it be community college
whether it be the university
whether it be trade schools we
provide that for them we give
them the confidence and the
ability to know have knowledge
of of accessing these places
thank you for your time and I
hope you have a beautiful rest
of the weekend happy Valentine's
day thank you got me now next we
have a Tricia Martinez.
bring her over merry.
Krishan metre cell.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dr
Christian Martinez to the right
home the lady the land grant and
resident of this month if your
house I am also southwest
Hispanic research institute UNM
Health postdoctoral fellow as
part of my service I am working
as a dual credit use on
collaborating with thirteen
different high schools providing
college credit opportunities to
over three hundred students in
northern New Mexico and also
teaching to get in to get a
study I am a product of the
positive benefits of ethnic
studies I come from a family who
continues to work the land in
order to make a living many of
my parents generation could not
leave their homes to go to
college because of the
connections the land as a first
generation woman of colour
scholar and academic I have
experienced firsthand the
hardships and challenges of
navigating the educational
training it wasn't until the
taking my courses and general
studies and African American
diaspora studies at university
level that I realize the wealth
and knowledge and inspiration
these areas of studies extend to
our students they truly do allow
for us to create a sense of
belonging and institutions that
often marginalized identities
experiences it is with great
honor that I was able to achieve
my doctoral degree drawing upon
my own family history highs to
the land and experiences on the
money trail our students are
sources of knowledge and a two
pin drop on their heritage
experiences as cultural and
academic well just yesterday I
had the honor of meeting with
the tells high school director
to to discuss a series of
professional development
training that she requested from
the Santo studies faculty
experts for her teachers who are
predominantly Anglo informatics
State she recognizes the
importance of these trainings as
a means to foster a greater
understanding and academic
approach that will help her
teachers educate our students
our unique heritage in the
richest of our lands at this
part we have in place educators
and community leaders who have
the expertise and passion to
give back to our community the
implementation of training in
ethnic studies curriculum thank
you for your consideration of
this bill.
Thank you did you say are you
are a doctor Martinez.
Sorry that you know I just
noticed I had my last Ruiloba
from yesterday on their
background yeah.
In addition.
I've got some good friends up in
the oil and the law of the land
grant you probably know them and
yes section at the and David
article L. yes that is my people
yeah they've been leading that
line grant that for the longest
time and they're doing a darn
good job.
Ready to jump on board.
Sue bird also we need we need
young blood in this land grants
thank you board of trustees
leaders.
next we have a Elisabeth Johnson
this kind of a mess wringer over
merry.
She's the second one on the
attending this.
There you are less about.
If we address the committee that
some of two minutes thank you Dr
I'm at members of the committee
my name is Dr Elizabeth Gonzalez
got that of the system professor
and she got a check of studies
at UNM I've been teaching in you
cannot you cannot studies for
over thirteen years now and my
PhD is an education with an
emphasis in race and ethnic
studies and I'm also a product
of Chicana Chicano studies up in
my published research I have
examined the positive impact.
That ethnic studies has on
students and have found that
students will come across
culturally relevant education
like ethnic studies have a
larger you know as many of of
people have said previously
retention rates graduation rates
and they also become civically
engaged with their community
community and they develop
social values that
really assist all communities
right that everyone benefits
from some of the other positive
start student learning outcomes
is this deeper sense of value
towards their education and also
the future aspirations so for
example in my research students
who major or minor in ethnic
studies at the university level
become lawyers doctors are
social workers are teachers in
K. through university our
counselors of the list goes on
and on and they credit having
ethnic studies beat you know
part of part of their chosen
careers so providing ethnic
studies in K. through twelve
without a doubt has a positive
student learning outcome as well
ethnic studies in K. through
twelve you know as people have
said can assist students into
college pathways with the larger
sense of commitment towards our
education and the needs of the
community as well.
unfortunately students of color
in this country experience the
highest education push out rates
and I think that.
Supporting H. B. two two seven
completely you know demonstrates
the necessity to prevent these
these push out right and to
close the gaps that exist in our
educational system for K.
through twelve thank you
everyone for your time.
Thank you Elizabeth I'm next we
have.
And then the more please.
Rigor over merry she's second on
the attendee list.
There you are the main on me
yourself if we address the
committee maximum two minutes.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me yes we can good morning
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
the lead more tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico scored Association the
New Mexico all school board
association and paints a
membership in eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
of New Mexico and we are four
hundred fifty strong school
where board member voices The
New Mexico school board
association Mr chairman
recognizes the value and the
importance of providing our
students multiple perspectives
to build critical thinking
skills through the examination
of social ethnic cultural and
gender and historical experience
Mrs The New Mexico school board
association supports legislation
that funds culturally and
linguistically responsive
curriculum and materials that
will allow our students to
engage in the work necessary to
address educational disparities
disparities among racial groups
we also support districts.
We also support allowing
districts to develop ethnic
studies curriculum which would
satisfy social studies
requirements hi Mr chairman
members of the committee I might
also add that while The New
Mexico school board association
was not named as one of the
possible members of the ethnic
studies council we would be
happy to assist and stand ready
to work in this regard us so
they could be at the table to
participate and that that you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we support this
legislation we ask major we
think majority whip Lopez and
Representative robot provided
appropriate this legislation
forward consistently and
continually and we just for
favorable consideration of this
committee thank you Mr chairman
for allowing us to voice our
position thank you lily may next
we have a Lisa dial.
Rigor over merry she's second on
the the attending this.
Lisa mute yourself and feel free
to address the committee the
maximum two minutes.
Thank you and good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee my name is.
We we lost we lost the audio of
the sun.
But we are still together.
You must be up in the cloud.
Very can we bring her back.
Issue issue showing up on the
attendee list.
Go over again for some reason
she moved down come down at Lisa
hi R. eight thank you sorry
about that my name is Lisa deal
are Mr chairman and members of
the committee I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center
online poverty and a member of
the legal team for the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit The New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty stands
in support of this bill this
legislation is consistent with
the Yazzie Martinez ruling which
calls for the full
implementation of the bilingual
multicultural Education Act
Indian Education Act Hispanic
Education Act I think studies
will read kick the K. twelve
curricula to reflect the rich
cultures languages and heritages
of our defer state as we've
heard here today we and it will
also ensure that our students
receive a culturally and
linguistically relevant
education as required by law we
stand in full support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr we'll go to Robert
the most though.
Merry he's second on the
attending less bring them over.
There you go Robert on need
yourself and feel free to
address the committee.
No more than two minutes sure
thank you thank you for allowing
me to speak today I'm happy to
say also Representative Garcia
you are my representative here
in Albuquerque in the south
valley thank you Sir part of
Robert Prost or teach Mexican
American studies as an elective
at highland high school in
Albuquerque is also dual credit
class through U. N. M. in
addition I'm of the age.
And she got in trouble studies
at UNM and I also teach classes
there we created an ethnic
studies program at highland high
school to address our high drop
out rate among Hispanic students
in the seven years we've had the
program the graduation rate for
students that take the class of
the equal to or higher than the
state average for that my
graphic and essential part of
that success is due to the
collaboration with that you got
it you got most studies
department which is functions as
the ethnic studies council this
legislation creates as function
the department is proven to be
invaluable in their support for
by students through our
collaboration we've shared
curriculum and strategies and my
students have been able to
participate in conferences and
other college prep activities
the programs and curriculum we
created shared and implemented
have helped students achieve
success in school and become
more engaged in our community
students that I taught in high
school or not taking our classes
that you want to we're research
is showing the efficacy of
ethnic studies programs and they
should be a required part of
part of a comprehensive
curriculum thank you for
allowing me to talk.
Thank you Robert the and next we
have up for right now I'm a
little school.
Bring him over Mary he's second
on the on the list.
There you go for nine.
I mean yourself.
You're free to address the
committee a maximum two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is from our school I'm a
graduate student here at the
what's the distance of the water
studies program at the
university of Mexico and I also
support yeah so this bill
because of the fact that
studies.
By the opportunity for students
to establish since the regency
and I don't want to repeat
what every we also reset so I
just want to say that it's
something that I I see as a
benefit for students and and
something that will help them
change their relationship with
their education system and see
themselves with better self
esteem and being able to
navigate the educational system
as a whole so I strongly support
this bill thank you for your
time.
Thank you for not.
And lastly we have a P. Sanchez.
Bring him over Mary he's second
on the attending this.
There you go peak me yourself.
You're on.
If we address the committee
Keith the maximum two minutes.
Thank you chairman Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee my name is keeps
artists originally from Berlin
New Mexico I am the ethnic
bilingual ed English language
arts and music teacher at the
arcade charter high school I'm
also a proud that graduate
student at UNM through that you
kind of to kind of studies
program and of my testimony are
here today is simple I'm asking
for all our distinguished
lawmakers to support house bill
two twenty seven because it's a
clear I will up past towards a
better society simple and a
trajectory towards higher
education for our use we have
been made to believe that
college is out of reach.
I've seen that light secretary
my students sites when they
realized through dual enrollment
ethnic studies programs wait a
minute these are troops these
are the truths of the place in
my world these are the troops
I've never been presented in
school until now.
Certainly that intrinsic desire
for education begins I've seen
it.
Everyday life I gains a purpose
some link to a fibre ancestral
past and in power future this is
how you build a better society.
Ethnic education inspires kids
to be their best selves and to
reach for goals they want they
once thought impossible.
We're reaching over six hundred
students throughout APS on a
shoestring budget right now
please help to sustain that.
To sustain that and more
importantly please help to grow
this program thank you for your
time and dedication to this and
then we'll miss.
Thank you Keith.
Regulations on your teaching
initiative there and serving our
kids thank you that does it in
terms of comments from the
audience and Jarrell if I may.
Then I makes a couple.
These.
It's Representative are going.
Can you comments wait till at
your closing our we're going to
go to the committee for
questions.
As.
Merry are you you kind of a.
It wiped out on the
just Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Senator back to the ocean honor.
Underserved board.
So are you representative.
If.
Thank you I I got into the some
but go ahead I was asking if you
could wait until your closing to
the kind of address what your
concerns I wanted to go to the
committee that that's how it
wasn't a concern I just wanted
to make you all laugh for a
second
it that's fine you can I can
wait just I saw so many I wanted
to write let my
colleagues in my Concord snow
that because I haven't been
attending regular faculty
meetings or graduate meetings
I'm not missing in action this
is what you're seeing me do I've
seen them all come on today and
I just wanted to say that thank
you.
I will go to the committee we
have a residents are act all
representative on yeah and and
Representative Castellano in
that order as an as an act of
questions discussion.
Your muted.
I mean yourself I know it's
gonna happen thank you Mr
chairman and thank you to the
sponsor this bill for bringing
this forward I didn't want to
question I I didn't know how
much effort was into ensuring
that ethnic studies with good
education I was curious how much
it is already or part of this
would be to integrate it into
other subject areas as well.
Mr chair.
Thank yes.
The question.
Thank you that is a great
question and what I would like
to do because I'll take it away
and go on and on I'd like Dr
Irene Vasquez to talk a little
bit about
from issue on.
Yes I am.
Answer that and then all of
supplement how is it addressed
the question share their C. M.
and Representative set up up
thank you so much for the
question
ethnic studies does take
different forms depending upon
this the high schools needs so
we are working right now with I
APS high schools and of the
course is integrated at times
into the social sciences or the
humanities in our work now with
the state run the high school
Intel's we're actually
integrating to gone into gonna
studies in
math science humanities arts.
And the social sciences so the
the wonderful thing about the
bill is that it's broad enough
to allow.
Each high school to determine
well I mean the basic bills
asking for integration of social
science but it's all it also
encourages of course integration
into other areas.
I hope that answers your
question thank you very much Mr
chairman into the Sanchez and
thank you doctor Vasquez for
that answer I really appreciate
that and it's very
poignant I think that it is that
you you're looking at the full
circle I do want to also note
that the number of men of color
educators that work commenters
today on and you know just for
context I think it's important
number that we don't necessarily
have not just as a state but
also the country there are no
clues there aren't a lot of mail
that of color educators and so
to see the passion from from
that workforce losing ten
percent or something like that
and so I do believe that that's
a very important aspect of this
as well but not only are they
hearing the history from two
different contexts but from
people that may look like the
students themselves and and I
you know a state that is
majority people of color this
you know representation makes a
big difference so I appreciate
the bill appreciate the answer
thank you so much Mr chairman
and to the sponsors of this bill
thank you Senator Representative
merry before I go to a the next
the.
Committee member for questions
and answers
Representative terrible Han is
on board but she's over in the
attendee section so can you
bring her over to the panelists
we wonder well over.
In terms of the discussion and
debate from committee members.
Next we have a there you go
our next Representative
Representative Montoya questions
discussion Mr chairman thank you
so very much and Representative
Roybal Caballero it's beautiful
to see you and what an
extraordinarily important piece
of legislation.
Senator Lopez thank you for
being with us today it's a great
honor to see you as well.
I have a comment in the question
my comment is of exuberant what
I've been hearing the array of
panelists the expert witnesses
riveting work we all know that
the Yazzie Martinez case pointed
squarely where we need to go we
simply haven't gone there it's
almost as though the arts the
cold the culturally relevant
linguistically appropriate.
Tools are sitting in plain sight
how many decades have we not use
them.
Twenty five years ago I returned
from a career as a professional
dancer and a pager I was very
very lucky came back to New
Mexico to see the potential in
our young people I spent twenty
five years as an accidental
educator I have no degree in
education but I invested in my
pool was the arts as a form of
the medicine to move children
from a place of trauma to one of
trust.
What the arts and cultural
please please education can do
is to give us the resilience it
gives this sense of well being
the sense of trust of oneself
the fact that New Mexico is not
using it
nearly as a side dish it's time
that have become the main
course.
I hope one day I'm a freshman
here that I will land squarely
on the Education Committee so
about breast Romero's listening
I'm auditioning.
I'm passionate about this
inspired my question is where
where is the the funding how
much is appropriated how will it
roll out how can I help my rural
district that includes mora some
you get Rio Arriba and Colfax
County all beautiful rural towns
and villages.
To really fully implement this
in in body it because we know
the value I will stop their.
Representative Herrera.
You Mr chair and thank you
Representative for your vibrance
that's that's what we need to
and welcome again.
That's a great question and it's
one that's going to be addressed
and if the senator wants to add
I would appreciate it too will
be considered
In the work of the council which
is what the bill is recommending
that the council undertake all
of the structural considerations
that will be necessary and that
means from development of
curriculum.
To we now and thank you for
raising that
Get who raised it but you as
well Mr chair we know that we
have a lot to do a long way to
go with eight Martinez Yazzie
all order.
And we do know that culturally
and linguistic education
embodies.
Much more than just curriculum.
The overall wellness and well
being of our children and that
means that we have to look at
factors such as social economic
health all of the factors so I'm
hoping that within the council's
development of this framework.
That we embody because that's
what to come and you're gonna
studies and ethnic studies is
all about that's what we started
Mr chair and Mr chair knows
because he was along with me on
this on this up have more than
fifty years ago when we fought
to have to come in to get to
kind of studies at that time the
I was one of the founders of
Chicana studies them and yet you
tap and we worked with UNM and
cross paths with with the chair
got see along the way as well
and what we embodied then what
we envisioned was this whole
embodiment of what we meant by
ethnic studies and so part of
the review will be what is it
going to take Mr chair what will
it take to incorporate.
This approach and and it's
taking its involving also Mr
chair the whole restorative
justice approach that we hope
our public education department
begins to continue to roll out
and incorporate in their
approaches because the
restorative justice approach
actually continues the path what
we started more than fifty years
ago envisioning our ethnic said
ace and how it should be
comprehensively
approached within the public
education system leading from
grade school middle school high
school to college and career
pathways that's what it was
meant to do and Mr chair just
one other point
You know I teach your
introduction to to come a step
to going to come studies at UNM
and time and time again.
The students have indicated it
had they known and understood
their history where they came
from and I understood why they
practice certain cultural
practices and traditions.
The relevance of their place in
history here in New Mexico but
in the southwest in particular
had the understand still all of
this from the very beginning
they could have made the
relationships between what they
were feeling and experiencing as
a family member and taken that
into their understanding and in
the educational arena in terms
of what that what all that meant
where did it come from what with
the foundations for all of this
and it would have made a huge
difference Mr chair in the
pathways they chose whether it
would be careers or whether it
was higher education or whether
it was on community based work
whatever it was it would have
made an impact and made a
difference so and and.
Your Mr Chairman representative
your
Coming from the arts and culture
you understand that you
understand how important it is
for children to know that our
history and culture to
traditions so
Mr chair and and
Representative I don't know if
Senator Lopez would like to add
to that.
Senator Lopez would you like to
add to that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative I had and
Representative Montoya I I would
just say did but I think you
know for all of the
unity Center say I think if it
lends itself because art is so
central to each of the cultures
that we have here in New Mexico
native American within the
spinal also within the are
African American communities
you'll see it across across all
of the sectors that art is so
important and integral to how we
express ourselves.
My my children have gone to what
a novel is a dual language
immersion so yes that up in the
in the committee that in Espanol
it then the individuals that if
this level sick I thought on the
mass it is so you the intended
again some so with the music the
arts that this is I think a
vision that I have at some point
we're going to get there and
this is a great place to start
Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Montoya.
Further questions.
Okay next we'll go to our
Representative Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman up thank
you Representative Caballero
Senator Lopez you know that this
really touches.
Such as a little bit at home for
me because when I was in high
school I think it was a maybe a
sophomore we had Chicano studies
and only hold that was one of my
favorite places to go to we had
his his name was Larry Cockell
was our what I'm struck at that
time and you know that I always
wanted to go to that class
because I was intrigued on where
we came from we talked about I
think as we talked about the
land grants and you know it was
something that was intriguing to
me as a.
Hispano here going into high
school you know social studies
in that we're kind of gray but
they didn't treat me as much as
Chicano studies did and and I
don't know maybe you guys can
ask this question.
This will like in eighty seven
eighty eight what happened that
those those electives or those
courses got taken out of the
schools can anybody answer that.
Mr chair
I don't have an answer for that
I mean I can give you a my
generic overview of what I think
happened but I think that
there's been a kind Mr chair
there's continued attempt.
To do in the race the histories.
Our communities of color.
Across the nation.
And that I'm doing began.
Soon after the seventies and
into the eighties and that's
it's amazing that you made that
observation.
Because we've seen a consistent
attempt to minimize this is part
of why we were fighting so hard
to break down institutional
racism and the structures of the
systems that are us structurally
racist.
Because those very institutions
of education and higher
education have been responsible
for the racial inequities and
part of that has been
demonstrated in the manner in
which Mr chair that our stories
I have been removed from the
publications from textbooks
they've been removed
from from.
You know museums and historical
sites in archives and it's been
because of the that that don't
that institutional racist
approach to education which.
Minimizes or attempts to a race
that we had any role to play in
the history of these United
States and it plays right into
the white privilege mentality
that has continued to dominate
in all of our systems and
structures Mr chairman and
representative and so we saw a
huge gap between the sixties.
In the eighties and as such
we're struggling now to
re capture and re group.
And reignite.
With.
Legislation such as this because
even our research our
publications were treated as
insignificant and so it has been
Mr chair our only attempt to
build our own publication homes.
In order to be able to publish
on behalf of our our our
scholars so there's been a big
huge gap in in that gap has
contributed to our young people.
Not.
Recieving.
That.
Type of education historical and
significant culturally language
significant education and that
is what my overview of of the
explanation and so this is been
a reason it's crossed all
society it's reflective of all
society and I don't know if on
anyone else wishes to contribute
specifically but that's my kind
of my overview in general thank
you Mr chair thank you
representative because then we
still have the floor.
Your German you know I and I
really want to tell you guys a
commend you guys for bringing
this forward because I think we
need to we need to bring that
card what do with us our history
in in our in our educational
courses because you know what we
need to know as a culture as a.
The city that we need to know
where we came from what we're
all about and I support this a
hundred percent and I I commend
you guys for bringing this
forth.
The.
Thank you.
Representative Roybal Caballero
we have no further questions and
I
I I kinda I'm gonna have some
questions but.
I'm going to kind of boastful
knows.
Mainly because we're about to
lose our quorum and if we lose
our quorum we won't pass this
bill out today with the full
committee so members of the
committee what is your wish and
therefore do pass let's check it
we have the best recommendation
by Representative on the second
by Roger Representative Montoya.
Sting no further questions
discussions their opposition to
do pass recommendation.
Seen on the record reflect that
all those present voted in the
affirmative representative what
are you know you have a do pass
recommendation on house bill two
two seven.
The model you get access to us
at those Miss Gallegos and if
they call me thank goodness yes.
Yeah members that does it for
today
we'll be back in the saddle on.
Tuesday nine o'clock.
I simply went building this and
then I could go and the.
Us just Representative.
Representative Lujan on what
happened and Health.
We want.
We.
Representative I don't see any
black eyes and bruises.
Once the gun pretty good.
It was it was wonderful it was
and I'm full of energy I think
that you know.
Moving forward with and we do
have a vote that we were
schooling and Madam.
Questions from the committee so.
Yep on Monday.
Okay good.
As a co sponsor
It was a vibrant thoughtful deep
discussion on so many years of
work on this bill it was an
honor to listen.
And I believe that a of a
powerful collaboration a merging
of best practices for the best
price product that we can
produce as a as a body for the
state of New Mexico will emerge
this session that's my that's my
prediction and it was an honor
to be with you Representative
which was address leader.
I.
Removing a miles city forward.
Right now in C. pack.
Well good luck.
