Use by trying to see you.
Your.
Can you hear.
Got seven folks have a quorum.
I'm sure there.
Thank you.
Good morning everyone and thank
you for joining us for those who
are watching and listening
we are scheduled for a hearing
today from the department to
provide us of funding overview
as I mentioned last year I mean
last week feels like last year
is that
that a lot of the new were
legislators and even some of the
the those of you who weapon in
this legislation in this
committee for awhile
are just interested in hearing
some presentations as we get
bills assigned to us right now
that's moving a little bit
slowly but we think that with
the Senate getting through that
done getting theirs done soon
we'll start to see those coming
through but if there are
presentations that you all would
like for us to
To include I know today is of
funding overview Thursday will
have a a presentation from the
real runner of folks from the
representing the road runner and
then and then we can incorporate
some more of that so just let us
know if there are any
presentations you like to hear
and we'll certainly get that
will make those accommodations
so with that I will hand it over
to
I think Tamara's here miss Haas
yeah here we go so the welcome
miss Haas thank you so much for
joining us.
Thank you chair Rubio.
So let me just go ahead and get
started I'll be sharing my
screen I'm not sure how many
people have are in the office
they may have a hard copy of the
power point.
But during this presentation
later on
will have David can town our
chief engineer joined
and he'll go over a couple of
slides so let me get start on
sharing my screen I'm gonna turn
my video off just to make sure
that.
My.
Internet connection stay stable
for.
Hey so I am seeing my funding
overview screen can I get a
confirmation from somebody that
you guys are seeing it too
okay great all of get up and get
started as schools.
this mainly came from some
information that was provided to
us from Representative Garrett
talking about funding and
finance I'm gonna talk about it
more and respect the funding
because I think of when we say
financing with highways were
talking about taking out a loan
or something like that
so the question is how to get a
road project funded
so I'll go over that first part
and then I'll dive a little bit
into the federal aid highway
program
will usually refer to that as
FH that way there's a little bit
information about state funding
and then Representative Garrett
also wanted to know some
information about our bonding
program so after I talk about
state funding is when I'll turn
it over for a few slides for
David and if the committee
please as we might stop and do
some questions are before we
dive into the bond program.
So the first thing that we
really need to know as we need
to define what the project is so
if we go back to the typical
questions we always think of of
who what when where why and how
that's kind of what we need to
know if you come up with an idea
so one of the key points is the
location of the project the road
that you're talking about it
really matters whether or not
you're within an MPO area we
also need to know the ownership
is a state local type of road
and that includes a city town
village or County I tribal road
whether the road is considered
federal and then private roads
obviously we're not going to be
signing any private roads but
that's really kind of the key
thing is who is the owner as and
then the thing that we refer to
at the department is a scope
really what is the purpose of
the project are you gonna pave
the road is it and maintenance
activity are we going to do
something to a branch do you
want a new interchange are we
going to add a lane
are there some safety concerns
are for chair Rubio is that
looking at adding bike lanes one
of the common things always is
installing a traffic signal.
Other key items is is the road
on the national highway system
we need to know that because
that's going to point us in a
direction to which federal
funding category and then the
all important thing is what is
it functional classifications so
that's probably a new term for
you guys and This slide here
talks about functional
classification this is based on
the federal definition so we
have in our state and we have
three of those in the state
interstate ten goes from the
Arizona state line to the Texas
state line goes through
Lordsburg and Deming in Los
crucis area I forty goes through
the middle of the state so
that's got in the car crossed
Gallup grants in going through
Albuquerque Santa Rosa to come
carry and out to the Texas state
line.
And then I twenty five starts
down in Los crucis and comes up
through Sapporo in Albuquerque
and Las Vegas and then up to act
on before it hits to Colorado.
Then we have a roll
classifications that we refer to
as principal arterial those are
usually classified all of our US
highways so we have down in the
south US sixty US fifty four US
seventy US sixty to one eighty
eight US two eighty five those
are all also federally
designated wrote a city street.
Can also be classified as a
principal arterial so something
like Montgomery in the still
City of Albuquerque I'm terrible
of our
over in Rio Rancho area and
Albuquerque so then we also have
something called in other
freeway or expressway
and those other freeway an
expressway sorry I messed up on
the slide but the other freeway
and express way we really don't
use that classification very
much but the one good example is
the piece of US seventy that's
east of I twenty five outside
Los crucis so that would be
typically a road that has
interchanges on it but things
like tramway in the City of
Albuquerque New we don't
classify those as freeways and
expressways we usually put those
into principle are Terry all the
minor arterial as a separate
category so that's where I
messed up it should have been
it's all own bullet.
But minor arterials are other
road to but also provide it can
activity major collector is when
you get into some of the lower
classes of New Mexico roads.
Or other streets within local
government when you get into a
minor collector is usually less
traffic and then you get to the
local road which is really going
to be looking at some of your
residential streets so kinda
like education and everything
else I drew a red line between
major collector in minor
collector because everything
above the red line is eligible
for federal funds and they wrote
in the road classification
functional classification of
minor collector and local those
are not eligible for federal
funds for road projects and so
that's a key piece of
information because that's going
to kind of guide us into what
type of funding category we
should be using.
So this lie that I have here is
really the path of funding a
road propped object we like to
look at things in the long range
transportation plan on the
department of transportation has
one we're currently updating
that and there's a link I next
turn website to provide comments
on that NPOs are also required
to do long range transportation
plans and our regional
transportation organizations we
also asked for them to do their
regional transportation plan so
then when we get into this
preliminary project definition
and screening that's using all
of the information.
That I talked about on the first
couple of slides as well as any
information that we have on
pavement and bridge condition in
order to really start kind of
putting that project idea
together and once we have that.
Then we're gonna start looking
at
what type of funds that we
should probably use on that
project and and what they are
classified as.
So when you look at
defining a project it doesn't
matter
Doing the lead on the project
whether it's the DOT whether it
sent county whether it's a city
we all need to follow the same
process and looking at the
overall planning process so if
you're road idea is on a road
and we know that it's on by DOT
then we would say you need to
work with the district engineer
to really start getting out that
project if the road ownership is
a city or county then you're
gonna want to work with those
and to tease on those types of
projects tribal government we
also fund projects there and
some of the tribes actually have
their own planning process and
identifying their project needs
so that's why it's the key
unfortunately.
For you as legislative course
you need to work with the owner
of that particular road in order
to get that project from the
concept that you may have our
constituents may bring that
we're always going to have to
refer you back to whoever the
owner as and coordinate with
them to actually get it through
the process so the next block I
have here is something that we
call the development step and
when we are we have a project
like a new interchange we know
it's going to take longer the
development part of the staff is
really how we're going to fund
the design and that preliminary
engineering process and through
that process we always have to
do an alternatives analysis.
To look to find the the feeding
the most stuff feasible and
prudent alternatives for that
project.
And so what we refer to as a
delivery Stephens really
what the construction
where the construction funding
is identified and that's where
we're gonna start finalizing
environmental documentation
doing all the preliminary
engineering to get to the final
design of a project.
Slide to show some of the more
detailed stabs the column on the
left is all part of the project
definition an initial screening
and how that works through the
process and then as we go into
alternative development and
screening is to start fleshing
out what direction we're gonna
actually go with that project
is a road gonna need two lanes
is going to be four lanes are we
going to have interchanges are
we going to have at grade
intersections are those
intersections gonna be
controlled with the stop sign or
there's gonna be a traffic
signal those are some of the
types of things and then we
always look at our data
collection in order to do some
more detailed analysis of that
so the data is not only about
the road in that condition but
we're also looking at the
environment is there items that
are are protected or endangered
species are the their cultural
properties that have significant
so we need to avoid those and
there are other things like is
this area of adjacent to any
part because that has another
level of protection and this
could be just a city park not
necessarily of federal or state
park but really just kind of
neighborhood park center
designated as parks can get us
into trouble at times as well
and then of course we also look
at whether or not there's any
historical properties on their
so as we start getting all of
this information it starts
directing us into the level of
effort and actually
identifying how much money we
would need for the project and
identifying the best source of
funding for that project
especially if it's going to be
five year old but in some
situations that we're we may
push or recommend a.
Local government consider the
new transportation projects fund
that was created a couple years
ago
or or whether we look at a local
government road fund especially
if the project doesn't qualify
for federal funds but those are
some of the decisions that go
into actually identifying which
funding categories and how to
really allocate out the funding
and then
Sometimes we have projects that
are not in the step at this
point and we're still working
through the development because
we know it's going to take
longer but then before we can go
in and finalize the
environmental document and and
go to final design we need to
identify all of the construction
funding especially for federal
projects in going into the step.
So all of this is really talking
about our our planning process
so the federal government
Federal Highway Administration
everything you wanted to know
about federal highways is
covered under title twenty three
on the national level CFR stance
for the code of federal
regulations or the code of
federal regulations as
equivalent to the New Mexico the
ministry of code and title
twenty three of the United
States code is more equivalent
to the New Mexico state statute
so the planning regulations are
created under part four fifty
twenty three CFR so that's
really any project that's
federally funded or regionally
significant with state or local
money must be in a step or a tip
so that's again are statewide
transportation improvement
program and then the tip is a
transportation improvement
program for an MPO area.
So in a ten we are required to
the department is required to
incorporate that tip verbatim
into our step and that's all
covered in the park for fifty.
So they always talk about for
planning we have a continuing
cooperative and comprehensive
planning process so what I've
shown here is some of the
responsibilities and
requirements of metropolitan
planning organization or
regional planning organization
we added in the T. regional
transportation planning
organization so under the
metropolitan planning
organization those are for
metropolitan areas with
populations greater than fifty
thousand that's all covered in
the part four fifty when it's
mandated to have an MPO so we do
have I M. P. O.'s within the
state of New Mexico
they are required to have a
metropolitan transportation plan
I either long range plan
they're responsible for
developing and to.
In cooperation with the
Department mainly because of
some of the allocations on their
available funding and then as I
mentioned earlier that that must
be included in the step without
modification and that tip and
the step must be fiscally
constrained.
As far as our regional
transportation planning
organization's they are
designated by the NM duty their
incorporate the rural areas with
populations less than fifty
thousand they also have to do
our regional transportation plan
for those of you that our work
with the regional transportation
planning organization they have
what they call there are tipper
the regional transportation
improvement program
recommendation so that document
is not fully constrained but it
is
More or less a list of what they
look at so that as a can look at
priorities they have that are
tempered to rely on and that has
been one of the things.
It having something you cut out
a little bit.
Yeah we're.
I don't know what happened.
We can't hear you.
I wanna give me a second to
reconnect.
We've been so technical
difficulties to on this
committee and ruin our record.
Okay I think
She might be looking back and
maybe.
Wait a few minutes and.
Unless one of you on the
committee would like to make the
rest of the presentation.
Exactly what I wanted.
Now Mallory and David can cannot
from T. O. T. are also on
not sure if they can reach out
to to Methos.
Hey David go ahead.
Thank you madam chair let me
turn on my camera here if I can.
The panelists David you should
be able to do that want to get
in the that section there we go
okay.
Good morning everybody we are
trying to get a hold of Tammy
I'm not sure if she has
connection issues but I can
absolutely finish this up
presentation of for it for the
committee if you all would like
yeah no absolutely thank you
David okay so I don't have I I
don't have the presentation
happy to share my screen I don't
know if you do yes back on the
as a panelist okay okay perfect
we'll just let her finish off
and thank you.
Well if you want to K..
Thank you madam chair.
Do we have a camera yes sorry I
was put in the parking lot
before I turn my mic back on so
that doesn't work.
So.
If we get you guys did you guys
hear this.
Particular slide number eight.
You are sharing currently so.
You were the regional planning
organizations section we you
started that and you were almost
done with it.
And we heard that.
You're not sharing your screen
currently you have to struggle
again and also just.
That law.
All righty.
I finish that you guys kind of
got the gist of that so.
As our starting in on the step
process the districts work
directly with NPOs are two PO's
and tribal governments to
program projects in the school
based on those funding
eligibility as well as the
district priorities we do
quarterly state meetings in
order to
Keep track in in keep up to date
to make sure all of our projects
on track so those meetings are
held with the districts and the
design regions and they discuss
any issues related to the staff
and any of the programs there is
a quarterly amendment that must
get approved by FHWA but prior
to that we always have that on
our DOT website along with the
press release to get public
comment on that this is very
critical that it is a four year
fiscally constrained program
with the federal funds our final
step is approved by FHWA
the federal transit
administration
and the step is actually
available at this link that I
show at the bottom of the slide
so you can look up any projects
in there if you so choose you
can either the easiest way I I
would think for the legislators
to look at this when we go in
and
use the options to look at it on
a district level for one of the
six transportation districts.
this map is showing you the
transportation districts along
with the MPO and RPO areas the
R. P. R. T. P. O. areas in the
rad are ones that across our
district boundaries there is one
and and PS our our GPO area on
the side of the state and that
one covers the
has to council of governments in
it and it shared between
districts two and four as well.
All market RPO act M. P. O. I'm
sorry is the el Paso MPO that
covers a little bit of Sunland
park so there are some
challenges when you're working
with the by state and peel area.
So the next part is the federal
aid highway program the federal
aid highway program in our
budget is in the program code
five six two project design and
construction the reason that
budget is always so big is
because that's where we put all
of the design and construction
funds that come to us with
federal highways and our budget.
So our federal highway program
comes to us through an
authorization bill the current
authorization bill is referred
to as the fast act fixing
America's surface transportation
it is a multi year bill in the
past they usually Congress
usually work on six year built
the fastback was actually
authorized for five years and
technically it expired on
September thirtieth twenty
twenty but Congress did pass a
one year extension for federal
fiscal year twenty one so now
the fast act expires on
September thirtieth the twenty
twenty one sorry federal bill
creates are funding programs and
establishes funding levels for
each program and it defines our
funding allocation formulas
for each of the of the fifty
states as well as there's
actually fifty two DOT's because
the federal highway program also
funds Washington Washington DC
And of Porto Rico.
So since nineteen seventy eight
these are all the different
versions of the transportation
bill at the federal level as we
look at all of those so we're
down here to the fast act and
right now we hear from the
Senate environment and public
works that they want to have a
dropped by Memorial Day for the
next surface transportation
bill.
So then when we look at
just like we do at the state
budget on the federal we have
the multi year bill but then we
have to wait for a spending bill
every year I E. the budget bill
so usually that's just one year
and establishes a contract
authority here spending levels
and then we're sent a notice of
apportionment
and that is supposed to occur
prior to the fiscal year we
don't always get it at ninety
days and our current
apportionment as up four hundred
and two million and all of that
information is publicly
available on FHWA is website.
So the fastback the main funding
programs in the fast act and the
national highway performance
program that's where interstate
and national highway system
projects can be funded out of
that program the surface
transportation block grant
program is where there is funds
allocated by population area
last week you heard about our
our bike plan in our
transportation alternatives
program those are also included
in the surface transportation
block program asked about
locations.
They're still a separate funding
category for congestion
mitigation and air quality
there is a little bit a
dedicated funds of C. mac that
is supposed to go to the
southern part of the state and
that is the only area in the
state that
is considered non attainment for
one of the regulated items and
that is actually the particular
matter ten which is ten microns
we have a highway safety
improvement program set aside
that programs about twenty
million the C. mac is only yeah
I think seven million it's a
relatively small program.
There's less than two million
for a real hard rail crossing
highway program and that really
is to do improvements
specifically where rail line
crosses either a state or local
road the metropolitan planning
funds you'll see that as a
separate program that funding
can only be used to fund the
NPOs and they're certain
requirements of those
eligibility is a new program
that was created under the fast
act is a national highway
freight program that program is
only about twelve million
dollars annually and there's
also some specifics.
What can and can't be done with
those types of funds.
Senator national high
performance program there's your
slides on each of the programs I
kinda covered wet
types of things the slide covers
eligibility is and then down on
the bottom all of the federal
funds requiring that in our
state we are on a sliding scale
because the amount of public
lands that we have so instead of
being an eighty twenty with
eighty to eighty percent federal
funds and twenty percent because
the the state or local match the
sliding scale increases our
federal chair to the eighty five
forty four.
Surface transportation block
grant program
actually it can be used for
interstates US highways and
state highways that are major
electors and higher so that's
going back to one of the early
side of why the functional
classes important so that when
you come up with the idea we
know which program you might be
eligible for on the federal.
So some of the categories in the
way this part of money is is
broken out there's about a
hundred million in this
particular program the large
urban Albuquerque metro
that are Albuquerque or that
maybe region MPO and then the
LFC aso MPO they have specific
allocations for the large urban
and those to NPOs will program
that money the smaller than is
between five thousand and two
hundred thousand that's another
satisfied within the surface
transportation block grant
program.
And then that part rural
populations less than five
thousand.
There's also a pop they refer to
as the flexible surface
transportation part and that
doesn't have any requirements on
where the funding can be
satisfied R. can be spent when
we look at the transportation
alternatives program that does
things like the landscaping the
lighting pedestrian
This is where we do a lot of
multi use paths that are
independent from the roads and
that when we look at the seventy
five twenty five program to the
unique thing about the tap
program is in law the DOT cannot
administer.
Any projects under that program
all of that funding needs to go
directly to the local.
And that one has different
requirements so I think we might
have lost you again.
I can still hear can you okay.
Like all right so the
transportation alternative is
also doesn't have the same
restrictions on the functional
classification like the other
pots of money do.
The national highway freight
program being in new program it
has its own prioritization of
projects within not it's very
specific on the route needing to
be on the primary freight
network we have a limited number
of mileage that we can have
designated as either a critical
rural or critical urban
in addition to that so this
particular part of money is is
Very restrictive as far as what
we can do and so as we look at
that funding we work with all
six districts to identify the
the prioritization for where
that right funding is going to
go each year.
Metropolitan planning P. L.
funds allegedly this at your
leisure just talks about this
money goes directly to them P.
O.'s.
And then as we get in the state
funds.
Of course we have the state road
fund you guys know all about
that
we're.
Go over that every year as far
as our budget this provides a
state match for the federal
program it funds all of DOT
operations and as you know with
our budget there's not a lot of
money left over specifically for
projects that not already
dedicated to the matching funds
however a great deal of state
funds goes into our hobby
appropriations for maintenance
and those maintenance activities
and contract maintenance efforts
are very important to
maintaining.
The quality of our roads through
those funds.
So.
Mallory's area are project
oversight division oversees the
local government road fund and
one of the key programs and that
is the municipal arterial
program and I know a lot of the
state legislators probably have
heard about when your local
communities get the map funds
There's also severance tax bond
projects to me those are usually
always capital outlay and so
when you allocate capital outlay
to transportation that does come
through the department to
administered through grants to
the local governments.
And then of course there is the
general fund and we get funding
for our general fund projects.
So in our operational budget
with the state road fund are for
programs hi this committee has
already approved our budget for
the this year and it's gone over
to House Appropriations and now
off to the Senate each district
allocates your budget to address
maintenance needs within their
district they set up how much
money they're going to allocate
to contract maintenance or do
with their owns of forces and
then if there is a hundred
percent state projects budget
the department will prioritize
those projects for funding.
this committee are the crews are
operating budget every year.
So in the local government road
fund that is actually created in
statute quite a number of years
ago
it's part of our operational
budget that was included in
house bill three is established
under sixty seven dash three
dash twenty eight in the state
statutes it does require the
twenty five percent match before
then programs under the local
government road fund either
cooperative agreements the
municipal arterial.
School bus routes in the county
arterial program.
So each year we do a call for
projects the applications are
due now in March each district
is allocated an equal amount of
funds for each of the program
areas and the projects are
selected selected based on
district priority.
So the projects are awarded in
October and
we do take these projects
through commission for approval
it is a disbursement program and
then when the projects are
coolly completed the district we
does a review and sign off for
the project closure.
There is potential in in to
included in this program for the
match waiver does match waivers
are due by July thirty first we
do are relying on DFA to approve
those projects are those
localities that qualify for the
match waiver and then after we
get that we take that for
commission approval on this
match waivers.
The new transportation project
fund created in twenty nineteen.
Has at fifty million dollars and
we like this program and I think
the like the locals like it a
lot more because it only
requires a five percent match
in twenty twenty we requests and
and legislation passed in change
the name so that it would
clarify that the tribal
governments were eligible for
this fun.
We did create a rulemaking to
really go into identify how we
would select projects in the
type of information that we
would need in order to allocate
funding and that's included
under eighteen point twenty
seven point six of the New
Mexico ministry of code.
So as you are aware I hope you
remember last week house bill
twenty eight to twenty eight
that are Representative
Castellano presented to the
committee was to move the motor
vehicle excise tax that was
passed in house bill six hundred
twenty in twenty nineteen that
was originally designated for
the local government road fund
to move that funds to the new
transportation project funding
so that would have a recurring
revenue revenue source for this
fun
Senate bill twenty is the
identical bills that made it
through the Senate and we hope
to have that moving through the
house to get that change
included.
Regardless all of the money for
the transportation project on
the motor vehicle excise tax has
already been approved by you as
part of house bill three.
As part of our budget.
When we get to capital outlay.
The department of transportation
has no control over capital
outlay this is totally up to the
legislature on how you guys are
going to allocate capital outlay
and what those amounts are so in
prior experience of working with
the DOT in working with this
program capital outlay either
comes to us from general fund
appropriations or severance tax
bonds
In the recent couple years we've
been getting some general fund
for DOT but there's also a
significant amount of general
fund and severance tax for local
projects there's always a
question about severance tax
bonds and doesn't Department
issue though now New Mexico
department of transportation
does not have any involvement on
issuing the severance tax bonds
that strictly something that's
done by the New Mexico board of
finance.
In there under the department of
finance and administration it's
just the DOT could be a
beneficiary of those severance
tax bonds but the Legislature
completely controls who they're
gonna allocate severance tax
bonds funds to in a given year.
The New Mexico DOT does
administrate a dozen minister
the transportation plot projects
included in capital outlay and
that's all
Down under Mallory shop with her
staff and they're referred to as
a program oversight division.
So I will turn it over with
David these are his order so
slides so I don't know if your
power if the hard copies you had
have these inner into it they
were added later last night so
David are you still on I am
thank you talking about yeah I
appreciate going to go to the
next slide.
Thank you so I'll just talk a
little bit of madam chair and
representatives about the
project development process
the project development design
is is under my shop we have
three regions north region
design here in Santa Fe central
region in Albuquerque and our
southern regions and Sierra Los
crucis of the support our
districts in developing their
there are project priorities and
they are go to use the they work
with the district to go ahead
and program projects within the
step and districts but the like
timing said work with our
regional planning organizations
metropolitan planning
organizations what what am I
projects to put in a step in
step
project typically go in one of
three directions the district
will take lead on the project
design with their designs what's
up or they will request us
assistance from one of our
design regions depending on
which a district they are so
soft region of is there for
district one in district shape
design needs central region is
there for district three and
district six and north is are
available for district four and
district I.
We also have a twenty five
million dollar annual consultant
program and we utilized what
that funding to get up
professional services for more.
A study type projects that have
a the that might be a little bit
more
Difficult to develop or or
they're just gonna take a little
a little more time to get to a
point where where they're
actually going to get to final
design
so scoping is part of the
problem is part of the early
initial process of project
development where we identify
the project purpose in need now
that can be a simple scoping
report if the project is
relatively simple if we're doing
a minor pavement preservation
project or pavement
rehabilitation project that is
not really affecting right away
utilities or some of the
environmental and cultural
resources that timing it alluded
to earlier.
Other times the scope when we
have some.
Other projects we actually are
identifying different
alternatives we will go through
what's called the phase one HB
study and we will identify a
host of alternatives will that
will
that will go ahead and address
the purpose in need of the
project that that we have going
on so that once we do that and
we get out of that initial
scoping or or or alternative
analysis if you will we move in
the preliminary design and
that's pretty much everything
that time you discussed with
right of way acquisition or all
of our environmental
investigations into getting a
project up to thirty percent
design level and then that's
where we are moving the final
design where we're getting to
sixty ninety and ultimately our
projects specification and
estimate level when our project
design is a hundred percent and
we were ready to let the project
next slide please.
So project leading over calendar
year twenty twenty we advertise
a total of fifty five projects
offer total of five hundred ten
million dollars County your
twenty twenty of the costs of
those projects they include the
bid costs we also include
general of gross receipts tax
and often time payroll and
augmentation so of if we need to
get some consultants to provide
our construction or construction
project offices with some
additional inspectors or lab
workers that's with augmentation
program is for typically that
runs anywhere between three to
five percent of the total
project costs.
Lot over fist over excuse me
County or twenty twenty and M.
D. O. T. of how to ninety
percent accuracy meaning that of
all the projects that were
identified that here in our
budget schedule that we have
advertised on our website over
ninety percent went out on time
next slide please.
All right so finally we also
develop what we call a shelf
program these are our projects
that are shovel ready they've
gone to through final design
that a hundred percent they
received all the five
certifications and by that I
mean we have to get an
environmental certification or
railroad certification utility
certification right away
certification and ITS
certification so once we've
gotten all those certifications
we sent we submit those projects
to our PS the section and those
projects again are shovel ready
for any redistribution funds
that we might get at the end of
the federal fiscal year around
July time frame last federal
fiscal year twenty twenty in
India to receive sixty nine
million in federal reserve
mission funding and that
included the state match so that
was on top of the of the federal
a portion of that we received
last fiscal year for this coming
fiscal year we have twenty
projects they're gonna be shovel
ready for redistribution amount
of about two hundred ninety
eight million dollars now if we
got all that that would be great
we don't anticipate getting all
of it but any of those projects
would roll over into the
following year so we we have a
consistent shell program to take
advantage of any redistribution
funding that comes at the end of
the fiscal year that funding is
basically any states that are
able to utilize a hundred
percent of their portion meant.
Get rolled back into the office
to you individually distributed
equally to the different states
that have projects that are
shovel ready so and I believe
that's the end of my slides.
So on to the bonding program
victims.
So with that madam chair I don't
know if the committee wants to
come
ask any questions on the first
part because I do think the
bonding program is a little bit
different and I don't want them
to
lose your train of thought if
they have questions for David R.
I. on this first part
Whatever the committee please.
Yeah I know we can certainly
stop for a bit right now I know
there's a couple questions from
legislators first we can go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation it's
always very interesting.
On slide twenty five under your
local government road fund
process it talks about your
projects your call for projects
or Senate January application
secured March.
How do you communicate to the
cities and counties.
Right regarding the.
in vios in PS are are to be
honest.
How do you communicate with
them.
What when you're opening date
isn't and when they're
initiatives are has to be
finalized and how they decide
whether they want to use map
funding local government road
fund or transportation projects
funds how does that
communication take place between
D. O. T. and the local
jurisdictions.
I can take this one of Madam
chair representative of product
will
so the districts will will send
out
We'll send out to all their
introduce the other local
government section letters of
the available funding and
provide them the timelines to
for the application process
every the in it's been such an
ongoing process that the
entities expected every January
from all district offices are
out so that they're pretty good
at getting their applications in
now where the funding goes to so
the map is mixed Municipal
arterial program so that has to
go to municipalities on
arterials County arterial
programs have to go to counties
on arterials and then of course
school bus routes have to go to
school bus routes local
government road fund is more
flexible in that regard can go
to different routes so it really
depends on where the project is
the scope of the project and and
do that'll identify what type of
funding that they will actually
apply for.
It.
Madam chair and and
Mr can tell that thank you for
that answer I I guess I find
myself.
Wondering if there's any way
they can have a a calendar on
the wall that says you know in
in January we're going to see
the receive this notification
for local government road funds
in July we're gonna receive
transportation projects on
opening in an application
process do you publish any kind
of a calendar.
And provide that to the the
municipalities or counties
jurisdictions.
So that they can select which
one edit I'm struggling to
understand that a restaurant a
local government road fund and
the new transportation projects
on those are very similar the
the matches are are different
once twenty five percent five
percent but.
I I'm not sure how they can
discern which one of those two
they need to apply for both or
how that works.
But you're madam chair
representative Custer appreciate
that still so the districts
through the R. P. O.'s and NPOs
always get this information out
to the local entities and they
are well aware of the time lines
as far as when the application
is due for the local government
road fund cap map again that's
been a reoccurring program that
that the locals are relatively
used to to the transportation
program fund that is new that's
last couple years and the
biggest difference there besides
the match which is huge is the
fact that the entities are
required to get certifications
for the projects having to get
those by certifications I talked
about earlier railroad right
away Bayern mental utility I. TS
that is a is a pretty lengthy
process and can can be quite
costly and often times isn't
worth the effort for some of
these local probe for a local
entities to go through for the
amount of funding they're
getting so the intent of this
fund was to make it easier to
get the local projects out for
instance a sidewalk project in
you know communal because we
because showing see about a year
or a of likely project here in
in Santa Fe on a local road very
intent is really for the locals
to be able to get that money
spent easier and get that
project developed easier and and
just make it a lot easier for
part for local governments to
get projects done without having
to go through too many hoops if
you would if you will okay final
comment or question of the I I
know that the rules are fully
developed on the transportation
projects funds are I believe
those are going to be done in a
few more months if if I remember
what I was told.
Do you know where in the
application process will start
of those and and how long do
they have or does it depend on I
know it can't start till after
we adjourn to go home in the
governor signed something
because that that's when the
money will be there but.
Can you speak to the timing of
of that process please Sir yep
Madam chair representative yes I
can it'll be similar to last
year's time line I believe the
call for projects went out from
the districts and around April
for the last half of April the
applications were due back to
the D. O. T. V. of the appeals
and RPOs just to the districts
by June and then the districts
provided have been secretary
Michael Santa Fe list of
projects in July that was then
and those projects within forty
two commission for approval in
September if I'm not mistaken
and that's similar process in
schedule that will be looking at
implementing this year as well.
Wonderful that's good I think
what I was looking for I
appreciate that very much and if
I can put that together with
with the.
Projects that call for projects
in January on the local
government wrote I I kind of
understand it now thank you for
walking me through that process
I appreciate it thank you madam
chair.
My pleasure thank you
Representative Crowder next we
have Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you madam chair on
Is this presentation on page
eighteen she mentioned
flexible monies that can be used
anywhere in the state anywhere
the surface transportation where
surface transportation applies.
And can you explain to us what a
federally eligible consultants
services are and how they are
used to in the state.
Madam chair Representative
Powdell Culbert that flexible
money a lot of times that's what
we use to fund our consultant
program David actually overseas
that program and we have to put
a budget together every year
with this set aside that we have
and all of those projects are
actually included in the state
as well.
Okay then and we're just
consultant and I mean is that
your contract with some of the
I would argue that I would
developers of for lack of a
better word.
Madam chair.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes so we will hire engineering
consultant firm
Representative Pettigrew works
for one of the State Farm as
well as all of the the
consultant firms a lot of the
big names that are all part of
the American council of
engineering consultants in New
Mexico but really
Any engineering consulting
whether they're in New Mexico or
outside in New Mexico is welcome
to respond to a request for
proposal that we put out so they
are all on.
Competitively.
Bad but not exactly we don't go
with low then because it's
federal funds we go with the
quality based selection but I do
want to say there is competition
for that and and it's whatever
phone to respond to that
particular requests for
proposals.
Project.
So this is how when we're
traveling around the state is
legislators and we see all these
different companies and you're
working on our state roads.
This is how they come and based
on their relationship with some
of the consultants and and then
previous history.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
as thank you both economic David
for this wonderful presentation
my question is is that project I
trace the is that part of the el
Paso someone part and when they
extended the road and I built a
concrete road to to cover the
heavy trucks how was that
funded.
Madam chair representative here
at so on that particular project
we did use some of our federal
funds to hire an engineering
consultant to do the design of
the project once the dust line
is complete like David mentioned
then we go out to bid letting
that's also another competitive
process where we advertise a
budget we did use our federal
funds that particular road New
Mexico one thirty six that we
did in concrete as part of the
national highway system and so
the department of transportation
transportation actually district
one they were the ones that
identify that project as a need
and the construction was
actually a competitively bid
construction contract.
And that is a little bit.
Madam chair me so is Senate race
of heart of that MPO that el
Paso someone park MPO.
Are just part of district one.
it's the southern part of
dynamic County and that's really
close to sanitary so that gets
covered under the el Paso MPO we
are at the mercy of the federal
government when they establish
the urban area boundaries of how
that grows are certain criteria
that they use and usually that's
all our MPO boundaries many
change based on population
figures and since we just have
the census during twenty twenty
that triggers a bunch of
re looking at things that we
have to do one of those things
that will look at is if any of
the
population areas change like
Carlsbad and Hobbs if those go
over fifty thousand we may have
additional NPOs created once a
sentence is released we also
have to relook at the functional
classification of every road in
the state after a census to see
if those changes so in some
respects it's more work but the
longer they take to actually
release a Santos delays when we
actually start doing those types
of things but that project is
really right there on the
boundary the advantage without
posso MPO because they're so as
such a small part of New Mexico
within that MPO boundary
They.
Are very flexible and allowing
us to do what we want to do with
the money that comes so it's
pretty much district one if they
decide.
Then the el Paso MPO will
include that project in there to
kind of no questions asked type
of thing and so we do Trent the
little he does sit on that and
PO policy board
many is very active in that.
Thank you madam chair I really
appreciate your explanation and
what we have to look forward to
with the senses thank you.
Thank you Representative Garrett
I just have one question and I
don't know if we can also maybe
wait until the end but it's just
something that I've been curious
about is the level of
coordination I think
Representative Crowder may have
touched about on it earlier but
I think what's been challenging
for me not even just serving on
this committee but just in
general serving in the
legislature is that like roads
you can't limit them to people's
districts and like roads over a
lot there's a lot of overlap and
so I've been trying to really
think about how we can be more
efficient internet not just not
the department but us as
legislators in terms of how do
we how do we better coordinate
to make sure that projects that
are
That maybe we're wanting to to
to work on or create like how
how how is what's the best where
have you seen the best way in
terms of coordination around
projects statewide so that it's
not just limited to just
people's districts but I mean
because my district is very very
small but
but it also I mean it's part of
a much bigger community and so
I'm just curious as to what your
thoughts are on that.
The madam chair I I thank you
all the best your bill here in
Los crucis so you're part of a
civilian fuel the best way to
get any project really in in on
our radar is to utilize those
planning organizations you know
if you if you're in the city use
your M. P. O. if you're in one
of the rural areas the act with
your regional planning
organizations or plantings are
planning division is a very
active they go to all those
meetings they provide continuous
updates on project programs
there coming up funding
availability that's coming up
and any projects that you will
want to get on the tip and then
eventually on the step really
that's the that's the best way
to do that is utilize your
planning organizations.
Thank you David and then also in
terms of just the the outreach
to the public I know you
mentioned earlier that our P.
O.'s have they send out that
most public notices and things
like that is there I guess now
that we're sort of moving
towards this post comment
I guess enrollment and and now
that the more people I know that
we've seen it here in the
legislature we've had so many
people participating through
zoom call for public comment and
things like that that are there
what are some of the the things
that have been done in in the
districts to really bring in
more public input in some of
these projects as someone
mentioned earlier with the
January when you start making
when you start that planning
part that planning process what
are some of the things that have
changed in the last year to help
improve community outreach.
madam chair I I believe that the
fact that we are able to utilize
platforms such as zoom to reach
out a little further to some of
our constituents I think that's
probably brought in a few more
people into the fold than
normally
typically of meetings were held
in person they would be rotated
throughout the region and it
really I don't I I I I think
that that did a fairly good job
of getting all of the of players
involved when it would rotate
through the regions and I think
when we move into the future you
know hybrid model of zoom and in
person meetings will probably
bring more people into the fold
and should help us to get all
this information out and then of
course we have a new
communications director resumes
director resumes is a great job
and really just getting a lot of
information out to the public
that the department's trying to
to let people know about whether
construction or major projects
that are that are designed and
and we can again utilize utilize
for communications department to
to see what we can do to better
get that and that that
information out to the to the
constituents and local entities
to make sure that they are aware
of the programs.
Well I have every intention to
ride my bike to all the major
projects around the state such
as home putting that out there.
All right so we wanted we wanted
to move forward with bonding
right.
Yes madam chair I can go back to
us during the screen and.
Continue on with the the power
point.
All right and now we're on the
funding program.
The bonding programs been around
for as long as I have been in
the state of New Mexico.
So a little bit of history back
in nineteen eighty seven and is
when it kind of started all of
our bonding program is covered
under state statute under
section sixty seven dash three
dash fifty nine point one back
in eighty seven is when we're
actually authorized to issue a
hundred million dollars worth of
bond.
for those that have been around
the state for a while they might
have heard remember the term
chat program that was something
that was created by a governor
Johnson in nineteen ninety eight
and
There are a couple of different
laws that were passed both in
the house and Senate that had a
list of projects and those were
all of the projects that were
bonded as part of the chat
program.
So by the end of the Johnson
administration with the DOT had
issued about one point one
billion dollars worth of bonds
for those trapped projects.
In nineteen ninety nine the
highly infrastructure fund was
created that was done under
Senate bill forty and it's under
sixty seven dash three dash
fifty nine point two so the
projects that are part of a
highly infrastructure fund are
actually those projects that are
party chat that are.
Listed above so the highly
infrastructure fund that is
actually
created.
And there's a direct revenue
source for those particular
funds one of the things that
happened in nineteen ninety nine
was that added the requirement
that we're to use material from
state land so when I talk about
material that means the the
aggregate that's used and the
actual pavement.
So in two thousand three that's
through a program everybody is
probably the most familiar with
it's a great program that was
governor Richardson's investment
program.
So that was created under house
bill fifteen in two thousand and
three and actually added the two
new sections of statute sixty
seven dash three dash fifty nine
point three and fifty nine point
four that changed how bonds were
issued under grip now we needed
to use in New Mexico finance
authority.
Actually issue our bonds but it
the language states when it's
directed by the transportation
commission and also made the
requirement but the design
Michael about projects must
exceed the life of the bonds and
also included a provision that I
believe now is a at
constitutional amendment that
the legislature cannot amend or
repeal laws that have revenue
pledged for bond repayment in
their.
So under sixty seven dash three
dash fifty nine point four that
actually created the authorized
amount for the bonds at one
point five eight five billion
dollars
And to provide a list of
projects in another type and
there are you for about three
zeros on it but it defined the
list of projects in quarters
to fund the projects in that law
that's where we actually funded
rail runner
within the grant program.
While the great program was
running through the process we
needed to provide quarterly
reporting and it required a
ranking of the projects.
Then last summer in June when
the legislature came in the
special session of Senate bill I
actually and then the the grip
legislation it would allow us to
authorize asked to issue seventy
five million dollars worth of
bonds but we can do that no
sooner than July first of twenty
twenty two
in that special session that's
where
Twenty seventy five million
dollars general fund
appropriation was reverted at
the end of June of twenty twenty
and that was for some of the
projects that were listed in the
loss of twenty nineteen of
chapter two seventy one section
nine I E.
the house bill for our budget.
So when you look at our major
program under Johnson one point
two billion there are seventeen
court orders and we completed
fifty one projects on those
corridors with the Richardson of
program in two thousand and
three about one point six
billion there are thirty eight
high recorders included in
section twenty seven and then
there are three quarters
included in section twenty eight
of the law that had more
restrictive requirements the
differences between the chat
program and the group program is
under chat there were amount
specified with each of the
corridors under the grant
program there we don't know
dollar amounts
listed for this specific
corridors.
Department role are the federal
highway administration's role in
the bond program
The national highway system
active nineteen ninety five and
introduce something referred to
as grant anticipation revenue
vehicles or guard the bonds
in nineteen ninety eight that's
where house bill seven modify
the statute so that we could use
our federal funds to pay back
bonds issued prior to nineteen
ninety eight we were only
allowed to use state road fund
to pay back our bonds because we
chose to have the federal funds
be used as pledge revenue.
For bonds that required us to do
a memorandum of understanding
with the Federal Highway
Administration.
The current M. O. U. S. created
in June of twenty ten and it
separate a cap on the maximum
amount of federal reimbursement
at a hundred and twenty two
million for federal fiscal year.
So that service I know you guys
have heard that we did a re
signing back in October all of
cover the re signing term as
More like a refinance of the
bond so the chart here shows
what our current that services I
believe the secretary I shown
this and others presentations
and that's some of the
information we show as part of
our discussion on Senate bill
one twenty eight
which is a bond bill that should
be coming over to the house in
the near future.
So the column with S. R. F. is
our state road fund FHWA is the
federal funds and then H. I. F.
as a highly infrastructure fund.
So the reason that we have bonds
in the highway infrastructure
fund as I and twenty fourteen
in order to finish the US for
ninety one order we issued about
eighty million dollars worth of
bonds.
That are funded strictly by the
revenues and have to pay those
bonds back and then of course
you can see the total of those
three columns of what we would
pay each year for our debt
service.
So some of the definitions that
we refer to bonds as series so
we'll refer to the some of our
charge will show the twenty
fourteen a twenty fourteen be
here twenty fourteen RB one RB
two bond so really to decipher
this these are just
essentially bank account type in
names that we need to track are
different bond series so
obviously the first four digits
are the year in which the bonds
were issued a beer see the notes
which sale during the year so in
twenty fourteen we actually did
two separate bond sales that
year.
And then under the second sale
because there's a B. one and B.
two this is really defining
whether the bonds are considered
subordinate our senior lien.
and during twenty fourteen we
issued our two different bond
sales and we actually during the
second bond sale had both senior
and subordinate lien bonds.
So the chart that we have on the
lot we have the contracted
financial manager that that
helps us with our bond portfolio
and helping us decide for some
of the information so as we go
to the second call in here.
We have this series and the
series is just really the name
when we issued the bonds and
which sale that they were the
original issue size is really
the face value of the bonds that
were sold so think of if you've
ever bought a savings bond.
Back if anybody remembers back
in the day a fifty dollar US
savings bond but have a face
value of fifty dollars but you
would only have to pay twenty
five dollars for it and over
time it would accrue interest so
if you try to cash it out before
it hit maturity.
You would get more than twenty
five dollars but less than fifty
because you needed to hold it to
the date.
So the delivery date is actually
the date that the bond sale
closes much like us at if you're
purchasing a home you have a
closing date for the sale.
The final maturity is the date
that the bonds are going to be
paid off.
In the outstanding PA R. the
last column is really the amount
of the faced by your bonds that
are still outstanding.
So in our twenty ten A. one
bonds they had a majority of
December.
Fifteen to twenty so those bonds
today are now paid off so will
no longer show the twenty
nineteen R. twenty ten A. one
bond.
The twenty ten B. bond.
Have an outstanding part of
ninety one point two six five
million those bonds have a final
maturity at June fifteenth of
twenty one so this coming June
will have paid off this twenty
ten B. bonds so we'll only have
remaining the twenty twelve to
twenty fourteen and the twenty
twenty a on the senior Lee and
then the same thing down at the
bottom as you look at these
maturity date.
This subordinate lien on the
twenty ten eighty two bonds were
paid off in December so those
bonds are now completely retired
and paid off.
So we'll have three bond series
lap so this twenty fourteen Hey
with the twenty thirty two
payment that is the highly
infrastructure fund and how much
we have remaining on that.
So as you look at the bottom you
can see the total of the
original issue size and the
total outstanding par.
Amount that we still have
remaining so we do have to pay
interest twice a year on our
bonds and those interest
payments are due in June.
I'm December each year.
So a lot of.
Our bonds are all issues
typically with a five percent
coupon so that's the interest
that we pay.
In December in June each year
for those bonds we also have a
few bonds that are three percent
coupon and we leave this up to
the financial adviser and the
underwriters when we do a bond
sale to determine whether gonna
issue a three percent or five
percent coupon and that kind of
depends on what the market looks
like.
And what people are wanting to
do to buy our bonds and invest
in the bonds.
So some of our bonds will have a
call date.
And all that call date is is the
bonds have to have a life of
more than ten years because the
call is usually put in at the
ten year point so the bonds we
refunded.
In the fall they all had called
dates of either June of twenty
twenty.
Our December of twenty twenty so
by law an IRS rules the December
bond we couldn't into.
Are we couldn't re issue a
refund those bonds
more than ninety days before
December fifteenth.
And once you pass your call date
you can redeem the bonds
whenever you want but it's not
mandatory to redeem the bonds
the reason we rebooked funded
our bonds this year was because
we knew we could get a lower
interest rate.
So.
So in that particular sale.
We had a part in mount of sixty
nine point nine million dollars
of outstanding bonds that we
chose to refund.
And when we refunded those bonds
we ended up.
With a total of sixty three
million and par value.
But with the proceeds
you can see they were done at a
premium so that means our bonds
are selling above the face value
which is the prime out.
The revenue that we received
During this transaction we put
in a bank account and tell the
after December fifteenth so
that.
Those additional funds were
actually used to pay off the
bonds.
The SL GS purchases
this is for the re issue of the
June twenty twenty bonds and
it's just really an accounting
of what we received.
What money was gonna be captain
savings.
Until the call date of December
came so there's always a cost of
issuance much like if you're
gonna do a refinancing of your
house but there is talk cost of
issuances as we have expenses
for disclosure counsel
bond counsel financial advisors
we have to pay the credit rating
agency agency those are people
like standard and poor's and
moody's moody's and then there
is actually a sales verification
agent so we did this transaction
with no cash out of pocket so
the financial advisors in the
underwriters they figure out
what the new.
Alright amount of bonds that we
should issue in order to make
sure there's enough money
generated from the bond
transaction to pay all of the
issuance cost cover the
underwriters discount so that
there's no cash out a hand from
the department.
And through this transaction we
received about eleven percent
savings on these bonds or this
pretty close to seven million
dollars and reduction in our
debt over the life of the bond
so they talk about that being
the seven point seven million
dollar
Net present value savings.
So you only want to refund your
bonds usually to restructure
that so that it's affordable for
in this particular situation we
kept the term of the bonds the
exact same as what they were
before to get him paid off.
But we are still able to realize
significant savings and what we
would have to pay out and that
each year.
So the role in New Mexico
finance authority in a
transaction.
Is there really the banker
they're they're the ones that
take the lead on ensuring our
bond they actually manage our
portfolio.
Our portfolio for us they
provide us with the monthly
statement of all of the
different bond sales and all the
different series that we have.
They maker that payments to the
bondholders every year it thing
invest any other that service
payments that we pay them
because we pay them monthly so
that we don't have a big bill
due in December or June but we
pay an equal installments.
Every month.
were also required to have a
line of credit because of the
BNS aft
owns the track and the
requirements of the escrow
agreement.
So during a bond transaction
they do a lot of the heavy work
they're actually managing the
transaction for us they're
hiring the underwriters so last
July they created an underwriter
pool where all of these bond
underwriters responded to an RFP
we did an evaluation I actually
participated and reviewing all
of the proposal submitted by all
of the different underwriters
and ranking them and then NMFA
set up a map the of trying to
be as fair as possible by
listing all of the underwriters
that were selected putting him
in a ranked order so when NMFA
does a bond sale
they go through the list and
they start at the top and they
they picked the first three and
then the next transaction we go
down the list as
they decide which underwriters
going to do that.
So during this if you ever
remember when you've closed on
any loan or any credit card
agreement there's a bunch of
transaction documents so during
the bond transaction we have all
of these different attorneys all
these law firms putting together
all of the fine print.
Because we need to
Of all that information spelled
out but then the department's
role in that is we have to show
our historical revenues as well
as our future revenues every
single revenue that makes up the
state road fund we have
information on that as well as
all of the information on the
funds that we get from Federal
Highway Administration down to
some details about the highway
trust fund.
We do representation
to present at meetings with the
credit rating rating agencies so
NMFA present some information
and the DOT present some
information
our financial adviser that we
have on staff all rights on
contract they should say.
They are the ones that actually
present a lot of the information
to make us look good when we do
those presentations and then
NMFA pays all of the invoices
for the costs of issuance
For that transaction so.
When we look at a bond issue
re signing is allowable of
callable bonds that's allowed in
statute for new issuance.
We need authorization by the
legislature so currently as I
mentioned.
Senate bill five and during the
first special session a twenty
twenty provided seventy five
million
a bond authorization so if we
sell seventy five million worth
of bonds we could potentially
get about ninety million dollars
in proceeds to use for projects.
However during this legislative
session Senate bill one twenty
one
is going to move that date up to
being able to sell bonds
immediately or
as soon after July first of
twenty twenty one as we can and
we would like to change the
amount from seventy five million
to the remaining group of forty
of two hundred thirty four point
six and so Senate bill one
twenty one also talks about the
types of projects that will be
included in that bond issuance.
So that concludes my
presentation for today this
particular slide here really are
the two best resources to go to
for the first half of the
presentation this first one.
if you go to do it and the FHWA
is website the one that I use
the very very most is a
resources tab and then it house
laws and regulations
In this particular link you can
also look for something called
federal aid essentials geared
towards locals laws and
regulations.
Under this federal aid
essentials there's a lot of
great videos cefic we geared
towards local governments that
was put together by federal
highway.
For.
Video T. under our project
oversight division this
particular link will take you to
the and then the O. T. tribal
local public agency training
program.
So we have the a guide book
mainly geared towards federal
projects but there also is a
power point as well as some are
recorded training sessions on
all of the different chapters in
our TL PA handbook so.
If you're more interested in
wanted to delve a little bit
deeper into some of the
information that they've and I
talked about these are two of
the best links that are there.
And of course our contact
information.
On the last slide if you guys
have any other questions.
So with that I will stop sharing
my screen and stand for any
questions on the bond program.
Thank you so much Cameron David
we really appreciate you all
taking the time there's still
several of us who are new to
this and trying to learn as much
as we can
we do have questions first we
have Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing these
presenters I do have a couple
questions which we can.
You know my madam chair we start
with Senate bill one twenty one
and the addition of the two
hundred thirty four.
At the very end of the
presentation and talked about a
list of projects.
Corridors
are they are they truly
specified because what I know
about bonds is.
Are are are great
aren't as good when when we when
we don't specify projects and
Judge of really like to know are
we are we do we have a list of
projects that are going to
ensure that we have a decent
bond right and then the follow
up question to that is.
With our debt load being as high
as it is why would we want want
to do more right now why would
we wait until.
Fiscal year twenty five twenty
six when we got rid of some of
our debt load and we can
actually afford dance person
and.
And and have a better interest
rate with respect she with
respect to this what's so
critical that we do right now
the DOT doesn't seem to be
hurting or needing this money
and I'd still like to increase
that we're just going to cost us
a higher interest rate and the
fact our bond rating.
So with that I know that's a
mouthful but.
Turn it over back over.
Thank you Representative.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew in the scenarios that
we have worked with our
financial adviser to put
together is the interest rates
are at extreme lows when we
first started looking at this
last summer and the transaction
that we just completed are re
signing the true interest cost
that we got on the re signing of
the seventy five million dollars
worth of existing that was at
zero point six percent.
The analysis that we've done
In determining what it would
cost us for either seventy five
million dollars which is
currently authorized or two
hundred thirty four million the
estimates that we looked out for
an interest rate would be at one
point two percent of money and
potentially we could even see
something as low as a one
percent or below one percent
true interest rate for either of
these transactions
I don't have the side in front
of me that we show with Senate
bill one twenty one but R.
seventy five million dollars
with that that we would
structure that that so we would
pay interest only until twenty
five when the debt service
really drops off significantly
that interest only payment is a
little over three million
dollars a year I'm two hundred
thirty four million it's eleven
million dollars a year and so
we've structured
The data so that.
We do pay interest only until
twenty five when most of the
federal that drops off and from
that point forward to twenty
thirty and we would only extend
up to twenty thirty
It's not going to a longer term
the shorter the term that you
have on your that
will generate a lower interest
rate the Senate bill one twenty
one does include any project in
the step as well as the
reference to the laws of twenty
nineteen
chapter seven or chapter two
seventy one section nine
projects those were the the
projects and.
Where the seventy five million
are are I guess we'll refer to
that as a two hundred fifty
million a general fund some of
those projects because we lost
the seventy five million we
haven't been able to move
forward.
When we look at the amount of
projects that we have ready to
go in the state of the economy
that if we were to start a bond
transaction today which we
cannot we would still need to go
to our commission to request
approval and then work with NMFA
and and the team to put upon
package together all last year
when we started the re signing
we took that to commission and
In July the bond transaction
closed at the end of October it
takes that much time to go
through all of the steps and
it's a three to four month
process.
Getting everything done meeting
with the credit agencies all of
that done this year was through
zoom in order to prepare those
bondoc immense so it takes that
much time I haven't heard
anything about having a list of
specific projects gives you a
better bond rate than not it's
really looking at the purpose
and looking at what our credit
rating is and we hold a
relatively strong credit rating
of the double a plus
on our credit so it's really at
what the market is doing.
From last week to this week
Based on reports that I've seen
the the the interest rate on
bonds is going up gone up about
twenty basis points there is a
little bit of volatility in the
market right now because
whenever the fed starts talking
about changing long term
interest rates but
The reason we're looking at the
reissuing or issuing and bond is
just because interest rates were
so good that if you could borrow
money at one percent and we
could put those projects out to
construction within the next
year to help the state recover
as whether you guys are familiar
with that are not for the
committee is.
Everything we do at the O. T.
that we contract out we pay
gross receipts tax on that so
we're reimbursing contractors so
if you put out a hundred million
dollars worth of bonds
at least the five percent of
that.
Date gross receipts tax rate
that's going back into the
general fund
so it is stimulate local
economies as well as the entire
state economy with anything that
we're able to put out we just
have a lot of projects were in a
situation where we have a lot of
projects ready to go but we
don't have all of the funding in
place right now in order to
deliver those and and David
spoke to that dollar amount in
the further we go in the fiscal
year the more projects ready to
get ready to put on the shelf.
We're in really good position
and we look at this as really
another boost to the economy.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
your.
For for that answer
It just seems like yeah we're
have somewhere around fifteen
million.
If I if I take the number she
gave us correctly and if we take
a three hundred million dollar
on.
Workshop.
Somewhere around thirty million
over the for each of the ten
years.
I I just.
To me it seems like we could be
using some of our we should be
looking more in the page go and
I'll working to reduce our debt
load at the same time in lieu of
increasing our devil are when
the economy in the state is
whether people want to agree
with me or not
It looks great right now but
getting between now and twenty
twenty five and twenty twenty
six
there's there's a lot of things
that you go.
Go really wrong.
And and create a problem for for
the day well so I.
I don't know I I I look it and
and what the concept is and and
I I would think that we would be
trying to get rid of art that
was.
Right now in lieu of adding more
and in.
Focus on a pay as you go
process.
My thought process.
Thank you very much for your
presentation.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and
the madam chair and that route.
Normally think very similar to
what my colleague just said.
You know what
not the.
A huge fan of bonding.
However we have an analyst on
our side that is Mr chatter with
me it at length over a couple of
items that I wonder if you
consider have processed in your
movement toward bonding in net
those two items are are
inflation.
Over the next ten years.
If we don't bond.
What is it going to cost us to
wait and just do what we can but
not bond.
What what is that gonna actually
cost us if inflation heats up.
Everything we could have done if
we do it now we don't have to
deal with flotation we can get
on the ground and so I wondered
did you consider inflation
through this process the second
thing.
We talked about was the
degradation of the pavement out
there now.
And and how much can we actually
get repaired so that we don't
increase the expense because the
degradation of of the payment
it's on the ground did you
analyze those two.
Pieces as you looked at bonding
going forward.
Madam chair Senator.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I specifically have a
look at that information I do
oversee our asset management
program and I can tell you were
falling behind on being able to
keep our roads and a state of
good repair at current funding
levels and so anything that we
do today
Will help to preserve the life
of those roads every dollar that
we put into improving the
quality the smoothness of the
road also returns
to everybody that's using the
roads by reducing the potential
cost of ownership for your
vehicle because if you're
driving over bad roads is
costing more money on
maintaining your own personal
vehicle so there's always those
trade offs that.
We don't look at I'm not that
good of an economist to look at
all of those details but I.
I know that it is you know they
are directly related
Frankly I've been around the
group and all of the bond
programming programs for a lot
of years
delivering projects and in my
diet I don't like bonding but
when you can borrow money at one
percent.
And that's always going to be an
inflation.
It's not a bad deal to to borrow
money at such a low interest
rate that's what for me makes it
attractive and all of the
different programs that we could
do is is potentially
Being able to do transaction
while interest rates are still
at all time lows on they've been
creeping up the last couple of
weeks but you know still the the
interest rates are considerably
lower than when we issued all of
the the grant funds and I know
Tom probably can speak more to
what those interest rates were
in the past but I believe there
were like four and five percent
money
if we were to sell two hundred
thirty four at what we estimated
around one one point two percent
we would get potentially upwards
of two hundred and ninety seven
million dollars worth of funds
for projects.
And the total debt service to
pay it off would be three
hundred and twenty million so
it.
You know you finance to thirty
four you get two hundred ninety
seven cash and it cost you three
twenty.
it's not a.
Thing I had to learn with bonds
is it it doesn't work the same
way as your mortgage or your car
payment to pay off in equal
installments you can structure
the deals in different ways but
you have to at least pay the
interest every year and so we
can structure the smart guys
that know all the programming on
actually selling the bonds
construction exactly which years
you pay off the principal and so
it's different than what's in
the FIR the NMFA put together
but when you look at.
some of the ways that our
financial adviser would
structure the deal to level out
the back in principle payments
when that that pays off after
twenty twenty five but between
now and twenty twenty five you
still have to pay the interest
only and we've tried to minimize
this as much as possible.
Thank you madam chair general
under this morning as I was
getting ready to come.
Down to the office here.
On the business channel it seems
to be the concern of of a great
number of the investors that
were doing presentations this
morning.
Inflation seem to become a major
topic this morning.
And then I think that the to
bond a project it on the ground.
While money is very expensive at
the moment.
It could be a very wise decision
if we wait we're gonna lose half
the value of our money at if
inflation heats it up.
Are the number line miles that
we can pay will be greatly
decreased so I thank you for
your presentation this morning
very good I I appreciate the
Representative Garrett
requesting this and it's been
very informative very awful so I
thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative by
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of.
The agency also Representative
all Crowder connector so when I
was in us you know I'm not a big
fan of bonding either.
And what was that seventy five
million we bonded the couple
years ago or last year we could
cash at Bonn madam chair on tool
twenty twenty two.
How much how much.
Did the price of low project to
win one for go up from then till
we we do bonded twenty twenty
two you said there was a one
percent money the interest on it
what is that edges will not come
up to.
If you go into affect the price
is the price change and
everything we're doing but
twenty twenty two.
Madam chair representative
Garcia when we issue bonds
What we're doing is just think
of it as a loan we're getting
cash right then and there so the
the terms of the the bonds are
all fixed so the seventy five
million of general fund dollars.
That was allocated in twenty
nineteen to the apartment was
taken away in June of twenty
twenty so one of the projects
that we had identified for that
seventy five million was to
build that new interchange and
wrote
down in Los Lunas that would
connect by twenty five.
To highway forty seven
that project has been a lead
for.
Develop a last minute for a
number of years
So in order to actually build
that project we need funding.
To build that
If we issue bonds today we can
invest the proceeds.
And that's what happens to all
of the proceeds until we
allocated to a project and
actually spend them down they
always stay invested with the
NMFA so it's it's really kind of
a trade off that
right now if we don't issue any
bonds.
Then.
We don't build the project.
We got to have the money some
way for it and so with the
Senate bill five that passed
during the special session we
cannot issue those bonds for
another year who knows what
interest rates are going to be a
year from now they probably hit
the bottom of an all time low
around December and they've
kinda held that way up until
like the last month they've been
creeping up a little bit.
On what those rates are and so
hopefully they'll the rates were
flat now.
and not continue to go up but
who knows what the market is is
doing right now and and what
they're making decisions on with
the federal treasury rates and
the tax free municipal bonds we
know right now that everybody
that's issuing tax free
municipal bonds they're getting
a lot of activity in a lot of
interest that people want to
invest in those types of bond so
we won't have any challenges
selling them but we need the
authority to actually sell any
bonds right now.
Thank you madam chair this house
you know that the W. word
hopefully it doesn't go up you
know to that's a huge work the
deposit will go up one more
question madam chair massages of
the seventy five million dollar
bond how much are we going to
want a feedback on the bond.
Secretary they'll see if I could
find with that
Number was in that comparison.
But we did end up paying a
little bit more than than what
the total proceeds are.
Could you explain to me the
better madam chair.
Well All.
Representative when we.
When we sell bonds the face
value that were authorized to
sell is seventy five million.
But and Bon terminology we
actually will sell those bonds
at a premium so we will sell
seventy five million with the
bonds but the proceeds that we
receive are actually higher.
And at seventy five million it's
estimated around ninety million
dollars of proceeds to use for
projects.
And then we pay the interest
back on the seventy five
million.
And we pay back the principle
that's our debt service and that
number will be a little bit
higher.
Then what the proceeds number
just.
Mr it is helpful.
Jubilo would really want.
Madam chair representative.
The seventy five million dollars
bond how much are we going to
feedback the end of the day.
I don't have an exact figure I'm
trying to find the document will
of course my computer's not been
cooperating today but it's going
to be close to a hundred million
dollars.
Madam chairman of this house
hoping show you talking about a
hundred million right right
there we have twenty five
million dollars in interest
already there were a few to ten
years.
So these funds will be paid off
by twenty thirty.
And so if we sell seventy five
million we get ninety million
dollars of cash and then we
would end up paying back a
hundred million.
So it's more like the the net
interest and all of that would
be the ten million dollar
difference.
Thank you madam chair a.
Maybe that will point would love
down to just a lot of your and
when we elected Donald to
so many people for you could
explained a little bit better
and what we're trying to do here
because even at ten million
dollars madam chair that that's
a lot of money the report the
way you know and I know we need
money for finish projects but a
good band of all bonding thank
you madam chair thank you
missiles.
Thank you I share just to the
point that folks have raised
where where is the Senate bill
now.
I haven't even had a chance to
look.
Representative.
I want to ask Bobby Gonzales is
caring it's passed both
committees and the Senate.
So apparently it's headed
towards the Senate floor.
Yes so the reason I was asking
is because
we're going to hear it if that
makes it out of the sentence so
we're certainly easier sort of
the question and that will be
able to ask
as if if and when that day
approaches so I just wanted to
to let folks know that
Are there any questions before
Representative your go ahead.
You madam chair and and me so
taking off where representative
Garcia said that the net
interest is ten million and
that's a lot of money however
when we build the roads we're
also investing and economic
development that.
Is the return of millions and
millions of dollars right.
When I look at transportation
funding
Every dollar that we put out on
to the roads were paying gross
receipts tax at.
The local right for that area so
the city the county they get
their cut the general fund gets
they're caught so it helps in
that respect of
what I say is more of a direct
costs to transportation but then
there's also all of the indirect
cost of buying materials to use
in road construction the number
of people that are employed as
part of construction and what
they're able to take home so it
helps with creating jobs
Within that area and just
depends on which contractor you
get and how many people they
need to hire to do that so there
are you know quite a number of
indirect benefits that sometimes
we don't realize when we talk
about what it costs for road
projects what benefit actually
gives to the economy as a whole.
Thank you
I think that's a really
important point thanks Madam
chairwoman and can.
Thank you Representative and
thank you all I mean I think in
terms I know there's been a lot
of discussion about the
legislation that's in the Senate
right now and again I mean I am
of the thought of Representative
Garrett is well is that when we
make investments on our roads
and
and infrastructure especially I
mean there is a return of
investment they're it's just a
matter of how big and bold we
want to be
one of the concerns that I did
have that Representative
Pettigrew did mention was just
in terms of the specifics of
what those projects are
I think is is one of the
questions that folks will be
asking when if and when the bill
comes to this committee and so
just giving you all of a just a
heads up that those might be
some questions that books might
have with that.
All all of vice chair has a
question go ahead bye Sir Madam
chair of
the us all on the bonding I
understand Mexico department of
transportation is the biggest
economic driver in the state of
New Mexico.
You know I understand that and
and well well but it's kind of
hard to be throwing away money.
Well let me rephrase that and
chair I wish we could one
another revenue source or
something that we would have to
be bonding and basically a big
interest rates could look it up
words not madam chair with the
rail runner where we're at with
that.
We still upside down and that's
been a fifteen year project I
guess and you know I I would
hate to have to get into a
situation that will be bonding
and bonding forever and not be
able to get out of debt that's
my biggest concern and I do
understand that the department
of transportation is the biggest
economic driver thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr chair and David did
you want to add to that.
Madam chair I just want to but
you all know just be of one this
the bonding bill is on the
Senate floor today okay.
Thank you so folks can listen
into that if you have some time
Representative Madrid and then
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I was
wanting to know if next week
we'll be able to get a report
from the trip report.
The B. presenting next week and
I want to know we're gonna have
a chance to to hear that come
before the committee.
Thanks Representative yeah we
can added to the agenda it's
important because the talks on
the conditions of our roads in
our state that really helps to I
think bridge a lot of this
conversation that we're having
thank you madam chair yeah
absolutely thank you
Representative Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair in just a
comment to the.
Discussion point for the vice
chair
I would I would love to sit down
with you and and have some
discussions about how we can
continue to provide revenue
sources in New Mexico we've done
a really good job and on the
house for getting rid of some of
our significant revenue sources
this year and
Ways that we could get or get
away from from having to to be
concerned about so many
different bonds and so I would
love to have that conversation
at any point in time mistrust
here thank you.
Thank you Sir would love to do
that.
Thank you representatives thank
you David and Tamera appreciate
your time and your willingness
to answer questions
and and if there are no other
questions from the committee
that is it for today we will be
having a presentation on
Thursday from the road runner so
I know last year mentioned them
earlier they'll be reporting
back on on that so with that
thank you all thanks for
everyone who's been listening
and we will talk to also want to
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
