Here.
Thank you madam secretary and I
just got an email from from
Taylor are secretary saying that
Representative Brown is late
because she's having trouble
getting into the capitol
building so
will join us insure shortly but
before before I begin I I want
of just the of the committee
know that when we're gonna hear
bills in this committee others
Representative Rapp good
morning.
The role is this.
That that you're here with us
in this committee I want to make
sure that we run of just there's
of the committee as we can yes
there meaning that you know when
we have these twenty for our
rural.
For an amendment or whether it's
we're a committee substitute
that we abide by the twenty four
hour rule and that it's done for
both.
Looking members and and
democratic members as well and
so that being said we've had
some issue not not the fault of
the Sanchez and not at the fault
of of any of our staff in the
committee but it seems like
there has been some some
technical issues in regards to
the weight then drafted for
house bill two oh seven and so
there was yesterday some concern
regards to.
Hospital two of seven the
committee substitute to that
that there were there was a
version of point two version
that had two different
language versions of that bill
and and that substitute so it
was creating a lot of of of
concern and confusion in in in
some of the members and how they
were reading in which one was
the real one that we're gonna
here today so
Fortunately and and and for
those folks are joining us that
are are are here to support or
oppose that bill I know that
I've been receiving tons of
emails in regards to house bill
two oh seven of that because of
those concerns I have elected to
then push that bill to Saturday
so we will have a Saturday
session the state but we will
work Saturday at one o'clock to
hear that bill and again that
that that's to hear the point
three version so so the the
version will be two one nine
nine zero one point three.
Point three zero eight four four
four the.
For the committee to be heard on
Saturday.
Please consider that the point
three version is the the the
committee suggested that we
heard on Saturday and for you
our analysts these note the same
as well and and so that's a good
that's just to be fair with our
members to be fair with our
analysts said they have ample
time to review the committee
substitute that is in fact will
be the one that can be discussed
and so that there's no confusion
as to what we're going with this
I I'd rather have it done that
way as opposed to really get to
committee this morning for
instance and then having that
discussion publicly about this
technical issues because you
know we don't want to do that a
public weeks so I'd rather do
that eight we all have ample
time not to know that they will
not be any work needs of
students coming our way these
constitute for house bill two oh
seven will be the two one nine
nine zero one point three
version which was sent out to
all of us this morning by a
committee secretary and then
again for our analysts that will
be the one for us to analyze as
well so I hope that makes sense
and I hope that that you know I
I don't I don't mention this to
to embarrass anybody but the
same time I think that we have
and I know that we have as a
committee integrity to want to
make sure that we are passing
legislation that we all
understand that we have all gone
through and that when we take
that what we understand we're
going on so with that being said
ladies and gentleman of the
committee we will not be hearing
house bill two oh seven to date
it will be heard on Saturday one
PM and so we'll move on with the
day's agenda house bill two
forty one which is the water
must fund mutual domestic set
aside and that will be presented
by our vice chairwoman Herrera
and if Representative Garrett is
planning to join us of that is
no Representative so last year
when you have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I do
have a substitute bill one of
four to forty one very well do
you have anyone in the audience.
Just.
Yes I have two expert witnesses
it'll be Marquita Russel CEO at
the NMFA and bill Connor the
executive director of the New
Mexico rural water association
very well will those two
individuals.
And the committee secretary will
let you in.
As a panelist.
Okay and as they're brought.
Representative slide shows.
You have a substitute yes.
Mr chairman Jim is the committee
substitute for discussion you're
a better move their second.
A second by Representative brown
and and the moral
Representative.
These talk to us about your
committees of student how it's
different from the original.
The committee substitute just
really clarifies language of how
the money will flow this is said
this grant program will be you
managed by the water trust fund
in in the other bill we said it
would be an appropriations it
it's it really wasn't correct so
we changed it to correct how the
how the how the funds work in
our state Mr chair.
Commuted sorry about that.
We are on the committee
substitute so can you explain to
us then the bill as it's
presented as a committee
substitute thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee you know I first
learned about mutual domestic
water systems and I was running
for office in the spring of two
thousand eighteen and it was I
was getting signatures at the
Walmart parking lot I and this
woman came up to me and she said
do you know anything about a sec
yes and mutual domestic water
systems and I said well I've
been a commissioner on the a
second through twenty years I I
think I know a second but you're
right I'm on well I I really
don't know much about mutual
domestics and she said well
you've got to learn we've got
real problems in the north and
you better get up to speed on
this if you're gonna run for
this office and I said well I
guess I will that that person is
now a dear friend of mine and
she's taught me a lot origins
Ollis along the way.
But after I was elected I am I
called a meeting in thirty
people showed up all of them
were over sixty five and most of
them were volunteers on a mutual
domestic water system
since then there's been plenty
of follow up meetings and I've
done my best to learn in order
to see how we as a legislature
that help them so when you do
funding the new fund projects in
in water systems in New Mexico.
It's funded to the water trust
fund and this was created in two
thousand one and they charge the
NMFA The New Mexico finance
authority with the
administration of the fund the
water project fund received
about nine percent of the senior
severance tax on annually this
year the get fifty three point
three million and they'll get
another four million from and
down and that's set aside for
water systems in New Mexico for
a total of fifty seven point
eight million there are two
other funds for water
infrastructure and the thing
that are financed by the senior
severance tax on the Los
colonias infrastructure fund was
created in two thousand ten and
as of two thousand nineteen has
awarded ninety eight million two
hundred ninety eight hundred and
fifty five dollars to two
hundred and twelve projects
within a hundred and fifty miles
from the border
it to gets it gets four point
five percent of the senior
severance tax on and it will be
awarded twenty six point six in
our FY twenty two.
The tribal infrastructure fund
was created in two thousand
sixteen and as of two thousand
nineteen it was awarded forty
million two hundred and sixty
two dollars eight hundred and
sixty eight.
Two hundred sixty two thousand
eight hundred and sixty dollars
to seventy projects and and all
of these projects are about
design construction or planning
all of these projects are about
that each year again four point
five of the senior severance tax
fund is allocated to this fund
and this year again like the
other will get twenty six point
six million and.
There are a hundred and forty
seven.
Our state these include the big
municipal systems like
Albuquerque and Santa Fe of the
small water systems the smaller
cities it also includes three
hundred.
Three hundred of those thousand
water systems are small mutual
domestic water system.
Eight of them have more than
five hundred hook ups that means
five hundred households have
more than five hundred
households most of them really
serve small populations of the
three hundred a hundred and
seventy eight have less than two
hundred cups or two hundred
families on that system.
This legislation is aimed at
serving our really our smallest
water systems they really can't
afford loans they can't pay for
three years of financial audits.
And they really can't tackle the
big water trust fund.
Applications those are really
for the major cities or major
systems from the water trust
fund that's really worth they
take care.
Please don't get me wrong the
NMFA does pre more work and
their exemplary work with the
tribal infrastructure fund in
the las colonias infrastructure
fund prompted me to to have the
NMFA act as the lead agency for
the mutual domestic set aside it
is really one of the best
qualities best examples of
quality transparent and their
work on behalf of our state
government employees during our
citizens but the requirements
demanded by the
by the what a trust fund make it
nearly impossible for small
mutual domestic water systems to
compete on an even playing field
so essentially this bill calls
for set aside of ten percent of
the billable funds.
Probably about five million in
the water trust fund for mutual
domestic water systems is
requests will not require a
matching contribution because
most of them don't have a match
nor they will normally have to
be part of the accepted regional
water planning area they will
have to comply with all state
and federal permits but they can
use the grant award to help them
get those permits and pay for
those permits.
So this bill is essentially
about access and equity to clean
drinking water in the rural and
incorporated parts of our state
if you're a hundred and fifty
miles from the border no problem
you can draw from a twenty six
point six million dollar fund if
you're on tribal land no problem
you can draw from that twenty
six point six million dollar
plan.
Infrastructure in your area but
as a citizen you rely on one of
three.
Miss water systems you may have
trouble building the needed
infrastructure you need.
This bill will address a
critical need in our state.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I would like to
introduce my to.
Expert witnesses and bills
Connor Marquita Russel and see
if they have anything to add
thank you.
Thank you Representative we do
again we on the committee
substitute and can you please
for our reference read off the
two one nine number on the
bottom of that connects us to
please sure.
It's two one nine eight five
five.
One.
Very well does that for all of
the page we're all the same
committee substitute we are
again moved and seconded and
we're again on your substitutes
so
If either market or bill Connor
had anything else to add to the
discussion of the floor is
yours.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think I will say a few things my
name again is Marquita Russel
and CEO of the New Mexico
finance authority in as
Representative at at a mentioned
the finance authority has been
the administrator of the water
project fund and just staff to
the water trust board since its
inception in two thousand and
one and also serves in that same
capacity for the colonias
infrastructure fund we don't
oversee the tribal
infrastructure fund that sits
with the department of Indian
affairs but we do have some
experience in working with
mutual domestics and smaller
water systems through both the
the water transport.
And the colonias infrastructure
board we would note that the the
water trust board oversees I
very broad types of categories
from Endangered Species Act up
to watershed restoration and so
it's it's taken awhile for the
water transport to really settle
in on how to handle this
diversity of projects fairly and
transparently we created over
the years a set of policies that
we've been honing and perfecting
over time the last set of
improvements were made back in
about two thousand sixteen and
one of the major things we did
was to try to address the
impediments that small systems
had in accessing the funds the
the law that creates that the
water project finance act which
representative Cadena is looking
to
amend here has a requirement
that the water transport give
priority to certain kinds of
projects in those priorities
have worked against small
systems really from the
inception.
So what she's doing is kind of
reducing those requirements for
matching funds and being part of
our.
And accepted regional water plan
and allowing for water systems
to small water systems to sort
of compete on their own without
having to have those
other pieces in place and so
that I think will be yet another
way for small systems to gain
access to the water project fund
so the application system itself
has been simplified over time it
is reliant heavily on a
technical document that is
required to be submitted with
the application small systems
large systems don't really need
a grant writer they simply need
this technical document and the
finance authority hat actually
will help pay for those through
its local government planning
funds so we've been trying to
match the requirements with
resources so as the water trust
board requires preliminary
engineer reports the finance
authority is with its other hand
increased accessibility for
small systems to access the
local government planning fund
to pay for those so that's
really helped water system the
smaller water systems I get a
little step ahead and as a
result over the last several
years we've had more water
systems small water systems
mutual domestics access the
water project fund but it it
really isn't enough and so the
amendments that are being
suggested by Representative at a
will give yet another like up to
the small water systems that I'm
happy to answer questions thank
you Mr Russell Mr Connor
anything else to add Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
The.
There's not a whole lot that I
think I think Representative
Ferreira and and Marquita
Covered it very well I would
like to point out that
The water trust board is open to
the majority of the.
Not all but the majority of the
five hundred and seventy two.
Unity water systems and
community water systems are
those that serves families in
their homes Sir schools that I
think.
Five hundred and seventy two
approximately community water
systems.
Almost seventy percent or three
hundred ninety four of those
system Sir populations.
Of the five hundred or less
of the changes that the water
transport is made over the years
the.
Have of been good changes
they've been aimed at helping
the small water systems of.
Have a better opportunity of
participating in the water trust
fund funding.
but the fact is the water trust
board funding is is the you know
is limited funds and is very
competitive.
And many of the larger systems.
Have people on staff that do
nothing except look for funding
or work on the this type of
funding so.
This will also take that off of
the table for the small systems
were there where
Limited staff and board
of volunteer staff are not
having to compete against
professional so that's really
about all I have to say I
appreciate your time thank you
Mr Connor and the Representative
at any us that if we go to the
audience.
You're on mute.
Sam Mr chair now that that
pretty much sums it up I think
that's a fair explanation of
what this bill is all about
sanda we'll hear from
help supporters thank you very
well thank you and I'm I'm
sorry.
That don't know if
Representative Ezzell won the
lottery or or what happened but
she jumped up and down Office
of.
You have a special announcement.
No I do look pretty special.
Mr Chairman hold on just a
minute.
This is what happened last
night.
I I I can't.
The third.
Little girls.
Right is it.
I'm pretty excited about that so
thank you for letting me share
my good news thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
On that note let's to go to the
audience folks in the audience
we will take members that are
looking to support house bill
two forty one.
All those in support of house
bill two forty one please raise
your hand and we'll call you one
by one lex begin with.
Begin with the all other CMS
Garcia good morning here with
us.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Garcia and I'm speaking
before you today as a former
more a county commissioner and a
former member of the water trust
board and I don't I would like
to speak in support of this
legislation which will create a
set aside for small mutual
domestics in in rural areas of
the state I can speak from my
experience both as a water trust
board member and as a county
commissioner that the need for
rural water infrastructure is
our is is extreme and as a as a
local elected official I was
often approached of four
resources
for small mutual domestics who
needed needed assistance out of
all kinds with their
infrastructure and when I was
would refer him to the water
trust board the they often
didn't feel like they have the
capacity
to to fill out the application
and I think the water transport
has come a long way in
addressing the diverse needs
across the state but I think
this is a of another step in the
right direction to to address
the unique needs of the small
rural water systems to have it
set aside so they're not having
to compete with the larger
municipalities and other other
entities that have more capacity
so I I think this is extremely
important for for New Mexico and
it's a could help invest more
dollars where it's needed most
for rural infrastructure is is
in dire need across the state
thank you Mr chairman for this
opportunity to speak before you
today thank you Mr still let's
go to Joyce bars and join in
mourning here with us.
That hello Joe you're on mute.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
for hearing this very important
issue Representative had brought
this to our attention and as a
member of the water trust board
we realize that there are some
smaller rural systems that need
an extra hand up we do not have
an official position on this
from our board at this time we
will likely be taking it to on
Saturday but we certainly
applaud this effort we know how
important this is and sometimes
those unique systems really need
a special allocation where
they're not having to compete
with the more professional
systems and for that we really
appreciate this being brought
forward thank you.
As far as an agency and go to
the mosque Campos Mr Campos good
morning you're with us.
Hello the must you're on mute.
Mr Campos morning Mr chair hello
so those are the only have the
most couples of the rear by
county manager
Mr chair I'm speaking in support
of this.
I have so the mistakes which
rural domestic center smallest
seventeen members.
And they they can't afford to to
compete they don't have the
resources they're strictly
volunteer and of course they
don't have the revenue stream to
to go out and borrow money so
I can go on with other stories
but I'd I want for the.
Or the committee of so you Mr
chair thank you for allowing me
to speak and I'm fully in
support of this thank you Mr
Campos this go to Paul Spencer
Mr Spencer here with us.
Mr chairman and members of the
board my name is Paul Spencer
from blue water water sanitation
district and.
And the this bill will be very
very helpful for for a system
like ours were
we came out compliance.
For funding and two thousand
nineteen and the middle of a
project and are needed to
million dollars in order to
finish this project is the waste
water sewer plant that we need
the place to begin in compliance
with the drinking water barrel
and the the grounds Water System
and we with the help the New
Mexico Environment Department
New Mexico finance authority
exhausted all resources after
increasing our rates three
hundred percent and something
like this up there will be very
very helpful for us to to be in
compliance with the New Mexico
state law and regulations and
the we'd be very grateful for
the for this bill to have the
support needs to go forward.
Thank you Mr Spencer I go to
Kyle Jim Mr Jim here with us
good morning.
Yeah okay attaining my
discussion question but that
need to change what you need to
know it Kylian check good
morning everybody my name is
Kyle and I'm from the committee
of Shiprock New Mexico and I
just want to make it known that
I do support house bill two
forty one in efforts to rebuild
the water systems especially for
rural communities that the vital
resource and that.
People know that it's it's very
special but it's sad to see that
it's being traded on the stock
market and that is nothing to
play around with that we do not
have time to rely on others we
need to make rural communities
self reliance self determined as
they can provide water for their
families and and businesses to
to to rebuild their communities
their economic system and so
whether it's water for
communities water for our nature
waste water everything needs to
be considered especially with
any contamination and so I
appreciate this opportunity
thank you.
Thank you Mr gym let's not go to
all those in opposition of house
bill two forty one.
Anyone out there any opposition
house bill two forty one.
Seeing that we will not come to
the committee for any questions
and answers first amendment on
the list will be Representative
Matthews.
Representative Matthews the
floor is your cement.
what.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you for
the presentation
It is showing interest here and
ask just a couple kind of basic
questions because I got lost a
little bit more discussion
What is who who who gets water
through a domestic water system
and mutual domestic water system
what what
I assumed the role is but are
they.
Are they run by and there's a
board I I got that but are they
part of some.
They're not part of the city
system or something there's
something out so could you just
tell me what it is and who they
serve that would be helpful
chair Mister chair
representative Representative
what what happens in a rural
community is you know people
need water and and what they.
Yeah there and the and the you
know usually drill these wells
and then they provide a lot of
affecting every household in the
community and they run it like a
it's a nonprofit that it is a
form of government because it is
it has oversight of certainly
the environment department and
that and the people who have to
do all the clean water testing
in the state and the US so they
are they are small governmental
entities the hafted and stay
abreast of all the public laws
including concerning public
meetings and they have to have
to let everybody know what
they're doing and they usually
have you know it it's anywhere
I've I have Mitchell domestics
as small as ten and as large as
five hundred in the county of
Rio Arriba so they they run it
like a small nonprofit and what
they do is provide clean water
to you know they'll go out and
sell the hook ups people usually
pay anywhere I don't know from
thirty to fifty dollars a month
for water and they provide the
clean drinking water in our
systems some of them are large
enough that they've taken on
waste water but not most of that
most of them just handle small
drinking so it's a it's a small
community
based
The governmental entity that
provides clean drinking water to
our rural citizens.
Mr chairman.
Representative Herrera thank you
so much for that information and
then is there there are separate
water boards for each of these
associations.
No well each of them by law they
have to have their own board of
directors to run it so yes every
if you your your thank you you
have the a nonprofit
classification in your
governmental and stating that
you elect your own board of
directors from that from the
group that you Sir that's how it
works very much like in a second
system.
Okay.
Mr chairman at.
Representative Herrera thank you
but the water trust board of
that's that's the statewide that
okay what it was enacted by the
state to oversee these funds so
the water trust board is is is
so part of the NMFA and that
oversees all of these systems as
part the granting as concert
initially Mr chairman
Representative Herrera asked
again thank you for the answer
but at and not but but
so the money the severance tax
money that is made available to
the special allocations under
the statute is that primarily
for is that capital it's money
for capital expenses and or for
operating.
It.
It's all money for capital
outlay for for the design
planning and construction of
water infrastructure systems
they operate on the dues paid
monthly by the membership.
Okay.
Mr Chairman Representative
Herrera thank you for schooling
may and domestic pressure
systems I was not familiar with
them and there's many of these
throughout the state.
you know Mr chair and
representative I was going over
the water so I haven't had forty
three of these in Rio Arriba
county and just Rio Arriba
County I probably have another
eight in Butchofsky county and
probably another six in Santa Fe
county so I I have the most I
think mutual domestic water
systems in the state but I was
looking at all these districts
and and I don't know some of you
are probably covered by tribal
infrastructure las colonias
Representative small had I.
Representative chairman Lente
had for.
Representative Allison had
eighteen Representative Brown
had I I again I don't know if if
you're districts fall and yet
representatives now I'm sorry.
You had I I think you had.
No I don't see it you have at
least five or six maybe more
any on and Representative
somehow had twenty three again
that was like looking as closely
as they could have been there.
But all over rural New Mexico
especially rural unincorporated
areas that's where you have
these water systems they don't
have access to city water
Wales maybe too deep to dig in
communities decided they could
they would be better off with
the mutual domestic water
system.
And if anybody wants to correct
me on any of this you're welcome
to do so bill Connor if you're
still on the line.
Mr Chairman thank you at.
It looks like bill Connor is
still here but I.
He has spoken up so I guess that
Representative Herrerra had it
precisely correct.
You may wish to have a go at
that answer.
you know Representative Ferreira
Covered it pretty pretty well
there are some probably three
hundred mutual domestics are
very close to it scattered
around the state of New Mexico
again there anywhere and size
from from fifteen to eighty five
hundred.
The eighty five hundred and are
the the larger ones only.
There are only about five of
those in the state I think out
of the near three hundred so.
Two hundred ninety five or
ninety.
Of them around the state that
are small.
Water systems that need this
type of help.
Thank you Mr Connor Mathis.
Mr chairman and Representative
Herrera Mr Connor thank you very
much and so I just want to now
that I have a better sense of
what these are the purpose of
your bill is simply to simplify
some of the processes that they
go through that the NMFA uses to
a system and is that.
Pretty pretty Act statement what
was happening here it's really
to set aside I about five
million dollars a year to help
them build infrastructure in the
small water systems okay really
about okay.
Fund of fifty eight million
dedicated to small water systems
so that they can build needed
infrastructure that is the crux
of the bill yeah.
Mr Chairman Representative
Herrera thank you and I think
that's all the questions I have.
Thank you Representative
Matthews next on the list we
have Representative Brown.
As well as yours good morning Mr
chairman everybody I do have a
couple questions are first of
all Mr chair would like to thank
Representative Herrera for us
sending us a map of the state of
New Mexico with a pinpoints for
all the domestic mutual domestic
water organizations I I found
that very helpful like I knew I
had some in my district and
if this bill passes are there
certainly want one and going to
want to know about it so Mr
Chairman representative.
I wanted to get a little bit
more information about mutual
domestics are they like a public
utility where anybody can join
them.
You know I'm gonna have to defer
to bill Connor on that I'm I'm
I'm pretty sure they are better
bill can you answer that.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
They of.
They are a public utility
They can however old.
The number of members they have.
Based on the amount of water
that they have available through
their infrastructure and through
their their water sources.
Of.
Is there first and foremost
their their purposes to provide
safe clean drinking water to
their queue Danto all of their
members of some of them have
just another of water to serve
the members that they have an
existing is present time and
they wouldn't be able to take on
new new membership of somebody
want to move and build a house
or or try to tie infirmities
that sting house necessarily.
Some of them have excess water
that they can use and and many
more if not most of those
systems happy to try and do a
new connection a new member of
if somebody's so desired but
again it's controlled by the or
that they have available to
provide to their to their
members to their customers.
Does that answer the question
Mr Kirk Mr chair representative
right right I think so I think
what's rolling around in my mind
is our this is potentially going
really benefits that.
Mutual for sensible point of it
but we're adding value to I
guess you could even call it a
property right.
And yes thank you and I
understand their natural
restrictions on amount of water
and it just seems that would
enhance the value of the members
have that mutual domestic and
If there's almost a private
interment that occurs on this
one and I'm I'm just wondering
about the anti donation clause
and if you all I'm sure you
probably thought it through but
it is this is this perhaps
violation of the anti donation
clause Mr chair representative
ramp I don't think so because
the these are competitive grants
nobody it just because we have
we're setting aside a fund
doesn't mean everybody
automatically get so much money
it's not like that they still
have will have to compete for
the money through the water
transport there will be you know
a set of requirements that
they'll have to go through and
they'll be judged on the on the
quality of the proposal and that
and the urgent need probably
will be part of that and the
ability to keep providing clean
drinking water I don't see it I
think because it's competitive
and this these kinds of funds
are available statewide through
the colonias infrastructure the
tribal infrastructure and the
water transport is is a exist
now so we're not changing any of
that we're just we're just
trying to carve out a small
amount of money not twenty six
point six million but about four
point seven the five million to
help small mutual domestic skip
the needed infrastructure they
need.
Mr Chairman representative so I
I appreciate that answer it
don't think it really addresses
my concern however
the fact that it's competitive
application it you know is
flying it's it's more about
state project gets half million
dollars and they do whatever
infrastructure work they need to
do and there are certain number
of members of the usual domestic
and maybe they're not allowing
other folks and it really raises
the the property value I guess
you could say of of that right
so perhaps Mr Carter or anybody
else who could give me a.
Our Marquita I think could
answer that to.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair.
Thank you market.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure that I
have a lot to add in the sense
that these are volunteer point
they are associations they don't
have condemnation rates they
have areas that they serve in
their often overlapping
territories
they are is Representative that
I mentioned currently able to
receive capital outlay it does
not change anything so you your
capital outlay bills that you
see regularly have a large
number of mutual domestics that
receive probation it does not
change anything there the
Senator project's Act was the
act back in the fifties that
maybe these non governmental
entities government like for
purposes of capital outlay so
Essentially I don't think
there's anything in this bill
that changes of the ability for
or the way in which a neutral
domestic would be viewed in
terms of capital outlay it's
simply as Representative at a
Senate eliminates a few of the
provisions
that mutual domestics are would
be great all relative to the
water transport process and
requires that a certain amount
be set aside for those so I
don't know that I have a better
answer than the one she gave.
Mr Chairman representative
an expert I am thank you right
to land on this one is that
these mutual domestics request I
governmental and in that case
there is no anti donation clause
issue it would that be a good
thing.
Mr chair representative that's
exactly the initiatives that I
just giving you before yes thank
you so much and then I just a
couple more questions Mister
chair Mister chair
representative
in the bill it stated that the
direct that mutual domestic
water associations would not be
required or shall not be
required to be part of an
accepted regional water planning
area could you explain for us
please why you but that
provision in the bill why would
they be excluded what what.
Mr chair and representative
grant thank you for asking that
question because I I did
struggle with that and then I I
realized in Rio Arriba county
the last regional water plan was
done in two thousand sixteen the
people usually take part in
these regional planning
processes as I I like I like
Representative Senate is from
the county and the city you will
get large ranchers so you'll get
people that really study
watersheds the Forest Service
will be involved it's it's a I
have a much higher level when
you develop a regional water
plan they wouldn't ask a mutual
domestic and I can just tell you
in the Rio Arriba plan I and I
talked to some people who'd who
implemented that plan you know
the it it wasn't about it wasn't
about mutual domestics it was
really more about surface water
and the biggest threat to a
watershed in the north frankly
is a forest fire you know we get
a huge cerebra Andy fire like
they had Los Alamos in Rio
Arriba that will feel all of our
rivers and tributaries up with
ash and it will just it will
ruin every I mean it will just
that will be the biggest
catastrophe we can have in the
north in as far as a regional
planning
what our plan is concerned
you know you look at extreme
drought and you look at all
those other things as they are
important but they're not as
dangerous as one of these huge
huge forest fires so so really
it it didn't really affect
regional water plans I can tell
you in Rio Arriba the word got
out for the and that.
Your allocation and then tell
everybody what you needed and
this is how things are in the
north and in rural communities
and so one wondered you know for
some might call the other take a
get your plan and get your
planning so at the end of this
regional water plan and we are
right that they have.
Practically every single little
mutual domestic water
association not in what they
need you know thinking that well
you know someone might fund this
well it's not gonna happen it
didn't happen there it is it's
time to do another regional
water plan now most of these
were done in two thousand I
think sixteen but if they really
aren't that really when you talk
about the regional water plan
you're really talking mostly
about surface water so that's
why I said they didn't have to
be part of that plan.
Mr chair representative so
that's a very very satisfying
answer I thank you for that line
I have one other question and
it's regarding just say there's
about a five million dollar sign
here for that.
For the purpose of the bill and
I imagine I would be surprised
if a lot of mistakes didn't
apply for this money and and you
know in the next few years keep
applying for it but what is you
don't have enough applications
to account for the full five
million dollars I think it's
five four million.
What will happen to them money
that is not starts will it
continue I'm not sure the bill
tells us what will it birds will
it state and the fund my concern
is that we don't want to park
money and just let it sit we
want always get out the door for
the benefit of those for whom
it's it's meant so is there
something in the bill that I
just miss that talks about that
or maybe something in another
statutes that would answer that
question Mr chair representative
grandmother another great
question I think I actually
didn't put that in and I
couldn't imagine having money
left over in them and if you
want to know the truth I think
we could use it in Rio Arriba
alone I I yeah I know we could
because I get every capital
outlay every year from each one
of those mutual domestic plans
and and I I keep putting twenty
five thousand dollar bandaids on
you know four hundred thousand
dollar projects is really what
it looks like so eight but
you're right I mean I guess I
could be for the next committee
amended to say if any there's
any money left over to revert
back to the Water chess board
like I could put that in I
really.
I really can't imagine not going
through that money for the next
several years but I I you know I
could do that I thank you that.
So Mister chair representative I
think that would be a good
modifications of the bill I I
think if we can.
It may not ever be triggered but
but I think it would be good to
have and then I'll just finally
closed Mr chair and
representative with just about
that I I kind of wish there were
just a little bit of a match
required in this bill maybe five
percent maybe apply and also
you know maybe provide for a
hardship waiver on that five
percent match but I understand
that the the reason for the bill
I will support the bill
I just I just kind of think it's
nice when everybody has a little
skin in the game and capital
outlay certainly could be well
applied to I'm helping come up
with management and so anyway
thank you for indulging me with
these questions Mr chair I.
Thank you Representative brown
let's go next to representative
Allison.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
thank you for the presentation
Representative Herrerra.
I'm just gonna ask if of my
local waters Water System and
fruit and would qualify for some
of the benefits of this
organization.
We have a water system that
doubles as an irrigation canal
and also feeds into the water
system and the.
Where we draw water from the San
Juan river and where it goes
into the irrigation ditch is
under a bluff and it seems like
every spring this of.
Portion of this blusher laughs
off and it covers the hearing
radiation dates and thereby we
don't get any water for several
days at a time and the the water
organization has been trying to
put all this in caps lead lines
and I'm just wondering if
disorienting it organization
would benefit us to us for help
so with that I would like some
contact numbers so I can point
the people in the right
direction in the area that I'm
at they are not able to get help
from tribal infrastructure this
is on the state side so I'm I
live on that side and Hey.
Want to know if there is any way
that I can help my community
improve the water system.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison yeah you've got all the
people on our your expert list
that can help you with that
bills Connor heads up the New
Mexico rural water association I
will I will get you his phone
number after this call it king
yeah that's what his
organization did it does it's a
nonprofit they go out to rural
rural places in New Mexico they
look at what the water problems
are and then they advise you on
how you should go about fixing
this and and then they would
tell you to probably apply for
grant and if it's right yet this
is is this a mutual it's not a
mutual domestic water system the
right.
Is it will often then you'd be
eligible for it under this
legislation and then you'd get
help from Marquita wrestles team
at the NMFA in writing the grant
and
It's all possible provided
that's what I'm presenting this
to this bill Representative Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Listen to the whole
presentation.
Thank you Mr chair and a look
forward to getting the numbers
for Mr Connor and miss Russell.
Thank you Representative out
thank you Sir this movie to
Representative Ezzell
Representative Ezzell the floor
is yours.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Herrera and miss
Russell Mr Connor thank you all
for being here this morning I
have a couple questions to
One of one of the now is this is
from the office of the state
engineer and Mr chairman I would
like yes Representative Herrera
if she's had the chance to look
those of.
I did read that analysis
Representative Ezzell we would
think the question is.
Okay the state engineer state is
saying that there's some
ambiguities in this particular
bill that you're presenting the
committee substitute and miss
Russell have you have the
opportunity to read the analysis
from state engineers office as
well.
Madam Mr chair yes.
Okay
He is stating that or the office
of state engineer is stating
The way it's written right now
it could be interpreted
different ways and the the funds
that are disposed to be
dedicated to the state engineers
office from the water project
fund might be reduced.
Representative do you see that
might be a problem for future
funding and mistrust so I'd like
to hear your inputs as well.
Mr chair and representative
thank you for that question I
interpret the bill to say that
it would be available funds the
the state engineer right now has
about the tickets about fifteen
percent of that money is
allocated for different offices
through this state engineers
office I think I think the ten
percent would come from the
available funds between to
subtract that fifty percent from
the you know fifty seven million
and then you get that amount and
then we can just that that the
money left over from that so I
don't really see a problem I
guess I could I guess I could
make that clear but it when it
says available money I think
that means they're they're
already it is already in statute
that the it that this fifteen
percent out of that fund so I
think it's it's the money after
that fifteen percent so thank
you for asking that question.
Mr chairman and Representative
Herrera miss Russell how do you
see that you're in your opinion.
I'm thank you Mr chairman
Representative I believe that
the allocation so the
appropriations come to the water
project fund and that the
language that directs the
appropriation says that ten
percent immediately gets peeled
off for the the office of the
state engineer and then further
on to the
minister of office of the courts
for education purposes so that
money any money that comes into
that fund then ten percent
immediately goes off the rest is
remaining we would interpreted
the same way that Representative
and that it says which is that
should that amount you
it's the net amount available so
it's not nine percent of the
severance tax bonds but eight
point one percent of the
severance tax bonds should the
legislature appropriate out
money from that fund it would be
the net amount available for
water projects is the way in
which we would interpret that.
Mr chairman and Representative
and miss Russell I am reading
the analysis also from the.
Environment Department.
And under significant issues as
stating says the H. B. two forty
one set aside would be ten
percent of annual amount
appropriated by the legislature
for the water project fund
however the legislature does not
appropriate amounts for the
water project plan which means
to set aside is zero some kind
of confuse their.
Mr chair and representative to
south.
This bill that's why I Amanda
that's why you have a substitute
it takes us all right thank you.
And I I just wanted to make that
clear because I think that this
analysis was done prior to the
committee substitute which we
are discussing right now so
Mister chairman and
Representative Herrera I am I
understand what you're trying to
do here.
But I want to inch back sure and
maybe miss Russell could answer
this question because we are.
Going after the small mutual
domestic water systems that
actually do need the help so I
Egolf one of a water project.
That is coming in that does have
lots of users are on it that
will be able to.
That's necessarily need this
money how are you going to
differentiate between the two
because I know that there's a
ten month period there that
there they have that the smaller
what all of them have the
opportunity to make applications
can you answer the.
I just want to make sure that it
is these small or mutual
domestics that do receive
consideration as far as this
goes as far as the committee
substitute Bilko's.
So thank you for that question
the water transport currently
utilizes
and application process that.
Has a seventy agency review team
evaluate the applications based
on criteria set by the water
trust board so in that criteria
is some of the stuff that's been
legislatively directed to us the
the
Project is considered urgent to
meet the regional needs a full
water of regional water plan
accepted by the Interstate
Stream Commission the matching
funds all of those are
requirements currently in the
policies so what I anticipate
will happen is that there will
be a new set of criteria that's
developed for the mutual
domestic set aside that
eliminates those two things that
doesn't mean they wouldn't get
priority for
Additional match should they
have it but they wouldn't be
required to necessarily have
that match so I anticipate that
there would just be a new set of
criteria that would the seven
agency review to would use to
evaluate these applications they
will still lead.
Rents there's a loan component
under the current water
transport policies for any water
system that has a right pain
constituency so mutual domestics
while they would not have
That's required under this
legislation water trust board
existing policies would still
require a loan of at least ten
percent so that is is there
still some skin in the game
because they will be repairing
over twenty year period a
portion of the funds that are
received through the form of a
loan it's a forgivable loan it's
a zero percent interest it's you
know they're very flexible terms
but the water trust board
believes it's important for
projects to
show their support over a longer
term so they do require the loan
and so I don't anticipate a lot
of the elements would change but
the things that have been
difficult for smaller systems in
terms of competing with the
bigger guys those would be
eliminated from the review
process okay and.
Mr Chairman representative miss
Russell that really makes me
feel a lot better because in the
past I've been working with the
system down in my area that in
between Hagerman and dexter
Fambrough mutual domestic and
their problem is is that ten
percent of they can't come up
with that money and so whenever
Representative brown was talking
about maybe a five percent wave
wave for and also having capital
LA many be able to help them
with that with that match their
and that's exactly what I have
done this year I've I've helped
them out through kept hopefully
help to have.
I think it would.
Budget everybody that has the
small mutual domestics in their
districts to be able to get them
up and running and get the
application may cause a lot of
times just the.
The work involved can be a
little bit overwhelming and so I
I do plan to support this bill I
just needed some things
clarified especially whenever
the Nelsons refer the regional
bill and not the committee said
to Mr Chairman representative
thank you all very much and miss
Russell Mr Connor thank you all
for participating that's all Mr
chairman thank you
Representative finally on our
list we have Representative
small I say handled real quick I
don't know if you still want to
speak.
Mr Chairman my questions were
answered very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative seeing
no further hands up with the
pledge of the committee.
Representative is a Mr chairman
and now move that health
agriculture water resources
committee substitute for house
bill two forty one to pass.
In motion made by Representative
is L. as their second second.
Listen of.
Madam secretary please call the
roll.
Thank you Representative Allison
okay yes Representative we.
Yes what's going on.
Excuse me really quick.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Matthews all.
What.
What percentage of small
businesses in your.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you for.
Some of the call.
My.
You're on your.
Not sure I just.
Chairman thank you for your
right.
But wait to zero you every man
is passed house bill two forty
one the committees that bill I
see a hand up our analysts.
Donna Griffin gonna do have
something to add to the
conversation.
I'm sorry chairman and
representatives but I believe
the motion should have been a do
not pass on the bill in a do
pass on the substitute.
Representative.
Mr chairman I would like in my
motion that there is an do not
pass on house bill two forty one
but it do has on health
agriculture water resources
committee substitute for house
bill two forty one.
Very well thank you for catching
that Donna.
Appreciate keeping a straight.
At that the motion made by
Representative Ezzell second
again by Representative Allison
at this point is there any
opposition to that motion may we
were taking the the vote at this
point I don't see it changing
much so that being said you
still Representative at a have
that do pass on this a committee
substitute for House Bill to
forty one thank you very much
and thank you Mr Connor and and
record regarding this this
morning at this point in time we
will then move to our next
agenda item which is House
memorial Hey House memorial ten
Representative Pettigrew
which is a house memorial ten is
the new water appropriation and
public welfare Representative
Pettigrew I see a hand up we
will we will over.
Here in just a second.
Representative Pettigrew good
morning thank you for joining
us.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and thank you committee for your
time
before you begin do you have
anyone in the audience you wish
to help you out with this bill.
Actually Mr Chairman a request
respectfully request the
committee allow me to roll this
bill until your next maybe until
your next.
committee meeting okay I
appreciate that Representative
we we will allow that our next
committee hearing will be this
coming Saturday one PM.
And so you will be second on our
gender Representative Medicaid.
Okay that that works I do have a
house sepak at one thirty so
I'll just bounce back and forth
like I did today we try to make
it work brother Hey I appreciate
you in the committee yeah I have
a great day Sir thank you.
With that being said the members
of our committee of finally on
our list we have house bill one
ninety seven.
This was the bill that I
presented an hour Tuesday
hearing that that that passed
unanimously through this
committee but.
There was a a catch when our
committee secretary order to get
it drafted in the
Legislative Council Service and
so Representative Brown made a
motion in regards to the.
The underscoring the under under
score of a semi colon with in
the bill so if you recall that
there was an underscore on page
two line nineteen that was so
not in an amendment.
When our committee analyst I
wanna Committee secretary went
to have that drafted we were
told by the Legislative Council
Service that the way that it was
originally put into the bill one
is the correct way.
And that and that had one of two
options one was to send it off
to the next committee that I'm
going to which Judiciary haven't
been there or bring it back to
our committee and and and we
will to keep it the same way
that it was originally presented
which again in L. I. Essie was
mentioned to us that that was
the right way for it to have
been drafted in the first place
so no substantive changes just
that technical change and I
bring that four of the to the
extension of the committee and
and and if what's the pleasure
of the committee Representative
Brown yes I thank you Mr
chairman so I I do apologize for
letting that I I was working on
for analysis that have been
provided to us and so I
I do have a copy of the
legislative drafting manual and
I went ahead and and took a look
at what I was told we were going
to be discussing this and indeed
on page under the six we do not
apply to rural underscoring to
punctuation that's added that's
the only exception what I
believe there is for that so I I
also want to point out Mr chair
that I read some analyses on
bills not in this committee
where analysts have fled the
same type of issue so maybe
Legislative Council Service
wants to put out a short memo to
its staff members so we're all
doing it the right way but I
always appreciate analyst trying
to you know catch things like
that in this case though there
is an exception on page twenty
six so again I apologize for
putting us through this.
Mr chair is there a motion in
particular that you would like
to hear on this one too.
you want us to do that so so so
then they they recognize that we
will have to make a new motion
and that.
The motion would propose that
the language of house bill one
ninety seven as presented to the
committee intact rather than
underscore the semi colon on
page two line nineteen would be
the motion data that corrected
send it back to them and then he
would be back to the original
bill the way it was originally
drafted.
So moved.
To try to repeat that okay so
then that there is there's a
motion by Representative brown
is there a second to this motion
Matthews is here and that.
Madam secretary please for the
record call the roll.
Senate Allison yes.
Senator Browne yes
Representative is out.
Yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Matthews.
Your and you.
At the yes this first time I
voted on a colon but it's Mr but
I'm glad to do it.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Vice chair Herrera yes.
Chairman yes it is.
Thank you for that correction
house bill one ninety seven in
its original form will move for
that to the next committee again
I want to thank all of the
committee members this morning
for a very efficient meeting
reminder that we will again meet
on Saturday to take up House
Bill two oh seven and then with
Representative Pettigrew is
request House memorial ten.
At that point in time I I'm so I
would have to work the weekend
but the this is the way it's
going to be hopefully we can all
coordinate our schedules so we
can be here at one o'clock on
Saturday so with that being said
was anyone else has anything
else to add to the discussion
today thank you all
congratulations to the baby full
awesome.
Appreciate you being with us
this afternoon or this morning
excuse me all have a great day
we will see you on the floor at
eleven o'clock have a great day
everyone stay warm.
