are meant to help an extensive
survey conducted not long ago by
the Department of Economics.
Yes, yes.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, again, my name is
Bill Lee, president and CEO of
the Gallup McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce, we stand
opposed to raising the minimum
wage. It, it is all too often
that those who will suffer the
most are those seeking gainful
employment and experience in the
job market, an extensive survey
conducted by David.
Yes.
Oh, I'm sorry, I thought it was
minimum wage. I'm sorry.
246 if you wanna.
OK, thank you. I'll come back.
Thank you.
OK.
That's it.
Yeah.
I just shared the file with you
I just I just think.
I started it.
Uh, so we're gonna go to the
room. Those in opposition,
please raise your hand.
No, uh, check your email real
quick.
No one in opposition?
OK, please stand.
And I think someone will take
the microphone to you.
Um.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm JD
Bollington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. Just to clarify,
this bill is a minimum wage bill
for institutions of higher
learning, correct? and state
employees. You told, you told
the other person this was not a
minimum wage bill, so I just
want to make sure that's what
we're talking about here, do you
want to clarify that? yes,
so.
The title of House Bill 264.
Is relating to state employees.
Providing for a future increased
minimum salary.
Annual leave accrual rates and
paid parental leave. This is for
state employees.
This is different from.
House Bill 246.
Which is a minimum wage bill
across the board for all the
state for the entire state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce respectfully opposes
Hospital 264. This bill has a
large impact on the state
budget, uh, increasing, uh,
salaries for state employees and
then also increasing them
annually based on the consumer
price index, which creates the
potential for an economic
setback.
When we have another economic
downturn. It also mandates 12
weeks of paid family medical
leave for parents of a new
child, which puts this
legislation ahead of the policy
that's already articulated in
House Bill 11.
The chamber believes that these
types of salary increases should
not be tied to inflationary
measures like automatic cola
increases, and the legislature
should revisit increases in the
state employees' salaries, with
caution and care and keep them
isolated from other employee
benefit programs. Thank you.
Anyone else in opposition in the
room? OK, let's go to support on
Zoom.
All righty. Um, so can you tell
me who, who is up?
Who?
Bill Lee in support, um.
For House Bill 264. Go ahead.
I'm sorry, madam chair, I don't
know how my hand got raised
there. Excuse me. OK.
Who's next? on Zoom?
Diana good. Go ahead.
I'm not scheduled to speak. I
think my other colleagues have
prepared statements.
Thank you.
Only if they have their hand up.
Oh OK.
Sony Gonzalez.
Hello, um, thank you, Madam
Chair and committee. Um,
I'm a union member and current
employee with the state. Um, I'm
also disabled and I want to
speak briefly on the impact that
remote work would have for this,
the state, um, to be more
accessible to current and future
employees.
Um, I live with widespread
chronic pain, joint instability,
low blood pressure and chronic
fatigue, among other things. Uh,
working from home allows me to
manage my pain with things like
joint braces, heating and
cooling pads, the ability to
change seating as I need.
I can manage my blood pressure,
which uh compression garments
that I might take on and off
throughout the day, elevating my
legs and adjusting my diet, uh,
with salt and and liquid
throughout the day as needed.
My blood pressure cuffs braces,
splints, uh, for joints that can
start to hurt throughout the
day. Kinesiology tape and other
medical supports all stay at
home because I will hurt myself
trying to haul those between my
office space and my home, and I
simply can't afford to buy
duplicates.
These are a few examples from my
personal situation, but I
encourage you to think of the
over 1 in 4 New Mexicans over 18
living with a disability, and
that that is from the CDC, and
this is the same school of New
Mexicans that make up our
workforce.
From home, employees with
sensory issues can control their
sensory environment, employees
with diabetes can manage their
blood sugar, employees with
seizure disorders can continue
their work when they're on
driving restrictions. Employees
can prevent migraines triggered
by lights and smells. Yes. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Dan is good. You have 2 minutes.
I respectfully, um, leave room
for my other colleagues.
All right, there isn't anyone
else, uh, on Zoom, and we'll go
to the room, all those in
support, please raise your
hands.
Okey-dokey.
Um, please be brief, if you can
be briefer than 2 minutes, that
would be appreciated. Thank you
so.
What was first, Madam Chair and
committee, thank you for the
opportunity. My name is Lindsay
Bargout and I'm speaking as a
union member. I'm an employee at
the New Mexico Environment
Department, where I have worked
for the past 4 years. Highly
skilled workers have options
these days, and we are eager to
go where we are valued. I'm
constantly being recruited by
environmental consulting firms,
but my family comes first and my
job second. I left a higher
paying job as a landow
subcontractor to work for NMED
because of the paid parental
leave and flexible alternative
work schedule.
Now years after I've had my
child as I am paying exorbitant
daycare costs. I'm eager to be
retained by a competitive
salary, more BTO and the option
of remote work. Every January, I
carefully plot out how I am
going to use my PTO to cover the
29 days that my daughter's
daycare is going to be closed
that year. And I hope that my 15
year old car will make it until
she is in kindergarten and a car
payment can replace the daycare
bill. It was hard to even
sacrifice 4 hours of PTO to be
here today.
All of these different benefits
are necessary to recruit and
retain valuable employees as
they face different personal
challenges throughout their
lives and careers and state
workers deserve for their
benefits to be codified into
law. Thank you.
My name is uh Jerome, Madam
Chair, members of committee. My
name is Jerome Romero. I'm a
regional vice president for
Northern New Mexico for CWA
wanted to address some of the
concerns of the, the gentleman
from the chamber of commerce,
the way this bill is structured,
we currently have no employees
that are at $15 a minimum, and I
want to thank all of you here
for getting that done for them.
And so I think it's it's amazing
to be in to, to do in the state,
but we're still really
struggling with, with, um, not
a floor, uh, of, of just, just a
base of $15
you know, um, I'm gonna speak
for, for, um, the custodial
staff who, who, um, go down to
the shelter here to eat for
lunch because they can't afford
lunch here, uh, in, in the city,
you know, rent is $2100 a month
for a one bedroom apartment here
in Santa Fe, you know, a lot of
our security guards.
Our, our, our homeless, and so
they might live uh in the
parking lot across from, from
where they work and, and come
in, or they live in, you know,
uh, a single trailer, one of
another.
Who's next? Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Carter Bundy
with asks me, we stand in strong
support of this bill and thank
the sponsor for bringing it in
our sisters in CWA for being the
experts, you know, just as a
general matter about cola.
We really need to be indexing
more of these things to
inflation, and that applies to
our healthcare premiums for the
state and hopefully you'll see
that bill a little bit later.
Um, it applies to almost
everything we do, because
businesses get to raise their
costs, landlords get to raise
their costs. And if there's not
a guarantee that we're keeping
pace at least with base
inflation, then we're gonna fall
farther and farther behind and
you're gonna hear more stories
like the one this gentleman just
shared. So we encourage you to
support that part of the bill
and of course,
annual leave, we are not
competitive with private sector
at all at annual leave. A lot of
state employees are looking at 2
and 3 weeks for the entire year,
and they have families, they
have, forget about going off and
doing something fun, they need
that time just to take care of
doctors' appointments and family
issues. So we hope you'll
support this bill and move it
along. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Next
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, John
Lipshutes with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor, AFL-CIO,
uh, as you all have heard
before, we represent well over
40,000 workers throughout the
state and the public and private
sectors. Um, we stand in strong
support of this measure and
pretty much any measure that uh
provides anything close to a
reasonable wage for workers,
reasonable benefits. We are not
asking for the world like a lot
of folks do think that we do.
We're asking for a
amount of respect in the
workplace, and we will always
stand for these measures and,
you know, as was stated during
uh introductory testimony, if we
were in a position in the state
where we were turning away
people looking to work for the
state, I could maybe understand
that, but with a 25% vacancy
rate that is unacceptable and
the only or certainly the most
effective way in order uh to
fill those vacancies is to offer
fair wages, fair benefits. So
for those
reasons, we strongly urge you to
support this measure. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, anyone else?
please move over to the
microphone.
Madam Chairing committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is Doctor Yoe
Shah, and I am here speaking as
a union steward at the
Department of Health where I
have worked for the past 3 years
as an epidemiologist with a PhD
in public health.
When I was hired in the summer
of 2022, the COVID-19 pandemic,
remote work policy was still in
place for state employees. DOH
employees demonstrated that we
can work effectively from home
to conduct our surveillance and
epidemiology response
activities. I worked every day
from 8 to 5 p.m. with an hour
lunch break. I work on a team
that conducts surveillance for
respiratory hospitalizations. My
team includes non-DOH colleagues
who all work remotely based in
other locations in and outside
of New Mexico.
My team and many others at DOH,
we could continue to work
effectively while remote because
all our work is done on a laptop
with video calls. In February
2023, all state workers were
required to return to the
office. My work was almost
exactly the same as before,
working 80 to 5 p.m. on a laptop
with video call meetings. The
only difference was that now I
had to spend an extra hour each
day commuting. Most
epidemiologists in other states
and institutions are permitted
to work remotely, returning
state workers to the office has
pushed.
and continues to push many of
our most talented colleagues to
leave DOage for other employers.
In fact, before February 2023, 2
of my team members left DOH for
another employer, so they could
continue doing the same work,
but remotely. According to a
2024 survey of New Mexico state
workers, 37% are considering
leaving their position due to a
lack of a remote work option.
Lack of a remote work option
makes it difficult to hire
epidemiologists, we desperately
need to carry out our work
combined with
salaries, we simply cannot
compete with other job options,
providing a remote work option
for state employees will help
the state filled vacancies and
retain workers so we can better
serve New Mexicans. Thank you.
OK. Next, good afternoon, um,
vice chair and committee
members. My name is Ann Keller,
and I am the treasurer for the
local 7076, and I'm here in that
capacity.
Uh, on behalf of myself and all
of our members, we would like to
thank Representative Roy Ball
Caballero for bringing this
legislation.
From forward
Um, in the first, excuse me, in
the 2024 study of the New Mexico
State Personnel Act and the
state system of classification
and compensation, Deloitte
concluded that the state of New
Mexico falls below the national
average of annual leave accrual.
CWA's own research supports the
Deloitte conclusion of the 50
state governments and the cities
of Santa Fe and Albuquerque here
in New Mexico that we surveyed
the state of New Mexico's annual
leave accrual rate ranks at the
very bottom.
The cities of Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, and even our neighbors,
Texas, Arizona, Colorado, Utah,
and Oklahoma have a more
generous annual leave rate than
the civil servants in uh in the
state of New Mexico.
Second, the proposed annual
leave accrual rate, uh, for
Senate Bill 264 is the same as
GovE employees are currently
getting. We are asking for.
Nothing more than what they are
getting. Um, we believe we
deserve equal treatment because
we work.
As hard and we are the backbone
of state government.
Third, after checking your, um,
employees that have 20 plus
years of of state work. They
have reported that their annual
leave accrual rates have not
changed since they started back
in the early 2000s.
So we believe it is now the time
to implement increased annual uh
accrual rates to retain our
existing.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Alexander
Sanchez. I'm here as a union
member and as a current employee
of the state of New Mexico. I
come to express my support for
this bill.
In my opinion, as a state
employee.
Providing flexibility to the
workforce would be a benefit to
the entire state workforce, not
only current employees, but
those who would be seeking
future employment as well.
Having an option for remote work
would allow for an increased
diversity in the workforce, as
has been pointed out before.
And provide opportunities for
new individuals to become
employed who wouldn't otherwise
be considered.
Or would turn that offer down,
because they would have to
choose between.
a better paying job that would
allow for remote work, or a
commute of up to an hour or
more, one way to a duty station
far away guarantees for parental
leave would help allow for a
better balance for those of us
who either have families or
planning on starting them
sometime in the future.
In my opinion, these are those
who have the ability to work
remotely or more productive.
are more satisfied with their
work and are far more inclined
to stay employed even if the pay
isn't as good as it could be in
the private sector.
Having that flexibility is a
very high benefit and.
A good consideration for staying
in these places.
People like me or my wife who do
have to contain our, uh, excuse
me, choose between either a $300
monthly gas bill or more, or
have to spend
Almost 20 hours a week commuting
back and forth to Santa Fe or
stuck in traffic trying to just
simply cross Albuquerque as I do
for more than an hour one way.
For all these reasons, I hope
you stand and support this bill.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today. My name is Tristan
Ramirez, and I'm here speaking
as a union member at the Envi
Environment Department for the
past year and a half, I've
served as a health compliance
officer for the occupational
Health and Safety Bureau. When
we consider how much our lives
are spent working about 1/3 of
our life. It's clear that our
personal time is precious.
After work, we dedicate the
remaining hours to handling
everyday responsibilities,
commuting, chores, cooking and
childcare for those of us with
kids, and then we try to squeeze
out the remaining time before
bed. For most of us, myself
included, annual leave is not
just a luxury, it's a necessity
to make up for time lost during
the year, whether it's visiting
family, enjoying a vacation, or
simply recharging, the time is
invaluable. Yet for most of us
and most of the developed world,
2 weeks of annual leave is
hardly enough for state workers.
were tirelessly for their
community and state.
This is especially true and as
many of us have experienced
annual leave must sometimes be
used for non-vacation related
situations. It's hard to
overstate the value of annual
leave. Last year was an
incredibly difficult year for my
fiance and I. Her father passed
away suddenly at the beginning
of 2024, and I'm sure as many of
you can understand, grief is
unpredictable and overwhelming,
with only 3 days of bereavement
leave in less than a week of
annual leave to process such a
devastating loss, we were left
scrambling to manage both our
emotions and our responsibility.
i b il ities Half of our annual
leave was spent navigating the
aftermath of losing a loved one.
While the other half went
towards a trip in Toronto in
October, that trip became a much
needed escape, a chance to
relieve the emotional pressure
of the year, explore a new place
and most exciting while getting
engaged. This is how state
employees use their annual leave
to recharge, heal, and simply
live. Uh, currently is a
relatively new employee, I crew
only 2 weeks of leave per year
in contrast every country in the
European Union mandates at least
4 weeks of paid vacation
annually, even in the US, many
private sector companies and
public agen.
are moving towards 3 weeks or 4
weeks. Thank you.
Thank you, I think we have.
Two more people?
Go ahead.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Tiffany Pineda. I am a member of
the union and also a current
employee with the state of New
Mexico.
As a union-covered state worker,
I'm asking you to support House
Bill 264. It would improve the
lives of public workers like me,
our families, our communities,
and of the New Mexicans we work
to support remote work with
significantly reduce my
community costs such as gas,
public transportation, fares,
and vehicle maintenance.
Additionally, it would help me
save valuable time that would
otherwise be spent in traffic or
on public transit.
Allowing me to focus on my work
or personal responsibilities.
Paid parental leave would
provide essential financial
stability during a time of major
life changes.
It would allow me to bond with
my child and support my family
without the added stress of
income loss.
This time would be invaluable
and ensuring a healthy
transition and reducing stress
for both my family and me. I am
responsible for assisting and
managing projects and contracts
for the state of New Mexico, for
the department I work with,
these tasks are critical to
ensuring the impact of my work,
compliance, efficiency, and
public service.
My work supports the state of
Mexico's missions contributes to
the department's goals and
outcomes.
Uh, compared to other employers
in the industry.
My pay is relatively low for the
responsibilities I carry out.
My compensation is not
competitive with the market
rates for similar positions in
public or private sectors.
Many co-workers of mine have
left the state of New Mexico.
For positions, offering better
leave policies, remote work
options.
Their departure has increased
the workload of the remaining
team members, and in some cases,
OK.
Thank you. Next,
Oh, you, oh sorry, Madam Chair
and committee members, thank you
for allowing me to speak today.
I am speaking in support of this
bill. I, the state is unable to
accommodate my service dog at an
office closer to home, so I have
to commute 3.5 hours a day to
work in an office and the leave
that I've taken last year, the
majority of it was to help my
family because I'm just not
available during the week
because I'm too busy commuting.
I don't mean to sound negative.
There's many, I feel very
positive about this bill, that
this is a pro-family bill. It
will support workers to have
more time with their families
like commuting. It will support
more time for to allow them to
bond with their newborn
children. It is a pro-rural bill
that it will allow world jobs
that you don't have to live in
the city to be able to work for
the state of Mexico, and it's a
pro job for folks with
disabilities that there are
people with disabilities with
exceptional abilities that want
to work for the state and serve
the people of New Mexico.
and this bill will make that
easier and allow it. Thank you.
Thank you, and I believe that it
concludes our public comments,
so we'll go to uh questions from
the committee.
No questions?
questions.
Um, Madam Chair, may we have
closing, uh, you want to do that
now? OK, go ahead, closing
because of, yes, thank you.
to go
Not closing
OK, they want to go ahead and
wait, we'll wait, we'll wait
until after, right, OK,
Representative Hall. Thank you,
Madam Chair, expert witnesses, a
few questions here, um.
Can you explain how our current.
Annual leave crues.
Based on
The years of service, police and
vice chair.
Uh, the vice chair
Representative, thank you. Yes,
I.
The um current levercrus you can
find in Speboard rule, but I can
read them to you right now.
Currently, we as state employees
accrue 3.08 hours per pay period
for less than 3 years of
cumulative service.
3.69 hours per pay period for 3
to 7 years of service.
4.61 hours per pay period or 7
to 11 years of service.
5.54 hours per pay period for 11
to 15 years of service.
And 6.15 hours per pay period if
15.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and expert
witnesses, um, on
The proposed parental leave is
at a flat 12 weeks a year, and
then it starts over, or will it
accrue?
of moisture.
Uh, none of us share if I
understand your question
correctly, Representative, and
let me know if I don't. It is 12
weeks per child per employee.
It's not an accrual, it's if you
have a child, you're eligible
for that.
And that is currently offered
under executive order.
Thank you. Um,
And then
Oh let's see here.
When we're, when we're looking,
I was looking at uh
Let me go back and look at this.
Page 7, Park that goes over to
the bottom of page 7 going over
to the
Half of page 8, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair and expert
witnesses.
Um
I have no problem with remote
work.
Would this be on a um hoping on
a case by case basis, you'd have
to explain why.
Because having come out of the
federal government and during
it, we discovered.
We weren't able to actually
verify people were working.
And then when they got called
back to work, it didn't go over
too well, cause there are
definitely some jobs that can be
accomplished at home.
But my, my concern on this.
That it's just not gonna be a
free pass for everyone, and, and
that's maybe not good
terminology. Forgive me for
that, but if, does that make
sense,
Madam began and then um Lindsay
Hirst will continue. I will call
your attention to page 5.
Oh, you can't.
OK.
I will call your attention, uh,
representative page 5, which
states the um
Under the terms or conditions or
situations under which remote
work will be approved or will be
um.
applied for for lack of another
word or request it and then um.
How that will be carried out.
For the department, for the
position, per the workload, per
all of the factors that go in
that a supervisor assesses in
and, and finally the evaluation
of the productivity in the
remote works. So I wanted to
begin with that and then for
further detail I.
Speak to
Madam Vice Chair and
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, so, um,
Uh, as the, the chair drew your
attention to uh Section C, we
are putting essentially all of
the uh decision making ability
about what positions could
qualify for remote work in the
hands of the employer. So
currently, there are positions
that are essentially remote
working. Some of them are called
deployed workers, if you've
heard that term. Um, and this
would be, uh, employees, um, at,
for example, the PRC public
regulation Commission.
They inspect gas lines and such.
They are traveling all over the
state. They essentially have a
home office and a state vehicle
and a laptop. And that is, that
is how they complete their work.
They are independent workers,
um, at the Environment
department, for example, we have
a lot of inspectors who have a,
a travel abroad range uh
throughout the state. Um, and
these types of positions could
be eligible under this. A lot of
others could, but we're putting
all of the decision making
ability.
Um, in the hands of the employer
based on job function, nature of
the work performed and the
operational needs. Um, so, so
that's the first portion of
your, your question, I believe,
uh, the, the second part was
concerning um how uh these,
these uh remote workers, uh, can
be evaluated. So currently, um,
state employees who are in
career status, are evaluated,
uh, twice a year. There is an
interim evaluation.
and a final evaluation. Um, each
evaluation is is required to
have a list of what are the
expectations and essentially,
you know, remote workers can be,
can still be evaluated based on
their productivity. So, uh, at
one time I was uh an air permit
writer, um, at the Environment
department. And they had an
entire system, each application
that came in was evaluated for
complexity, and about how much
time it should take.
To write that permit and follow
through on all the steps
required. And so they did, they
did the math for each
application coming in, divided
the workload into uh an amount
that a given employee could
reasonably complete in their 40
hour work week. And then there
were interim steps of, OK, did
you complete this, this part of
the process? Did you, did you
mark this complete? Did you
complete review? Did you issue a
draft? And so there's very clear
steps that are predefined.
for a lot of these types of
positions, so essentially it
doesn't matter where you're
doing the job from, because it's
very well defined. Um, so, so
that is something that an
employer could make a decision
uh based on in terms of, OK, can
we effectively evaluate
performance while people are
remote working. Um, I, I can
provide other
At
Um, vice chair and, and uh
representative that the bill
doesn't mandate but opens up the
option, um, for agencies to
make.
These considerations. And the
other, um, point and what I was
really excited about on this
component.
Um, is that it's, it's designed
as we learned the hard lessons
of COVID.
We heard over and over again,
how a rural communities were
struggling even more.
than other communities, um, and.
This is a perfect opportunity,
um, for remote work.
Um, being a driver for
recruiting.
In a rural communities, rural
rural employees that wish to
stay in their communities and
not necessarily pick up and go
to wherever there's a particular
office, so again, it's based on
certain.
Factors which would Miss Hurst
outlined that I think that it's
important to note that um those
remote community, those
communities, rural communities,
uh, would be would stand to
benefit a great deal.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, and expert
witnesses
has what's the, I see there's
not an appropriation, um, has it
been budgeted for? Cause I heard
your number.
Which was a little astonishing
$90 million in lost income
during FY 24 because of the loss
employees, but have, have, have
we, we have, has it been figured
out how it's gonna be paid for?
Out of the out of the uh budget,
Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representative, um, if you will
look in this bill, the sections
requiring an appropriation are
not to be enacted until FY 27,
so not, not during the session,
not during this fiscal year. So
we believe that will leave time
to account for those
appropriations that were um that
were found in the FIR.
And so, and to add um.
Vice chair and representative.
It's up to the agencies when
they submit their budgets. Once
we enact legislation, um, in
such as this, then we allow for
um the agencies to be able to,
uh, ascertain their uh workforce
needs.
And then budget in what they
believe um is the workforce
their need that that is needed
in those departments and within
those agencies and then work it
into their budgets and that's
why uh we set the uh fiscal year
2027, so that the agencies would
have the ability to work these
numbers in because they also
have to anticipate.
Uh, turnover vacancies and other
factors, but they still will
budget for what their agency
needs are.
In terms of workforce.
Like
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair. And then, so
And forgive me if I'm not
grasping all of this.
Should this be enacted, does the
$15
Uh, minimum wage rate going that
portion of it going into effect.
This coming
Year
But, um, or does it all wait
until FY 26 because it says that
on FY 26, then we'll begin using
a
The, the, uh, CPI and a couple
other things, I think if I read
that right, Madam Butcher.
Oh, none of my share
representative, um, the $15
minimum salary wage was already
um.
Put in place by an appropriation
in FY 2023, there, I don't know
if you all remember, but there
was a very um sort of convoluted
legislative raise increase that
year, uh, offered that year to
state out to employees, and that
was because we were trying to
get everyone up to $15. So
Allstate employees are at 15 if
you check um our pay bands on
supposed website at the bottom
of the pay band is actually like
1569 right now because there
have been increases in the two
years since then. So again, um,
15 this year would be going into
statute, but would not enact a
salary change for for any
employees as far as we're aware.
However, starting in FY 27, the
indexing would start. Does that
make sense?
Uh, Madame Weiser, thank you for
clarify that and forgive my
ignorance. I read over a couple
of times and
Um, and then just to go back in
this.
When you said this is 12 weeks
parental leave.
Her child
And so if you have 5 children,
you get 60 weeks a year.
I moisture.
Madam Vice Chair and
Representative, um, it's, it's
for a new child.
Well they deserve it if they
have in 1 year
Thank you for clarifying that as
well, again, forgive me, I was
just like, oh my goodness, no
worries.
Someone can do that. I'm on
board. Give them what they need,
um, and I, I, uh, that, that's
all I have my share. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representatives,
presenters, um.
One question that I have, how
many days of PTO right now uh
state employee.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representative I
Read those earlier, but
unfortunately I gave them to you
as our per pay period, which
doesn't make a lot of sense, but
the um starting rate for a new
employee that was the 3.08 per
pay period of less than 3 years
of cumulative employment comes
out to 10 days per year of
annual leave.
Mhm
So how many days is, Madam
Chair, how many days that's
gonna increase if this bill goes
through.
Got you.
Lindsay, correct me if I'm
wrong, but Madam Chair, I
believe.
The starting rate
OK. Thank you.
So, um, how many days can I,
madam chair, I'm sorry, how many
days can an employee carry over
to the next year.
Madam Chair
An employee can only carry over
240 hours over to the next year,
and that is also the limit for
payout if you separate with
service. You can't, you can
never accumulate more than 240
hours.
Thank you Representative
Representative Terasas.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Um.
Excuse me, I vice chair, chair,
and experts, um.
So, and, and I didn't get your
witnesses, uh, names and
They're both with the union or
where, where are you?
Yeah, uh, Madam Vice Chair, I am
a current state employee at the
Environment Department, however,
I'm here in my capacity as our
union's president right now,
Megan Greene. Thank you.
Madam vice chair and
representative, um, my name is
Lindsay Hurst. I am also a
current state employee of the
Environment department, but I,
as, as Megan said, I, I'm here
in my union capacity. Thank you.
No problem. Thank you, man, uh,
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
so let me back up here and just
understand if I heard this
right. So right now, currently
we have not a single employee in
the state of New Mexico that's
making less than $15.
That true?
Um
Madam Vice Chair, I believe so.
I, I have not evaluated
everyone's salary. However, I
know what the pay bands say and
um no one should be making less
than the lower pay band.
And so, um, Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, representative, so.
Who, I'm just gonna kind of go
through this little quick little
thing here. Who, uh,
Gives racism. I mean, who in, in
the departments do they, are
they, are they locked up right
now where they can't give
raises? Explain to me that.
Explain that to me a little.
Madam Vice Chair Representative,
there are mechanisms in Speboard
rules to allow for increases
outside of the legislative, uh,
the legislative increase that's
awarded every year, the
legislative cost of living
increase. However, we largely
don't see those happening. We
have um done records requests
and IPs from spell, very, very,
very few people get their salary
adjusted outside of the
legislative increase that's
awarded every year, um.
It
Unless they've they move jobs
unless they take a promotion,
they apply. They don't know, we
don't get promotions. You must
apply for another job at a
higher level and um interview
for that job and get that job
offer and take that promotion.
So they're very limited
opportunities for um wage
increase outside of the
legislative increase.
Madam Vice Chair and chair
expert. I've heard of weird
things like that where they
actually have to apply for a
different department and then to
come back and then they can come
back and then they get a raise.
So executively.
On the executive side, where,
where's the executive on this,
Madam Chair.
I
Uh, Madam Chair, which specific
issue the, the.
Does she have the powers?
Mad vice chair chair, she has
the authority to
To adjust those right and give
her department heads and and
secretaries, the authority to
Deal with those on, on an
executive, that's what the
executive does.
You know, um
Vice chair and representative.
It's tough to be put in the
position to speak for the
executive for the governor, and,
um, so I, I wouldn't want to be
put in that position because I
really don't know, but, um.
What I do know is that what we
have right now, uh, in terms of
this piece of legislation, but
it's really hard to, uh, as the
expert Ms. Green indicated, we
Factor in the executive factors
in the budget just as we do with
our budgets, uh.
Agency requests and the regular
annual increases that we
approve, uh, when we ultimately
approve all the budgets, so
that's as far as I think I'm
ready,
um, to speak to on that
particular,
did you have any discussions
that any of you guys have any
discussions with the executive
to see what.
What could be worked out and and
work out some of these kinks.
Representative Anaya on that
point, madam, uh, Madam Vice
Chair.
I would imagine that if the
executive, even if they wanted
to give a pay increase, we as a
legislature would have to
appropriate that money. Is that
correct, Madam Vice Chair and
Representative?
Mm mm, yeah, I make sure I will
agree with representative Anaya
said, I will say um,
We have these conversations with
the executive a lot. We have
these conversations with cabinet
secretaries and agency heads
about pay. I, I believe you know
Representative Weir.
Here at the Roundhouse talking
about pay a lot, um, but because
we're under collective
bargaining agreement with the
state of New Mexico, I don't,
you know, I, that, that's
between us and the executive, I
guess I would say, but there is
a reason we are here asking for
some of these things Madam Vice
Chair,
let me just finish that, what I
was talking about. You have
budgets, right? So, and, and
correct me, I don't know, uh, I,
I don't work in, in, in the
governmental land. So I'm just
asking here.
You have vacancies, you have 20%
vacancies, but you budget for
those, I don't know, just keep
the the math simple. There's 100
employees. You only have 80, but
you have budgeted for, for 100.
Why can that
Well, let me re
Can that department, so you know
what? I'm going to give the 80
that I have a raised based on my
budget of 100. Can that happen?
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representative, we have the same
question. We have the same
question. We're in agreement
with you that those vacancy
savings can be used for salary,
but we don't see it happening,
and see, let me tell you, uh,
Madam Vice chair chair.
I think we do have a problem in
the state of New Mexico routine
employees and we do have
problems, um, uh, you know, I
know that we sat on, on, on
veterans and we've heard the
things with BSOs and how long it
took to get those raises that I
think it took us 5 years to get
that actually.
accomplished in, in that we're
wasting money.
Because we're not retaining the
employees yet we're training
them for for another for let's
just say the feds or whatever
are a better job. So I, I, I, I
get that we have a problem. I
just, um.
My concern is, or not my
concern, my question is, you
should be able to happen and but
who has the authority? I don't
think it goes all the way to the
executive, does it, to, to the
governor's office. Doesn't that
department head or the or the um
possibly the secretary have the
authority to do that?
And a vice chair and
representative. Thank you for
the question. Um, to be very
clear, uh, we, we cannot speak
on, on behalf of any of the
secretaries or the executive. I
just want to make that clear
before I respond, um, so, um,
Megan had mentioned that
spillboard rule does allow for
increases within in pay band.
Um, they do report on this data
point in the annual SO
compensation uh reports. You can
find them online. Um
One of, one of the uh
We have filed 13 grievances
about appropriate placement of
pay at all of the agencies that
we represent. Now that is not
relevant to the bill in front of
you today, but I think it is
relevant to your question. Um,
in the case of the Environment
Department, they actively, uh,
did the calculations to correct
pay and do in pay band increases
based on years of experience and
education. And then they went to
LFC and requested the
appropriation.
needed to cover those increases.
The vacancy rate at the
environment department has since
gone down. We are very close to
being fully staffed as a result
of that. So, yes, it can be done
under current spe board rule,
and, um, and, and I think that's
all I have to add. Yeah you
have. And just to clarify, we've
been saying spoke.
personnel office. That's what I
I've noticed a few. I wanted to
make sure we.
So madam, last year, chair, I, I
think they do have the ability
to do that already.
Um, I, and I, but why being that
You, you what, why are your
unions struggling to accomplish
this.
Why, I mean, that's usually
their, their job, they negotiate
that with why do you think
you're unsuccessful?
Sure, Madam Vice Chair
Representative, um.
I, I understand the questions
regarding wages. However, uh,
we're not asking for wage
adjustments in this bill other
than the minimum wage for state
employees. So, um,
I will say I wouldn't say we've
been unsuccessful. We're in the
process of working on those
issues, but they are separate
from the bill.
OK, I'm just gonna move on to
next, next question, uh, Madam
Vice Chair, Chair, how does this
affect Per in any way in the
future? Does it have any impact
whatsoever?
Some others underfunded as well.
Um
I
So the way operates is the more.
More contributions in our
building in the the fund as you
so the more personnel in the
system, the more personnel
working, making contributions,
then we're continuing to
increase the um
The para.
Retirement, and that's the hope
that we increase so that we can
uh have a workforce that is
experiencing all the benefits,
which includes retirement Madam
Vice Chair, um, and, and the
last time when we, the last, I
don't know, last week, I think
we heard Per was in needed about
8 billion to be just solid, you
know, uh, in, in funds. So I
agree with you. I mean,
obviously more people, more,
more uh funding is put in there,
but also at higher pay, they,
also take out more. So, Madam
Vice Chair Chair, um, the other
thing is what happens uh and,
and this is a real question,
sometimes we have to be nimble,
right? Um, we've seen in the
past where um our budget gets
stifled tremendously, and
there's all of a sudden this
pullback of, let's just say oil.
Prices just go down. We have a
major impact. Do you worry that
By us codifying $15 an hour,
which, you know, if they had to
come back.
And this is a real question.
Would it, are you afraid that it
would cause layoffs rather than
them adjusting everyone's pay
down a little bit to keep more
people on and maybe pull back
just a little bit. I'm not
saying we'd want to do that. I'm
just saying what happens if we
got in a situation where we say,
I'd rather have, I don't know,
keep.
Um
More of the employees and pull
back a little bit of their pages
so that we can survive this dip
or do we codify it and say, hey,
stuck, well we're stuck with
that now we have to lay off a
few people. Is that something
that you'd like to address?
OK share representative, um,
I've been thinking about this
since we discussed this
yesterday and I truly $15 an
hour is so far below the minimum
living wage that I believe if
the legislature or executive did
want the ability to drop pay
below $15 an hour, those
employees would probably leave
anyway for another higher paying
job. It's just not a competitive
salary anymore, Madam Chair.
Vice representative, I think
that we also have to be
cognizant of the federal.
Uh, wage and salary laws.
That kick in because I think
there's a federal protection
that indicates that when you're
at a certain level.
Um, it's a violation of.
That law, that particular law,
to reduce an employee's salary,
and so there, there are a lot of
factors that are associated with
this, so it, it's hard to second
guess, but it's not even a
living wage. So we're already
having a cycle of problems, and
this will just continue to
exasperate exacerbate Madam, I
should have been a little more
specific. They'll probably cut
hours is what they'll do.
Or positions. So if that
happened rather than hey, I
should have been more specific.
So, madam, uh, I'm gonna move on
because we got other bills, uh,
the remote work.
Is there any exemptions to the
rule now, Madam Vice chair
chair.
To that rule where you can
remote, I would imagine there's
some, so is there any remote
work being done currently?
Or is it an absolute no?
Madam Vice Chair and
Representative, um, there is
some remote work. So for
example, um, I used the example
of the public regulation
commission, um,
Uh, PRC earlier, they have what,
what is called deployed workers,
um, you know, who have a laptop,
a vehicle, and they, they work
out of a home office and or
there are such. Um, there are
also, um, a number of, of
agencies who are allowing, uh,
remote work for ADA
accommodations. However, we have
had, um, uh, for, for agencies
under the executive, a lot of
those people who have applied
for those with
medical conditions. We have had
to refer to organizations like
Disability Justice New Mexico
for representation, uh, when
agencies have refused to
consider their accommodations.
So, so yes, there are some
already remote working, uh, but,
um, it is, it is limited.
Madam Vice Chair, Chair, I mean,
they're already, most people
you're saying, OK, based on the
record that you said most do you
think?
You're not sure 100%, but you
think that that because of what
we passed.
Um, everybody's at $15 an hour
and that's where we're at today.
Um, and my, and so.
I, I'm comfortable with that
because you're already there.
The state is obviously um uh
budgeted for that and stuff, and
I'm OK with the accrual, which
would be 10 days, right, Madam
Madam Vice chair chair, 10 days
is what we're talking about,
right? Or leave.
Cruels
Ma'am Iceho representative, we,
we currently have 10 days. We're
asking for 15
and then um I'm sorry, I didn't
catch that. And then um
And then you have some uh
parental leave, which I'm fine
with that.
Uh, the remote work I have a
heartburn on it and I think we
talked about that, um, Madam
Vice Chair, um, because I just,
I think each department should
already, I know you're saying.
They, they, we should give it to
them, but they're, it's already
there, and I think that's, I
think what worries me about that
is
Where
in the private sector when we
have people that are, it's hard
for us to, cause there's just
some sometimes us working
together here and all of us,
Madam vice chair, chair,
remember what we went through
through COVID, trying to have
these meetings, they're
terrible. It was very, very
hard.
And so you can't, I can't turn
around and say, hey, uh,
Representative Hall, what do you
think about this? or, or even
my, my colleagues across the the
aisle here for us, um,
especially Ortez and, and, and
be able to have a discussion
that are important, right?
And so we lose some of that. And
so I'm not a big fan of that.
That's, that's the only thing I
have to say. So, um, that's
pretty much all I've got to say
about that. Thank you.
Metal bikes here.
Are there any other questions
from the committee?
A movie you pass.
A second.
Alrighty, before we take the
role, um.
Madam vice chair said that she
wanted to, to offer some closing
statements. Do you still want to
do that?
For the um.
We do need to uh attract.
The best and brightest and try
to hold them and take care of
them.
And although I have a little bit
of gray hair in my beard, I'm
not that old, and
Oh, well.
52, man.
No, but what I'm saying is, is
we need to try and do some
things that, that'll work to,
to, to help our state and, and
I, I, I just hope that we don't
over.
That this legislation isn't
abused. That's the key for
remote learning and stuff.
We still have to, in my opinion,
still have to give the executive
and their departments, the the
ability, the agility.
To move of what the needs of
their departments are.
It's important because it's
think of yourself as a as a
Uh, manager or something, and
then somebody forces you to do
something and you know that you
could do better, um, by
manipulating your department in
the ways that you best can serve
the the the.
The state and I hope that we do
reach a point where we can pick
up the phone as, as our
constituents can pick up the
phone and get a hold of these
departments.
That the phone isn't ringing
without a, without an answer.
We're our, our phones, our phone
calls and messages are being
answered. I think that's very,
very important.
And so thank you very much, um,
Madam Vice Chair, Chair.
Uh, for this, and, and, and
again, I, I vote like that with
with caution, and we'll see
where this goes. Thank you very
much.
Madam. Thank you all and um I'm
sure you have the next bill.
26 and 4 246. I'm sorry,
sorry.
Thank you.
Get the right pronouncement of
the
Expert's name.
OK.
I'm ready to go.
Yeah. Madam Chair, you ready?
OK, go ahead. So, um, I am here
once again before you, vice
chair and members of the
committee to present House Bill
246. Before I do that, I do, uh,
want to notify you that there's
an amendment and um.
I think it's
We can go ahead if you want to
move it. Do, do we, do we have a
uh motion to move the amendment
for discussion, let's discuss
it, yes. Well that's what we're
doing.
Already.
Move for discussion. Do we have
a second?
2
Represented at the
on, on your go ahead and go
through. I'd rather her explain
her amendments and then, and
then we'll ask.
I will go ahead and um point
your attention to.
Um, I think they're clerical or
grammatical or uh corrections,
page 3 line 8 after the semi
semicolon, we're just inserting
4.
On page 3.
Line 12.
We are striking a semicolon and
and or and inserting.
In lieu of their period that was
not quite clear, but we're
inserting a period we're.
On page 4.
We're striking line 9 in its
entirety.
Which then continues to
Strike, which is the same page
4.
That whole section in its lines.
18 to 22.
So I will go ahead and um
Present
The bill.
So Madam Chair, I don't know if
there's any questions on the
amendment. Oh.
Represented Terazas, did you
have questions on the amendment?
Now's your chance.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. It's
mostly um Metavi your chair, the
uh
Line uh your 3rd and 4th.
Um
Requests her to strike.
It seems like it's all
agriculture, so what, what is
your, what is the uh intent of
that?
You should keep the uh web page
and line you're referring to
it's page 4, Madam Vice chair,
chair, uh, where you're, where
you're striking, basically
you're striking everything with
agriculture, um, here.
Um, you're taking it out.
Where it says page 4, line 9
strike its entirety, then you go
to page 4 strike.
818 through 22.
What is a
of that.
Uh, vice representative because
I want them to be included.
In the complete uh minimum wage
increase. What I'm asking you,
Madam Chair, then, I want to
make sure I got this right.
What you're saying is you're not
going to exempt agriculture at
all.
Uh, vice chair and
representative, that's correct.
Yeah
Madam Chai moved to adopt the
amendment?
022.
OK
So to take the role.
One more thing, uh, my vice
chair, do you know why we
currently
exempt agriculture.
I chair and representative, will
you explain?
Madam chairs cause it's, it's
the food prices and stuff, you
know, tremendously would, would
increase the, the cost of, of
food and stuff. And, and.
You know that that's the main
reason.
And agriculture has some special
exemptions.
Are you aware of that West vice
chair and representative I am.
That's why I said earlier that I
want everyone excluded. This is,
uh, and we'll, and when we go
into the discussion of the bill,
I'll further discuss. Thank you.
So let's go ahead and take uh
the vote clerk to call the roll.
Representative Anaya.
Uh, yes to the amendment.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Johnson.
Sorry, Representative Hall.
No.
All right, Representative
Johnson.
Representative Mejia.
No. Representative Ortiz, yes.
Representative Reed.
Representative Terazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Yes.
Vice Cha Chavez, yes.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
Madam Chair, on a vote of 6 to
3, the amendment has been
adopted.
We go ahead and explain the
bill.
So again, when I'm here to um
present the HB 246, which is to
increase the minimum wage, um,
we've had many efforts
throughout the years to increase
the federal minimum wage and
we're still locked in at $7.25
an hour.
And um we haven't been.
Experienced, uh, a race since
2009, I believe.
Uh, we in the state of New
Mexico took very proactive
measures back in 2019.
Uh in our increase of the
minimum wage, which took a tier
level approach and so the final
rays of $12 an hour actually
took uh became effective in
2023, which is important. New
Mexico has always been ahead of
the curve, and so in in many
things.
So currently we have no um raise
anticipated in the minimum wage.
It basically dropped off at $12
an hour. So there's no
expectation on the part of our
workforce, um, for any type of
increase and um other than the
$12 an hour, which.
Became effective in 2023.
Consequently, we are looking at
a wage that will remain
stagnant, sort of what.
Vice chair. We've experienced
both at the federal level and
for many, many years at the
state level.
So because of that, um,
There have been many, many
studies that have shown.
A living wage.
Is a different levels. They,
based on the state you live in
based on the um demographics.
This bill is increasing.
The minimum wage to $17 an hour.
And
In doing so, we are including a
consumer price index to this
bill.
Which will then remain removed.
Minimum wage from being stagnant
for any period of time, give our
workforce the expectation of
having an increase, it will
address the high inflation rates
that we're experiencing, which
is costing um our hard workers
and hardworking families in
additional um costs that that
were unexpected. Many of them,
um, vice chair and members of
the committee are still
struggling, uh, with.
2 or 3 jobs just to make ends
meet.
Because of the high prices. So
what we do is that um.
We're increasing it.
And then we're attaching it to
uh consumer price index increase
and would give the employees,
the workforce of our state.
The stability, the security, the
knowledge that while they
continue to be the backbone of
our economy that they will have
the expectation of an increase
and not have to, um, work 2 and
3 jobs in the future.
Again, this is not necessarily
the living wage that I, um,
would.
Anticipate or would like to do,
but it is a step in the right
direction and that's what this
bill does, uh, vice chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you.
Thank you Madam Chair, we are
going to uh go to Zoom.
All those in opposition on Zoom,
please raise your hand.
Anyone on Zoom in opposition?
OK
All righty, we're gonna go to
um.
Bill Lee and we will give
everyone in opposition 2
minutes.
On Zoom.
Billy, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Bill Lee, president and CEO of
the Galum McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce. We stand
opposed to HB 246, an extensive
survey conducted by the
Department of Economics,
University of California, Irvine
found consistent evidence that
increasing the minimum wage
creates job loss, especially for
those between the ages of 16 and
34. Proof of minimum wage
increases creating job loss can
be found in the recent
California minimum wage increase
to $20 an hour for fast food
restaurants as of April of last
year, 89.
of those employers reduced
employee hours, 73% limited
employee shifts to overtime and
70% reduced staff or consolidate
position. Our community small
businesses tell us they face
fierce competition in the
marketplace and they rely on
being able to be cost
competitive against the online
marketplace, raising the minimum
wage will force them to make job
cuts. Additionally, we point to
the irrefutable fact that
increasing the minimum wage only
serves to fuel inflation and
while your paycheck may reflect
an
larger amount overhead burden of
higher minimum wage simply gets
passed on to the consumer. Your
dollar simply won't go as far as
the checkout counter. Gal
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce urges you to oppose HB
246 or any legislation that
would increase the minimum wage
to preserve jobs in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, who do we have next on Zoom?
Carol Wright, go ahead.
Yeah
You're right. Are you there?
Madam Chair of the committee. My
name is Carol White. I'm the CEO
of the New Mexico Restaurant
Association. I represent 3600
restaurants in New Mexico. I
want to illustrate the financial
burden of HB 246 on a small
restaurant with just 20
full-time employees. Under this
proposal, server wages would
increase by $14 per hour. This
change alone would cost the
restaurant with only 10 servers,
an additional 2
$91,000 in payroll annually. On
top of that, the increase for
back of the house employees in
this bill would add another
$104,000. Together, a small
restaurant would face an
increase of $395,000 to their
annual payroll. This is an
unsustainable burden. They would
be forced to lay off employees,
reduce hours and raise prices.
Still, with the labor cost
increase this steep.
Many will not make it.
As far as the removal of the
server wages concerned a recent
survey of 3700 tipped restaurant
workers found that 87% fear
their earnings would drop, or
they might lose their jobs if
their employers had to pay $17
an hour. 90% of servers say the
current system is their first
choice. The survey data is
crystal clear, tipped employees
overwhelmingly prefer the
current credit payment system
and they don't want it to
change. We would be happy
to discuss a reasonable increase
with an annual CPI increase, but
this bill goes too far. We
desperately ask that you oppose
this bill, thinking about those
small restaurants in your
districts.
Thank you.
Thank you. Who do we have next
on Zoom, please?
Deborah.
You're next, go ahead.
Thank you. Uh,
Madam Chair in the committee, my
name is Deborah Dowds, and I'm
the executive director of the
Riodo Sovale Chamber of
Commerce. We are in opposition
to House Bill 246, an increase
in the minimum wage would pose
an undue burden on our small
businesses. We're still
struggling following the
devastating fires and flooding
we had, uh, last year. Um, I've
been in conversation with many
of our midtown merchants who are
um all small businesses and such
an increase in the
minimum wage could be the final
straw in the backs of our small
businesses, um, without our
small businesses, um, we won't
have jobs for employees, so um
we do request that you vote no
on this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Who's next?
Alex
I
What did you say Galaxy?
OK, uh, whoever is on Galaxy.
Uh, yeah, uh.
My name is Keith Bledsoe. I'm
very opposed to this bill, uh,
out here in the rural
communities, we have been
struggling just to keep our
small businesses open, and
That
Simple,
few dollars raise.
is going to be the straw that
broke the camel's back. Uh,
We cannot afford higher wages
out here, and we're just
struggling just to keep
business. It may be fine in the
cities where they get much more
people, but I have noticed our
restaurants around here have
fewer people now, and everything
else because they had to raise
their prices already.
And if they have to raise them
again, how long are they going
to be in business?
This is a very big
Uh, small business killer.
Uh, thank you very much.
Nina, you're next.
Please go ahead.
Hi, um, I'm with the National
Restaurant Association and just
simply want to say on the record
our opposition, but I defer um
all comments to the New Mexico
Restaurant Association, which
directly um represents the
industry in your state, um, but
just wanted to go on the record
and say our opposition. Thank
you. Thank you.
David, you're next, please go
ahead.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
can you hear me OK?
All right. My name is David
Galloway, and I'm speaking in
opposition to this bill as an
individual, uh, I am 27 years
old and I'm newly married, uh,
while my wife and I are not
currently making minimum wage,
we, like many young couples, are
feeling the weight of rising
costs.
This bill proposes a $17 minimum
wage, an amount that's not far
from what I make after many
years of hard work, gaining
experience and developing my
skills. The idea that somebody
with no experience, education,
or specialized abilities could
earn nearly the same amount is
not just unfair, it's downright
offensive. It undermines the
value of hard work and my
personal growth as I would
assume there's a lot of other
people who feel the same.
same way. Aside from my emotions
tied with the proposal, the fact
is that rising wages, this
drastically will give up will
drive up prices on essentials
like groceries, rent and
utilities, making it even harder
for families like mine to try
and get ahead and to go even
further, businesses are gonna
have to cut hours, reduce jobs,
or pass higher costs onto
consumers, leaving many working
families worse off than they
were before. So if we want to
truly help
struggling New Mexicans, we
should focus on reducing the
cost of living, not passing more
policies like these that just
make everything else more
expensive. For these reasons and
more, I strongly urge, uh, each
of you to vote no on this bill.
Thank you for considering my
comments.
Thank you.
Carla, you're next. Go ahead,
please. I was so nervous.
Carla, you're next.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
It's actually Larry Sontag here.
Can you hear me?
We should focus on reducing the,
can you hear me, madam? We can
hear you, yes, OK. It's Larry
Sontag here on behalf of the New
Mexico Business Coalition
opposing House Bill 246, a
minimum wage increase to $17 an
hour with automatic yearly
increases while raising wages
may seem like a positive step.
The bill sponsor mentioned the
trouble that working.
individuals are having with
inflation, and the young man
that just testified also
mentioned that non-market driven
government mandates increase
expenses that trigger a cycle of
rising costs.
The businesses are forced to
increase qualifications
or work or performance, they
must raise prices to cover these
expenses. As a result, workers
will find that higher wages
don't stretch further as the
cost of essentials like.
Also climb. This undermines the
intended benefits of wage
increases and further strains
businesses and employees. NMBC
believes blanket wage mandates
are unnecessary and harmful to
small businesses that are
striving to grow and support
their communities.
House Bill 246 would do more
harm than good, hurting New
Mexico families and the small
companies they rely on.
We urge you to vote no.
Thank you.
The Santa Fe Chamber of Commerce
is next. Please go ahead.
Madam Chair and member of the
committee, my name is Bridget
Dixon, and I serve as the
president and CEO of the Sanofi
Chamber of Commerce,
representing over 600 businesses
in our community. I appreciate
the opportunity to speak with
you today. I strongly oppose
House Bill 246, I accidentally
called instead of I, I texted
you while raising the minimum
wage to $17 per hour. This bill
would put immense financial
strain on small businesses,
particularly in the restaurant
and hospitality industries.
In Santa Fe, 80% of businesses
fewer than 10 employees. This is
also true in many communities
across the state. Small
businesses are the backbone of
our economy, but they've been
hit hard in recent years by the
pandemic, inflation, and raising
costs. Restaurants in particular
operate a very thin profit
margin, typically 3 to 5% and a
sharp increase in labor costs
would leave them with few
options. Many would be forced to
raise prices, cut staff, or even
close their doors.
For many business owners, this
isn't just a policy change, it's
a breaking point. I urge you to
consider these consequences and
reject House Bill 246. Let's
work together towards solutions
that balance fair wages with the
ability of businesses to survive
and thrive. Thank you.
Thank you. And let me remind the
folks who are on Zoom, if you're
not speaking, please mute
yourselves.
How's next?
Smith.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, madam Chair and
committee. I apologize. I'm in
the roundhouse and I, my one
hearing just came out. I'm
calling, I, I'm calling in to,
to oppose 246 because I think of
my dear friend Mary Newell in
Portales, New Mexico, who has
one of the most popular and most
beloved restaurants, Courthouse
Cafe and Portales. Everybody
loves going there. It's a
wonderful business. She gives
back to the community. She
employs several of our college
students and right now between
the economy
that we're in. And now facing
another minimum wage hike. She's
faced with possibly having to
close her doors. Mary told me
she's already choosing not to
take.
Very much if any profit for
herself at all right now.
Everything she's doing is she's
doing to keep her doors open and
why is she doing that for her
employees. She's choosing to
take very little to no profit
for herself so that she can keep
her doors open for her
employees. And right now,
Eastern is having, is struggling
with drawing more college
students because we've been told
there's not enough jobs for
those college students. That's a
problem. This bill could
effectively
Courthouse Cafe to finally close
and some of our other
businesses, it would have a
devastating effect on our
community. Please vote no on
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right. So we're gonna go to
the audience, all those who are
opposed, please raise your
hands.
All righty.
Um,
little bit quicker.
Members of the committee, thank
you. My name is Jared Taylor. I
represent a locally owned
restaurant. We have 3 New Mexico
locations and 171 New Mexico
employees. Uh, we fear the
unintended consequences of this
bill, uh, from everything
mentioned to raising prices, uh,
closing doors, what we
specialize in, what we provide
to the community is the
hospitality angle. We provide a
place to escape all that's going
on in the world and coming.
relax with us and have a great
time, great food, great drinks.
Uh, what this bill and the
unintended consequences would do
was take away that motivation
for our employees to go above
and beyond and take care of you
and provide that world-class
customer service experience. Uh,
we fear that, uh, our employees,
as mentioned by Miss Carol
Wright, um, they make way more
than $17 an hour as currently
constituted with the tipped
wage. Uh, we encourage you to
vote against removing the tipped
wage because what we provide to
our community.
is so valuable
to be able to provide that to
you, our neighbors, all New
Mexicans. Thank you.
OK
Good afternoon, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee,
Travis Day, a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Chile Association, the, uh,
we're here to stand a respect
for opposition of the bill, the
immediate increase to $17 an
hour will trigger a reaction
from big box businesses to
reduce contract prices to chili
processors for their value added
goods.
On top of that, the elimination
of the agricultural processor
exemption will require a chili
processor processors to meet the
new $17 an hour wage, forcing
them to purchase chili from our
farmers at a lower contract
price to offset higher labor
expenses.
The chili farmer who was locked
into the contracts will now have
to take on the financial burden
of $17 an hour minimum wage for
their employees and decrease
contract prices.
At the end of it, the big box
stores will continue to make
profits while our farmers,
processors, and consumers will
feel the burden of the increased
minimum wage. The legislature
has a choice to tackle
inflationary costs of goods to
benefit consumers, or make it
more expensive to do business in
New Mexico, but both cannot be
done at the same time.
Please vote no on this bill.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Abby O'Connor, and I'm a
5th generation rancher from
Stanley, New Mexico, and I also
represent the New Mexico Cattle
Girs Association.
Cattle growers opposes HB 246.
Quite frankly, it is an attack
on agriculture. They essentially
wholesale amendments to the
minimum wage exception
exemptions for agriculture are
unexplained and unwarranted.
Agriculture producers are small
business owners who are unable
to absorb these costs. We are a
price takers in the agriculture
industry and when costs go up,
we cannot raise our prices. It
is typical for the ag industry
to provide other
benefits to our employees, such
as housing, sides of beef,
vehicles, etc. and with this
bill we will most likely have to
strip these added benefits from
our employees just to add on to
their minimum wage requirements.
It also removes the family
member exemptions immediately,
immediate family members to farm
owners, such as spouses, kids,
parents, they will all now have
to follow this law as well,
respectfully, cattle girls
opposes this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, which also opposes
this legislation. This bill is
proposing a 42% increase in the
minimum wage rate.
That means this is a 42%
increase in a significant sector
of your, of your labor costs.
You've heard what restaurant
margins are.
Almost always in, in single
digits, way, way below 10%.
This creates a significant
burden on small businesses. We
all know that they have very few
options. They can relocate, they
can raise their prices, which is
what they would absolutely have
to do here.
Place people with technology.
Or reduce employees and cut
hours and for small businesses,
it's almost always going to be,
you got to raise your, raise
your prices, or you're gonna
have to reduce hours and get in
there and work yourself. So the
chamber feels this bill proposes
a significant
burden on small business and
that's why Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Mark Scherer. I'm with
Clark and Carlsbad. We are a
Medicaid provider for
individuals with developmental
disabilities.
I oppose this legislation on the
basis that this, this gonna cost
me a minimum of $176,000 just to
bring people up to 17, not to
mention the cost of doing the
accordion effect for people who
are at 17 and a little above.
But this money is not in my
Medicaid.
Funding
So I don't know where it's gonna
come from. So does that mean I
have to close some homes and not
provide services to individuals
with developmental disabilities.
Or does it mean I go out of
business? Which one is it?
In addition,
We have a child daycare program.
It's very small.
Uh, it's very needed in the
community.
This increase
Will result in a necessary
increase of at least 15%.
My daycare rates.
Which
So many people came in with for
them already.
So this bill has many unintended
consequences.
I, I would ask you to vote no on
the bill or at a minimum amend
it so that Medicaid providers
are made whole for this increase
and the continuing annual
increases to come. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza state
director with the National
Federation of Independent
Business. We do stand in
opposition to the legislation.
Uh, what are the things that we
think this bill fails to really
take into consider consideration
is the diverse nature of our
small businesses across New
Mexico, especially given our
geography with rural businesses.
You know, a big business in an
urban area has a much different
um outlook and profitability and
structure than a small
restaurant, a small business in
rural New Mexico. Uh, this with
taking away the exemptions in
many cases for many different
industries, uh, in skills, you
know, this one size fits all
approach really doesn't work for
New Mexico. We have a distinct
culture, a distinct diverse
business community here and we
need to recognize that in the
legislation. Uh, additionally,
the CPI does not have an annual
cap that
takes into account. So we look
at these past 5 years with what
we've experienced across the
country in the world with
inflation at historic highs, uh,
we could see 6% increases in the
minimum wage year to year,
potentially, um, that creates a
lot of volatility and
unpredictability in the for
small businesses to uh take into
account as well. So we do stand
in strong opposition. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
I'm Jerry Shallow, president and
CEO of the Rio Rancher Regional
Chamber and an officer for the
New Mexico Chamber Association.
We stand opposed to HB 246,
increase in the minimum wage is
$17 an hour may seem like a step
forward for workers, uh for
small towns and rural areas it's
gonna have serious consequences.
Many small businesses
In these regions already operate
with small and thin profit
margins, and a sudden wage hike
could lead to increased costs
and services.
As a result, businesses may be
forced to reduce staff, raise
prices, or even close their
doors altogether.
For small communities with
limited job opportunities, this
could lead to higher
unemployment rates and
employment instability.
Moreover, small town economies
rely on local businesses that
cannot absorb the same wage
increases as large corporations
in major cities.
In addition, something to keep
in mind.
If you have noticed that you're
coming from another area of the
state. This is why higher
minimum wage is why a Big Mac
combo in Santa Fe is $5 more
than Clovis.
That being said,
Instead of raising the minimum
wage of $17 an hour, we should
focus in on creating sustainable
job opportunities that will
support small businesses and
ensure long-term growth in rural
areas. Please vote no on HB 246.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Kelly Fajardo,
I'm here representing the New
Mexico Farm and livestock
Bureau. I just want to clearly
articulate the profound
implications that this bill can
have on our agriculture sector.
We really don't understand why
the exemptions were removed for
us. This bill could drastically
increase operation cost for
farms across to Mexico. Under
under the provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act,
agricultural workers have
historically been from certain
wage requirements, a measure
that has been crucial to
managing operational expenses.
The proposed increase in the
minimum wage will place an
enormous strain on small farms
across across New Mexico.
Research indicates that a mere
10% hike.
In the minimum wage translates
as 6% reduction in in urban
farms, and an 8% reduction in
rural farms.
It's important to consider that
the their Labor Standards Act,
which this bill does not
It's not unique. This bill does
not recognize the seasonal
nature of agricultural work,
which is inherently consistent
throughout the year. HP 246
seems to overlook these critical
aspects applying broad strokes
that fail to account for the
nuances of agricultural. This
this oversight could lead to
significant financial hardships
during off-peak seasons.
Good afternoon, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. Um, first of all, I'd
like to thank the chair for
letting everyone in the room
speak. Therefore, a lot of my
points have already been taken,
so I'll keep it brief. While we
do understand the goal of
raising minimum wage is to help
workers. Studies show the
contrary in that when labor
costs rise and small businesses
are forced to cut jobs and cut
hours, it hurts these employees
and their families who rely on
stable, predictable earnings.
Inflation leading to rising
costs can be particularly
harmful in rural and low income
communities where small
businesses already struggle to
compete. So for these and all
the reasons previously stated,
the chamber stands in
opposition. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
thank you much for your time. I
am Chris Altman. I've been
working in restaurants since the
late 80s, so nowhere near
millennial status at all. Um,
2/3 of that, I was a tipped.
Employee, either a server or a
bartender.
Uh, I am now in management, and
I would like to urge you to vote
no on this from my hometown
Seattle, where we've gone
through this. Many restaurants
have already shuttered their
doors since the beginning of the
year. Uh, 10% of those are
contributed to uh removal of the
tax uh the tip credit and the
higher wages, jobs have been cut
out. They no longer have hosts
or bussers, and sometimes
servers. Uh, we are going to be
losing jobs if you
vote yes for this, especially
without the tip credit included.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Madame Chair, members.
You know, I'm
I'm here just to share with you
my experience. Uh, I think that
it's a good intention behind
this bill and not having it out,
but I think that this bill that
they will do is gonna hurt the
restaurant industry.
I've been in the restaurant
industry for 35 years, working
as you can imagine, 40 hour
days.
I got a stroke a few years ago,
came back to work. I've been
struggling with so many things,
but this bill is not going to
help anybody. It's only gonna
hurt especially the small
communities.
You know, and I, like I said, I
know that your intention is
good, but as well, the credit
tips, you know, yeah, you say,
well, what we are paying, you
know, but there are many
expenses that we have to cover
in, in the, the workers, they
are making a very decent income
in Santa Fe.
And like I said, you know, in
other small communities, you
really will kill businesses.
We'll get a lot of unemployment.
If that's what, what you try to
pretend, go ahead.
My recommendation is please vote
not for the bill. Thank you for
listening. Sir, will you please
state your name for the record.
Uh, my name is Fernando Olia.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association and New Mexico
Center for Assisted Living.
I just want to point out in to
the committee and have them as
you consider this piece of
legislation, the impact that it
has on long term care providers
who rely heavily on Medicaid
rates to fund their their
operations.
If you want there, we represent
64 of the 68 nursing facilities
in the state. If you were to
walk into any one of those 64
nursing facilities, on average,
67% of the residents in those
nursing facilities are Medicaid
beneficiaries.
That is 60 that translates to
65, 67% of revenue based on
Medicaid rates. Keep in mind
that those Medicaid rates for
nursing facilities have not been
re-based since 2007, but
rebasing does is get nursing
facility Medicaid rates, which
are established by the state up
to what their costs are to
operate.
Therefore, since 2007, we have
not had, they have not had that
rebasing done.
According to the healthcare
authority, it's, there's a $90
million Delta.
Between what it costs to operate
a nursing facility.
All nursing facilities in the
state to what the Medicaid rates
are. Therefore, please
understand that this is, this
will require
Nursing facilities to take
whatever portion of them of
their Medicaid rate that they
have now to to instead putting
it towards resident care access.
To uh funding uh uh this
increase. We would ask if you
would please consider some type
of Medicaid rate offset in order
to ensure access to long term
care for
Folks in New Mexico. Thank you.
All right, we're gonna go to
Zoom, um, and hear from those
who support the bill.
Ba year before you do that, I
failed and when you finish, but
I wanted to, um, mention that I
failed to introduce the expert
witness that is on Zoom because
I thought they had not connected
yet. So whenever we're ready, I
just wanted to mention that. OK.
Thank you. All right. Thank you.
Aaron
Here
Karen, you, um, can go ahead.
Yes, I wanted to speak in
support of the bill. My name is
Karen Martinez. I'm from Re Riba
County, and I'm tired of seeing
my neighbors having to work 2 or
3 jobs just to survive and also
be on food stamps. It is
exploitation from their
employers that don't want to pay
living wages. I think it's
necessary um to
Increase wages so that they can
be able to live. I've also seen
some research from Upjohn
Institute, showing how raising
minimum wages has little impact
on inflation. Um,
And I would like to see you guys
move this bill forward and do
pass. Thank you.
Judy
You're next, please go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Vice chair and members of the
committee. I'm Judy Messel
speaking on behalf of the
Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches. We
strongly support House Bill 246.
We applaud the efforts to assure
that working people have
sufficient sustainable
livelihoods. We remember our
appreciation of essential
workers during the pandemic.
Many of whom earned low wages,
especially agricultural workers.
Decent pay is a step toward
alleviating food insecurity and
other markers of low wage lives.
Please support House Bill 246.
Thank you.
Emma, you're next, please go
ahead.
Madam Chair, my name is Emma
O'Sullivan for the New Mexico
Center on Non-poverty. We thank
the sponsor for this bill. We
support this bill because work
should pay at least enough that
workers can meet their basic
needs, and minimum pay is a
minimum protection that should
apply to all workers. The
current minimum wage is too low.
It has not increased in 2 years.
The increases we've all seen in
the cost of living, not only
have low wage workers' wages not
gone up, but their buying power
has actually gone down, and too
many workers are excluded from
even this basic.
Protection of the current
minimum wage. In particular,
many people whose hard work
creates the food all of us eat
are excluded from our state
minimum wage. This bills
increased to the minimum wage
and continuing increases to keep
up with the cost of living would
help make sure that low wage
workers are able to put food on
their tables, clothes on their
backs, pay for housing, and
provide for themselves and their
families. In addition, it would
bring agricultural, ranch, and
dairy workers and others who
process food with within this
very basic guarantee, so that
workers who provide everyone
else with their
basic necessities are more able
to meet their own basic
necessities. Thank you.
You shot your next. Please go
ahead and I hope I pronounced
your name correctly.
Can you hear me?
Yeah, we can hear you.
OK, so I would like to support
this bill, I guess I feel like,
uh, you know, uh, it should be
increased, uh, which is uh the
price of grocery and all the
stuff is increasing, so it's not
possible for, you know, all the
people to afford this. So I
really want to support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
That's it.
OK, we're gonna go to the room
now all in favor please raise
your hands.
Alrighty. Um, why don't you go
ahead and line up where the
microphone is and we'll go ahead
and start.
Madam Chair, madam chair,
members of the committee, Carter
Bundy with asks me, um.
There aren't many benefits to
getting older. I just had
physical therapy for my knee.
But one of them is, you can
remember these bills and these
arguments year after year.
I was Speaker Ben Lohan's lead
lobbyist in 2007.
When we raised a long stagnant
minimum wage that was $5.15
to 750 an hour. It was done over
a couple of years.
But that was a 46% increase.
All of the exact same arguments
were made then.
None of them came true.
Unemployment in the state of New
Mexico dropped that first year.
From 4.0.
To 3.5%.
I have no doubt that the
opponents are sincere in their
fears.
Their predecessors and frankly,
a couple of people I think.
Said the exact same thing.
Exactly 18 years ago.
So, um, just to make sure that,
you know, that that's not just
not my recollection. Um, there
is in fact a recent study that
evaluated 21 minimum wage
studies, and this is from the
Economic Policy Institute, and
of those 21 minimum wage
studies, and they all evaluate
unemployment because that's the
thing people have the biggest
fear about.
One showed a large negative
impact on unemployment.
One showed a medium negative
impact on unemployment. 7 showed
a small negative impact on
unemployment, and 12 of the
studies showed a positive impact
and if I could just share a
classic story briefly when
Lewiston.
Idaho and Clarkston, Washington.
When Washington raised their
minimum wage by about $3 an
hour. What they found is
employment went up in Washington
state, and that side of the
river crossing because the
people in Idaho, nobody wanted
to work for the low wage
employers. So they all went over
there and that's where all the
good restaurants and bars and
everything else were, so.
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is Lindsay Hurst.
I'm currently serving as the
executive vice president of CWA
Local 7076.
Our union represents state
employees at 13 state agencies,
about 3000 positions. Our union
bargained increases in January
2022 for FY 2023 that brought
state employees pay up to a
minimum of $15 per hour. Since
that time, CPI has increased on
average 6% in 2022.
3.2% in 2023 and 2.8% in 2024.
We often talk about the impact
of compounding in reference to
investment interest. Compounding
effect of pay that does not keep
up with inflation cannot be
ignored in the right in the face
of rising, the rising price of
housing, food, and
transportation.
We believe that tying the state
minimum wage to inflation with
automatic increases indexing is
critical for the, for the
survival of New Mexico families.
We would like our working
colleagues across the state to
be paid a living wage that is
reflective of the actual cost of
living.
Please pass House Bill to
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. As you know, I'm
Megan Greene, president of CWA
Local 7076. I'm also speaking on
this bill on behalf of the CWA
Legislative Council, which
represents all CWA locals across
the state. It's approximately
5000 members. So I wanna share a
few numbers to put this bill
into perspective. If you're not
familiar MIT has a living wage
calculator, they update the data
every year based on cost of
living. The living wage for one
adult, uh, in New Mexico. It's
across the state, who has to pay
pay for their own expenses is
$21 an hour. For a family of 2
adults with 2 children, 2 adults
both working, the living wage
for both those adults would need
to be making us $26 an hour.
This is based on data. This is
obviously significantly higher
than the 17 that was proposed
here. With that, I'll say, um
with my brother Carter said,
it's disappointing year after
year to come here and hear the
bosses, the business owners and
the lobbyists show up, but the
workers themselves.
Don't have the financial
resources or time to show up
here and advocate for
themselves, leaves a very small
few of us in union roles to do
that work for them. So we are
here on their behalf, asking for
you to pass this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, John
Lipschutz with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor. Heard some
great comments so far, uh, about
this issue. Uh just a couple of
quick things. First of all, um,
a little history lesson by uh by
Carter Bundy over here. It's
just year after year, it seems
like we have these battles and,
and we have two different sides.
We have business side, we have
worker side. And I just want to
speak for, for all workers.
Workers are not anti-business.
We're not, and I know business
is not anti-workers. This is,
this is, I, I, I think what we
have seen with this discussion
and, and sometimes we do see
these with other discussions is
there has to be room for
discussion. There has to be room
for understanding. And as I
heard from some of the
opposition testimony, there was
even some talk about, let's talk
about things that could be
passed.
That being said,
You know, at $170 an hour wage
is still far below a living
wage, and there are only certain
factors that you as a
legislature can control when it
comes to, you know, how people
live. Cost of living is, you
know, you have some control over
that, but a lot of that is
dictated by much bigger factors,
inflation.
We have a federal government
that claims that they can cure
inflation. That is not
happening. I'm not sure how much
you all could do to cure
inflation either. One thing you
can't control is how much people
are paid, and if that is in your
control, it is clear that you
all are responsible for trying
to help those that that need the
help the most. We have the 3rd
highest, uh, poverty wage in the
country and or poverty rate in
the country, and by
ensuring a larger minimum wage,
which is still not a living
wage, we could chip away at that
and understanding that so much
more is out of your control. So
for that reason, we thank the
sponsor for uh proposing this,
what I consider monicum rays in
the wage and good afternoon,
vice chair, committee members,
and chair.
I'm Ann Keller with the CWA uh
the treasurer. I'm here as a
member of the CWA and as myself.
I see
Every day, people who are
suffering from the lack of
Monetary resources and
Um
It is visible, having the 3rd
highest poverty rate, um, in, of
all the states.
I think it's important that we
try to support our fellow.
Humans
And
Um, a living wage or the
beginning of a living minimum
wage.
Is one way to do that. I think
it's an important step.
So I encourage you to support
this. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, would you like
to introduce your expert witness
at this time? Yes, please. Thank
you, um, vice chair.
The um extra witness that will
be um assisting me today. His
name is Landon Giacchino.
And he is with the National
Council of State conference of
State Legislators. He's a policy
associate.
And uh when I failed to
recognize him earlier because I
thought he was on, I'd like to
go ahead and ask uh Mr. Jack and
to go ahead and um write.
Opening statement at this time.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee, uh, my, oh,
camera's over here. Uh, my name
is uh Landon Jaqueno. I'm a
policy associate with the
National Conference of State
Legislatures, um, as you may or
may not know, the National
Conference of State
Legislatures, uh, provides
nonpartisan research and um
Testimony and all of these
things for states. Um, I cannot
say whether I support or oppose
the legislation, um, but I can,
um, talk about it in context,
uh, compared to other states.
Um, if necessary, I, I can, um,
I had some maps prepared if, if
you'd want to see those and just
uh
How
which states uh have above the
federal minimum wage as well as
with states do the automatic
indexing to the consumer price
index, um, but I'm also open for
questions now, um, instead of
doing the presentation.
Thank you.
All right, we're gonna go to
questions from the committee.
Uh, Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Ms. Beer.
Madam Vice Chair, I'm sorry.
I have this question.
In addition to the impact this
minimum.
wage increase will have on small
businesses on service
industries.
How this will impact.
State funded groups like
childcare facilities or Medicaid
providers.
Uh, that of chair and
representative.
I think that um I think it will
have an overall positive impact.
I think that we're going to be
able to address our uh high, um,
turnovers are failure to be or
have vacancy rate, uh, our
inability to retain.
Our inability to recruit.
Our workforce we've heard from
state agencies. If anything's
happening, we cannot hear it.
Oh, closer.
Who is saying that though,
that's anyway.
Um
Are we OK?
Anyway, I will continue, um.
We've been hearing from agencies
across the state from businesses
from the from everybody across
the state about the high in the
inability to recruit and retain
and maintain a healthy and
secure and productive workforce
and um my position and it is the
position that has been
articulated by many others is
that.
Providing a living wage actually
is, um,
The strongest.
Way in which we can. Were you,
were you not able to hear me,
madam Chair, Madam vice chairs
and members of the committee.
Part of
Um
Vice chair, do you think we have
enough of a break time to for me
to.
OK.
Go ahead and take a quick break
so we can figure out.
Um
Zoom and webcast, yes.
