Representative.
I across.
Vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair here.
Madam chair with that we have
six president and three.
Either absent or excuse great
thank you let's go ahead and
start we do have some items on
our agenda which we only have
about forty five minutes to
address so I don't see
Representative Anderssen.
Are there yes great.
So I'm going to let him in.
Thank you madam chairman.
Madam chairman did you hear me I
did it welcome thank you madam
chairman and also with this is
Representative Madrid who will
be leading off today on that
let's see this is house bill one
oh three okay we will get he is
here welcome Representative
Madrid.
Getting muted.
Madam chairman.
Good morning good to see you
good to see you all members of
the committee as well.
We are on house bill one oh
three please begin when you're
ready.
Thank you madam chair and
committee this is a a simple
idea that I think cat got
cleaned up and made better for
our state that deserve providing
an added categories and
certification services to
utility operators on the
certification act providing late
fees providing definitions and
establishing fees and basically
what this is in rural in terms
it's our facilities and have of
the certification process that
are needed presently there was
only been like three times or
three locations of our state so
many times we've had to pay per
diem and mileage for the people
to go in and then miss days of
work which makes our facilities
somewhat normal to to the
necessities that they have
however it's essential for the
certifications so through the
great efforts of a workforce
employment commission we're
working with them for them to
provide the services throughout
our state so now we got better
opportunity in the rural areas
was why are million excited
about this is that it begins to
assist our people in the rural
areas of the state they won't
have to troubles for more missed
days of work or per diem that
being said I like to reduce my
witnesses.
Rebecca Roose.
She's.
And then a good chief.
Of the New Mexico.
Bermel Department Joe Martinez
he's also another witness can we
have them aboard please.
Representative I heard you say
Joe Martinez and who was the
other one Rebecca Roose okay.
I knew that I just.
Okay.
We are.
Okay we got Joe Martinez on.
And now Rebecca.
I'd like to turn over to my
experts with Mr Martinez to
expand more on on this bill so
if I may be permanent thank you
madam chair yes welcome Mr
Martinez.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
present a couple of key
provisions to house bill one oh
three in addition to the
information that Representative
Madrid provided
I just want to go over a few a
few key provision simply put
this is adjustment fees for our
utility operator certification
program for the first time in
fifteen years these fees will
allow us to bring water and
wastewater certification exams
into the twenty first century by
allowing us to provide operators
with computer based exams at
convenient locations throughout
the state
we've been able to partner with
the department of workforce
solutions and the association of
boards of certification to offer
are these exams at twenty two
locations throughout New Mexico
and with these but these funds
with these fees that we're
proposing will be able to
find those those certification
exams well into the future
lastly I'll just mention that
this bill it is and the proposed
these are supported by the New
Mexico municipal league the New
Mexico association of counties
The New Mexico rural water
association New Mexico water
wastewater Association and the
New Mexico utility operator
certification advisory board
with that I will close my
comments and I welcome all
comments and questions from the
committee.
Thank you.
And M. is your other expert
going to speaker it issue
available for technical
questions okay will protect
records.
Madam chair we're ready for
questions thank you okay let's
go ahead and pull the audience
will keep it open for fifteen
seconds if you would like to
vote for or against house bill
one oh three the poll is now
open.
And we're going to close the
pool and five seconds.
Okay great the pool is closed we
have eight attendees for and
zero against the bill and now
we're gonna take public comment
but if I could just tell
everyone were on a very to very
limited amount of time so you
don't need to speak we did take
your you know your your vote by
Paul but if you do want to speak
up please don't be repetitive
and we're giving everyone one
minute so if you'd like to speak
please raise your hand and now
we have and we can take support
it doesn't appear that anyone is
in opposition joy just bars and
you are now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
we have met with New Mexico
Environment Department on this
bill we clearly see the value in
it it will provide more
resources statewide limit travel
costs and for those reasons and
much more we stand in support of
this bill.
Thank you Kathy you are now and
made it.
You'll have to limit yourself
Kathy.
I'm sorry Madam chair good
morning thank you I just want to
speak on behalf of the entire
advisory board.
For the tilde operator
certification program that we
are in full support and this
bill will allow us to offer
certification opportunities to
people statewide on you know
almost immediate basis and all
it's really and everybody else
is already said what I want to
say so you know it will benefit
everybody greatly thank you
great thank you bill Connor you
are now and muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
any my name's bill Connor and
executive director of New Mexico
rural water association we stand
in support of house bill one I'm
sorry historically operator
certification testing has been
done pretty much up and down the
I. twenty five corridor are very
close to it.
Which will lead to significant
costs for some operators
particularly in the far corners
of the State.
To to be able to attend testing
in New.
Travel expenses.
hotel expenses and and and some
of them it's very difficult to
be gone for like the time from
their systems so across a little
bit more to be offset by
savings.
And and efficiency.
The convenience.
Work thank you.
Thank you.
And just to give a fair
opportunity to anyone that would
like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Seeing none that we will go to
the committee.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and.
Representative Madrid in
Anderson for bringing this bill
forward.
So on this testing that they're
going to do is this mostly for
the.
For the is there is there any
physical stuff that they learned
in the testing and when you hold
this is test.
These locations in how you have
them in the past.
Do they are they held it water
treatment plant or something so
somebody can do something as a
goal learning or or is it all.
About the paperwork.
Electronics for imaging just
please.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative Zamora
typically the the way the tests
were done in the past they were
done on paper in large ballrooms
at hotel conference rooms were
upwards of two hundred operators
would be in it sitting at one
time taking the test so that was
the normal operating normal way
of doing that there's no
physical
testing requirements were there
physically are looking at pumps
and motors or anything like that
it was all paper based test
previously.
Okay and madam chair and the
expert witness
appreciate that and you know
we've we've learned.
From our kids and their
schooling that in in the school
of the.
Seems like they do better in
person.
Do you feel like this might be
an issue for you as you go for.
Madam chair I think this this is
bringing it to a better
convenience of being able to
expand services and trainings
along with this because it's a
little closer for people to be
able to go to and I think at the
end of the day we're serving our
state better by having more
locations to be able to do it I
don't think the size is as much
the issue is the better after to
get into closer to these
facilities and having the
training is close so they can go
back to work and and our
facilities are being managed
correctly thank you.
All right Sir more.
Madam chair if I could jump in
this Representative Anderson
Representative.
Representative Zamora
this is really about
certification and taking the
test that is different than
training and you're correct
training cannot be an old video
of occurrence but just taking
the annual or bi annual of
certification exams for these
operators requires long distance
travel often overnight meals
mileage away from home all of
the above and so this is the
first step I believe in bringing
of.
The state government closer to
rural communities where they can
successfully gained of what it
is they need to get today and
get hold with the with their
wife and kids or whoever thank
you madam chair.
Okay madam chair that thank you
for that answer Representative
Anderson and one one more last
question does this cover all
levels of the of the job this is
for certain levels.
All that money thanks for
joining us.
Thank you madam chair and
representative somewhat out so
we have twenty two different
levels of certifications in our
utility operator program this
would cover every single one of
those certifications so these
these tests be for every single
one of those.
Okay thank you for that answer
thank you madam chair that
concludes on my questions.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair I'm having
difficulties I hope you can hear
me.
We can hear you we just can't
see you.
Yeah that's because I'm on my
phone now my I pad for some
reason I couldn't hear so okay
are being technologically
disadvantage I'm able to figure
all this out I do have several
questions madam chair and
they're probably fairly
technical and and so I'd like to
direct.
The representatives attention to
page three.
Line seven through nine.
That's the definition of late
penalty.
And and I'm going to read it
because my comments later on are
going to deal with this
definition I think there needs
to be a change but late penalty
means and monetary amount for a
renewal application.
That is received by the
department after the established
the deadline.
That.
Definition in mind so turning
over to page seven.
We we have a requirement to pay
section three of the top line to
Hey and jump down the line line.
To the Department all
applicables fees are picked at
the time the application is
submitted comma including a late
penalty comma.
Then it goes on so my first
comment is.
The way that's written is that
every time they pay it will
include a late penalty and I
don't think that's their intent
to madam chair and other
representatives is it.
Madam chair
throughout.
Regions.
Rebecca Roose apologize.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Madrid
Representative night we're
you're right that that's not our
intent that the late penalty it
would be required to be paid
each time and the operator
applies to take an exam it would
only apply when they're when
they're actually is a late fee
generated and I so you're
correct so line ten the word a.
Needs to be changed to and it.
If I understand your testimony
correctly so you pay those fees
including any late penalty that
may be do not including a late
penalty because of your budget
all time you shouldn't have to
pay like.
So the word a you should be
having.
Now.
Here's a second problem.
White penalty is defined as.
A monetary amount for a renewal
application received after the
sprout established three
deadline so that's.
The monetary amount it's it's
it's everything.
I don't think that Urinetown so
I think the definition of late
penalty needs to be revised
slightly decided.
The monetary amount imposed for
filing after the deadline it's
not the full amount it's only a.
An additional.
Imposition because you pay that
later that correct madam chair
and.
Representative.
All of our Rebecca Roose
requests please.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nighbor I your
correct that is in in your
understanding of the meaning of
late penalty yes.
Well what we'll do is defined
as.
A monetary amount for a renewal
application that is received by
the department after the
establish the deadline that's
that's not really a late penalty
that's this do you pay after the
renewal deadline and and I think
what you're trying to say is
that it's the monetary amount
imposed for filing after the
monetary or absolutely us
established a license an
additional amount not the full
amount so I think you need to
work on your definition.
Then let's look at lines twelve
through for a Levin through
fourteen of rate so.
Could you tell me what you're
trying to do Madam chair
representative with respect to
that.
Because it's after the COVID
online tomb.
Madam chair you store the
Rebecca Roose please.
Thank you madam chair
representative neighbor looking
at lines eleven to fourteen on
page seven of the bill and in in
plain language what we're
intending is that when so this
only applies to renewals so as
operator already has a level two
certification they and it's that
they're due to renew that if
they are late on their renewal
than this is a stab wishing that
the late fee is a would be
assessed monthly for up to a
year until they
submit their renewal application
as as they're required and it
doesn't go beyond the year
because at the end of that one
year period if they don't renew
within a year there
certification lapses and then
they would have to take an exam
again so this is intended to
demonstrate that the department
would assess a late penalty
eight each month.
no for no longer than a year.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of.
I was talk a long time ago that
whenever you see the work which
you better watch out because
it's not a word that the.
Is generally helpful but
if if that is the intent madam
chair.
And representative.
I would suggest that you put a
period after including any late
penalty and then explaining what
you're trying to do because.
Which shall be applied to a
certification renewal
application
Apparently that's modified late
penalty not the not the other
fees.
And I would I would think that
you would want to.
Of explaining that if you're
offended that is your intention
because it's not those for four
lines are are.
Very and they decide I could
tell you what you meant by those
four lines so I would.
Suggested to get some amendments
made to this bill the four years
on.
Our redefine late penalty.
Change a word A. two NE one
channel on page seven and work
on your language and lines
eleven through fourteen thank
you madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank you representative a
neighbor.
We're sorry we can't see you but
we can still hear you thank you.
Committee members.
We can do that.
Thank you.
I'm sorry.
I would really like to see on
the.
You know fix it before we move
in on where to move and stuff on
is a six the.
For a while now and it's only
gonna get worse if we if we keep
pass and stuff on that needs to
be corrected so I think they
have a roll it and just bring it
back for a real quick caring
later on Representative be my
opinion.
Madam chair.
Senate.
Thank you representative the
madam chair I think it's the
he's correct and we can do that
we can have it ready by Monday
good.
So we are Representative Madrid
let's go ahead and roll it and
then if you have those
amendments ready we can clean it
up on Monday you madam chair and
thank you committee thank you
Representative number for your
advice we appreciate it.
Thanks representatives and
experts.
Hi.
We will now move on to house
joint resolution to.
We have Representative el Cajon.
Representative welcome.
Thank you madam chair.
We hear you you folks so early
in the morning.
We're gonna have the Lee L.
Coleman show and and we got a
bill bomb so it's now the show
will go on so.
Sen on.
Chair of.
If you are ready I'm ready to
start with the House joy and
resolution non.
To yes please began.
And house resolution to is a
This proposed amendment of
article eight section fifteen of
the New Mexico constitution to
extend the current property tax
exemption of a hundred percent
disabled veterans and their
widows or with and with orders
to veterans with less than a
hundred percent disability.
Mason on the amount of
The veterans percentage of
disability.
But we simply I will use myself
as an example I am a one hundred
percent disabled veterans.
I'm on my mobile is it on I
think zero property tax on it.
If I was a fifty percent under
this legislation if I was a
fifty percent disabled veteran I
would get fifty percent discount
basically off of my property
taxes I will madam chair I would
stand for questions.
Representative before we go to
the public for COVID let's go
ahead and vote in the poll so.
We can pull the audience to see
whether they are for or against
house joint resolution to and
we'll keep that open for fifteen
seconds beginning now.
And
the poll now.
So we have eight in favor and
one against so if you would like
to speak in favor please raise
your hand.
And I see a familiar name.
Really Martinez you are now and
it.
Thank you madam chair
I thank the sponsor for bring
this of
drug remote resolution forward.
And I also is a disabled veteran
stand in support of this
legislation.
House joint resolution two would
open the property tax exemptions
for disabled American veterans.
disabled veterans whose rating
is less than a hundred percent
according to the most.
Recent.
The eighth annual report from
twenty nineteen eighty five
percent of disabled veterans
have a rating of less less than
a hundred percent.
By allowing this exemption to be
claimed by veterans with less
than a hundred percent
disability.
Our state will extend the
benefit to see.
To a small yet group of veterans
who have sacrificed more than.
Most service members.
So we are.
As a member of the bedrooms.
Committee for a.
And we
could see
Do Senate supports of thank you
madam chair.
Thank you for your from you and
remind folks were on a limited
time so we have a one minute
timer.
During the same time you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and.
Representative upon good morning
to you
like Rudy I'm a member of the
veterans military families
caucus we support H. J. R. to.
I am a twenty one year veteran
of military service I'm not
disabled however I've seen at
close range the disability
suffered by my colleagues in
service and I believe that those
with less than a hundred percent
disability are are deserving of
some consideration here so I'm
in full support thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Gary Williams you are now and
made it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Gary Williams I am
support with the R. P. New
Mexico I'm also a veteran that
U. S. military airforce
specifically and I speak on
behalf of the R. P. this morning
in support of this joint
resolution thank you very much
madam.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
C. moving over to the committee
members.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Leon for bringing
this bill forward.
If if I could send
Representative of going to the
doctor and get em overhauled to
make a fifty percent.
Disabled are they got both for
this bill in a heart beat.
Charges and taxes in cash flow
the state.
But it's a more serious based.
Madam chair and representative
I'll go on the when we do these
things we raise taxes on
somebody else.
And I understand and I respect.
The veterans are understand that
sometimes have a hard they they
can have a hard time with
disabilities and holding a job.
If they wish to war.
Those are my concerns.
We did we were given a graph
the.
And it it it shows how much it
raises the taxes on other
people.
To make things work.
It is something well to look at.
Even though I do supports
veterans strongly and and
understand what you're trying to
do with this bill and the those
are my comments thank you.
Madam chair representative
welcome.
Representative Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Just a couple questions I would
echo the thoughts that were
expressed by Representative the
more as well.
The the bill that's before us
says the big shell exempt from
taxation the property including
community our joint property of
every that trend and that goes
on and so madam chair and
Representative the way I read
this is that all property owned
by.
The veteran who qualifies would
have their property tax
adjusted pursuant to the
provisions of this well this
bill if it's passed from the
people of.
Pass a constitutional amendment
is that correct.
Madam chair and.
Representative.
That language is from the
original bill.
amending.
And that's the way as soon as.
Really well as a nineteen ninety
eight that the original bill
passed.
And that's the way it has been
insisting language right now.
So so.
Madam chair and and
Representative what I'm getting
at it it has to be there their
principal place of residence but
could a.
Veteran on a large apartment
complex for instance and reside
there and be able to exempt the
entire.
Property the entire.
Our main complex
Because I don't see any
limitation there other than that
it's their principal place of
residence.
Madam chair.
But I'm looking at is that your
your tax assessor in every
county.
Termination of what your
principal residence is.
And in my case I was example I
have a mobile home located to
double wide trailer since July.
My hope is.
The lost jobs.
The property taxes on the law.
So is exactly the tax is willing
to decide how
and one of that is going to be
the principal
Right of the veterans.
Or their family.
Madam chair representative I
think I would contest the
determination by your county tax
assessor if if that's the case
there only exempting a portion
of the value of the residence
itself and not the land
I don't see anything in the
sector.
Would allow them to do that but
But that's that's why my concern
madam chair with with this is
that it's.
Although it's limited to the
place of the veterans principal
place of residence your could
have some situations where.
That
Could result in a fairly
significant property.
Not pain really of property tax.
The the county may are more wise
needs to to perform its
obligations and and as pointed
out by Representative Zamora
those things get shifted to to
the remaining.
The property owners to to make
up that.
Representative genom and that's
that's somewhat of a concern
that thank you
one other question madam chair
representative.
Did you consider.
Allowing.
Each Callum wait to determine
whether or not you wish to
allow the exemption of property
within its to county and kind of
give the local counties the
option to.
Provide for this tax relief or
to are not provided to the tax
relief that was that was that
even the consideration.
But while.
That way madam chair the only
thing we change in this language
was a percentage.
Everything else is existing
statute and I don't think in
nineteen ninety eight when the
first the reason legislation
came about that any counties are
asked if they wanted to do this
or not I am.
I don't know how to answer that
question madam chair I mean the.
One answer for that.
This.
Representative used on the
floor.
That I get turned off.
I think so okay solves all start
over madam chair the
constitutional amendment as it
exist currently.
Yes the tax relief to veterans
who are one hundred percent
permanently disabled.
And what you're proposing to do
is expand that universe start
and I would say I would.
Survives that the universe of
people who fall who would fall
in the category of partially
disabled is a much greater
numbers than the people who are
one hundred percent permanently
disabled as a result of their
service to this nation.
And so we're expanding the
universe of people who would
potentially qualify now at and
so my question is if we do that.
Do do we want to allow the
counties you're more local
control over whether whether
that should be something
considered and I particularly
count because if you have
if you have a great population
of veterans who have suffered
some disability of the county
you could really undermine the
the property tax base so I just
your last question more and it
appears that there was no no
consideration for that that's
fine I I just wanted to know if
the issue had been discussed and
prepared for this so madam chair
about the.
Thank you thank you
Representative and again
you know our our our hearts and
some of these are are for the
veterans particularly those who
have suffered disabilities and
continue to suffer disabilities
are on I'm not sure that tax
policy is the place to be
delving into those issues thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
neighbor to have Representative
Johnson.
Thank you I thank you pass.
We have a motion for a day pass
by vice chair Johnson and a
second by Representative Ortez.
is there further discussion.
Okay let's call the roll on that
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part.
No.
Representative Cortez yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes and I'd like to explain
about.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair with that we
have six in the affirmative and
three in the negative.
Thank you and vice chair Johnson
to explain your vote thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative al cone my good
neighbor to the west of my
district and community I wanted
to thank you for bringing this
bill forward because I think I
as as someone who comes from a
long line of veterans our
veterans still do not get the
support and the services that.
That they should receive after
their service to our country our
freedoms and our independence so
I appreciate this bill and the
rest of your bill after you
finish your alley el Conejo
thank you.
Share our by a vote of six to
six and the permanent secretary
in the negative you have to pass
on house joint resolution to
Representative Akan and I don't
know that we can finish the show
but I'll give you a choice about
which one you want to take on
acts just in case we need to
there and early reports session
I would like to go to house bill
one was because that is the one
that the most important great
let's do that witnesses.
On that bill okay if the
witnesses will please raise your
hands.
Okay okay looks like we got and
go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair up House
Bill.
One twenty.
Okay.
One of the other.
Is a meals still basically if
you'll remember last year I did
house bill thirty was offered a.
The method for.
There was thousands of family of
military members serving in New
Mexico to get expedited licenses
in their profession so that they
can when they come to New Mexico
they can transfer from whatever
state they come from and get
their licenses to do whatever
your work day the new here in
the state of New Mexico
what we found is that we missed
a lot of different spaces we
live when you because of our
haste.
I'm gonna turn it over to Mr
Cassidy and Mr Myers so they get
real quickly explain what the
differences between what we did
last year and what we're adding
today.
Thank you we'll go ahead and
turn it over to them a good
morning madam chair and
committee members and
Representative awful cold I'm
gonna will begin in a colonel
Myers can can complete with
comments we up subsequent to
drafting house bill thirty which
was unanimously passed by the
legislature and signed by the
governor last year the
department of finance more for
some particular came up with the
breast best practices piece.
And told us if you will what
they're going to be looking for
to benefit spouses and military
service members and their
families and they're going to
use the data and and making
citing decisions on future
missions which is very important
to our state Montoya is a very
important component of our
economy you know really second
only to oil and gas and it's
actually higher than tourism we
have a huge amount of GDP in the
our state
as a result of all the military
missions we have we're we're
very fortunate to have all these
folks here so what we would like
to do is expand house bill
thirty and we will be adding
additional professions.
And they include
The nursing which is already
included but it didn't include
components of nursing that's
important to the military it
will include a number of other
professions like uniforms
athletic agents architects
interior designers public
accountancy funeral home and
utility operator so the military
spouse hits
New Mexico one of the bases here
and they need to go to work
right away this bill would would
benefit them yeah we're also
making sure that the licenses
can be turned around and thirty
days with some of the
professions were sixty days and
then we're also going to add
the skilled labor.
It is just another amendment
here and we've been visiting
with them and they're in support
of this.
As well so I believe we've we've
addressed in our comments.
That we received on the FIR all
all of the comments to date and
there is an amendment that
Representative of all Cologne
has
to not make the bill applicables
to civil service members which
was I thought that.
The group had going into this so
we remove that because it really
opens very broadly and it's not
as needed as it was we were told
early on that it might be needed
to health so service members
coming to our state
And I think I'll stop there if I
could madam chair and and turn
it over to Greg Myers for a
couple comments.
Okay.
Chair members the committee
thank you so much for the
opportunity to to meet with you
so I'm currently the director of
the military based planning and
support office for New Mexico
and I may be a better in twenty
five years but and I think Paul
described the the bill very
clearly but as a personal
experience my twenty five year
career.
I moved twelve times in ten
different states and
my spouse along with many other
military spouses gave up on her
career very early on in my
career and made that sacrifice
to follow me around
the United States so this bill
is extremely important and I
I'll be happy to stand by to
answer any questions thank you
madam chair.
Great thank you.
So Representative it's a if it's
okay we can pull the audience
and take.
Madam chair.
If I could I I do I have an
amendment that I forgot to bring
it to the beginning let's
address that once we get back to
the committee thank you ma'am
thank you so we now are going to
vote the poll or house bill one
twenty if your in the audience
who and would like to vote is
now open and will remain open
for another ten seconds.
It will remain open for five
seconds more.
Okay great the police closed we
have six four and zero against
if you would like to speak.
We have a one minute timer
available so please make your
comments brief.
Welcome Rudy you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair.
Again this is a private.
I just would like to
as a representative for the
veterans caucus the.
The committee for a veterans
advocacy I would like to stand
in support of with all the
comments that were made in favor
I know the benefits of this
piece of legislation would
greatly benefit all military
bases and military facilities
across the state thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative about going.
Ashley Wagner you are now in
muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we commend
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward and support house
bill one twenty because it
enables the number of licensing
and entities to accommodate
military service members and
members of their family during
times of transition when they're
seeking employment and we
believe that expediting the
process to get a skilled
workforce into our economy will
benefit you Mexico thank you.
Thank you you're at the C. and
your now and muted.
Thank you madam chair again I'm
with the veterans caucus in the
I'm in full support of this.
Military service for families is
a family affair and when we
enable family members spouses to
be able to work in their
profession it enriches the
family life not only of that
worker but their spouse and
their children so we support
this and think it'll be a great.
A great help for military
families transitioning into New
Mexico as well as providing more
quickly the skilled expertise of
those people being licensed
thank you madam chair.
One.
That concludes our public
comment Representative I'll call
then we can go back to you or
your proposed amendments.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
Background noise
the the
The number is the following two
one nine six two five point one.
And it does very basically down
six with our blunders in the
amended by the amendment removes
the awards civil service from
the legislation.
We in the.
I'm proud was problems because
we really could not decide what
is civil servant was if we were
to include in there the way we
had it is going to include
anybody that works for any
government entities so we just
decided that
It was just too much for us to
put that the card into the
legislation.
But we do have that amendments
thank you for reading the number
out.
so I will move the amendment.
For discussion purposes.
Committee members.
I move that we pass the
amendment the past year member.
Right we have a motion to adopt
the amendment is there a second
the second madam chair this is
day many lines and a second by
Representative Eli is there
further discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing and hearing none of we
have adopted that amendment to
house bill one twenty now we're
back on the bill.
You can.
Madam chair all move a do pass
on House Bill or.
Hang on one second.
One twenty as mended.
Hi I move that do pass on house
bill one twenty our amended.
Thank you madam chair we have a
due pass motion by
Representative neighborhood and
a second by Representative Eli
is there a further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
day pass.
No ma'am.
I didn't know about this
committee hearing seeing and
hearing.
We have a due pass on house bill
one twenty as amended showing
all members present voting in
the affirmative thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
members thank you.
Madam chair of the speakers at
his desk and ready to call us
and to order.
Great thank you representative
let's go ahead and roll house
joint resolution three so that
folks can get on to the floor
and change over there is doing.
meeting and so thanks for your
attendance thanks to the public
for your participation and have
a great weekend we're not
meeting on Saturday.
