We're just waiting a few more
minutes for the webcast to get
reloaded.
Test, test.
OK, it sounds like we're ready
to go again. The webcast is
working, uh, can you folks
please keep it down. We're ready
to go back to Zoom public
comments.
OK, thank you.
He Helga and Jessica, you're up
next.
Helga, Jessica.
Sure did.
As a chair
We have representatives in where
I sure did.
Uh, we're moving to Yummy.
Yummy.
Can you hear me?
Hey, um,
Go to help uh I just uh
I am a young farmer and father
from San Felipe Pueblo.
I strongly oppose HB 137.
Produced water is highly toxic
and radioactive.
No scientific research supports
the treatment of produced water
reuse to standards that make it
safe for humans or the
environment.
Extensive research points to the
toxicity and hazardous nature of
this waste to environmental and
human health.
Please choose to protect our
precious waters, land, and
non-human relatives, and
especially our children.
Thank you.
Evelyn, you're next.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Evelyn Bemis. I'm a member of
the greater Frakov Charcoal
Coalition where I've seen
directly the impacts on uh the
Dana community from
The uh the fracking and what I
haven't heard addressed about
this bill is uh climate change
being a factor for this need for
strategic water supply Act. I
would far rather see $75 million
in a wind and solar advancement
um fund and other new
technologies to get us to wean
us off oil and gas revenues. We
know that day is coming, but it
would be far
served if we got there now, and
we didn't have this wastewater
as an issue to resolve. Thank
you.
Thank you.
All right, we're gonna try Helga
and Jessica again.
We're gonna move on.
R. Sobell
Can you hear me?
We can.
Great. Good morning, ma'am chair
members of the committee. My
name is Rebecca Sobel. I'm the
campaign manager for Wild Earth
Guardians. I just want to say
it's a rare day when
environmental advocates in oil
and gas lobbyists are standing
shoulder to shoulder in
opposition, but that's how
flawed this bill is. Uh, while
we support the inclusion of a
PAST ban and chemical
disclosure. This bill ignores
the ticking time bomb, the
concentrated toxic waste from
produced water treatment. And in
fact, HB 140, the hazardous
waste constituent definition
backed by enemy D in the
governor's priority, exposes the
oil and gas.
industries get out of jail free
card that allows them to skip
basic rules like chemical
disclosure and hazardous waste
classification rules that every
other industry in New Mexico
must follow. Without these
safeguards, this bill doesn't
protect New Mexicans. It turns
our state into a toxic dumping
ground, and we deserve better.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. I think that
concludes the comments on Zoom,
um, I, no, I think that's us.
Meeting host?
Hi, I apologize that my name is
incorrect. I couldn't figure out
how to change it. Uh, Honorable
Chair and committee members. My
name is Sarah Swati Kalsa. I'm a
mother of three from Espanola.
The sponsor said that this bill
is about climate change and
water scarcity, but the
strategic water supply was first
proposed to help the oil and gas
industry deal with their waste.
That's what it is. Chevron has
been holding symposiums around
the state, saying the science
for treatment is proven, but
when they are under oath in a
hearing, they admit that it's
not there yet.
This bill also seeks permission
to tap deep brackish water
aquifers that are often not
renewable, and once dried out
could result in poor space
collapse, leaving our children
and future generations with
nothing. Complete mapping of
these deep brackish aquifers
should be completed before
proceeding with drilling. My
guess is that Chevron has 75
million lying around in its
petty cash drawer. If they want
to experiment with treating.
produced water, let them pay for
it. I want no part.
One more person, right? I think
Colleen.
Colleen
OK. Can you hear me now?
Um, Colleen representing Newco.
uh, I want to comment that the
bill is insufficient as written,
produced water projects that
benefit the oil and gas company
industry should be separated
from projects utilizing novel
technology to address emergency
water.
Shortages. Specifically with
regard to problems experienced
in Cuba and New Mexico, and the
many tribal nations and
communities experiencing water
shortages for drinking and
agricultural use. Nuco water
treatment process does not
produce the brine waste product
includes steps to capture
radioactive and toxic materials
and makes water treatment
economically feasible through
the production of precipitated
saleable commodities, in
addition to clean agricultural
and drinking water solution.
I encourage legislation that
would um promote novel solutions
to water treatments for
communities in need.
OK, that concludes our public
comment. Sponsor, would you like
to make any quick comments
before we go to the committee?
No, madam chair, I'd like to
just go right to the committee
for questions. OK, um, I have
Representative Rubio up first.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your presentation.
Um,
I, I've already let the sponsor
know about some of my concerns,
um, I.
As folks may already know, uh, I
was born in Roswell. I grew up
in Lake Arthur just north of
Artesia, so oil and gas for me
is an important part of my life
because of how much it's done,
not only for my community, but
also, um, in terms of um
disproportionately impacted
communities and so I recognize
the economic impacts, but as
someone who also believes in
climate change and um the future
of this.
Plant, this is where I feel like
my unique perspective is
important because um this is a
very complex issue, and yet I
think that we have a very
limited amount of time to
address so many of the issues
that we're facing, um, when it
comes to climate and so, um, I
have a number of issues that I
have regarding areas of the bill
and, and so I'll ask those
questions based on those areas.
Um, the first question that I do
is related to public money
toward, um, towards the, um,
The wastewater from oil and gas,
um, there have been comments
from public comment about
taxpayers being on the hook for
cleaning up the industry's mess.
Um, I personally am concerned
about this legislation regarding
that area and um taxpayers
constantly having to pay for the
mistakes of the industry, and so
I'm, I'm really wanting you all
to explain why we're going at it
in this direction.
Thank you, Representative Rubio.
I'm gonna turn this over to
Rebecca Ruz because I do think
we have a solution for that in
the bill.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Rubio, um, I think, uh, Ben
Shelton from Amner is well
positioned for this question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. The bill does
require uh particularly for
contracts, uh, for financial
assurance, the same way that we
require financial assurance
under um mining or oil and gas
drilling from, from the
contracted entity.
So financial assurance being
something like a bond or putting
on an insurance policy that
would allow the state not to be
on the hook for uh for clean up
for remediation costs. Sometimes
these wells can get a little bit
expensive when it comes to the
sort of the lugging. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. And the reason I
bring that question up is
because we have so many wells
that have been left without
being cleaned and um and so
that's one of the concerns that
I have about this particular
thing is that
again, it's been perpetually
done throughout our history
where taxpayers are having to
fit this bill, and so that's an
area that, that I'm, I'm still
relatively concerned with um
another issue related to the,
the public subsidies,
particularly around industry
cleanup is, um, the state
agencies regulating oil and gas
or you're, you're supposed to
regulate oil and gas, um, not
fund the projects that benefit
the industry.
And so, can you explain to me
the process, um, of, of how you
intend to, um, I know that
there's the grant program
through the 5 cents fee. Um, it
feels like you all as regulators
are handing out money to
companies that you already
oversee. And so, can you explain
more in detail around how that.
My impact the work that you're
doing from the regulation side.
Madam Chair and Representative,
certainly and, and to clarify
when we're talking about a
contract, there's, and remember
there's two things that we're
talking about here, grants,
which is restricted to like
brackish water projects and
contracts which can go uh to
either.
A contract in this scenario is
for somebody who is going to
pump and treat the produced
water. That is not necessarily
uh an oil and gas operator. I
think that there are certainly
some operators that are pretty
good at drilling and pumping,
but uh,
That's not anywhere on the face
of the bill that we, that's not
really a given. The contracts
are going to be sort of standing
contracts or the state is going
to help defray the stand-up
costs of a treatment plan by
basically allowing them to sell
that water a little bit cheaper,
so they don't have to.
Catch all of their, you know,
recover all of their operating
costs and their, and their
capital costs on the sale of the
water to that to a specific
vendor or a specific.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, Mr. Shelton, um,
The other area that I have
concerns with is related to the
water quality standards, and
particularly around public
health protections, um, this
bill, as I read it, relies
heavily on uh water quality
standards that
As far as I know, don't exist
And so, um, or yeah, I know that
we're in that process, hopefully
in terms of rulemaking, but my
understanding is that the states
own experts have said that there
currently aren't enough
protections in place to allow
water to be safely discharged.
This bill to me in this area
around the water quality piece
seems very, very fast. Um, and
so I kind of wanted to.
I mean, point blank, just asking
why we're moving so quickly on
this piece. I like part of the
reason that I love the bill is
through the mapping. I think we
absolutely need the mapping, but
there's already 17 million.
Already in appropriations and
so.
Um, I just want, really want to.
ask about this piece, this area
around the standards that if the
standards aren't in existence
yet, why are we already moving
in that direction.
Madam Chair Representative
Rubio, thanks for the question.
As I mentioned earlier, the
proposed rules from the
Environment Department do not
allow for any discharge of
treated or untreated produced
water.
The science is moving quickly in
this area though. Um, there's
regular advancements, um,
industry and others have a big
incentive to
Move that science forward.
And we have seen.
That
Through our work and research at
NMED, uh.
We
Understand that that's going
forward and our proposed rules
do refer to forthcoming.
Standards, um.
That we even reserve a section
in our proposed rules where
those standards will go.
Um
We anticipate those standards,
which you're correct that
they're not in place yet.
And, and just to finalize that
point, uh, that the bill does
require that any project
through the stretch of water
supply would have to comply with
our permitting requirements and
so until those standards are in
place, there would not be.
Yeah, and
Representative Rubio, Madam
Chair, I just want to elaborate
on um director Armstrong's
answer there, um, to be very
clear, the sequence of things
related to what's in this bill
and then what might happen in
the regulatory space is, is
really important, um, to, to
understand, I think, in, in what
we're proposing. So the language
uh in um on page 6.
Um
Section I, starting on line 10.
Creates really important guard
rails for any strategic water
supply project that involves
treated produced water, and that
first subparagraph number one.
What that means is that if, if
the strategic Water Supply Act
is enacted this year.
And water quality control
commission regulations related
to water quality protections for
produced water treatment and
reuse are not yet in place, even
though the strategic water
supply is enacted, no, none of
these agencies could move
forward with a strategic water
supply project until those WQCC
rules are in place. So this is
um a restriction on strategic
water supply implementation that
ties directly to the regulatory
process.
So however long that regulatory
process takes, and whatever
rules are ultimately in effect
under the Water Quality Act
would be the point at which
strategic water supply projects
related to produced water could
go forward. In the meantime,
let's say that there is a lag
between when the strategic water
supply goes into effect, and
when those regulations for
produced water standards are in
effect. If there's time between
them. We would, as a state be
able to move forward.
the brackish projects, stand up
that grant program, get some
money going out to projects in
the state that are needing some
additional investment in order
to move brackish water studies
or treatment plants forward. So
that would be able to continue,
and the produced water piece of
the strategic water supply would
be on hold until regulatory
certainty is in place.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, um, I
I guess for me, it definitely is
a concern around public health
and the environment, and
It doesn't, it still doesn't.
Feel very clear in terms of what
those safeguards will be, um.
I'm clearly not a scientist and
so for the last 8 years, I feel
like I've been trying to learn
more about how rapidly all this
technology has been um changing,
and so, um, as Representative
Herrera mentioned earlier, I too
have visited fracking sites, um,
I have talked to people about
how they're going to be, how the
industry is going to be impacted
and, and, and whatnot, um.
The issue with produced water.
is still uh it's a concern for
me because um
As was mentioned briefly in some
of the comments is that
scientists still don't know how
there's still not enough
evidence to show um that
produced water can be treated
safely for people and the
environment. And so given that
uncertainty,
Um
I guess my question is, should
state water funds be limited to
brackish water projects then
instead.
I know that there's talks around
the brackish grants and and all
of that. So if you could speak
to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Rubio, uh,
that's, that is something that
we've heard and talking with
some stakeholders and
legislators is a suggestion of
um limiting the uh any general
fund infusions to the strategic
water supply to only BRCA
projects, um, you're correct
that the bill before you and the
appropriation language um
proposed in the executive
recommendation, um, are not
restricted in that way, um, and
so
I can tell you we've heard those
concerns, um, we are in with the
we have the proposal in front of
you right now that we do because
in part because of the
sequencing, I just talked about,
um, we believe that it creating,
putting the putting the $75
million into the fund without
restricting it on produced water
projects.
A gives more flexibility, and we
also expect that the realities
will be that produce water
projects may come in a little
bit later in implementation once
the fee revenue is flowing into
the strategic water supply fund
such that the
Real source of revenue for any
produced water projects under
the strategic water supply in
the future will ultimately come
from that oil and gas fee
revenue, um, so it's flexibility
upfront with the expectation
that it's largely likely to work
out the way you suggest in, in
practice and in implementation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that, um.
So since we don't fully
understand how um produced water
projects, um.
How to treat it safely.
Why don't we just let
State agencies and universities
focus on that research, um,
because I think that's another
concern that I'm hearing from
folks is that
Um, we need to set some of these
standards first for produced
water and so I know that there's
there's funding being considered
for uh New Mexico Tech and um
New Mexico State and, and, and I
think that that research should
be considered, um, so why don't
we just let that
Live within
Universities.
And share representative Rubio.
Thanks for the question.
Absolutely, sir. I'm trying to
lean in here.
The reason that we are not
Or that we see uh or are
motivated to allow for larger
scale projects is that a lot of
the research that has happened
is at a bench or lab scale and
is limited in opportunities to
scale up at this point without.
Reuse regularly I hope that
answers your question, but I
have to clear.
Yeah. OK. Uh, thank you, um,
Madam Chair, and thank you, um.
Uh
Regarding water rights and and
management, um.
I know that right now there's
deep brackish, uh, the deep
brackish water, and I, I, I'm
glad that you all were able to
clarify around um defining the
deep brackish water, um, that it
could be potentially a major
source of of new water.
Um, I guess the question then is
to the uh the subject to the
same water rights uh laws as
shallower water, um.
And, and again, I don't know a
lot about water rights. I'm, I'm
still learning a lot about that
as well, but.
I guess my question is,
shouldn't we be treating all of
our water resources with the
same level of protection because
um from what I'm reading, the
deep brackish water is
potentially this new major water
source, but isn't falling under
those same water rights, um,
protections that we have, um,
across the state. Do you all
have, have any information on
that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Rubio, uh, that's a great
question. So the state does have
a process for what we, what
we're describing as these deep
wells and um the, if the well is
greater than 2500 ft deep. It
goes through a different
approvals process and this um
this bill with codify the
process that we currently use
for evaluating whether or not um
developing that resource would
impair another resource.
So we do still go through the
process of looking at whether or
not if that well is pumped, if
it's gonna impair another well
in the area or a surface water
body, and if it does, then
there's conditions that are
included within that approval.
It's slightly different. It's
not a permitting process for the
deep wells. It's an approval
process, but we still go through
those protective steps. And, um,
the other pieces that we still
regulate the well, we still
look at the well in terms of the
well construction and make sure
that it has all the things that
are needed to make it protective
for our aquifers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, um, could you provide a
little bit more detail on that
because one of the, what's the
word that I learned yesterday?
About the syn, the.
Subsidenceside, yes, the
subsidence is that there are a
lot of folks who've reached out
around um just the, the worry
around what that process could
do and so could you provide a
little bit more detail around
what you just talked about.
So subside is is something that
we, we are concerned about no
matter where you're pumping
water, uh, whether it's a
shallow aquifer or a a deep
aquifer, uh, if, if you an
aquifer was being developed to
the extent where we saw
subsidence or we're concerned
that that was happening, that
would be something that we would
have to deal with as a state and
there are mechanisms within the
office of the State Engineer to
deal with that.
OK. Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I just, I have just a couple
more questions. Um, the second,
the, the, one of the questions
that I have is related to the
climate, to climate and its
impacts.
Um
Someone mentioned in the
comments around how um.
How much energy it takes for,
um, treating brackish water.
And um
And also in terms of produced
water and how much more that,
how much energy that's going to
also require.
And um
And so I, I guess one of the
questions is related to the
state's climate goals, um,
And whether or not we should
require projects funded by this
bill to use energy sources that
are aligned with those climate
goals. Where, where are you all
in terms of thinking that
through.
Madam Chair and Representative
Rubio. I really appreciate that
question because the last thing
that we're trying to do and that
the governor wants to do is to
create more problems in one
place when we're trying to solve
so.
Solve problems someplace else.
Um, so the one of the provisions
in the bill that is required for
um any one of the agencies
that's considering entering into
a grant or a contract for a um
brackish water or produce water
treatment project, is that they
consider the greenhouse gas
emissions of that project.
What's that's going to mean is
that if the environment
department issues a request for
proposals to um cast the net to
see if contract.
actors and, and companies want
to come forward for a strategic
water supply contract. That
request for proposals will spell
out what those um proposals need
to include with respect to what
type, what is the energy demand
of their project? What types of
energy are they using? And it's,
it's intended to drive projects
that are cleaner and greener in
terms of the energy supply and
use and emissions of any one of
these projects. So that was very
important inclusion.
for our team to demonstrate that
we're not trying to create more
greenhouse gas emissions as we
solve some of our water problems
with these alternative supplies.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um, and
I, I have two last questions and
this one's related mostly to um
accountability of the industry,
um, as I mentioned at the start
of my questioning, um.
We've had so many wells that
have just been abandoned over
the course of the history, and
so, um,
One of, as I was reading this
bill, the one thing that came to
mind, especially when we're
talking about waste disposal is
just our long legacy around
nuclear, and we know that
there's people who consider
nuclear as part of this next
step around how to um um
diversify our energy sources and
When we're talking about waste
disposal when it comes to this
issue specifically.
I think I also have concerns
around how do we safely handle
the waste from produced water
and, and, and all of that and
so, um, the, the question that I
have is that as we figure out
how to safely handle and dispose
of this waste, um.
I guess I don't know enough
about these salin desalination,
um, is that how you say it?
Yeah, desalination, um, have you
all been what are, what's, I
guess I'm trying to figure out
what are the steps being taken
to figure what the wastewater,
um, what the, what the, what
the, how you all are gonna, how
you're thinking through around
disposal.
Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So there's two
sort of waste streams that we're
talking about here. One is
liquid and one is solid. So the
liquid and under sort of the
proposed rules that are going on
at WQCC comes back to OCD so
I'll discuss those. And then
I'll let Jonas handle the solid,
uh, the liquid waste disposal
would be handled in the same way
that we currently handle um what
we call, you know, saltwater
waster, uh, other liquid wastes
in the Permian.
Or in the oil fields, which is
basically it gets re-injected,
so we uh test the aquifer that
we're injecting into to ensure
that it is not um kind of
salvageable water, which is to
say we ensure that that water is
above 10,000 TDS and then it
gets injected, uh, very, very
deep. It, it goes, uh, far, far,
far below the water table
thinking of 5000 to 10,000 ft
underground, which also actually
while I'm here, um, goes to the
point that you mentioned about
subsidence. I think when people
think about this issue, they
tend to think about the
Carl's Bad Bridewell.
Um
Rightly so. That was a that was
a touch and go moment we I think
we had as a state there a few
years ago. Um,
Two things. One, the formations
underground are generally
distinct from the surface
formation that we had in
Carlsbad where you were getting
a lot of water eating away.
You're getting a lot of solid
sort of water soluble minerals
and so that thing was growing.
That is not really the case.
We're talking about a lot of
clay layers and a lot of um
kind of material that's not
going to dissolve and create
these giant voids and then the
second piece is that it is so
deep, uh, underground that
you're just never, it's a little
bit of a princess in the pea
thing, right? You've got enough
kind of layer layers of mattress
that, that even if there is a
shift, it would, it's just not
something that makes a
noticeable difference. Um, so
that's, that's the basics of how
we would deal with the liquid
waste and I'll hand it to Jonas
for the solid waste component.
Mai Represented Rubio. I'm gonna
have to apologize. I will have
to check in with our hazardous
waste Bureau folks, uh, to make
sure I understand how the solid
waste would be treated in these
situations.
Um, Representative Rubio, Madam
Chair, uh, well, uh, enemyD
expert can't get into the
specifics. Um, I do want to make
sure to point out that the um
strategic water supply bill is
fundamentally not a regulatory
bill and it's relying on
existing regulations that are
already in place. So this the
state of New Mexico hazardous
waste Act, the Solid Waste Act,
the water Quality Act. There are
these regulatory regimes.
that are in place and every one
of the projects that would get
supported and funded through the
strategic water supply would be
subject to those existing
regulatory regimes. So if the,
at the point at which a plant
was being built before it could
go into operation, that company
would have to determine whether
or not a solid waste permit or a
hazardous waste permit from the
state is required, submit
applications, get that permit in
place. So all of those existing
re
ator y parameters would apply to
these projects. Um, I just
wanted to add that for clarity.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, and I, I
just have one more question, um.
I also have serious FOMO that I
missed access last night because
I was prepping for this, um.
But if a company walks away from
its financial obligations, the
money as as far as I understand
the bill is that it goes back
into a general water fund
instead of directly toward
cleaning up of any damage.
Um, so I
Wouldn't those funds be better
used to fix environmental harm
instead?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Rubio, I, that's, that's a
really important piece of how,
um, how funds would flow. The
intention of the language in the
bill and and the way in which
the financial assurance
agreement would be written
between the company and the um
state agency, we intend and
believe the language um supports
this would ensure that whatever
uh fun financing is uh provided
by that company pursuant to the
financial assurance agreement
they've made would in fact go
back to clean up that project,
that that is the direct
intention of what that financial
assurance would go toward and we
don't think the language in the
bill precludes that.
I hope that's all. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you all.
Representative Lara Karena.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sponsors, and wide table of
like our colleagues here, I
think we've all spent a lot of
energy.
And for me,
Going back to the beginning, I
believe Madam Chair, that there
were probably the legislature
and um Madam Chair, our sponsor
here, Representative Zamora and
I.
I believe we vote and we had a
debate like this. We had rooms
full of people, crowds in the
hallway, um, public comment from
coming, coming from all over New
Mexico.
With some of the same.
Questions and concerns and
considerations that we're
hearing now 7 years later, for
me, Madam Chair, sitting on that
committee at the time, it was
really important to me, had a
better grasp on what we were
actually debating what was in
front of us.
What we could, what we could
pick up and read in an FIR in a,
in a bill draft.
And hopefully with some
intention and and bipartisan
collaboration break through some
of what the noise was around
this issue.
New Mexicans of all stripes are
rightfully um.
Practicing in this democratic
space to tell us what they think
and what they feel.
Uh, but at the time when I, when
I was on House Judi share and we
had those contentious hearings.
For me, it made sense that we
would eventually get to New
Mexico driven data, New Mexico
collected data in New Mexico
learning, scientific learnings
about what potential we have in
brackish water.
Use words deep brackish water,
treated deep brackish water,
water.
I'm really proud, Madam Chair,
that out of those conversations,
um.
Indirect dialogue with our NMSU
chancellor at the time,
Chancellor Avisu, and your
secretary quickly turned around
big MOUs to establish the New
Mexico system.
Um, there's experts today and
over email that have said.
That that consortium has not
produced data, they're wrong.
That's just
Wrong.
That consortium with some of the
world renowned scientists in
this field.
are working diligently in labs
that are underfunded.
Uh, in, in spaces that look like
you're walking into a high
school.
Situation 30 years ago, like
somehow with little fish tanks
and live organisms and samples,
they're making incredible.
Including, um, such, Madam
Chair.
That they have been recognized
with awards, but also, um.
In their own scientific
communities with peer reviews
been published again and again
and again for what they're
learning when it comes back to
the content of what's in this
water.
Really important. I don't think
it's been shared yet today is
often we hear that industry has,
um, their, their intellectual
property rights over what
is
Used and treated produced water,
so the products used the
chemical makeup of what they're
using as part of what's unique
about the setup with the produce
Water Research contortum. Is it
in those MOUs, they get to know
what's in everybody's water
because they're studying it.
So with a lot of protection
around those trade secrets, they
know it's in the water and
they're better giving us all a
better understanding of the
impact of what that treated
produced water could look like
in other uses.
Madam Chair, to my questions,
um.
Just I'm grateful I went after
Rep Rubio cause she was killing
it.
Uh
I want to start with that. In
our analysis, in the comments
we've heard today.
We have to produce Water Act 6
years ago.
There are not rules.
Out.
We handed you all the authority
to go and make the rules, and
you tell us directly why did we
not yet see rules that would be
related to what's in this
legislation.
Um
Madam Chair,
representative Lana,
thank you for your, um,
Understanding of what's
happening, the incredible work
is happening down at NMSU and,
and um to get to your question,
um, why not, why not yet? I
think there's a couple of
reasons. Um, one, the
Science takes time and uh doing
really good and sound science
that's peer reviewed, takes
time. So while you're correct
that there is really important
scientific progress and data
coming out of the produce Water
Research Consortium, um, it has
been a several year long process
to really move that forward and
still a lot going on, right?
They still have a lot of
questions that they're working
to answer as they continue their
work. Um, so that's one reason.
Another reason is
Um, and I was, as some members
of the committee know at the
Environment department when we
um initially began implementing
the Produce Water Act in 2019. I
was the water protection
division director at the time,
and we did a road show.
We went around the state in the
fall of 2019, we had 5 public
meetings. We heard from hundreds
and hundreds of New Mexicans,
uh, some that were really
concerned that we weren't moving
fast enough, but many, many who
were concerned, um, that we were
moving too quickly and that we
were going to get ahead of the
science. And you know, some of
those same concerns that we
heard from um New Mexicans this
morning.
And so, uh, the Environment
department has been very
diligent and continuing to
engage with stakeholders and in
my view, taking the policymaking
process as fast as the science
supports.
And in late 2023, it's been a
long rulemaking process, but in
late 2023, the Environment
Department filed their first
produce Water Act
implementation, rulemaking
petition with the Water Quality
Control Commission. So over a
year ago.
And those rules are not yet in
effect. They're, they're all the
testimony was held during
hearings last May and August,
and we await the decision of
that commission and we
understand they plan to
deliberate this spring, um, was
the last I heard. So not a,
maybe not a very satisfactory
answer, but I do think that
there are some really key
elements of progress that has
been made and uh I think it's
taken longer than some of us
expected, but it's reflect
of in part where the sciences
and scientific process in part,
the nature of the regulatory
process and very much informed
by uh what we hear from
constituents.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I really appreciate that
thorough review and we've all
been hearing about it,
including, um,
Understanding that you are, or
the, the departments and the
right agencies were taking that
public testimony, taking that
scientific evidence, taking so
much into consideration, but as
you've shared, they've not yet
come back with the final rules.
Um, and just like I sat in
judiciary 6 years ago, Madam
Chair, I want us as policymakers
to be informed by the science in
front of us. I want us to trust
the executive agencies who have
the authority and background and
expertise like you all to tell
us what
those parameters are based on
what you know. So I'm not here
to say you haven't moved fast
enough. I appreciate that you're
moving at the pace of science,
and that science is grounded in
peer review. It's grounded in
Experts from around the world,
it's grounded in the science
that New Mexicans deserve before
we make these decisions, but it
does make me wonder, Madam
Chair, why we're considering
this bill in front of us when
these processes are still in
play. I agree with you, um, that
policymaking
As the process should be fast as
the science it supports. But if
we are still in the scientific
review, if the agencies are
still determining what the
parameters are and what the
potential beneficial uses may be
outside of the oil and gas
industry. I'd like to have that
in front of us before we imagine
setting up a fund like this or
collecting a tax like this when
it relates back to that same
industry. Specifically, when I
think about whether or not New
Mexico, the state should have a
role in market creation.
I keep thinking markets if
they're supposed to work the way
economists say they do.
We'll find and fund themselves
when they have parameters and
rules and regulations
stipulating what is possible.
I want that to be grounded in
science. I've supported the
scientific endeavor, and I'm not
frustrated that those rules
aren't out yet.
But I do have concern that in my
mind we're we're stepping ahead
of ourselves right here to say
that we're establishing this
fund for these purposes when I'm
still trusting that you all of
the agencies are going to do
your jobs and do them well.
Um, I appreciated, Madam Chair,
when representative Rubio was
asking her questions. We'd heard
back that this will largely work
out the way Representative Rubio
suggests. But that's not what's
in this bill. If we all have a
consensus that that's likely and
largely how it's going to work
out.
Why isn't that timeline or
process.
What we're contemplating here.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, that
as I said, um, in one of my
earlier comments, I mean the
sequence of the regulatory
process and approved uses of
produced water outside of the
oil and gas field as it relates
to the strategic water supply
bill in front of you is, um,
from our view, this, this bill
is timely, even though those
rules aren't in place and we've
accounted for the fact that they
aren't in place by saying that
those type
of projects in the strategic
water supply would not be
allowed to proceed until those,
those regulations are in effect.
Um, why do it now if they're not
why have that sequence, um,
challenge even at all is because
um the our foundation here is
the 50-year water action plan.
We know um how complicated these
issues are. We feel getting a
program stood up.
Even if parts of it are going to
be delayed on implementation.
Now is the time to do that, and,
um, and we appreciate that we're
asking members of, of this
committee and, and the
legislature to um to act on
something that is a um.
a creation of a new program
without all of the regulatory
pieces being known, um, and yet
we feel now is the time and that
we've accounted for that in a
responsible way in terms of how
we've structured the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
think part of what's coming up
for me.
Is what our legislative and
executive authorities are. So
part of what's being presented
here is that we can and should
trust that you all, when you get
through these regulatory
processes will do so and the
authorities you hold every day,
but we don't yet know what that
decision will be. So we're being
asked to vote on something and
take action on something with a
background and context that we
can share, but I, without
knowing what those regulations
are so folks on, on many sides
of this issue.
whether they're concerned about
what's in that water, um, some
of the incredible activists like
Yucca and others that are saying
we don't know what's in there,
or the folks that said today
that water is prayer, right?
Like, they're asking us to take
um a valued position around how
we approach this from other
folks on the industry side,
saying like, tell us what our
market will be and we'll go find
it. Why are you charging us to
create a market when we actually
just need the rules and regs to
see how we engage in this new
market. So from multiple
perspectives, people are asking
us as policymakers to take a
position, but this bill is
asking that we trust you're
going to create rules and regs
and that we've already put an
idea out into the world without
knowing what those rules and
regs are. And for me, like that,
That brings some concern up. I,
I'd like to know what exactly
we're doing if we were to put
something like $75 million into
a new fund before we make that
investment, I'd like to know
what those rules and regs are,
um, just to wrap up, Madam
Chair, when I think about, um,
the, the mechanics of this bill,
can you share with us why we're
combining
The this new piece around the
new water fund with the funding
for
The aquifer mapping and the
further research at NMSU, why
are those all in one bill?
Uh, Madam Cha, representative,
um, happy, uh appreciate all,
all of your remarks this morning
too and, and thoughtfulness of
that. Um, the reason though that
we have packaged the strategic
water supply creation of the
program and the fund, the
appropriation for that with
appropriations for the aquifer
monitoring mapping program in
New Mexico Tech, and ongoing
brackish and produce water
research at NMSo is because um I
kind of think of it as a
three-legged stool of new water
supplies that we
put out in the 50-year water
action plan. That section of the
50-year plan talks about
advancing
treatment and use of new water
supplies through the strategic
water supply program and working
on rules and policy, which we've
just been talking about, that's
another leg of the stool. And
then the third leg is, is the
underlying research to
understand, to fill in whatever
gaps we have left, um, and it
really emphasizes that the, the
combination of those, those um
needs is emphasized in the
50-year plan as um we have
A lot of work to do in the state
of New Mexico to finish fully
studying and characterizing our
aquifers, shallow and deep,
brackish and fresh, um, a lot of
incredible work that's been done
but that program has never been
anywhere near fully funded. And
so we want, it's really
important to us to demonstrate
in this bill, how these things
are interrelated, that while we
are asking this body, the
legislature, to establish the
strategic water supply, and that
would open up new
opportunities to advance
brackish water treatment
projects, where we have known
and under understanding of where
those brackish water resources
are, we also have to continue
investing to fill all those gaps
to to characterize all our
aquifers. What we didn't want is
to, um, put out a strategic
water supply proposal that um
was isolated.
From those other really
important needs and efforts. Um,
so that's why we chose to
package them in this way, um,
and they're obviously reflected
in the executive budget
recommendation as 3 separate
items.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'll
wrap with one final comment. I
want to appreciate our governor
and all of you for prioritizing
water in New Mexico, at least in
my time doing legislative
advocacy and now being a member
of the body, um, we have not so
clearly, decisively out loud,
been talking about water. So
thank you to the governor and
all of you for putting together
the 50 year water plan, we
needed it, and now we get to
have conversations like this.
I'll wrap by saying,
I'm not comfortable with this
bill as it's drafted.
When I hear the expertise you're
offering.
The, the timeline that would
sound appropriate to me.
would be reflected in striking
the 75 million appropriation.
Fully funding the request for
Aquifer mapping and further
researches, research at our two
state institutions.
And then lowering the 5 cent tax
to something like 2 or 3 cents.
In my mind, um, that would mean
we wouldn't be funding the fund
until we had the rules and reg
in place, but we would be
continuing the research.
After you all and the right
people came through with those
rules and regulations, you could
pull us into special session.
You could get us back here. You
could say water is an emergency,
and I imagine everybody in this
body and board, at least in this
committee would agree to that.
And then understanding the
regulatory framework in front of
us, I think we could have a much
more meaningful debate as New
Mexican policymakers about
what's possible here. So, I am
so grateful we're having this
conversation. I'm not
comfortable with funding the
fund, not having the regs in
place, um, and I wanna make sure
that we fund these important
research initiatives and mapping
that we all should be relying on
when we make decisions like
this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, we have a lot of
questions remaining, uh, so
Representative Mirabel Moya,
you're next. Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, thank you, um, panel
for, um, your
great answers to the questions
and to the representatives but
before me, a lot of their
questions, um, or, or my
questions were already answered.
I just have a couple of like
technic uh technical questions
in here. Um,
Madam Chair. Well, um, um,
Representative uh Lara uh Cadena
kind of alluded to this a little
bit, but where, like why 5
cents? What did we come up with
that amount? Why not uh a
different amount or whatever.
Where did that come from?
Madam Chair Representative, the
we've modeled a number of
different um
Of fee points, we tried to sort
of shot for uh a
point on the, on the fee
assessment that would generate
meaningful revenue repeatedly
for the, for the fund, but I
wouldn't put too heavy of a, of
a thumb on the scale for what
sort of the watermark.
OK, um, thank you. And, um,
Madam Chair.
What, um, now this tax on, on
The produced water. Um, do you
worry that this is like, um, and
I, and I know your intentions,
but my, my kind of concern, I, I
guess I would say is that we
have a lot of small operators
that this could like drive them
out. Do you think that this
would potentially increase the
risk of more orphan wells.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's a, that's a fair concern.
I think that
A thing to keep an eye on is
those operators are currently
responsible for the, for the
water. Well, and for as a
threshold matter, small
operators, small, a little bit
less production, a little less
water to deal with, generally.
So the problem scales down um to
the extent that it's presenting
a problem for operators.
The
They're currently paying now.
For their water to be taken
away.
They're currently paying uh for,
for water disposal, a contract
rate and it depends on how, you
know, how good of a deal you get
and, and when you sign it and
how long you sign it for, but
it's 75 cents per dollar.
So this is a 5 cents.
Increase on that. Um, and that
I, I was gonna, I, you know, a
lot of these operators, a lot of
these smaller operators
certainly are on smaller
margins, but um,
I think that there, there is,
and this is actually get, gets
to a point that Representative
Larry Kadena raised as well
around the state's role in sort
of market making.
We're not really making this
market. There's a very, very
busy water management industry
right now, down there. So, um,
You know, we have some
confidence that, that that
industry will scale and, and
sort of meet this moment and,
and meet the challenge that.
Uh, that we're asking for here.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
well, and I, I, I, I agree with
you that like the smaller
companies have less water and
and less stuff now, but they
also have, uh, when if they're
producing less, that means they
have less of an income than,
than the bigger, then the bigger
ones, um, and a 5 cents where
where it seems small to us when
you're talking, um, the amount
of barrels that are coming out,
it could be huge to them and,
and, and that is, that's a,
that's a lot of our smaller
companies.
My now up at like leave these
wells here and go to a state
where they're not taxed for
their water.
And they're utilizing it. So,
um, now that brings me to my
next question, Madam Chair. Um,
is there, is this happening
something similar to this
happening in any other states
currently?
Uh
Madam Chair Representative,
well, we're gonna have to get
back to you on that one. Well, I
think we've got some research
questions out for that.
And just to add, Madam Chair, a
representative, um, I'm aware
of, um, some of our neighboring
or nearby oil and gas states
that do have some sort of a fee
on volumes of produced water,
um, we'll get back to you with
more specifics. Um, we're not
aware of any state that has
imposed a fee on produced water
for a purpose like we're
suggesting today.
Thank you. OK, um, and thank you
my, my final question is just a
little bit, um, on page 3 where
it talks about, um, Madam Chair,
the
Um
was starting around, OK, that
subsection A on 11, um, where it
says the where the strategic
water plan uh supply program is
created and then it says that
the department of energy, um,
wait, let me see, the Department
of the Environment, Energy
Minerals, Natural Resources
Department, and the Office of
State Engineers may each enter
enter into contracts or award
grants for eligible product, uh,
projects. Now since they can
each.
Do their own, is there gonna be
a set of like what these
requirements are, do they have
to have each other's approval or
they can do it without, uh, you
know, one can go in without the
other. How is that going to work
when all of them can.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
excellent question. We thought
hard about that when we were
figuring out how to structure a
program with 3 agencies
involved, um, the language in
the section that talks about the
fund creation, Section 5,
requires any before any one
agency can draw any money out of
the funds, they have to get the
approval of the other agencies.
So it hardwires, uh,
coordination, collaboration, and
um making sure that each agency
He knows how the other is
planning to proceed and get that
approval before they can voucher
to DFA for any of the dollars.
Thank you. Um, I appreciate that
thought, Madam Chair, because uh
when, I mean, I'm, I'm used to
education and to get 3 entities
to talk, that's a huge, huge
lift. So good luck.
Uh, but thank you.
Uh, thank you for that,
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Representative
and and presenters, um.
And, and thank you to my
colleagues. We've had a really
great discussion today with some
very uh smart questions. I will
be providing simple questions,
and so I hope that for just the,
the length of our meeting that
we can get some simple answers.
Um, I do very much appreciate,
I, I want to start off with
saying just full transparency. I
was adamantly against this bill
last year.
And had talked about it
throughout the summer of uh that
I could not support this bill.
Although
This is not last year's bill,
and so I very much appreciate
you bringing it forward, um,
between this and the substitute.
This is most certainly worth the
robust conversation that we've
been having today. So thank you.
Um.
I want to just make it clear,
this bill clearly says that the
produced water will not be used
for drinking or agricultural
water. Is that correct?
That is correct, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you. Will
this will produce water in this
bill be used for aquifer
re-injecting.
Madam Chair Representative Nell.
Thank you.
is currently the waste.
Water from oil and gas.
Drilling such as fracking, what
are we doing with that
wastewater currently?
Madam Chair Representative
Gates, uh two things happen, it
gets injected, re-injected in
what we call saltwater disposal
SWDs in New Mexico, or it gets
sent to Texas, where it is
generally injected there. Those
are
Writ large or it is recycled or
reused in, in certain kinds of
operations, enhanced oil
recovery or a lot of operators.
Thank you. And currently,
We allow the oil and gas
community to use our potable
drinking water for this process.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
currently there's no outright
prohibition on that. The actual
use by oil and gas of fresh
water has trended down
significantly since the produce
Water Act was enacted in 2019,
not an outright prohibition,
though.
And Madam Chair, if I could add,
there, there are a couple of
areas where we really do want
them to be using fresh potable
water if they're drilling
through a drinking water aquifer
or car system. We don't want
them using brackish or recycled
water for that. So that's
actually an environmental
concern, but broadly speaking,
they are not
the economics don't really work
buying fresh potable water to go
use and inject 10,000 ft
underground.
Generally speaking, that is,
that is brackish water, uh,
that, that is getting used for a
lot for a lot of those purposes,
if even if it's not recycled.
Thank you so much and thank you
for that clarification because
there is this I'm asking you
simple questions for a very
complex issue. And so I do
appreciate for that further
clarification. Um,
So in this bill, you're, we've
talked about tax, we've talked
about uh subsidies.
Grants, all those, all those
funding words are in this, uh,
grant. Let's clearly go over it.
This bill isquiring oil and gas.
To take the wastewater.
To um to.
to go through the process of
produced water. Is that correct?
Madam Chair
No, what this is authorizing is
contracts for someone to take
produced water from oil and gas
operations and treat it and uh
and sell it and basically allows
the state to sort of step in and
help defray some of those costs,
as long as that water is getting
directed towards a use that is
allowable under, under the WQCC
rules, um, which is to say not
really discharged and not put
into anything that might look
like, uh,
You know, the food chain or any
sort of human contact. Think
about things like um
manufacturing.
Applications, industrial
applications.
Thank you. So the in the bill.
Um, the proposal is for the
produced water.
Um
Can be
Is it being purchased?
By oil and gas.
Or they're continued for for
fracking or other uses, and how
is it being stored before it is
um before it is purchased or
taxed at the 5 cents a barrel.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
hard to imagine an oil and gas
operation choosing to purchase
this water, uh, given the fact
that it will have been treated
fairly extensively to a quality
that they may not need. Um,
there's cheaper water in the
Permian for them to go get. We,
they could easily just go and
use their neighbor's water,
right, to the people are storing
water on site. It's, that's kind
of where this would go. The
applications of the sort of the,
the end use for this is
envisioned, I think, is less
likely to be oil and gas
operations.
And is more likely to be again
industrial applications, things
that um.
remember the goal here is to
displace uh competition for
other freshwater. So the, to the
extent you've got some
manufacturing that's um
competing with local farmers or
local communities for drinking
water. We would like them to
think about using some of this
water, especially if they are
able to keep it out of the human
contact sort of cycle. We've got
that in here as well. That's,
that's what we're sort of
envisioning we, we did a
feasibility study for all of
this, um, where we kind of laid
out where we, where we think the
sort of the buyers are.
for this, and I, I think that
the volumes we're talking about
treating, I mean, I pulled up
the, the frack operation. I, I
pulled the
file on this the other day and
for an average well completion
and it was 500,000 barrels.
That's
Probably that that's a volume
that would be.
Um
That we're probably not talking
about as a, as an end off take
for something like this.
Thank you. Thank you for that
clarification.
So how is the produced water
being stored.
Madam Char representative,
that's a.
There's a lot of answers to that
question. Um, sometimes it's
stored on site, um, midstream
operators have the ability to
store some of it. A lot of it
goes into pipelines for disposal
right away. Managing produced
water, the volumes again, we're
talking about billions of
barrels every year with a B. Uh,
we send 2 million barrels just a
day to just to tax us. Um, so
that if if you have, if there
was one answer for it all goes
here and it's, it's getting
stored.
Boy, that, that'd make it easy,
but right now, one of the
greatest constraints on
production, one of the hardest
parts about being in the
business down there is trying to
figure out where your water is
going. So I'm sorry, I don't
have a simple answer for where
it's all being stored. Right
now, I think I can say with some
degree of certainty that's
mostly underground where it's
either been re-injected for
disposal or, yeah, that's where,
that's the sort of the majority
of say.
Thank you very much and of
course I'm, I am, um, I'm asking
very simple questions for
clarification for a very complex
issue and I appreciate that. Um.
So
If my constituents are
concerned.
About the validity and the
safety of produced water.
And we are not injecting it into
our aquifer. That is why I'm
asking how are we storing it?
How is it getting
Access to our ground and surface
water.
And what assurances?
Will this bill.
Provide so that it is not.
Like
I, I can also just.
Madam Chair, again, that
The assurances you're seeking is
exactly the problem we're trying
to solve in the bill. Um, right
now, management to produce, I
mean, it gets the truck traffic
that you write that your
colleagues who represent Eddie
and Lee County, a huge amount of
the truck traffic that they see
on the roads down in their
communities are carrying water
around.
So that's part of the issue is
if we can try to get some of
this water into another channel.
I mean, the, the environmental
concern, you know, people,
people think.
Hydraulic fracturing activities
actually water handling is the
bigger is the bigger challenge,
um, unauthorized releases of
water onto the, onto the ground,
and then it's sinking into, into
groundwater.
That's we're we're getting.
And Data shape this week in the
Oil Conservation commission on
exactly that issue. So, um,
that's what we're trying to, to
solve here.
And Madam Chair was in a case,
if I could, I appreciate what
you're trying. I think, I
appreciate what you're trying to
understand here in addition to
what you just heard from, um,
Mr. Shelton. I want to say a
couple of things. One, the
disposal wells that you've heard
about from our Mnerd expert.
Every single one of those is a
has a permit that is compliant
with not only state law, but the
United States Safe Drinking
Water Act. So anytime we're
talking about disposing of
produced water underground.
That's really broadly stating
the regulatory scheme that we're
in. Second thing I want to point
out is that when we start
thinking about produced water
treatment and reuse in the
context of the strategic water
supply.
And the feasibility study kind
of bears this out. The economics
of moving water long distances
and storing large volumes, drive
the costs of a produced water
treatment project way up.
So in practical terms, in
implementation of this bill, it
produced water product and as
reviewed by any one of the
authorized agencies would be
scrutinized for proximity.
You're gonna try to have your
treatment as close to where the
water is being generated and
coming above ground in the oil
field as you can, and you also
want your customers, your end
users, as close to where the
water is being treated as
possible, and we expect that
just because that makes for a
better costing out of a project
that the companies that would be
proposing projects under the
strategic water supply would
have already figured out the way
to make the products as cost
effective as possible. So that
is
indirectly getting at where um
storage for a strategic water
supply.
produced water project would
come into play. There would be a
storage component case by case,
site by site basis, um, that
would be reviewed, um, again in,
in accordance with all the
existing environmental
protections that we have on the
book.
Go ahead and representative.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
I deeply appreciate these
questions and this conversation,
uh, it has uh given us, I think,
um, a pause to consider, and I
respectfully ask that we roll
this bill and that we come back,
uh, at a different time taking
into uh taking into
consideration, uh, I think, I
think the um.
The, the questions that have
been answered today and um and
uh to come back and and uh put
in path forward again, um, it's
also difficult because I know
everybody got this, you know,
the final substitute bill the
night before. We debated whether
we should move it till Tuesday,
but we have 3 committees to get
through if we get through this
committee, we have another 2 to
go, so, so in the interest of
time, we tried to do it today,
but I think
We want to roll this bill today
and then come back later and
answer some of these questions
or make some changes to this
bill, so I thank you very much.
Thank you, sponsor.
OK, we're going to roll the
spill. Um, that's the only bill
we have, uh, in this committee.
So we are going to adjourn.
