Okay, Everybody's ready. We're
gonna go ahead and go to
Generated from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business concurrence.
Objection. It is ordered.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana, Are you
ready on item number one on the
concurrence calendar. I am Mr
Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I move
that the house concur in Senate
amendments to House Bills two
and three.
The gentleman to explain the
amendments. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Body, Mr.
Speaker body you have before you
are summary the LSC summary of
the Senate Finance Committee
amendments to House Bill two and
three while they took a little
while with their work. They did
overall good work, Mr Speaker
and body first on the recurring
side, Mr Speaker body their
total changes included an
increase of $31.6 million.
From what we sent over bringing
when you add in the feed bill, a
6.8% recurring budget increase,
um, equal to $10.22 billion. Mr
Speaker embody some of those
raises went for snap benefits
for elderly and disabled
individuals.
Um, 6.1 million Mr Speaker. Body
for rural healthcare rate
increases.
Mr Speaker. Body 7 Million to
the healthcare Authority for
administrative needs, Mr Speaker
embody the big ones. Um, $20
million recurring for universal
school meals. Ah, $10 million to
the Department of Public Safety
for an officer Pay plan and $4
million to the administrative
officer of the Court for Judge
raises.
Contingent upon either the House
or the Senate bill that deals
with those raises Mr Speaker and
body. I would point out that
this is slightly under the LFC
targets on recurring spending
something Mr Speaker body that I
think is is worthy. And I think
very noteworthy Mr Speaker body
when it came to the non
recurring side of the bill.
There was an increase to one
time spending by approximately
$400 million. Mr Speaker and
body that included $20 million
to the firefighter recruitment
fund $25 million for the law
enforcement recruitment, 5
Million for food. Bake emergency
assistance. Um
More money to the Department of
Public Safety for law
Enforcement vehicles. 4.4
million Mr Speaker and body for
Council of of Government to
build capacity support for our
Public health school.
The $100.8 million that we've
discussed that went in for the
grow to your district
Appropriations. Um, $70 million
in additional general fund for
the Department of Transportation
25 million for the New Mexico
Match Fund.
$50 million. Mr Speaker and body
that went for two eligible
healthcare facilities contingent
upon Senate Bill 161.
And, um, that's a sort of a
quick summary of some of the
significant action. There is
also Mr Speaker and body
Additional appropriations for,
uh, really, when you look at it
at a big picture, rural
healthcare benefited greatly
from the work that the Senate
Finance Committee did.
School meals was one of the most
significant recurring
beneficiaries of the work that
they did the Mr Speaker body
were left with actually 31%
reserves because when we took
out Tobacco Settlements
permanent fund which we did in
action earlier today, we that's
about $404 million.
We added $512 million that's
unencumbered from the expendable
trust from house Bill 196.
That's why you see that reserve
number a little bit higher than
what it left the house with. So
Mr Speaker body That's a quick
summary of some of the work that
the Senate Finance Committee
did, and
With that.
I believe that briefly explains
the amendments. Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
debate will go first to the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Lane. Thank you,
Mr Speaker as a gentleman from
Dona Ana. Yield, Mr Speaker, I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from San Juan. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen
from Dona Ana. Just a few
clarifying questions, so my
understanding of one of the
changes that the Senate made two
HB two, is they
Made about a $10 million
increase the state police play
that pay plan. Can I get a
little bit of details about what
that percentage increase will be
compared to the rest of state
employees?
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from San
Juan. I'm told we have our
experts here. Charles Lee from
the LFC Amanda Dick Petty, HFC
Chief of staff, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from San Juan. I'm
told that that's over 10% pay as
it relates to our state police
officers, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
from Dona Annan's, and so I
think it's
It's It's no secret that I'm a
huge fan of law enforcement,
including state police, but I
think we also has a body need to
be careful about, um
What those large increases due
to our local police agencies and
then having to compete with
those staffing issues. So I'm
want to flag that for the body.
Can I get some understanding
about what we're doing with
transportation funds now?
Because the way I understood
when HP two went over
I thought we had specific
projects earmarked and now I
think we're having more of a
statewide approach. So can you
explain what we're doing now?
With transportation? Absolutely.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, as I said,
they added $70 million in
general fund in the Senate
Finance Committee that brings
the total amount of general fund
2 220 million, um, based very
close to what we did last year,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, that was broken there. The
projects that are House
Transportation Committee sent
over. Ah, yeah, that were put in
after HB two crossed over. Those
were in Maine in this bill, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, so
priority projects from all of
our districts, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Ah. The Senate also added,
although did not exclusively
dedicated funding to additional
Senate projects or additional
road projects that are now also
included in HB two, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, heavy maintenance,
which has been a need for our
Department of transportation for
a while.
There was a hefty amount of
about 120 million dedicated to
that. And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
That's a quick description of
some of the transportation work
that they did. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen from Don
Yanan. So those
Those monies will be doled out.
I assume at the discretion of is
that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Absolutely. And then
the last thing I wanted to
highlight, as I understand that
there are some money is that the
Senate?
Put in with regard to structured
literacy. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is correct.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and just
that brings the total they sort
of met us halfway. The $30
million for this structured
literacy during the summertime.
Rather, it's for the debate.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
representative Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
kind gentleman from Dona Dona
Ana Yield Mr Speaker, I gladly
yield to the kind gentleman from
Sandoval.
Mr Speaker, County, Gentlemen.
First of all, I wanted to thank
Amanda and your staff for
helping me.
Uh, take care of an issue in
house appropriations on
Page 252.
Number 46 that talks about the
$160,000 to provide domestic
violence training to municipal,
county and tribal law
enforcement officers. But I
wanted for the record.
To make sure that that goes to
Sandoval County.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen from
Sandoval. I very much appreciate
you flagging. This appreciate
you sort of celebrating the work
in the committee and Mr Speaker
body for the record. I want to
confirm that these dedications
were part of the district
dedication that you worked on,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, in
concert with the piece of
legislation that you sponsored
And so it is absolutely
appropriate, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that these funds be
dedicated to the law enforcement
to the entities in Sandoval
County that you listed in your
legislation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you
Kind, gentlemen. Thank you,
Amanda and staff.
There is a debate on concurrency
generated from Valencia
representative miserable Moya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield Mr Speaker, I
gladly yield to the General lady
from Valencia. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I have a
quick question. I'm I'm getting
a lot of calls and emails from
concerned educators. So when
this house bill two left here,
we had a 4% increase in it came
back with the three. Can you
explain what was the reasoning
for reducing that? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady. Yes, Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
When we came into the session,
the executive recommended three
the LFC Mr Speaker General Lady
ultimately went with four. Mr
Speaker General Lady when the
bill went back over the some of
the increases that I talked
about, in particular the 20
million for the Public Education
department. Some of the snap
increases Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Um, the rural healthcare
increases the finally the
officer pay plan with the state
police and with the in the
judge judicial raises with the
AOC. That's where the Senate
Finance Committee dedicated the
capacity by by going back to
that 3% from four.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I have a quick
question about that whole
process because I know being an
L. E s. C. We We all make
different recommendations. What
was the L s L. E S C s
recommendation for that salary
increase speaker. Thank you,
General Lady, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, I'm told that that
was 6%.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Um, I personally
agree with the LSC because
they're the ones that work and
live and breathe education, So
they definitely know the worth
of the people that are that are
there. Um, It's sad that we
chose the lesser of all three,
But so hopefully maybe next year
we can get it up there because
because it is said that that it
I'm kind of disappointed, and so
is a lot of my educators.
That we that we got, the less
the lesser of it.
Famous speaker. Thank you,
Gentle lady. There is for
divisional leader from eternally
yours, Thompson.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield Speaker General
Lady I gladly go to the general
Lady from Burnley? Oh, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, the
famous $10 million for the DD
waiver. The additional 10
million that would make them
whole.
Did that. Make it Speaker
General Lady. I'm told that we
added additional rate increases.
I believe it was at $8 Million.
Mr Speaker. General Lady is what
I'm told by the director, But we
did add those those rate
increases were added by our
colleagues in the Senate and Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, you may not
know this. So were they rate
increases for specific services
are overall rate increases.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I'm
told that they will have
discretion within the department
to dedicate those raises. But Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
within those, uh, disability
service providers. That's where
the need is. That's where the
focus is. That's where we need
to ensure in that these raises
go to
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, What page? Should I
look on?
With them and threw it here,
General Lady
Mr Speaker, General Lady Page
95. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Iceberg.
Right. There is for debate on
concurrence. The gentleman from
San Juan representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Dona Ana yield
gladly yield to the gentleman
from San Juan? Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, um
During the year there was had
some concern about
Money put in the budget for
For legislators, staffing. I
understood that, um, when House
Bill two made it
Two Senate finance that the
language was added.
To, um, require a bill.
Uh, to be passed for that
appropriation to be spent. Miss
Speaker and gentlemen, did that
language survive? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, there is contingency
language, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
the contingency languages on our
bipartisan Legislative council
to adopt a staffing plan.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, so
We're going to have
The we're going to have
legislative leadership.
Determine that instead of us
passing a bill
To to codify it, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen for this budget, yes.
So Mr Speaker and gentlemen did
the amount remained the same.
Did it go up? Did it go down, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen amount remain
the same.
So thank you. So Miss Speaker
and gentlemen.
Ah $6 million
But no real parameters on that.
We don't know.
What that will provide. We don't
know how many staff we don't
have any FTS. We don't know how
many office space how much
office space
Um all of that's not determined.
Is that correct? Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the language remained
the same except for the
inclusion of the contingency
language based on a staffing
plan from Legislative Council.
So thank you for that. So, Miss
Miss Speaker and gentlemen.
The staffing plan would be
Uh, Legislative Council Service
and Legislative Council or just
legislative counsel. Ms. Speaker
and gentlemen, Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, just
Legislative Council. So thank
you for that. Miss Speaker and
gentlemen, um
So Legislative council would
have to meet.
And do you anticipate Miss
Speaker and gentlemen that there
would be another
More interaction with the
legislators themselves or
ourselves to to to be involved
in that, or that would be
completely decided.
By a few folks, and then we
would just be told how that
would be implemented. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, I'm I can't.
I'm not in a position to
speculate. Sort of what That
will be. But, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I expect that it's a
robust engagement from the
bipartisan Legislative Council
leadership. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I
I hope that's the case. I don't
believe that I've seen much of
that throughout the last couple
of years. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thanks for the debate on
concurrence. Your lady from
McKinley Representative
Lindstrom. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield Mr Speaker, I gladly yield
to the general lady from
McKinley had a couple of quick
questions. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I'm looking at your
reserve detail on page 11 of the
yellow handout that was passed
out. Did have a question
regarding, um
The government results and
opportunity expendable Trust
there. I'd like to know why is
this part of reserve?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. General Lady, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. We included that
in reserves this year, Um one
because it's easily accessible.
It's actually Mr Speaker.
General lady more easily
accessible than some of our
other, Um, the Tax Stabilization
reserve. For example. Secondly,
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Those
are totally unencumbered funds.
They do not have any purpose
attached to them so they can
serve as a as a reserve. Third.
Mr Speaker, General lady as
there's you know, the last
couple of years we've worked to
take the tobacco settlements
fund out of reserves make it a
true permanent fund. Um, in
order to stay at or in this case
slightly above our 30% target.
Ah, that this allows us to do
so. But Mr Speaker, General
lady, um, as we look at house
Bill 196, and these
The this expendable trust the as
these funds really, I think
could serve very well as a
reserve, a true reserve that is
easily accessible. We have
chosen to make it so for at
least one year.
Mr Speaker, and that's what my
question was going to be is it's
in the reserve before the actual
bill is passed. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I think similar to
what I've seen where Mr Speaker,
General Lady, for instance,
coming into last year's session,
we counted Tobacco Settlements
permanent fund.
Out of our reserve. Prior to
that legislation passing and
being signed, um this year that
so we're doing the same thing
essentially forecasting, Mr
Speaker, General Lady what the
reserve will be as we take
action. The fact Mr Speaker,
General Lady that, um this grow
expendable trust has passed our
chamber.
Has passed the it's one
committee in the Senate headed
to the Senate floor gives me
great confidence along with the
Tobacco settlements permanent
fund being passed off of the
floor and ready to head up to
the fourth floor that this is
very accurate accounting.
Mr Speaker, I guess I I
challenge that a little bit, But
it's um I would just be
concerned Mr Speaker, that it is
part of the reserve detail only
because the bill hasn't passed.
We don't know what the
governor's necessarily going to
do with that.
And depending on what she does,
I mean, it's obviously stays in
the Treasury, but it's just
interesting to me, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen and members, the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund has always been in there.
It's always been part of our
reserve. Um
So I I don't I don't understand.
I mean, I know the bill that
we've just talked about takes
that out now and we won't have
it in there, but it's always
been in there.
Just curious why we wouldn't
have looked at some of these
other trust funds.
As you did with the government
Results and Opportunity Fund.
Mm hmm. Thank thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
lady, Um, the it was. This was
really designed to be that back
up reserve. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, uh, some of our again some
of our reserves, tobaccos or
the, um, Tax stabilization
reserve, in particular, are very
hard to access.
And so when we created the
expendable trust, we meant it to
always serve as a backup
reserve and that's why this Mr
Speaker, General Lady, in
contrast to something like the
Higher Education Trust fund,
which we could not access the
corpus of as in the same way
that we access the corpus of
that $512 million here.
However, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
My question, though, is is that
I know for the Legacy Fund where
sequestering the funds before it
goes into the rainy day fund.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Generally. Great question,
Mr Speaker, General Lady. In
that case, we want the state
investment counsel to be able to
robustly and aggressively invest
that permanent fund in order to
gain more of a return. In the
same way, Mr Speaker, General
lady that return that taking the
Tobacco settlements permanent
fund.
Out of reserves allows the S. I
see that leeway to then more
aggressively invested, build the
corpus and therefore build what
comes in to serve the state
every year.
Mr Speaker. So, gentlemen, it
wouldn't be all that much in
terms of a percentage. But if we
didn't include the growth fund
inside the reserve detail, what
would the Reserve B
Mr Speaker, General Lady if we
took that out, and we and the
legislation is taken out for,
um the tobacco settlements
permits fund roughly about 25%.
Maybe I think, uh, probably
closer to 26%.
It would be 26 Mr Speaker
generally because it's 512
assuming that Tobacco
settlements permanent fund
Comes out of reserves. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that seems a
little high is that
Could would you ask your expert
Please? Mr Speaker, General
Lady I'm confirming with
Director Sally. But I think
that's it would be at that 20. I
think that 26
Our working. We confirm those
numbers with the experts. Mr
Speaker, General Lady, Alright,
That's what I wanted to know.
Thank you very much. Thank you
Generally right. We are on a
motion to concur with sentiment.
Senate amendments to House Bills
two and three is twice amended
All those in favor of the motion
to concur signify by saying aye.
Suppose Naomi
The eyes have it. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to house Bills two and three is
twice amended. Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker I had If I had the
red flag, I'd ask you to check
the replay.
It is confirmed the eyes have
it. We have conquered.
And you lose the time out.
Generally from Brunel, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business.
Committee report.
Mr Speaker, your consumer and
Public affairs Committee to him
has been referred. Senate floor
substitute for Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 146.
Has had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari chair
Mr Speaker, Um, move adoption.
We are on adoption of a federal
community Court for Senate.
Floor substitute for Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for
Centerville 146. All those in
favor signify by saying, I
suppose in a Yeah, it's having
commuter report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Labor Veterans
and Military affairs Committee
to has been referred Senate Bill
21, as amended has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
and then referred to the
Appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
a sale The Alkon share
Do it after report adoption of a
federal committee report in
Centerville 21 as amended all
those in favor say if I would
say, Ni Ni. The committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, your Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee tomb has been referred
Senate Bill 128, as amended has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass and then referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted a list
Celio conquer.
Mr Myrtle Doctor report adoption
of a favorite committee report
on Senate Bill 128 as amended
and also in favor signify by
Mr Myrtle Doctor report adoption
of a favorite committee report
on Senate Bill 128 as amended
along some favors, and if I was
saying I was supposed name, the
eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Appropriations
and finance Committee tumors
been referred. Senate Bill 76
has had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small Chair,
Mr Speaker. Move, Adoption
Adoption Committee put on
Centerville 76. So those who
favor signify by saying, Ah, I
made Yeah, it's have a committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your appropriations
and finance committee tumors.
Branford Senate Bill 108, as
amended has had another
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair. Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption Committee Report on
Senate Bill 108. All those in
favor signify by saying Aye
opposed nay.
The eyes. Have it coming report
adopted Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to miss been referred
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 151,
as amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption adoption of a Federal
committee report on the Senate
tax, Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute percent
about 151 as amended. All those
in favor signify by saying Aye
opposed nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, Your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 161, as amended has had it
under consideration reports.
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, Respectfully
submit and Nathan Small Chair,
Mr Speaker. Move Adoption
Adoption Favorable Committee
report on the Senate Finance
Committee substitute for sent
about 161 as amended all those
in favor, say nine
All those opposed name.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted Mr Speaker, your
Appropriations and Finance
Committee to him has been
referred. Senate Bill 165 has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended,
Respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small Chair, Mr Speaker, Move,
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on Centerville
165 all those papers and if what
I say nine
Don't suppose name?
The subcommittee report adopted
Mr Speaker, Your Appropriations
and Finance Committee to miss
been referred. Senate Bill 216,
as amended, has added under
consideration reports, same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Nathan
Small chair, Mr Speaker move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on Centerville
to 16 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying nine.
Others opposed nay.
The eyes. Have it coming report
adopted Mr Speaker, Your
appropriations and finance
Committee tumors been referred.
Senate Bill 217, as amended has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair,
Mr Speaker Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate Bill
217 as amended all those in
favors and if I was saying I
Suppose. Name the eyes have it.
Community report adopted Mr
Speaker. You're enrolling in
grossing committee tomb has been
referred House Bill 193, as
amended has had it under
consideration reports, same has
been duly enrolled in a gross
preparatory designing by the
officers of the House
Respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair.
Mr Speaker Move. Adoption are on
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house Bill
193 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
Paul supposed name.
The ice Abbott coming report
adopted that the record
reflected the duly enrolled in
it grows. Copies of House Bill
193, as amended were signed by
the officers of the House in
Open session.
Mr Speaker, You're enrolling,
engrossing committee to him has
been referred. House Judiciary
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill 129 as amended.
House Bill 148 with the
emergency Clause House Bill 177
as amended with emergency clause
has had them under
consideration, reports that same
have been duly enrolled in and
gross preparatory to signing by
the office of the House.
Respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair
Mr Speaker move adoption
adoption of favorable committee
reports on House Judiciary
Committee Substitute for House
Bill 129 as amended House Bill
148 with an emergency clause and
House Bill 177 as amended with
an emergency clause. All those
in favor signify by saying nine
supposed name.
The Ice Habit Community report
adopted that the record reflect
that the duly enrolled in Negros
copies of House bills. How's
your District Committee?
Substitute for House? Bill 129,
as amended has been 148 with an
emergency clause and House Bill
177, as amended with an
emergency class were signed by
the officers of the House in
Open session.
General lady from Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order business third reading of
legislation.
See no objection of disordered.
Alright members. I will direct
your attention to
Calendar item.
Number 22 on the third reading
calendar. Gentle lady from Santa
Fe. Are you ready on this item?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Would you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect.
Let the record inflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill five,
as amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Mr Speaker and members
of the body. Senate Bill. Senate
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for Senate Bill five as amended
is
Brought with the intention of
bringing uniformity to polling
places. Um, and the presence of
firearms within those polling
places. So currently Mr Speaker
and members
In polling places that take
place at schools, firearms are
not permitted. However, many
polling places are in other
locations such as churches,
community centers and other
community locations. And the
idea here is simply to bring
those to the conditions within
those polling places.
Um into uniformity. Mr Speaker
and members. Um this bill has
been amended significantly since
it was brought forward last
session to ensure that we are
not unintentionally capturing
individuals that maybe just
passing by.
That may be visiting a
neighboring business that may be
coming close to appalling place
but not participating in an
election or entering the polling
place. And so Mr Speaker and
members of the bill has really
become quite a tailored
legislative initiative. Um, and
it does include exceptions for
persons in private automobiles.
Persons conducting non election
related business and certain
certified law enforcement
officers and Mr Speaker with
that I would stand for
questions. There is debate. We
go first to the gentle lady from
Chavez. Korean Roosevelt
representative Riebe. Thank you,
Mr Speaker will the generating
from Santa Fe Yield? I gladly
yield to my friend from Curry.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And, um,
General Lady, I want to go to
section or Page two of your Bill
Section B.
The provisions of subsection a
of the section do not apply to
if you could go over for the
body. Um what? Who works who is
excluded from this statute? Mr
Speaker?
I
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Ladies, So these
provisions do not apply to a
certified law enforcement
officer and performance of the
officers official Duties
enforcement officer who is
certified pursuant to the Law
Enforcement Training Act who is
acting in accordance with the
policies of the Law enforcement
agency, a person in a private
automobile.
Or other private means of
conveyance.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Mr Speaker. I have
an amendment.
Your lady. Has that been? It is
coming.
Would you like the number? Mr
Speaker? I don't have it yet.
Give us a second. We'll get it
passed out, and then we'll have
you read the number and explain
the amendments. So let's standby
call vote, please.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. I thought
you were. Are you ready for the
number?
We're waiting for a couple more.
I think we had to. I'm sorry I
gave the gentle lady a copy and
that might have earlier when we
were talking about it, and that
might be the problem.
We need like three more.
I apologize. Mr Speaker. It's
all right. It's all good.
Henry, pray to three extra ones
and
They stick together, you get to
pull them off.
Just knock off a little time.
There you go.
Or the link in writing the
coffees.
Lady from all those counties we
have the amendment passed out.
What is the 2 to 8 number? Mr.
Speaker? It's 0.228313 0.1.
Alright, That's what we all
have. Can you please explain the
amendment? Yes, Mr Speaker and
what this amendment does is on
page two of the bill as we were
just discussing it. Strikes
lines 13 through 18.
And inserts instead, a
commission law enforcement
officer with the power to rest
and performance of the officers,
official duties into a
commissioned law enforcement
officer with the power to rest
acting in accordance with the
policies of the officers Law
enforcement Agency.
Or
And so this is the amendment,
Basically, um Mr Speaker and
body is I received a lot of
phone calls from my local
agencies, the sheriff's
departments and stuff. And they
if you know you can be a
certified officer after you go
to the academy, but up to a year
prior to that, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, you can be a
commissioned officer and still
have the powers to carry a
firearm.
Make arrests and be a police
officer, basically, And so I
think that the issue that they
have and what they're concerned
about Mr Speaker and General
Lady is that they generally
local sheriff's offices are in
the county building where the
actual voting is occurring
there, working in that area
there actually being security on
the pole places and
Because of the way this is
worded and just allowing
certified peace officers on Page
two this amendment now if you
are certified peace officer, you
are definitely a commission
peace officer, and it will
protect those officers so that
they don't get penalized under
this law, And so that's the
basis of the amendment. Mr
Speaker to the bill, sponsors is
a friendly amendment.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. No,
it is not a friendly amendment.
Mr Speaker. I'd love to explain
why, um I really want to express
my appreciation to the general
lady from Chavez, Curry and
Roosevelt on the conversation we
had earlier today about this
topic and I understand
The rationale for expanding the
definition. However, the I do
believe that the issue of
commissioned yet non certified
law enforcement officers who are
working in a building that
includes a polling place would
be covered by the language on
page two lines 21 through 25.
Where it's specifically exempt.
any person who is conducting
lawful non election related
business nearer than 100 FT from
the door.
From this law, So, um, but I
really respect the General lady
from Curry and appreciate the
thoughtfulness on the amendment.
However, at this time it is
unfriendly very well. Is there a
debate on the amendment? Let's
go first to the gentleman from
Burnley. Your representative
Riemann.
Thank you. Mr Speaker Will the
General lady from Clovis Yield?
Yes, Mr Speaker. I'll yield to
the gentleman from Burton. Leo,
Mr Speaker and General Lady, one
of the things that we ought to
probably talk about is vagueness
in legislation and you know if
we have vagueness
It can be ruled
unconstitutional. Now your
attorney. Why don't you comment
on that? And then we'll talk
more about the the amendment,
because if we don't specify it
in here, exactly correct.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree with what you're saying,
Um in my concern is if we don't
change it.
Because it is spelled out so
clearly that a certified peace
officer is exempt. I don't see
how the parts see on Page two,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen would
exempt these other officers. I
believe that this is looked at
in a court of law. They're going
to be at the legislator
Legislature intended.
That commissioned officers be
excluded from this. They would
have added that to the language
And so I believe Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, we're actually
creating a statute here that is
going to be reversed in court
and get lawful commission peace
officers in trouble, Mr Speaker.
Yeah. Mr. Speaker in general
lady, Um, I agree with you. And
you know, when I was police
officer, we had to read the
language. Exactly, And it had to
be very clear for us to go ahead
and and follow the law I want
to. I want to for a moment. Talk
about most of the counties.
In our state. Most of the
counties you know our rule, and
when you go to the county
courthouse or the county
building
The sheriff's department and the
accounting clerk.
Are located in that same
building.
So let's talk about how these
small departments hire police
officers and the way they hire a
police officer is a higher um
They commissioned them.
And when they commissioned them,
they now have the power of
arrest.
By New Mexico State statute.
They have one year.
To go to the Kaddoumi past the
academy, at which time they
become certified.
So they're not certified until
they graduate from the academy.
one of the things that we have
in the larger districts
Albuquerque
The burden, Leo County Sheriff's
Department and the Albuquerque
Police Department, But they hire
their officers.
And start in the academy so they
are actually certified. When
they get commission. They pass
everything come out.
That is not most of the state.
Most of the state goes to the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy. So this is a real
problem. Um
Mr Speaker and General lady, Do
you understand? How is your
county? Where is the the clerk?
Do they have pulling places or
ballot boxes? Were the sheriff
would be entering Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um, we just recently
actually built a new county
facility but prior to about six
months ago to a year ago, they
were located in the exact same
building.
And I know Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that that is how it
generally is an all or most
small rural areas. Is that your
local sheriff's office because
it's a curry house, Achouri, a
county offices located with your
county sheriff, and they're
certified officers working with
them, and there's also
commissioned officers working
with them.
And I agree with you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I've had
commissioned officers for up to
a year walking around with their
guns and their badges, making
arrests and doing everything
that a normal police officer or
sheriff's deputy would do and
not be certified. And I worry if
we don't change this, we are
definitely not excluding them.
and we're going to be asking for
a reversal in court on the
statute. When something like
this happens, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Actually, That was the way I was
hired. I was hired and
commissioned and you know, and
then went to the academy later.
But in Albuquerque, it's the mid
eighties until the sheriff's
department moved out of the
county building and moved over
to the law enforcement building
at that time.
Um, in county clerk, the the
District Court. Everything was
in one building and that's what
we see Most.
Commonly around the state.
So we're going to place these
Junior officers in a real
problem.
Going either to the just going
to the office. But Mr Speaker
and and General Lady, talk about
some of the duties that the
officers have, like escorting.
Um
Ah, the, um, uh, individuals
from the clerk's office to go
and get a ballot box.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. That was
the other point I was going to
bring up even if you're not
housed in the same facility, the
the concerns that my sheriff,
another law enforcement heads
brought forth to me was they
still send their deputies
commissioned officers over to
the polling place or the clerk's
office because they're still
responsible for security of
those places?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. They also
are part of picking up the
ballot boxes. If there's an
issue over there, they may have
to respond over for any type of,
you know, report of any type of
threat at a polling place or any
issue at a polling place and
we're asking them to go and they
can make an arrest. And so
they're able to actually go over
there, Mr Speaker and gentlemen
and make a report and make an
arrest of a crime happened or
They need to go over there to
assist in some form or fashion
with the clerk's office. So
again, this is really asking
those officers then to go walk
to that building and leave their
firearms in their vehicle.
In order to actually walk into
this place because they're not
identified as being an exception
Under this section, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker and
Channel Lady, let's let's talk
about a different scenario. And
you know these rookie officers
haven't gone to the academy, but
they have the power of rest.
And many of them around on their
own out on patrol. Um, let's
assume that there is someone at
a polling place and that person
at the polling place has a
firearm.
And they are dispatched to go.
Oh, and enforce the law.
Should this bill passed?
At that polling police. You were
a prosecutor, Can that officer
who is not certified, he's
commissioned. He's a rookie. Can
he go and make that arrest
without violating this law, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, in normal
circumstances? Yes. He can make
the arrest if there was a
firearm in a polling place.
But with this statute, it would
require him to either call a
different officer or leave his
firearm in the vehicle and go in
and respond without a firearm.
Mr. Speaker, gentleman, Um, Mr
Speaker and members of the body
this the language she's
proposing clears up this
ambiguity.
And we must put this into the
statute to go ahead and fix this
problem.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is, is there further
debate on the amendment?
Third Gen. Two
Lady from Burnley and Torrance,
who is funding in a friend.
The other floor. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I will have to call you
back. Sorry. I was trying to
kill my county clerk because I'm
pretty sure and Torrance County
Mr Speaker we count on, the
clerk said.
It was a county was a county
commissioner. He'll forgive me,
Mr Speaker.
General lady from CCR. We
please yield ER like it
counties.
Yeah, I guess you're right Your
time. Mr Speaker, I will yield
to the General lady from where
are you from Berlin In 2018. BT
from Bt.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker.
Hopefully, we'll get through
this. Okay, So my question is
sorry. I just
Up on my county commissioner
because I was trying to figure
out what? Because we have got
and Torrance County we have co
mingling. We have a lot of
coming a week. Right now.
There's a big debate on if
you're what? Because you can't
have a fireman the courts but to
get to the sheriff's department.
It's right next to the court, So
we have people that are pushing
the limits right now of can they
carry
I also believe the county clerk
is in there. So how is this
going to play out of the
sheriff's department is actually
in the same building, like the
county clerks officers shared.
How does
The sheriff's can't be within
100 ft. Of that county clerk of
the hand of a ballot, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, Mr Speaker
General 80, according to the
statute that would be with the
problem would be they would not
be exempt under this, so if
they're within 100 ft from their
offices. What that 100 ft from
the clerk's office. Um, in that
situation, they would not be
able to have a firearm in their
possession, even though they are
commissioned officers allowed to
make arrests and allowed to
carry a firearm, Mr Speaker
generally, and Mr Speaker
What I did hang up the phone.
Gentle lady. That's what I was
trying to ask that question. But
I, but we haven't even bigger
problem. Mr Speaker, Gentle lady
in Burnley Oh County in
Albuquerque.
There is a strip mall. There's a
sprout. It's on tramway in
Central and the North Heights
are sorry. Four hills there
there is a sheriff's department.
Next to the voting station.
Their next door to each other.
So does that mean they have to
close up that burning Leo County
Sheriff stubs substation.
Because there's a voting polling
place like two buildings over
there. They're within 50 ft of
each other. So what happens to
them? Mr Speaker, General lady,
Um as far as
The certified peace officers
that are listed as an exception
in this bill. They should be
fine. However, it's the other
officers that have not reached
their certification and are only
commissioned, which could be up
to a year and again. Mr Speaker,
General Lady do have the powers
to arrest and carry a firearm
and actually be in a patrol car
by themselves with no
assistance.
They would be required to
I believe leave their gun in
their car.
Um, And that's the problem with
Not adding a commissioned
officer into this bill so that
we can make sure that they can
perform their duties as a
certified peace officer could
also Mr Speaker General 80,
right, Mr Speaker, and generally
I don't want to. I don't want to
make a pipeline to prison bill
for our law enforcement. Even
though this is what is the fine
for this? Mr Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr Speaker, Generally the that's
a petty misdemeanor. Um, looks
like that would be six months in
prison or jail, county jail and
up to $500 in fines. Mr. Speaker
generally, I definitely don't
want to send our young law
enforcement or commissioned law
enforcement into jail. I don't
want that. So I'm trying to wrap
my head around. How do we if we
don't do this amendment
We are going to have Mr Speaker
dealing with law enforcement
officers.
That potentially could be
violating the law and lose their
careers that correct? Yes, Mr
Speaker, General Etienne, and
it's also concerning I know that
the general lady proposing the
bill had said under section I
believe it was C they would be
protected. Um and that's
concerning to me, Mr Speaker
generally because if that's the
situation why are we exempting
certified peace officers to make
sure they're safe?
And not be in charge. So I'd be
a little hesitant to just assume
that commissioned officers are
going to be protected under
Section C.
Just because that's the belief
when if we feel Mr Speaker,
General Lady, we need to
definitely make a provision that
exempts certified peace officers
so there is no issue and they
can carry their firearm.
I would be a little nervous if I
was a commissioned officer
saying, Well, I think it's going
to fit under C and you're going
to be okay. Mr Speaker, General
Lady and Mr Speaker and
generally did not to pick on
lawyers. But if I was a lawyer
and looked at that you could
twist that in any way you want
it to either help protect your
client or a prosecutor could
look at it and says that does
not specifically
Exempt you so we're going to go
ahead and charge you. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Generally
that that's the problem because
when you look what the intent of
the Legislature is when you go
back and review these bills when
you're charging or when you're
actually charging somebody in
there in court, and they're on
appeal. You go back and look at
what the statute says in the
intent of the Legislature, and
the argument would be well, they
really intended the Legislature
to exclude commission law
enforcement officers. They would
have included that in that
section.
And so that means they weren't
intending to exclude them. And
therefore, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, they have a very good
chance of being charged with
petty misdemeanor. Okay, and, um
Um, Mr Speaker and General
Ladies, sometimes in Torrance
County. We have where there's a
very tense case happening in the
courts and there will be law
enforcement. They're out of the
county clerk is right there and
they were commissioned. That
means they could be arrested. Is
that correct?
Mr Violation. Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady.
definitely in violation. I guess
it would be up to the prosecutor
and whether to charge them but
technically, under the statute
per se, they would be violating
this law. Mr. Speaker generally
so, Mr Speaker, General Idiot
living Because I have urban.
I've got Albuquerque and I have
Torrance County, and there is so
much co mingling of here's the
county clerk. Here's the ballot
box. Here's the Sheriff's
office. Here's
The law enforcement officers.
They're all right there and then
you have a situation where
there's courts and they're
showing up because there's a
high profile or they need to be
there for whatever or even, um,
you know, in some cases, you the
county commissioner, the City
Council have their meetings and
law enforcement come to that,
And there's also the county
clerk right across. So what I
see is we're making a I like to
call the pipeline to prison.
For the commission officers who
don't know that this is a case
and now we're going to punish
them, and they're probably more
likely than not going to lose
their job. So I completely
understand why we want this
because we don't want to punish
our law enforcement officers and
have somebody unknowingly do
this and absolute agree with
you, Mr Speaker. Generally,
that's part. See if I was a
prosecutor. I would use that.
To go again if I wanted to go
against law enforcement, and if
the lawyer who was trying to
help them this is very it's.
It's convoluted, and it's not
very cut and dry. And I see this
as the solution. So thank you
for bringing that forward for us
in the rural areas who have so
much commingling of people in
one building. Thank you, and
thank you, Mr Speaker in
general, and I would just like
to respond one thing when you
said that.
Our county building, while they
have now separated the sheriff's
office from the county clerk's
office. All the county meetings
are held in that building, which
means all law enforcement goes
in for those county meetings,
commissioned and non
commissioned or non certified
and certified and commissioned
officers at the same time, and I
even think I don't even know if
you're sheriff has to be
certified.
I would have to take a look at
that. But
Not an election year. So Mr O,
not an elected sheriff, I
thought you said not regionally.
Sorry. If you're elected, your
that would not be applicable so
you would fall into that as
well. Yes. So, Mr Speaker in
general lady, I'm sure they're
commissioned. But they're well.
I don't even know if they're
commission. But we have an issue
there. Also with possibly your
sheriff, having some issues, Mr
Speaker generally.
But again, just Mr Speaker,
generally the one way to fix
this and to make sure this is
not an issue is to is to do this
amendment. It's simply common
sense and there should be no
reason why anybody in this body
would not want to protect their
commission officers and make
sure we do not cross this
problem if we're gonna protect
certified law enforcement, and
the attention is to make sure
they're okay.
Then we got to protect our
commissioned officers to Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady. There is
further debate on the amendment.
The gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero, representative Vincent
Thank you. Mr Speaker is the
general lady from Curry Yield? I
yield to the gentleman from
Otero and Lincoln. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you, gentle
lady.
You know, I wasn't thinking
about a commissioned officer,
And that was actually pretty
brilliant that you brought that
up because I got to thinking
back as as in our rural areas.
We try to hire certified
Police officers, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and most of the
time we end up hiring some home
groans that come in, and they
get commissioned and there with
a field training officer for
three months, and then they're
on their own.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
It's some of my real real rural
areas.
What is that officer going to do
if he's the only one on like,
say in Corona, New Mexico?
And he's not a full blown
certified officer, and he's just
a commissioned officer.
What happens there, Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, I guess he's going to
be taking a big old chance and
and weighing his options,
whether to go in and and
You know, protect the public or
face the possibility of being
arrested himself just puts his
officers, Mr Speaker, gentlemen
in a bad situation and in small
rural areas, it is extremely
common for someone to be
commissioned only for up to a
year because it's so hard to
recruit and so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I would ask the body
to think about these rural areas
and how hard it is to get law
enforcement just in general.
So let's not punish them in this
bill, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady from Curry.
So you know, I think of it's an
hour and a half from Carrizo to
Corona.
Um
We'd New Mexico, one of my other
areas. That's super rural.
It might take close to two
hours.
To get over there and
Sometimes they just don't have a
certified officer. There might
not be somebody willing to live
in. We'd New Mexico so I just I
would like to remind ever, uh,
I'd like to remind the sponsor
that we do have a lot of rural
areas And maybe you know when
you're in Santa Fe
Or you're in an urban setting.
Sometimes you forget about those
real rural places, and that
could pose a big threat to this
bill. So thank you for the thank
you for the amendment.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. There is
really debate. Gentlemen from
Santa Juana Duncan. Thank you.
Mr Speaker Will the general
later field will yield to the
gentleman from San Juan. Thank
you. Mr Speaker and Jenna. Lady.
I just have a question.
Um, we're going through the
process right now. I believe in
our county where, um
The Navajo Nation. Please are
working closely with our
sheriff's department and they
are cross training. We have
polling places that are on the
reservation. What happens there?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um, not
very familiar with tribal law or
how that works, but if they are
actually commissioned to come
onto tribal land and make
arrests and their commissioned
officer, um I guess they could
run into the same problem. I'm
just not familiar with tribal
lands and exactly how that
works, but that's the best I can
answer on that. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Thank you, Mr Speaker
and General ladies so
Oh, what if the sheriff's
department goes out and gets
The boxes from the polling
place.
On tribal lands. Can he be
arrested then if he's not a
certified officer?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen again, I'm
not sure in tribal lands, but
just in the general
Um, just in the general example
you're giving at the sheriff is
not certified officer and he
goes out to a polling place and
picks up the ballots. It seems
under this, He's not. He's not
exempt under the statute.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I think we might
have a situation there that
might cause some folks headache.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Speaker
for the debate on the amendment
chairman from Lee represented
Scott.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Well, the general lady from
Chavez Kurian Roosevelt. Yield,
please.
I will leave. I will yield to
the gentleman from Lee County.
Speaker, general lady I need to
make sure that I have this
Straight in my mind.
I'm going to pause it a
situation return uniformed
police officers.
Arrive at a polling place.
One that is certified and one
that has commissioned both
caring firearms arriving.
At the polling place in the same
vehicle is that
A plausible scenario. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, that is a
plausible scenario.
And Mr Speaker and General
Aidid.
Out of that situation.
Only two officers cannot within
100 ft of the polling place.
The certified officer will be
obligated to arrest
They
Commissioned officer
For possession of that firearm.
Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I guess
if he
He thought the there was a
violation of the law. He could
make an arrest because it is a
misdemeanor occurring in his
presence, and he might be
obligated at that point to make
an arrest or Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, he that that
commissioned officer could just
stay in the car.
Or leave his fire from the car
and not back up the certified
peace officer, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Speakers, Gentle lady. Sometimes
you just have to shake your
head. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you Generally. Thank you,
gentlemen. Mr. Speaker. It is
your further debate.
Uh, on the amendment.
Your lady from earlier, JC.
Mr Speaker will the lady yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker.
And Lady from Santa Fe.
No, I'm it's CCR. Right? Okay,
CCR.
Yeah, I remember that.
Um
On page two lines 21 through 25.
The language of this bill, says
a person conducting lawful non
election related business nearer
than 100 FT from the door
through which voters may enter
to vote are nearer than 50 ft
from a monitored security.
Container is not guilty of
unlawful possession of a firearm
at a polling place.
So I don't understand. Given
that Mr Speaker and Lady from
CCR
Why you need this Amendment.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
guess I could say why do we need
the exception under B? If that
is the case, any law enforcement
officer that is certified and
would be responding to, I guess
a business or some lawful non
election related business would
be exempt under Section C.
However, Mr Speaker, General
Lady
You have felt it necessary, the
sponsors felt it necessary to
exempt certified law enforcement
officers. So again, Mr Speaker
and General Lady, if you don't
exempt commission officers, the
intent behind the legislation is
going to be read by the courts
and by prosecutors to me that
you did not mean to exempt
commissioned officers.
So again, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, if C is going to be the
controlling
Law in this bill.
Why is there be Mr Speaker,
General Lady?
Mr Speaker and Lady from Curry.
I I can't picture
A scenario that was described
about the district attorney
trying to make sure that he or
she gets a conviction by
Charging, um, an officer under
these circumstances, it makes it
just
Boggles the imagination. So
I am.
I I would argue against this
amendment because it's
unnecessary. I think the
exceptions in the bill or broad
And inclusive and we don't need
any further amendments to the
bill. Mr Speaker, General lady,
I guess, respectfully I would
disagree. I would think if we
want to make sure, Mr Speaker
Ladies second wasn't a question,
Madam. Mr. Speaker. I just made
a statement. That's all. Okay,
That's fine. Your lady to
respond. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I would just respectfully
disagree with that. Because if
we really are wanting to protect
people when we really are
wanting to do the right thing
and have good, strong
legislation
What is the big deal of just
including commissioned officers
in this amendment? It saves
everybody, this heartache and
this headache and officers
worrying about whether they're
going to be arrested. It's a
simple amendment. It's a common
sense Amendment. Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I am not
understanding why there's
leading opposition to this, Mr
Speaker.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Mr Speaker. I moved to table
House for Amendment number one.
Okay, We're on the motion to
table House floor amendment
number. 12. Senate Judiciary
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill five As amended A vote of
years your member would have
been tabled. It would have. No,
we're back on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
Of the
Okay right now.
Okay. The board is not closed.
I would have 33 in the
affirmative 36 in the negative.
The motion to table House Floor
amendment number 12, Senate
Judiciary Company substitute for
Centerville five as amended.
Has failed.
We're back on the amendment. Mr
Speaker. I move adoption of
House Floor Amendment number
one.
Two Senate judiciary
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill five as amended.
Roll call vote, please.
Okay with the motion to
Adopt House floor amendment
number 12 Senate Judiciary, Can
we subsume personable five as
amended.
It would be answered, would have
adopted the amendment would have
no
And we're in the Twilight zone.
The vote is now open.
Was about to close.
Folks, I'm I mean, you know,
I've been very flexible with his
32nd 1 o'clock and it is very,
very frustrating for the staff
and everybody went folks are not
ready to vote.
In their seats. Okay. The vote
is now closed by a vote of 34 in
the affirmative, 35 and the
negative
Adoption of House Floor
Amendment number one
Two. Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill five
as amended, has
Failed.
Well, thank you, Mr Speaker. I'm
a little surprised that that
common sense amendment failed
and feeling bad for our law
enforcement officers, But, um, I
will yield and I appreciate your
time. Thank you. All right.
There's further gentlemen from
earlier representative Rim.
Yes.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will the
General lady yield I yield to
the gentleman from Bernie Leo?
Uh, Mr Speaker and General Lady
Allen take you to page two.
And, um, we're going to go ahead
and go.
Lines two through six so
Um
It, you know, having a firearm
within 100 ft of it.
And what I want to highlight is,
uh, persons, particularly those
who have concealed weapons many
times they're not thinking
about. Well, I have it in my
pocket, my hip, whatever, and
they walk up and they're
unintentionally walking towards
that now, now that they get
close to the door, they go.
Gosh, I've got to go back to the
car and put my firearm.
Arm in the car.
And so what we've created here.
In that paragraph is that
A unintentional act could be a
criminal act for a person. Let's
say that has a concealed carry
license.
The other area that I see over
here.
And and I do. Thank you for
having that in your bill.
Um
Mm yeah. And
And I saw him page to lie 19 for
20.
Uh, you do allow an individual
to go ahead and put their
firearm in the car, So I
appreciate that.
But my problem is
There's a legislature has been
very critical of
People leaving firearms in their
car.
And so with that
Mr Speaker, I would move. House
Floor Amendment number two
Two. Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill five.
And asked for a roll call vote.
Right. We gotta roll call vote.
Has the amendment been passed
out?
Read gentleman from early. Oh,
it appears the amendment passed
out. What is the 2 to 8 number?
Mm hmm.
Gentlemen from earlier What is
it? 2 to 8 number
Uh, Mr Speaker, the 202 was 2 to
8.
312.1 to explain the amendment.
Mr Speaker in the body, this
amendment If we look at on page
two line, 18 strike or and on
Why in 20 work between 2021.
We're going to add this
These words, and I ask you to
closely listen, because there's
something I want to emphasize
here.
A person caring a concealed
firearm.
So it must be concealed.
Who is in possession of a valid
concealed handgun license.
For the firearm pursuant to the
concealed handgun Carry act.
So it would exempt a concealed
carry person from this act and
I'm I added, the emphasis to the
person must be concealing the
firearm.
Um
I want to emphasize that those
persons who have a concealed
carry license have gone through
a background check.
Ah, prior to be issued a
concealed carry license so no
one should see that they have a
firearm.
And with that, Mr Speaker, I
would stand for questions to the
sponsors is a friendly
amendment. Mr Speaker? No, it is
not a friendly amendment to
explain why. Yes, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I appreciate the
detail that you included in your
amendment. However, it is very
important for this legislation
to
Remain within constitutional
confines Federal the U. S
Constitution as well as
Ah, in accordance with other
state statutes, and so, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen in the
Bruin case, which is the most
recent and well known federal U
S Supreme Court case, they held
that firearm restrictions that
sensitive places are
constitutional, including
schools, courthouses and
specifically polling places.
Now when we look at state law
for how we regulate the
possession of a firearm in those
same sensitive places.
There are no exemptions for
concealed carry licenses
carrying a concealed firearm.
Within schools within
universities within courthouses
and or court facilities. And so
it is Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
don't believe that we should
relax the, um the law in a place
where the most sensitive part of
our democracy is taking place,
which is at a polling place.
Where you have individuals
entering and casting their
ballots and exercising their
right to franchise, you know
their right to vote, and I don't
I see that actually is a place
where we need to take as much
care.
As we do.
And schools and universities in
courthouses where you do have,
um what the Supreme Court has
characterized as sensitive
places. So, Mr Speaker for those
reasons that gentleman this is
an unfriendly amendment. There
is a bit on the amendment,
Gentlemen from Ebola and
McKinley, representative Alkon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Berganio? Yield?
Um
Mr Speaker. I yield my colleague
from
Um, Cibola County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. You know, this is
exactly where the complaints
came.
It was our friendly concealed
carry. People would walk in.
And make sure that that poll
worker knew they had a concealed
weapon.
And that is where every time the
big complaints come in. Those
people come in when I could deal
weapon, but they make sure that
everybody knows they have a
concealed weapon, and that's
where the complaints came from
more than anything else. That's
all I have to say. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
Those people themselves are the
ones who go in and they make
sure everybody knows that
they're caring. And you said be
scared of them.
So with that, Mr Speaker, That's
all I had to say. The debate on
the amendment and lady from
Berlin Torres or reserve Lord
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Give me
one second to take a breath
here.
Mr Speaker. Will the gentleman
from Berlin County please yield.
Mr Speaker, I yield of the
general lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
Berlin County.
Um, how many? Well, I'm not
guessing how many years you've
been voting a long time like I
have is that correct?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
I've been voting over 50 years
and I have never seen anyone
walk in to a polling place
Standing in front of a polling
place where the firearm
And someone who is walking in
and pulling their jacket back to
show that they have a firearm is
not complying with the concealed
carry act.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, That's
what I'm trying to get to. I've
been voting quite some time. I'm
not going to say how long but
it's been a while and I've
consistently gone into vote.
And I think a few times been
sick have done an absentee
ballot. But I always go in
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
have never in my life ever.
Seeing anybody go. Here's my
firearm.
So I just wanted to bring that
up. Since that was just become
an issue. So, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, have you heard from
other law enforcement officers
that people, uh, showing their
firearm to other people that
that's because I haven't heard
that? Have you heard that Mr
Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr Speaker and General Lady, not
only not from law enforcement.
Um I have spoken to some of our
poll watchers or are individuals
who have worked for elections
and none of them have ever told
me that they've seen a firearm.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
because you were going to
basically say the same thing I
am because I'm very active in my
community. I am in touch with
our county clerks. I am very
involved with my community and
never once and all the time I
have lived here have been
elected officials, everybody,
Anyone ever come to me and said,
You know what people with
concealed carry scare me and
they're flashing my their
firearm at me because I think
that somebody would have called
law enforcement. That would
happen once you've guessed, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
Yes, Mr Speaker and General Lady
Clearly if you're displaying
your firearm in that manner, you
are in violation of the
concealed carry act.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I just wanted to
address that first because I've
never heard of that in my life
because you know when we looked
at all the stuff that came in
about people who carry it shows
99.9985% of us, and that was
presented by Senator Ivey Soto
are not doing anything wrong
with our firearms. So I think if
that was an issue, we would have
heard about that a lot more.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So, um
Because I think if I remember
correctly is actually started,
and it may be incorrect. This
whole bill started because
somebody got scared that they
saw somebody wearing an open
carry. But I may be wrong with
that. But I thought that's how
this whole bill started was one
from one person.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
So what you like to do because I
have some issues.
Um
I have got
And Albuquerque and
I have got some locations we go
up, um, tramway in my voting
district.
Where I have got
A voting place in a strip mall,
which you probably do, too,
because we have neighborhoods
and then right next door is a
business so this would be
helpful right for the people who
own the business next door that
they could wear their farm
concealed, carry and still have
their second Amendment. Right,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
that then it you know it becomes
Vega in this bill.
Which is problematic, But, you
know, I think you brought up a
really good point.
It's already a crime.
And I'm and I mean a felony
crime.
To intimidate a poll worker.
So you know if someone's going
to come in and and show is
firearm, trying to intimidate
someone who's working there,
that's already a felony crime,
not a petty misdemeanor, that
this crime is absolutely
correct. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that is absolutely
correct. So
If that was happening, I would
imagine we would be seeing that
in the news that being such a
big issue, people just flashing
their firearm and because then
it becomes that Berlin of being
threatening right you go from
just being normal. One of us
who's carrying every day to
someone who is now, um
Doing some criminal behavior,
but
Going back to my question, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, do I and
I'm missing. Am I? Because I'm
looking at this bill and I look
at exclusions.
And we have the certified
officer's car.
We have a person conducting
lawful, non election related
business near within 100 ft. So
When that person Mr Speaker and
gentlemen becomes hazy for me if
that person walks down the
street who's in a business next
door?
And they have their firearm
concealed.
It doesn't say specifically it,
says a person conducting non
election related business near
within 100 FT. So here becomes
the problem.
We have the strip mall.
We have the voting location.
Somebody walks out with their
firearm. Now how? How does that
apply? If they're walking on the
sidewalk right in front of that
voting location?
And they have a concealed carry.
Why? Because I can just see that
there's going to be a problem.
Because they're not doing
anything that is not related to
polling, but they're walking by.
How would somebody know
That they would be in violation.
I see if they're open, carrying
somebody's going to have an
issue with that. But if they're
concealed, carrying and somehow
they knew, so that would that
mean that they would be in
violation? That's where I get
On this part two on part C.
They're not doing anything
election related.
But their next to where
elections are happening. How
would that affect somebody who's
walking by open carrying versus
conceal carry? If you can answer
that question, Mr Speaker is
kind of vague, but I'm I'm
trying to figure that out my
head. Mr Speaker, gentlemen, Mr
Speaker in General Lady, That's
something that I posed and I
will ask for clarity in a
moment, but in our committee
when it was in Judiciary
Committee, I said
So what if a person wants the
role walk from 0.8 to point B.
Through that zone.
And basically what they're doing
is marching back and forth, but
they're not going to go in and
vote is that a lawful activity
in the answer was yes.
So, um, that is interesting
because that is the way I could
get by this law.
And go ahead and have a firearm
in that.
In the protected area if you
will.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
What I'm trying to do is I'm
trying to protect I like your
amendment cause I'm trying to
protect our lawful gun owners
because I think if if they're
saying we don't want any
firearms because they're scary
within 100 ft, But somebody has
a business and they open carry
going to their car. I'm sorry,
but I imagine them getting
jacked up.
Versus if there are legal
citizens like us who are not
doing things wrong, and they
have concealed carry, they can
move from their business. It's
next door to the voting location
to the car without being
hassled. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr Speaker, generally
I agree there are and this is
again to get a concealed carry
license. You have a background
check.
You've gone to training. This is
part this will become part of
the training and you concealed
means concealed. This is not a
license to carry open carry.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, What
I'm trying to do is I'm trying
to divide between because it
seems that looking at a firearm,
Askari
And some people got offended by
that, so they want us to
Not open carry, but now you're
violating somebody's right. And
this would take care of the
issue if I have a barbershop
next to a voting location, and
they say, I don't want to open
carry because we're not supposed
to carry. You know whatever.
They don't want people pointing
or calling law enforcement, I
think to protect the rights of
innocent people.
We should be able to conceal
carry that farm from the
business that they're at. Orphee
just wanted to walk through to
get to their car because what's
going to happen if somebody open
carries and they're coming from
their place? Next door?
Somebody's going to freak out
and they're gonna call law
enforcement persons got to
explain. I was going from here
to here. That concealed carry
makes it that someone can safely
travel.
From their business to their car
without being hassled. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
that's what I see as the biggest
issue is
Businesses that are located next
to these places, mostly getting
hassled for their open carry or
if somebody sees him in their
business and their open
carrying, I think that's going
to become a problem or
something. Oh, my gosh, I can
see their firearms within a
polling place and now law
enforcement called law
enforcement gap to come out to
figure out this.
And no this law inside and out
words of it said can still
carry. We have people who have
options that if they want to
keep their farm concealed and
not spook people, for whatever
reason than that becomes
something that benefits are
People who are using their guns
lawfully, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
agree with that.
Thank you. I think that's all
the questions we have, Um, the
other. The only other thing I
have is I just found out from
two law enforcement officers
that, um
They often use reserve deputies
to go pick up ballot boxes. And
with the last Amendment not
being used, they can no longer
higher reserve deputies, period
end of story or they would be in
violation. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Further read on the amendment
Gentlemen from Bonelli Europe
presented of the La Cruz. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from
Our county yield.
A formal peace officer, Deputy
And I suspect you know a little
bit about the law, Mr Speaker.
And you are, can you describe
but open carry means.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it
means clearly visible to the
public. Um, so it's got to be
clearly visible. I've got a
rifle slung over my shoulder. I
have. I don't have a jacket on.
I have a pistol on my hip with a
holster.
Tucked in my belt and sticking
out.
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Is that illegal activity in the
state of New Mexico, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen from burning Leo? Yes,
and almost a lot of locations
and Mr Speaker to the contrast,
gentlemen.
What is concealed mean?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
concealed is out of sight cannot
be seen your it's it's clearly
not visible to the public.
Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Gentlemen, Do you have a
concealed carry permit?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. I
actually have a couple of
different ones. One is law
enforcement, retired law
enforcement and one is concealed
Carry
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So do I.
I would just I would like you to
take a minute. Mr. Speaker of
the gentleman who take a minute
to describe to the body.
What does it take to get a
concealed carry? Can anybody
walk in and say Hey, I want to
conceal carry
Is it as easy as getting a
driver's license?
Yeah.
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. No, it's
not as easy as getting a
driver's license. Um, what you
must do is you must take a
class.
Pass that class battered day and
a half.
And also qualify with a firearm
that you're going to carry, so
it doesn't it doesn't concealed
Carry doesn't say you can carry
anything. It says What type of
firearm you can carry, and then
you submit your application to
the department of Public Safety,
or, you know, branch of our
state police.
They conduct an investigation on
you.
If they approve you, then you
get a concealed carry license.
If you're not approved, you
don't get a license.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
you love one part out.
I got fingerprinted. I don't
know about you.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. Yes. You've got to be
fingerprinted. They want to make
sure you are who you are.
Speaker Gentlemen as a former
peace officer as a former
deputy.
Would you agree that someone
with a concealed carry permit?
Is likely.
A certified law abiding citizen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I agree.
Mr Speaker who certified that
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. It's
actually this body. This body
past that concealed carry act
and this body said we're going
to recognize new Mexicans who
are
Above the law. They're not
criminal, and we're going to
allow them to carry. Not even
openly. They can carry open. But
if they're going to carry
concealed
They've got a concealed permit.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
for that. The speaker. I
I agree that there are sensitive
places that one ought not to
carry.
Weapon.
Speaker as an example.
A bar.
At the same time too often.
Because we get a little
partisan. We get extreme in our
Attempt. Mr Speaker passed laws.
Speaker.
I support Gentleman's amendment
because I think it is a simple
Common sense reliable.
And certified way to allow
someone to exercise their
constitutional right.
I have no further questions.
Speaker. Thank you.
Friends for the debate on the
amendment. Gentle lady from
Santa Fe representatives, Erato
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Benaglio yield I
yield to the General Lady from
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I'm I'm just a little confused,
and I'm trying to get a better
picture of what's going on. So
concealed carry. Is that okay at
schools at this moment?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
There are certain areas where
firearms are restricted period
schools in a bar that's serving
hard liquor. You know, clearly
we don't want someone drinking
and possessing a firearm, so
there are sensitive places.
But a polling place we're not
having individuals come in.
They're drunk or anything like
that. We've got individuals who
during their work day are coming
and going to the polling place.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. But
During school hours or on a
school property concealed carry
weapons or not allowed. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker and General
Lady?
Except in the parking lot. You
know when when you arrived to
pick up your child that is one
area that they excluded. But
yes, not in the school. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So when our students
come to school, and they might
have gone hunting this weekend,
there might be something there.
Backpack they are students would
be in trouble if there was a
weapon in their in their
backpacks.
Um, is that correct? Mr Speaker?
General Lady? Yes. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen. I
think that's the fundamental
concern I have with this is and
I apologize. I just want to be
really clear. I look at this
amendment and I see that we
expect 16 year olds 14 year olds
not to bring firearms onto
school premises.
But when adults are there to do
the duty as citizens as
Americans to complete these
tests, we give adults more
wiggle room and I have a concern
with that, because we're adults
and we are well capable of
leaving our firearms in our
vehicles, and we're well capable
of not allowing those those
firearms to join us when we're
voting. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, you know when I When
I go and vote, I'll be really
clear. You know, I I sometimes
bring my kid with me.
Uh, you know, and they played at
the desk with my phone. I'll be
honest with you. They watched
them Bluey and I go and vote and
all I needed that moment is a
felt pen and the ability to fill
in that circle. Uh, and that
paper that they hand me, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and so I'm
not really sure why a grown up
Would need to have their
concealed weapon with him at
that point, And for that reason,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, I have
deep concerns with this because
for my constituency, we're
voting on very important issues
that face our community and and
and for my community, not not
for the poll workers, not for
anybody else. But for the voters
who are there to make
consequential decisions.
I don't want them to wonder if
the person in the booth next to
them has a concealed weapon. Or
do you wanna think about it? It
shouldn't be happened because
they're at school and at
schools. We don't allow any sort
of weapons. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Thank you. That's
that's all. I'm saying it on the
amendment Gentlemen from Lincoln
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Burnley Oh, hell.
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
I need to bring this back into
line.
So we're not talking about it
child bringing a gun in a
backpack.
We're talking about.
A person.
That has completed concealed
carry course correct.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct and on Election Day
A concealed carry person can
walk all around almost anywhere
in the city.
With his concealed firearm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen from Bernie Leo.
How many hours is the concealed
Carry class speaker and
gentlemen, If I remember right,
it's 15.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen.
So in that 15 hours. What do
they teach you?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, they
teach you not only the laws of
the state of New Mexico, which
this will now become part of it
if it passes, but they teach you
other laws. They teach you how
to handle your firearm and how
to keep it concealed, and they
emphasize concealed because that
is under the act.
The act is not for you to go
ahead and partially concealed it
or seldom can seal it. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you
gentlemen from burning Leo.
About how many hours do you
think they spend on just safety?
Mr Speaker, General, Lady or
gentleman, It's about eight
hours.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, The other reason that
I bring this up is I I
personally carry every day that
I'm not here.
Every day that I'm not here, Mr
Speaker.
And
I'm telling you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that people that are
with me and around me are safer
for it.
And I don't just carry to carry
I carry to protect myself and my
family and friends.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, and I
and I paid
To get those certification.
And not only do I go through the
certification, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it I I go through the
lost sight of it, too.
And they teach me
Not to pull that thing out not
to pull my weapon out until
I need to use it and they give
you lots and lots of scenarios
on it.
They teach me how to be
proficient with it.
And I'm not worried about
somebody thinking that I've got
a gun, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
It's my right.
It's my second Amendment right
to hold on to that that
concealed carry
And it's my second Amendment
right to put it in my pocket and
protect myself. Do you agree
with that? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree. And all of us in here. I
guarantee you when we leave
here.
You're walking around
individuals who have concealed
firearms.
Every single day. There's
someone close to you whether
concealed fire.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And the
last thing I'm going to bring up
is Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
know the law enforcement
officers that are here.
When I walk in and I see that
they're here. I feel better.
I feel better that everything's
gonna be okay. In case somebody
does come in. That has l intent,
and I can assure you it's
usually not the law abiding
citizen. It's usually the
criminal element of everything.
So
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I I
support your amendment, and I
think we ought to have the right
To put our firearm and conceal
it.
And keep ourselves safe. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, and gentlemen,
it on the amendment generated
from Santa Fe, Representative
Romero. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Does the gentleman yield Mr
Speaker I yield to the General
Lady from Santa Fe. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Um, I'm
trying to wrap my head around.
What?
Your amendment is seeking to do
what I understand, Mr. Speaker,
um, from the general lady who's
presenting the bill is the the
folks that she'd like to keep
safe in a polling station. Mr
Speaker, General Lady are to
just ensure that there are no
guns per brought onto. Um, the
polling sites. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, is that your
interpretation of what she's
trying to do with this bill?
Yes, Mr Speaker and General
Lady. Yes, I think that it's
trying to restrict that. Um,
what I'm trying to do is go
ahead and say only those persons
who have a concealed carry
Can Kerry
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
that's where we might be losing
the plot here, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, in my community we
have, um poll workers who are
volunteers entirely. Is that the
same in your community? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, what I
have heard from constituents not
only in our community, but, um,
when we, you know, Look at how
polling is done, of course
across, um, different
timeframes. Now in New Mexico.
We can vote early. You can cast
a ballot into a ballot box. Mr.
Speaker, Um gentlemen.
What I've heard from polling
workers in our community. Is
that they're really concerned
about the safety of being in
those polling places. Should a
person be bringing in a gun
regardless of the license that
they may carry? There is a real
threat to the potentiality, Mr.
Speaker, Gentlemen of somebody,
perhaps creating a threat.
Or creating any sort of, um,
aggression towards folks that
maybe at that point station,
whether or not Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, they even intended to
do so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
when we think about, um the
folks who have asked us I
believe from many different
polling, um
From the polling data about
folks who are concerned about
the safety of workers and also
concerned about the threats that
have been made in previous
elections. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, the invitation to
bring a firearm whether or not
you have a concealed carry
permit. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
is what we're trying to protect
here.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Do
you know? Um
How many folks Um
Have responded, or I guess I'm
looking at some data here, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, about people
who have been asking for the
prohibition of guns at polling
places. Have you seen any of
that data? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady. No, I haven't You know,
but I know from my district and
I find it amazing that in Santa
Fe, it seems to be a problem.
But I live in the fourth most
dangerous city in the United
States and I have yet to hear
this problem in Albuquerque.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen and in
Santa Fe, and I understand
across the state. It's been
really difficult to even acquire
poll workers for, um, the
volunteer duty of being able to
cast those votes in our
community because folks are
really terrified to even be in
that area with worry that
somebody could bring in a
weapon, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
and what I understand is that
Even though we have this, these
concealed carry, um, laws is
that that we don't know where in
the two year period, folks have
been Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
we're still trying to understand
what that license means. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, we also know
that those eight hours that we
were talking about of training
could be, you know, just
propaganda videos, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that we don't really
even know what their training
is, like. Right now in the state
of New Mexico, which was
interesting for
Media here. Having been able to
look at some of the various
pieces of gun legislation that
we've had firearms legislation
that we've had this session.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So I
disagree with the premise that
we would have to allow some and
not others to do that at a
polling place when we've been
asked Mr Speaker, Gentlemen by
the volunteers who want to
uphold our democratic rights and
duties to feel safe as well on
these premises, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen for the folks that
were not only trying to protect
but those who are trying to
protect us and our right to
vote.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. And for
that reason I just disagree that
we should exempt some from just
this one time, place and manner
limitation in the sensitive
place. Mr Speaker, Gentlemen
were sacred right to vote should
be protected and to keep those
safe. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I've got to clear up a
couple of comments on hers.
Number one.
The class is mandated by the
DPS.
And it has an outline that they
must teach, so it's not he just
come and look at a couple of
videos and walk out of here.
The other thing is, I want to
remind the body it is a felony.
Felony already to intimidate a
poll worker.
Doesn't matter if it's a gun, or
if you want to get in their
face.
It is a felony to get in to
intimidate a poll worker period.
That's already law.
Hmm. This really based on the
amendment, gentlemen from
Chavez, Eddy and Lea,
representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
gentleman from Bern, Leo Yield.
Mr Speaker. I yield my colleague
from Chavez County.
Mr Speaker. Uh, gentlemen.
To reiterate some, uh
The
Concealed carry.
As our colleague said well ago
requirement on it is that it
cannot be seen by the general
public. Is that true?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes.
What is the protocol years and
ex law enforcement officer.
Or you to search me.
For a firearm that is concealed
is there Isn't there a protocol
of things that I have had to do
in order for you to confront me?
Whether I have a firearm or not?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, I
have to have reasonable
suspicion that you're committing
a crime before I can go in and
search you for a weapon. Uh,
Gentlemen, speaker. That's what
I was getting at it.
Lawful possessors of firearms
concealed
If we take it out and play with
it, we should be in trouble.
In the conversation another Ah,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, the
one more statement from the lady
before me.
In order.
Take a concealed carry class the
instructor for that caste class.
But certified
Mustn't instructor for the sort
of for the class be certified by
the state.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. He
is a certified firearms
instructor who is completed
training to be a certified
instructor on concealed Carrie.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. One other thing that
I always think of.
What in this bill?
Will stop.
Criminal.
Okay, I got and walking into a
polling place.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we see
criminals every day, violating
the law and this would do
nothing to go ahead and stop a
criminal from open open, carry
or concealed. Carry into a
polling place. Thank you,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker, And that
is my point.
These laws that we pass, then
friends of mine and other's
rights from the Second
Amendment.
We are the only ones that pay
attention to these laws are the
law abiding citizens. Criminals
do not pay attention to any law
we pass.
But thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And lady from
Ben Ali, representative Rebel
cover year old.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from my county a
yield? Mr Speaker, I yield to
the general lady.
Thank you.
I hesitated in rising
At this moment to speak about
To say what I have to speak
about.
I'll begin. Um gentlemen.
By asking you a question.
Are you aware?
Of the fact that my life was
threatened.
In 2018.
When I was running as a
candidate.
For re election.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. No,
I wasn't. I'm sorry. That was
threatened. My life was
threatened as a police officers,
So I understand that. Well, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, we're not
speaking about
When you were doing your
service, and I appreciate you
doing your service.
I have the utmost respect for
law enforcement as I do the
military
I am speaking about exactly what
this amendment
And Bill is speaking about
And that is
During an election.
Close to the polling place or in
a polling place and protecting
the sanctity.
Of the right of every person.
Of entering into a polling
location and being protected.
So this is what happened to me,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
In 2018 on the campaign trail.
One of the candidates running
against me.
Stormed my home.
And threatened to kill me.
Before Election Day.
Because of that threat.
I obviously filed and called the
police when he was at my door.
With his hand behind his back,
concealing his weapon.
And he was trying to conceal his
identity, although when he spoke
up
And Lenny when I looked through
the door in that instant, I knew
who it was.
Mr Speaker. My neighbors heard
the raucous
Everyone came out because he was
so loud and he made that threat.
I had the police, uh, dispatcher
online.
I stated who I was. I stated my
position they immediately
Dispatch me directly to the
state police because Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, as you know,
The state Police are assigned to
protect us.
Immediately upon hearing me,
calling the police
This person.
Left.
My home hurriedly.
And I was able to capture
Him entering into his car.
Placing his whatever he had in
his hand. I didn't have a good
look at it, whatever he had in
his hand.
In the back seat behind the
driver's seat, and then he drove
off before he drove off Mr
Speaker and gentlemen.
I captured a very good photo of
his vehicle and the drivers and
the license plate.
When the state police came to my
home.
Upon their investigation,
provided all of that to them.
They went and visited him.
They identified him when and
visited him and he did not deny
it.
I was given Mr Speaker and
gentlemen because he was given a
warning.
I was given from that point.
All through until the election
day ended.
Protection 24 7.
Every single time I left my
home.
I had to get provided schedule.
Of where I was campaigning. What
intersections I would be at
This person had a total
disregard.
For the law.
Even though Mr Speaker and
gentlemen he had been given a
warning.
He did not care.
He did not.
Pay attention. He followed me on
the intersections the state
police had to intervene.
My family.
Helps me.
In my campaign efforts.
On Election Day.
Dream early voting as a matter
of fact, all the way through
Election Day.
This individual continued to
follow me.
Continue to stand opposite us
when we were campaigning at the
polling place, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
And continue to threaten me.
And again and again and again,
He was given a warning that
because of our state laws
Unless, as you know, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, unless there's a
crime
I can't quote the laws. I'm sure
you can quote them but unless
acquired is committed
All they could do is continue to
give them warning on Election
Day, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen.
Tad the audacity or whatever the
word would be.
To come.
And parked his vehicle in front
of where we were campaigning.
And again he threatened me.
At that point, the sheriff
And everyone there on site.
Advised me.
What I needed to do. I then took
out a temporary restraining
order.
My point, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is
Here's intention, as he said in
court.
He was going to follow me into
the polling place.
To live up to his threat.
My son, my daughter in law, all
my family were there and we were
all going to go in and vote
together.
As a family as we normally do.
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
This amendment.
Is very important to me.
Because this was an
irresponsible
Person.
In the possession.
Of
What he never he never revealed
it, of course there because
there was police presence
everywhere.
But he had been in possession.
He adhere to his threat.
Not only what I and my family
May have been the subject of his
threat.
But all those innocent poll
workers
That volunteer to help uphold
our democratic right to a vote
to vote.
Their lives would have been
placed in jeopardy.
So, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen.
I? My father defended this
country to defend the Second
Amendment.
And all of the constitutional
rights that were afforded.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
However, he did not dedicate his
life.
In the military.
Four.
For him. He and I would say, And
this is why it was very hard.
My father died.
Before this incident.
Had he known
That this of this incident
I'm not really quite sure what
that
Loyal military 96 year old would
have done
But I can tell you right now.
That he would have said.
I did not give my life in the
military in three wars.
To protect the rights of
irresponsible gun owners,
especially entering into
A voting place where he gave his
life.
For 34 years.
To defend the democracy and the
right of every individual to
cast their vote in a safe place.
Again. This issue. Mr Speaker
and gentlemen in your amendment
has nothing to do with the
Second Amendment.
Nothing to do with the Second
Amendment.
It has to do with protecting the
rights of everyone who wishes to
enter into a polling place.
Freely safely.
And protected.
And so anyone carrying a
concealed weapon and
And it doesn't have
Uh um, I don't know what to call
it.
The, um
The intent.
To commit wrong.
Or right. That's not what we're
calling. We're calling into
issue.
What it were calling Mr Speaker
and gentlemen into issue is that
No guns under any circumstances
should be in our schools and in
our voting places or in our
public places concealed or
unconcealed.
This again. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen has nothing to do. In
my view with the protecting the
Second Amendment if anybody's
here to uphold the Second
Amendment, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen is myself. This is the
reason why I ran for office.
This is the reason why I'm in
public service, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Thank you for the
time Mr Speaker. Lady did that
criminal have a concealed carry
license, gentlemen, hold on a
second.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment from
Gentlemen from Eddy and Lea
justly represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
Ah! Gentlemen from Berna. Leo,
do you yield
Mr Speaker. I yield my colleague
over here.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
promised to stay on the actual
amendment, but to do that, um, I
need to set the scene.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Do you
remember an election bill that
was passed last year that
allowed felons
Get out early.
Are still
Have not completed there.
Commitment to society may have
an ankle monitor or something.
But immediately when they come
out, given the right to vote, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, you are
correct.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, How
many felons? Do you know that?
Our law abiding citizens.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I came
across numerous felons.
Who continued their criminal
activity throughout their entire
life.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would contest that probably
The fact that there
A felon would mean that they're
not law abiding citizens, right?
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen,
We now have two to the 2023
legislation.
The ability for felons.
To be Napoleon place. Would you
agree? Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. The only time they
can't vote is when they're in
prison, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so we did not make
sense that a law abiding citizen
with a concealed carry license
that has followed the rules
within the state of New Mexico.
Gone through the proper
background checks.
Um, would probably make that
point safe just a little bit
safer.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes, the
individual that protected the
officer down and lost Cruz as he
wasn't a concealed carry person,
but he obtained firearm that was
close to him and, uh, killed the
individual who had killed the
police officer.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I think we're on the same track
So we now because of the 2023.
Um, legislative session where
felons are now able to vote.
When they're out of jail. That
means there.
Their their commitment to
society there, Dude, they're
paying payment to society is not
complete, but they are no longer
in jail or prison.
Have the ability to go to a
polling place.
I think it makes sense that a
law abiding citizen would be
able to
Be one of the deterrence to keep
that feeling from continuing his
felony career. Would you agree
with that? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, you are correct.
Persons who are convicted
felons.
Who are on probation or parole.
Can go and vote.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate
The amendment that you brought
forward with respect to that. I
hope Mr Speaker and gentlemen
that I just displayed to the
body of 70 here that
It's okay for felons to be
within the polling place. Let's
protect ourselves from those
very same people. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I do hope that I
actually stayed on the
amendment. Thank you.
Is ER further debate on the
amendment will move from San
Miguel Co facts towels. Morariu
everywhere percent of Sanchez.
Mr Speaker. Does the gentleman
yield Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties. Mr. Speaker. I want to
ask the gentleman when you get a
concealed carry license you
required to
Take fingerprints.
Ah, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
didn't understand the end of
your question. Are you supposed
to get your fingerprints taken?
And do you send those in to get
checked?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. They take your
fingerprints and they go ahead
and send those off to the FBI.
They want to see if you have any
criminal record. They want to
make sure that your name is who
you are.
And Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
know you mentioned earlier in
Alburquerque. Uh, you haven't
seen many issues with people
brandishing guns at polling
places.
Ah, I myself the Espanola Valley
area. I've never seen anyone
brandishing a firearm in a
polling place. Ah!
I have a large amount of family
here in Santa Fe. Uh, I know
they're from the south side of
Santa Fe.
They're not from the more
affluent East side here, but I'm
not aware of
This issue happened on the South
side. I don't know if they have
the issue on the East side, but
that's another thing. But
Mr Speaker. I know you have to
get fingerprints, and they do
additional background checks
when you get this concealed
carry, so, Mr Speaker, I just
thank you for answering my
question for the debate on the
amendment Get away from
Catherine Hidalgo and Grant
Representative. The Russia's
Thank you, Mr Speaker with my
good friend from my really old
police shield. Mr Speaker, I
yield my good friend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. You know, I've been
listening here again and
We started hearing
Different. Uh,
Views on this particular issue,
and I just want to
Clear up the record here. We
heard earlier. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that guns are not
allowed at schools.
That is not true.
Um, some schools have armed
security.
And they they actually
Take. They're used. They're
usually previous law enforcement
officers.
Who complete 40 plus hours of
training.
And other mandated requirements.
And so that is something that
parents overwhelmingly, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Are in favor of over about 90%
of the school district.
Is in favor of arming their
school. So I mean to to say that
you know people that have their
Children. They're in school, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, in
comparison to us to appalling
place, uh, that they would feel
comfortable in one place, but
not another. I find it far, far
fetched. Uh, so, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I appreciate your
amendment. I will be supporting
it.
That makes common sense. I have
never
Ever gone.
For a death call.
At a polling place in my 36
years of being a funeral
director. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Further debate on the amendment.
Your lady from Burnley, Europe
presented button. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Does the gentleman from
Benaglio yield Mr Speaker,
General Lady I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Um gentlemen, I want to know a
little bit more about how I
fulfill
My duty If I carry a concealed
weapon if I have that license,
and I think you're just the
person to ask, Mr Gentlemen and
Mr Speaker
Um
If I'm wearing a crop top very
popular top for the ladies.
And I have one inch of my weapon
showing my fulfilling still my
duty for concealed carry Mr
Speaker General waiting. No.
If if I'm wearing a
A muscle shirt, and there's the
outline of my weapon and I
fulfilling my duty for concealed
carry.
Mr Speaker, General lady,
Probably not. And if I'm at a
polling station, and I have a
weapon concealed in the back my
pants I dropped my chapstick. I
lean over to pick it up and my
weapon shows and my still
fulfilling my duty for concealed
carry.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? No.
So, this amendment? Really, um
Seems to provide a carve out for
some of these exceptions, and I
think you've laid out really
clearly like if I were to do
some of these things at a
polling station that would be a
violation of a concealed carry.
Um, however, I definitely have
seen some people who carry their
weapons in this way. And, um, I
know that we've been through the
discussion of how much training
goes into getting that license
for concealed carry.
But does every single person who
gets that license fulfill their
duty to the maximum amount
possible, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Let me
say that in the class I went
through. Not everyone graduated.
Okay?
Let me also say that, um, the
Law enforcement, or DPS, is
notified of an arrest of a
concealed carry. We have
something that's called wrap
back.
So when the individual is
arrested if there is a state
license
That arrest is immediately sent
to them, so they notify them
that they can no longer have
concealed carry and they pick up
the license.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
I think
What I'm worried about is that
this amendment assumes that just
because people have gone through
this amount of schooling, for
instance myself, I've gone
through years of geometry and
calculus. But if you try to tell
me sign and Kassian, I still
cannot calculate that Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, do you remember
your calculus classes?
Uh, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
it's a second function on your
calculators,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Thank
you. You are clearly in astute
student. But I really feel not
everyone is like that. Not
everyone is like our relatives
who are are using that are using
the license in the correct way.
My neighbor, I've been able to
see his concealed license.
Um, And while I trust that he's
trained, I trust your train. I
trust our relatives are trained.
I don't trust every single
person that is trained in in
this license and
This amendment really feels like
it's making a really specific
exception.
Ah, because we don't have the
data that shows how many people
are fulfilling the concealed
carry to the exact amount
because it's a concealed carry
and we don't have a concealed
carry. Police are going around
making sure that every single
person is caring in that way.
Um
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
would prefer that we keep the
law that we have now is simple
as we possibly can carving out
for this specific exception
because we are stating that
these polling locations are
sensitive places that leaves it
open to laws for schools or
courts to be changed, and I
think we should really focus on
ensuring that we have
consistency in our loss. Mr
Speaker and
Amen.
There is for the debate
Gentlemen from Sunday well
represented Martinez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does my
friend from Romeo yield
Mr Speaker. I yield my
colleague to the north.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in kind,
gentlemen.
Um
Earlier you talked about
When you go through the initial
training classes to get a
concealed carry
How many hours did you say that
was
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
about 8 to 12 and then the
following day is, um the actual
firearm test. You have to show
proficiency with a firearm.
And Mr Speaker. Kind. Gentlemen,
How long is this license? Good
for?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
good for two years.
Then you have to take a re
certification.
And then that is good for two
more years, and then you must
take the full class again.
So, Mr Speaker. These, uh
Refresher courses.
You just call it in the just
send you a license.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Note,
There's actual refresher classes
and they're looking at an online
refresher now.
Mr Speaker Kind, gentlemen, so
there's ongoing training for
this.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. And
you know persons who have
concealed carry licenses are
very cautious.
They don't want to violate laws
They don't want to violate
rules. Um
It is made very clear that this
license can be taken away by
the, um DPS the the concealed
carry unit.
And it's really a privilege. You
know, Um you show that you're
You're proficient and you can
follow the laws and you can have
that privilege. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and kind gentleman.
Um, I I rather enjoyed my class.
It was engaging.
It was informative.
And it wasn't easy.
It was a tough class and this is
coming from somebody who has
been around guns most of his
life.
But it's not just a breeze. It's
not just sitting there watching.
I think. Earlier there was
reference to propaganda videos.
This is actual
Learning about weapons learning
about laws learning how to
handle a weapon.
Learning not only how to handle
a weapon, but the safe way to
handle the weapon. Is that
correct, sir?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Absolutely. In fact, there were
no videos in the two classes
I've actually taken. Ah, videos
weren't used. You know, the
instructor had a unique
perspective he could ask or the
class could ask me questions
about how law enforcement
Would handle it.
Um
One of the questions that that
I, uh, went ahead. No opined on
is you need to understand.
That the first record when the
police officer run your driver's
license or your license plate?
Is that it will come back that
you are a concealed carry
person. That's the first record.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind.
Gentlemen, I stand in full
support of your amendment.
Because
I am a very conscientious
concealed carry.
Individual
And although not everybody,
Um, follows the law.
But if everybody followed the
law
We would have
Much less to do here in Santa
Fe.
But protecting people's rights.
Is one of the mandates.
That sent me here to Santa Fe.
So I stand in full support of
your amendment.
And I asked the body too.
Sincerely think about what we're
doing here.
Sincerely think about what this
amendment is trying to do.
And that's to protect the rights
of every new Mexican. Whether
you choose to be a concealed,
carry or not.
It doesn't matter. This is still
a right that we should come to
Santa Fe and fight for
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kind,
gentlemen.
There is free debate on the
amendment generated from
Bernardi, Europe's Corona.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentlemen from Bernardi Joe
yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
General Lady from Burnley. Oh,
thank you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen
Since we started talking about
schools, high star wandering the
schools where I work and my
school you sure? Sometimes most
of the time, it's just as a pole
place.
So I was wondering Mr Speaker
during the day of the election.
Bull somebody who has a proper
license to carry again up arm
will be allowed to go with her
with, um conceal.
Get him.
Hmm. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
you bring up a point that I
brought up in house judiciary.
Let's look at your school. Let's
use it.
So on Monday, there were
teachers
And there were students there.
On Tuesday.
It is a place where there are no
teachers and no students, and
it's functioning because we we
at the Legislature a year or two
ago, we we made it. It is a
holiday for the students.
They're not going to be there.
So we truly made it now, not a
school, but a polling place.
And that's one of the issues. I
brought up that the school
location
On voting day is no longer a
school. It is actually a polling
place.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I pulled
disagree because being the
school, I actually have seen the
library changing to a pole plays
depending of the election type.
I'm guessing. Um, I guess I
never thought Mr Speaker. I
never kept track of which type
of elections. We have students
around and went not, but I'm
just curious that day of the
election.
The school is okay for somebody
to walk in with their Web with
that can, But the rest of the
364 days is not okay. Well, is
that correct? Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, I
think that we're going to need a
legal opinion on that. But I
contend that what you end up
having is on the days
That there are teachers and
Children there.
It is a school.
But on the day that it is used
as a polling place, it is now a
polling place.
But I think we need to get a
legal opinion on that. That's
one of the points I was going to
bring up in the debate.
Ah, because I don't think that's
real clear.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So their
teachers and students and they
want to feel safe is not okay to
have a concealed weapon with
them. I agree with you. I also I
disagree. Also Mr Speaker with
some of the comments about
people in school wanted to have
guns in school, Um, in my
experience and maybe in other
places in the state. I don't
know, Mr Speaker.
Um, teachers, parents. We don't
want to see that We want to feel
an environment that is more
constructive in less worry about
other things, But thank you so
much for your answer. Thank you
so much. Mr Speaker. There is
further debate on the amendments
generally from Berlin, Europe,
Garrett. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman from Berna
Leo yield
Mr Speaker, I yield of the
general lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, First I do want to
comment. My husband's that
concealed carry. He met his
excellent teacher who taught him
for three days over three
weekends when I carried the
extreme risk by armed protection
order, he was that's how we met
him. He's great, and so for
those people concerned about
training is rigorous. And it is
excellent. So I just wanna
Make that comment. My second
question, Mr Speaker and kind,
gentlemen.
Somebody said that we need to
carry guns in polling places
because of dangerous felons. Do
you think that every person who
has served their time and then
released is now dangerous?
Mr Speaker in general lady
there Speaking about a person
who has not completed their
time.
They're on probation or parole.
If they've completed their time.
they're not. They're not not
wearing an ankle monitor or
something like that.
Okay, because Mr Speaker and
kind gentleman and going door to
door
I've met many fillings.
Um
Who are deeply redemptive
people, and I just want to go on
record and saying to all those
people who have paid their time
and changed their lives. Thank
you.
My next question, Mr Speaker is
Why are schools and courthouses
specifically exempted from
concealed carry?
In the law.
Mr Speaker and General Lady
schools are exempted. Federally,
There's a federal law.
Courthouses that became an order
from the court.
From a radio See?
Mr Speaker and kind, Gillerman.
Why is that?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, uh,
Because they did not want
firearms at those locations and,
um
What we find is that's turned as
soft target.
And so consequently we have
criminals.
Who look for soft targets, and
that's where we have our mass
shootings.
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman
has that happened extensively in
this state?
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Thank goodness not
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, you probably realize that
I'm a teacher. I'm retired, but
I still take every opportunity I
can to teach.
And as I assume, are you a
parent and a grandparent, Mr.
Speaker and count, gentlemen.
Or an uncle.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
didn't understand your question.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, do you have Children?
Grandchildren, nieces, nephews
in your life, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, we are blessed to
have four grandchildren who are
of school age. We also have one
daughter who is a teacher.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman.
The reason I'm asking is do you
encourage their parents or
yourselves to take them with you
to vote?
Mr Speaker. General. Ladies.
Yes, they're generally with or
mom or dad during the day and
when they go to vote their long
and what we're doing is modeling
behavior for him. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen should So would
you say that when schools are
polling places?
There's often many many minor
Children whose parents, aunts,
uncles, elder brothers and
sisters want them to experience
the heart of American democracy
at the polls. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, I can't say that
I've seen many. I've seen some
Yes.
So, Mr Speaker and Kind
gentleman. The reason why I
oppose this is like truly
believed that for the sake of
our rising young leaders, and
we've been blessed in this
session to see so many of them
are shadows and interns as well
as our own Children,
Grandchildren, Neighbors,
Children, students, I feel that
we want to, as somebody
previously said.
We want to hold that polling
place.
Ah, sacred and honored and and
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
have senior centers.
Ah, where that they are pulling
places. For those three weeks.
We have many different situation
sites. Uh, I know our district
headquarters for schools in
Albuquerque and probably other
places around the state of
polling places. So even when
school isn't in session, there's
still parents and Children
conducting.
Ah, some of their work or taking
their Children to vote. So I
oppose your amendment because I
truly feel we do not need guns
at our polling places concealed
and it's nothing against
concealed carriers because I am
married to one and many people
in this session in this
In this round house are
excellent concealed carriers.
It's not about the efficacy of
training. It's about the fact
that we don't need firearms for
that 20 minute period that we're
voting. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you Kind. Gentlemen.
Debate on the amendments from
Chavez representative Hembree.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Benaglio Yield Mr
Speaker? I yield of my colleague
to the right.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, as as I understand
your amendment, all you're
trying to do is carve out an
exception that someone who has
has a concealed carry license.
And is complying with the terms
of that.
That the weapon is completely
concealed. That be an exception
to this law. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, they
have to comply with that, and
we're getting saying law abiding
citizens. We're not talking
about criminals who threaten
other candidates or anyone like
that.
Thank you and Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, if someone who has a
concealed carry license and his
carrying concealed carry weapon
into a polling place
Uh,
Begins to brandish that weapon.
Do we have a law on the books
right now? That would apply to
that situation. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Yes. So if he pulls
the gun out, we have we begin
probably with a negligent use of
a firearm if he points it or
brandish it to others. We have
that.
We could have an aggravated
assault. The weapon doesn't even
need to be loaded for the
aggravated so
So there's a whole litany of
laws that are on the books
already that apply.
Ah to the
This. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I believe we have, uh
1-20 dash 20 in IMSA, which is
disturbing a polling place,
which is a petty misdemeanor,
and then we also have 1-20 dash
14 M s a
Which is intimidation at the
polling place, which is actually
1/4 degree felony. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, This is
exactly what I referenced
earlier.
If you want to go and then
intimidate anyone.
And and by anyone. I mean a
voter or a poll worker or
whatever. It's 1/4 degree
felony. Thank you and Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's a
higher
Penalty than what is in this
bill. Correct. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, this is a petty
misdemeanor that you're
proposing in here. What? That
what you're speaking of the
fourth degree felony is 18
months in prison, and now you're
a convicted felon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, so it seems that
The exception would be extremely
reasonable given that the fact
that if the weapon was
brandished in any way
There is already a statute on
the books with which a person
could be charged. And that
statute actually carries a
higher penalty.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you are
correct. And if we think of a
concealed carry person doing
what you're talking about, Not
only does he lose his concealed
carry permit.
But he's now a convicted felon
and cannot own or possess any
firearms. And I mean any
firearms.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
Right gentlelady from Burnaby.
Yo, Mr Speaker. I moved to
table. The amendment number two.
House floor Amendment number two
Motion to table. House Floor
Amendment number two Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill five as amended.
The vote.
Is now open.
What about the clothes?
Closed but would have 32 in the
affirmative, 30 season Negative.
The motion to table House Floor
Amendment Number two has failed.
Gentlemen from early Oh, Mr
Speaker, I now move. House Floor
amendment number 22 Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill five and request
a roll call vote, right. You've
got the real call.
We are on a motion to adopt
House for Amendment number 22
Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill five
as amended
Was about to close.
The vote is now closed by a word
of 35 in the affirmative 34 in
the negative House floor
amendment number 22. Senate
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for Senate Bill five as amended
Has been adopted.
Children from the Leo back to
you.
Uh, thank you members and, um,
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
have a couple other questions I
want to. I want to point out
some
Some ways to get around this,
Um, anyway, a little more debate
on it. I'm sorry, but, uh, one
of the things that I do as a
police officer, I look at
legislation and try to figure
out how an individual can get
around the law and not violate
the law.
And, um, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, this is one of them. I
posed to the you the other day.
Ah, what if a person
Ah came in to a polling place.
And he had an open carry weapon.
Okay, It's in a holster. He
doesn't have a jacket. You can
see it.
But what he's done is he's taken
the trigger group out of it, and
he took the barrel out of it. So
now it's nonfunctional. Is that
a violation of law?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, so the
definition of a firearm is in
the legislation. And it is, um
Specific to the frame or
receiver of the weapon and
includes anything that can be
read about readily converted to
expel a projectile. So, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
that would be
I think that would be handled
very similarly, to someone who
carried that type of device onto
the premises of a school, a
university licensed liquor
establishment or other sensitive
locations where we've deemed
that we have a higher standard
for safety.
Of all those that are in that
facility, um, within the bounds
of the U. S constitution, so I
think it it depends, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, on what kind of
firearm that is, and so without
getting very specific, and Mr
Speaker and gentlemen. Earlier
we discussed a legal analysis
about
Whether this amendment would
mean that someone could carry a
firearm or to school premises.
So Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
can't really answer that
question without knowing the
specific firearm and probably
also the legal analysis of that
situation, So it's a little
complicated, too. I think
address completely on the floor
today.
Mr Speaker in general lady.
Let's won't go ahead and go a
little further. Well, use a
revolver.
So he's moved removed The
trigger group out of it.
By that you have to take and
disassemble the side of it.
The trigger group is at his
home.
He took the barrel off of the
weapon. The barrel is at home.
He doesn't have any ammunition
with him.
He has what's called the frame
and the cylinder.
And that is stuck in the
holster.
You can't tell that the barrel
is gone because it would be
concealed by the by the holster.
And the barrel was at home.
And when I read over here on
firearm on the definition means
a weapon that will or is
designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosion.
Well, he doesn't have
A trigger to pull
And he doesn't have the barrel
for the bullet to come out of
And he has no ammunition.
And I contend that is one way to
get around your law.
And again I point too
And again I point to
intimidating anyone at a poll
worker.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
don't know if you have any
comment on that or not.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um
Basically to walk through this
legislation.
Hmm.
If someone if someone were to
walk in with that type of
Heavily modified device.
However, what remained was the
frame or receiver.
Which
Um
The federal government and in
other places in New Mexico state
law would be categorized as a
firearm.
Someone would have to notice
that
And
Realize what that was. And so
without knowing specifically
exactly what type of firearm
you're talking about. It's hard
to say you specified a revolver,
But there are many types of
revolvers of many sizes. And so
I
I don't want to get too far down
the road because you would
basically need a voter.
Who was coming to cast a ballot
for an election. You might have
a poll worker, you might have a
precinct judge who were to
notice some kind of item.
Um, maybe it's on a belt. Maybe
it's in a pocket. Maybe it's um
in someone's hand. It's hard to
get very specific in this type
of situation because there's so
many variations, and then that
person
I think often these poll workers
who are incredibly brave and
have faced a lot of threats in
recent years, they face a lot of
challenging circumstances are
also doing an amazing job of
explaining to people how to
access their ballot. They're
verifying identity there.
Dealing with all of these
complicated, uh, situations that
may come up where someone may
not be able to find their name.
They may not, um, know if
they're in the right place. And
so these folks may notice
something that you're
describing. There may be a very
heavily modified item that may
or may not look like a firearm
and then they would have to tell
the person
Excuse me. You're not allowed to
have that item or you know they
may call the authorities.
However, nothing that you've
described
It is within this realm of
intimidation. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, you raised this
concept of intimidation, which
is separately defined and one of
the reasons Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, the penalty for
intimidation as you correctly
pointed out during the debate on
the amendment is 1/4 degree
felony is because the behavior
that's being described and
intimidation
Is so much more intense. You
know, we're talking in the crime
of intimidation.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Is, um
Inducing or attempting to induce
fear.
In the secretary of state.
It goes on to describe a number
of, um
Individuals who work in our
election system, including
county clerks, municipal clerks.
By the use or threatened use of
force violence, infliction of
damage, harm or loss.
Or any form of economic
retaliation. So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, what you're
describing with the with the
detail that we you've provided
doesn't rise to the level of
intimidation.
Um and I'm not sure it would
fall under
This legislation either.
Mr Speaker in General lady and I
appreciate you reading the
statute on intimidation.
I think that it already covers.
An activity of someone bringing
a firearm into
A polling place.
With
Any action to intimidate any
person there.
I noticed that there is a lot of
people on the board who want to
speak. I've already taken up
great amount of the debate time.
And Mr Speaker. Generally the
old uh, go ahead and stop there.
Thank you. Thank you for the
debate. The gentle lady from
beginning of the year
representative but alone.
Thank you. Mr Speaker will be
no. I called on the gentle lady
from early. Oh, you're on the
list. But on the general on the
list, too. I don't know if you
want to debate or if you were
just on the amendment. Thank
you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General lady from Santa Fe yield
I yield to the lady from Bernie
Leo?
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. This bill is
particularly important to me.
Um, my grandfather.
I grew up during the Somoza
dictatorship in Nicaragua, and
he would tell me many tales of
what it was like to go to
polling stations where there was
no real votes being cast.
And, um, I am grateful for the
opportunity to have, um, safe
elections in this country that
we have the right to vote and
and that we continue to protect
that right?
Ah!
So we've covered a few of this,
Um
But are there guarantees for
people who go to poll stations
to vote? And I think some of
those that have been mentioned
our race color membership. I
know some federal mandates.
Include that you must also
provide different languages for
instructions. Um
So are Is this true that there
are these sort of protections?
Mr Speaker. Generally the yes.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
when I walked into my vote
center in Daskal, ASUs fall to
vote in my local election, which
are very important everyone
should vote in their local
elections. The staff was really
friendly. The boots were really
clean. It was pretty quick for
me.
Are there laws in New Mexico
that also, um, delineate how a
poll station should be set up?
Uh, I doubt there's laws about
specific cleaning products, But
just the way that, uh, it feels
when you walk into that pole
center.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes, and some of those
requirements include
The
The signage.
How to assist voters in finding
that location.
Um how each of the voting
station should be set up.
The type of equipment that needs
to be in that polling place to
ensure for the
Effective and efficient and safe
conduct.
Conduction of the election. Um
so yes, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, there's there are a lot of
specifics about how elections
should be set up.
Most, especially to ensure
uniformity and to ensure access.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady and I have heard that in
other states or have been acts
of intimidation, um, and that
these could have involved
tactical gear. Is that true? Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
as I delved into the research
that exists on the case for, um,
the brewing case I really
started to understand a little
better about the right for the
government to regulate some of
these
Um, regulate weapons in
sensitive places.
I'm a really big fan, um of
listening to the Supreme Court
cases and I remember when I
listened to this case, the oral
arguments for this case back in
November of 2021 and I remember
thinking that like this was a
really historic case that was
happening. There's really
nothing that is so explicit in
the code so far in what the
justices had
Have we're delivering that day.
Um, And if I'm not mistaken, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady in the
decision that the justices
released that following year,
Justice Thomas found that the
the challengers desire to carry
that the case was about the
challengers desire to carry
handgun in public for self
defense, and that that was
protected by the Second
Amendment is is that correct? Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and General Lady
briefly stated yes.
And Mr Speaker and gentle Lady.
Justice Thomas reviewed
Um, seventh centuries worth now.
I'm not sure if he did that this
him just himself or with his
aide of his staff, but he
reviewed seven centuries worth
of historical cases starting in
the 2000.
Uh, 1002 hundred's going through
the early 19 hundreds, and he
concluded that our country has
at times placed some well
defined restrictions on the
right to carry firearms in
public.
And while he didn't agree that
those crowded spaces like in
Manhattan were sensitive places
didn't the justice agree that as
a historical matter, Um places
like courthouses, and I believe,
he quoted polling places, uh,
were part of that second
amendment that allows a variety
of those kinds of gun
regulations. Mr Speaker and
gentle Lady.
Yes, Mr Speaker and General Lady
and in fact that is correct.
And, um
In that opinion, further went on
to state that we could assume
that it is settled law that
these locations are sensitive
places.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. And
is it true that as we build out
our code of law in a in
We want it to be as consistent
as possible throughout Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
Yes, Mr Speaker and General
Lady, I believe that consistency
is very important and it also
allows for the public and for
our poll workers and county
clerks. Those are entrusted with
Running elections. Um
It's sometimes in very
challenging times, sometimes
with the backdrop of a lot of
concern, Voter anxiety, worry.
Consistency is very, very
important to underpin the
security and safety of those
elections.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
that that brings me great
comfort As I begin my career of
making laws and as we here in
this body trying to make laws
that make sense with the legal
code, because if we are going to
designate, uh, you know, through
this bill that polling centers
are
A sensitive place as determined
in the Supreme Court case that
has already come before us then,
Um, wouldn't it make sense, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady that we
do, in fact ensure that it lines
up with our other sensitive
locations that are in our state,
including schools, courthouses,
airports, you know, the places
that we've designated as
sensitive locations.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
My The other case that I found
was interesting in tangential to
this is the case of McLaughlin
versus the United States. Mr
Speaker and gentle lady and the
question there was whether an
unloaded handgun was a dangerous
weapon.
And, um
In that court case, the the term
IND that although the weapon
that was in question that was
being tried was unloaded. It was
not a loaded gun. They still
said that the display of the gun
instilled fear in the average
citizen and that even though it
wasn't loaded, it created that
immediate sense of danger.
danger and that a violent
response could ensue. Mr Speaker
and gentle lady
Seeing that So many of us here
in New Mexico have experienced
some sort of gun violence, and I
believe Mr Speaker and gentle
lady that for the United States,
that's 58% of American adults
that have that they report that
they or someone they know or
someone they cared for, has been
impacted by gun violence, um,
that that they might have that
That
Fear that when they go to the
polling station that there would
be that there might be a weapon
there waiting for them, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, would
you agree that, um, given the
amount of people who have
experienced gun violence that
the probability that someone
entering the polling station
might have residual trauma or
might have experienced with a
weapon?
Uh, would would fear going into
that polling station, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
It's certainly possible.
And, um, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. These polling locations do
they fulfill a critical
government function, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker in General Lady, I
would argue that they fulfill
the most essential
And basic step of our government
and our democracy.
Which is the ability to pass the
vote.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you. Um, I would also
agree that this is a
A really important place that we
protect. Um, I I agree that it
should be done in a consistent
manner that if we are
designating, this is a sensitive
place a place where there is
really important government
decisions being made for our
people that we would ensure that
it is a safe place for people to
go and vote and I think most
people in this body would say
yes to that.
I think the disagreements might
be in as we've seen, Um, the
The amendments and the
differences in how we execute
that.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady for
me.
As a new lawmaker and going into
my career as a lawmaker.
I would like to see that our law
Our codes of law are, um, are
specific.
And that they are, um
That they make sense and that
they are simple and that they
are consistent. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is for the debate Your
Lady Center for the debate and
later to close
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really
appreciate the robust discussion
today. Um, I, uh I
I'm pleased to bring this
legislation forward to ensure
that the folks that are casting
their ballots that are
exercising their right to
democracy that are supporting
our elections that are
volunteering or getting paid
minimum wage to work on our at
our election sites.
To ensure that they all can do
their work free of concern for
safety, security and free for
free of any threat, um, violence
and also that we can turn the
temperature down as we often do.
In this body, Mr Speaker and
body as we often try to do to
ensure that the temperature is
turned down, and we hope
That we can, even though we may
disagree, and even though we may
have strong feelings about how
much we disagree that we don't
have to be disagreeable and that
we can conduct some of the most
critical business of the
Legislature of democracy of
polling.
Of these polling places and that
we can do that in a safe and
secure manner. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I now move that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill five is twice
amended Do now pass final
passage of the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville five as amended
twice.
The vote.
It is now.
Open.
Votes about to close.
The voters are closed by one of
35 in the affirmative 34 in the
negative. Senate Judiciary
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill Five s twice amended has
really passed his house. Gentle
lady from Berna, Leo,
representative J. C.
Mr Speaker, and we go to that
order of business messages.
Objection. It is ordered clerk
to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed, informed
the House of the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate Bill
137, as amended, has been red
and full and signed by the
officers of the Senate and open
session and requests the
signatures of the officers of
the House respectively,
submitted Surely D Luhan, Senate
chief clerk
Will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 196 and return same
here with respectfully
submitted Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk. We entered
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in a gross copies of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 129 as amended.
House Bill 148. With emergency
clause House Bill 177 as amended
with emergency Clause House Bill
193 as amended, having read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate and Open session
to return, same here with
respect, Police Ministry dealing
Johansson and Chief clerk
message will be entered message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the House
of the Senate has passed Senate
Bill 96.
Senate Bill 230 as amended and
request the concurrence of the
house, respectively. Submit
Sheri Dillon Johnson, chief
clerk of the Internet.
Your lady from early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation
actually disordered Senate Bill
96, introduced by Senator Mestas
an act relating to criminal
sentencing, increasing the
penalty for attempted murder. In
the second degree, increasing
the penalty for second degree
murder to 18 years. Senate Bill
96 introduced by Senator Me
estas
Senate Bill 96 7 minutes was by
titles referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 230, as amended,
introduced by Senator Nibert and
Act relating to healthcare,
amending a section of the
Children's Mental Health and
Developmental Disabilities Act,
amending a section of the mental
health and Developmental
disabilities code, providing for
additional disclosure of
confidential information. Senate
Bill 230 as amended, introduced
by Senator Nibert 130, as
amended and moderators by
toddlers referred to the House
Judiciary Committee.
Lady from Italy Europe, JC
Mr Speaker, I will We go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation. Objection. It is
so ordered.
Geneva from Santa Favors ready
and item 26. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Will you get me to that
point reflected election has
heard for places in about 152 as
amended.
With an emergency class has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or substitution
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 152. As amendment is a
technical fix required by the
FBI to ensure that e C d the
early childcare, education and
care Department and C Y F D are
able to continue to conduct
background checks on individuals
who provide care to New Mexico's
Children.
And with that I stand for
questions. There is debate
Gentlemen from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker will
generally yield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Ms Speaker, General lady, I'm
gonna tell you a story.
And I the end of that story. I
would like to know whether
This piece of legislation does
anything
To solve those sorts of
problems.
Speaker and General Lady I was
contacted about
Two weeks ago.
By a couple living in Midland,
Texas.
Who was trying to adopt a child.
Through a professional adoption
agency.
And then the process.
Of making that attempt.
They had to have a background
check.
From C Y F. D.
For the two years that they had
lived in my community of Hobbs.
Before moving
To their present address.
They had been waiting nine
months.
For those two documents.
When I
Was informed.
Of the problems.
My legislative assistant.
I took the task on
And my name.
Of solving the problem.
And both of those background
checks.
Or effected yesterday.
Speaker and gentle lady.
It appears to me that C y f d
Today is pretty much
dysfunctional and disarray.
What does this legislation do?
To solve.
Those problems. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
So that's a wonderful question.
So currently both C Y f D and S
u, R E c c D or conducting
background checks on these
individuals? Um, what this
legislation does ensures that
they are in line with what the
expectations are of the FBI. So
if I may for a moment, um
On Page two. You can see that it
clarifies that includes the
department's employees and
volunteers in multiple places,
and then it's very specific on
page.
Um seven in the definitions of
the various places in which this
this will be applied, so this
again just puts us in line with
what? Um, uh, the the FBI
necessitates in background
checks to improve the background
checks that are happening for
our kids, whether they are in C
Y F D or at a daycare center.
Mr Speaker, General Lady
Anything
That we can do.
To make that agency more
responsive.
Would be a huge plus. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. For those answers, there
is for debate. Your lady from
Burnley on torrents,
Representative Lord, Thank you,
Mr Speaker. And will the gentle
lady from some awesome county
that I didn't look at yet,
please fielder time I yield to
the gentle lady from Breglio and
Torrance. Thank you, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I am so gentle
lady.
I am trying to pull this up
Because sea wave has been a huge
issue for me since I've been
here, and there's so many issues
that are happening, so I was
trying to go through this and I
don't do well when looking. I'm
a paper person, So I'm trying to
look at this online.
So when I go through this
Bill.
Um
Can you tell me on page
Excuse me because I have to go
through this on Page four.
And I'm on the amendments and
contact so I don't have that
right in front of me. So the
early childhood education care
departments will have access to
criminal history. We struck that
out.
We struck all these sections
out.
And then can you tell me where
we replace her with the changes
is exactly that we made
Two.
Alleviate the struck out portion
on Page four through five.
And the amendments and context.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General lady. So, um, in
looking at the what was required
by the FBI over the past summer,
We found that both c y f d well,
specifically c y f d in parts of
Um, E. C. C D were out of line
with the background check
requirements of the FBI. The FBI
did did grant an extension for
the department. SEC department
to continue these background
checks. However, what did not
make it the process whole. So
these amendments that are in
here make our statute in line
with what the FBI requires. Now,
the changes that you see on Page
four and Page five. You can also
see many pieces of this
throughout the rest of the
statute. So, for example, on
Page four
For example, earlier on on lines
eight and nine. You see that
this offers the chance to look
at the criminal backgrounds of
these individuals and to ensure
these individuals are safe to
work with as well.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally it's it's quite
sometimes horrifying when you
deal with the U F D stuff
because you were just assume
That they would be aligned with
FBI with. This also include Mr
Speaker Delaney. Anybody on the
purposes any volunteers as well
as the volunteers also have to
get an FBI background check
That's more in compliance. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Lady. Yes, that's
correct. And also interns.
And thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. Some looking
On Page seven.
We have, as used in the section
behavior management skills
development. So is this where
we're just making definitions of
casement yet? Child placement.
Sorry again. I'm looking at on
the computer doesn't compute to
my head like paper does.
So all of these people that are
listed here
Are people or a group home or
whatever all those people that
have contact with Children.
Those are all the people that
are going to get this complaint.
FBI background Check Mr Speaker
and gentle lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Generally
briefly. I wanna introduce my,
um, my expert that just arrived
Shelly strong with the CD
department. And yes, that is
correct. And thank you, Mr
Speaker, generally for
introducing your experts on
that.
Um, can you explain to me just
briefly and Mr Speaker generally
when we say an operator at
summer, 12 means a person who
has oversight. So that's
anybody. Does that mean if they
have oversight that they
technically could not be in the
building or have oversight
directly Children, but we're
still going to do a background
check on them. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker. Generally, yes.
And Mr Speaker and gentle Lady.
I'm looking through here and I
love all the I'm I'm briefly
skimming through all these
different things I see right
there. Sorry, Page 11. It says
volunteer. So I want to thank
you for carrying this on the
house side because it's super
important that we try to fix all
the broken pieces and this is
just one of another way that we
can use to have background
checks that are done in
compliance and make sure I do
have a question, though quickly.
Mr Speaker dilly when they do
the FBI check is that
Okay?
Are we gonna go back and retro
do that on people that we have
done them on before, or we just
going to go forward from this
time?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. They're
already getting FBI backgrounds
now, and they will continue to
get them as they work for the
department and beyond. Okay, all
right. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Gillian. How long does it take?
If someone this would be for
someone who's a new hire? If
there were new hire, they would
do the background check on them
And before they got employed,
there would be a completed
background check. Mr Speaker and
General Lady, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, So background
checks are for foster parents
and adoptive parents of all
stripes. And everyone along the
way we anticipated would be
about 2 to 3 weeks. And so when
any of our constituents, Mr
Speaker generally should run
into issues without they should
absolutely reach out to our
offices to ensure that you know,
something didn't get messed up
along the way and make sure they
Their application is moving
appropriately.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, generally
just for clarification. Somebody
applies for the job. They do the
FBI background check.
Are they hired before after they
get the results?
Mr Speaker, General lady. They
may be hired before, but they
cannot really interact with the
Children until after they get
the background check. Thank you
for the insurance act. I kind of
understand that logic of there
not being around Children rather
than you get the full check
before they're around kids just
so we don't get anyone who could
somehow in the periphery get
access to Children. That
shouldn't be around them. So
okay, Mr Speaker delay. That's
the only question I had. Thank
you.
There is to be gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Tricker. Thank
you, Um, with the General Larry
Yield.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield in the
General Lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you. This is this is good
legislation. It's good to have,
um, FBI background checks. Can
you tell me what were the new
requirements? Why was this just
an update the the FBI needed
because
Most have already been doing
background FBI background
checks. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. That's
that's correct. And if you
remember last year we had
updated this as well. And we're
just trying to stay in
consistent with what the FBI
requires for good background
checks for the individuals that
work with our kids. Thank you,
Mr Mr Speaker. Generally, I, too
had a bill.
Regarding FBI background checks.
Um, and that was specific to the
cannabis license licensure
process, and it's a It's a
conundrum trying to figure this
out, So I appreciate you being
diligent and bringing this
legislation forward and working
through it for another year. Um
Mr Speaker. Generally, you
Stated that you had to you had
interaction and information
directly with the FBI to figure
out what they exactly needed. Is
that correct? Mr Speaker?
General lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, General
Lady. Yes, that's correct. Our
department is working with him
actively to ensure that our
background checks are
appropriate and proper. Okay,
Thank thank you, Mr Speaker,
General Lady, um
So okay.
I appreciate that answer.
probably have some other
questions offline to ask you
about that.
But I think this is really good
legislation. Mr Speaker. Um I'm
glad that we're making sure that
we have this compliance in place
in strengthening our agency and
updating, um, technical issues
in our agencies. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Generally,
there is for it to be you need
from Chavez's percent of his
cell. And before we go to you if
folks need to remove their
coats, they are free to do so.
Your leader from Chavez.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Will the lady from Santa Fe E.
Oh, please, Mr. Speaker. I yield
from the jet to the general lady
from Chavez.
Mr Speaker. She's kind of like a
sweet purpose. She obeys. I love
that.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you very much. As you know,
we've had problems with big
problems with seaway of D down
in my particular area. There has
been for young people for babies
that have died down there in
that particular area in
southeastern part of the state
and the latest incident happened
whenever
There were I can't remember the
number now. I think there were
three or four.
Young people.
That were left locked in the C.
Y F D office.
Overnight.
Because they could not find any
other place for them to go, and
they were locked inside by
themselves. So to me, that does
raise lots of red flags here, Mr
Speaker.
In general lady. It caused quite
a stir in our community right
now. I think this particular
youth are
I don't know if it's still going
on.
But
To alleviate the problem of them
being locked inside this
facility.
Ah, the costs of program.
I was trying to step in and take
control of them, and it's very
alarming. What has happened
there whenever you're talking
about these background chicks.
In my understanding this that
only the operator is the only
one that has to undergo the
background Chicks, Mr Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, General lady, all,
um all employees would go go
through the background check.
So Mr Speaker, That is all
employees does that also include
foster families? Mr. Speaker?
Generally, yes.
Mr Speaker. Does that also
include Let me go over here
whenever they're talking about a
group home.
Tell me the makeup of a group
home.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. There are a
lot of different models when it
comes to group homes, but anyone
that interacts with the Children
and as outlined in this bill
would would have to go through a
background check.
So, Mr Speaker, anybody that was
involved with the group home
would have to be subject to the
background checks that are being
conducted by the FBI and my
understanding that correctly, Mr
Speaker generally, yes.
And Mr Speaker.
Whenever I'm looking at Page
eight and Page nine of the bill,
it's very all of that is new
material right through there.
And one of the things that
really caught my eye.
Was on Page nine.
Line eight starting up for the
prevention, intervention and
reunification services.
Meaning prevention awareness,
family support and reunification
services for families that are
high risk of child maltreatment.
And Mr Speaker. I can
I can testify that this that
It really does bother me
whenever
Whenever I got a call over a
year ago.
From a gentleman who lives in
Roswell.
That tell me about the situation
involving a one year old
Little girl and a four year old
little boy.
Both of their parents were on
drugs.
Children had been taken away by
C Y F. D.
This gentleman wanted to step
up.
And do the right thing and take
those Children.
While their parents went through
treatment program.
Come to find out he could not do
that, Mr Speaker, because a
month prior to all this
happening.
His background check had
expired.
These Children.
Placed in a foster home.
Six months in
The Foster family said Yes, we
want to try to adopt him.
Mr Speaker. They started the
process and then all of a sudden
they threw up their hands and
called calf rope. They said. We
don't want these Children
anymore. Our lives have kind of
changed. We want to do something
different.
C Y F D had to take those kids
back.
The next day, the mother had
completed all the treatment
program.
She had gone through all the
steps. She was clean. She wanted
to get back on track. She wanted
her Children back.
See why I have d.
And being. That's why
Sent those kids to a family and
blend to Mexico.
The mother did not even get to
talk to her Children on the
phone.
Obviously, the mother was
heartbroken.
This man that I was talking
about earlier.
I was trying everything in his
power to find out where the
Children was were.
So that at least the mother
could hear their voices.
The young boy, the four year old
whenever all this first started
head started, Uh
Pre kindergarten.
There in Roswell.
He was uprooted from that.
How it all worked out.
The little girl was sent
someplace else Other than blend
the little boy remained in
Berlin.
Seems like some paperwork got
lost, Mr Speaker.
And this mother is still trying
to get her Children back.
And those wheels turn slowly as
you will. No, I do not want any
child to go back into a home
where there is drugs.
They were taken away for a
reason. I get that.
But this mother has continued to
follow the program.
Has to go undergo the test and
everything.
And it's heartbreaking to hear
her story whenever she goes to
tell him.
All she wants is her kids back.
And it's not going to happen.
I'm afraid because of
Some mix mix ups on the part of
C Y F D Mr Speaker whenever
we're talking about background
checks on everybody, I realized
that it does take time to get
all of this done.
But Mr Speaker
This is one agency in our state.
That needs a complete overhaul.
And until we get that done,
these young Children's lives are
at risk. There is no
reunification with the family as
far as I can tell.
We have foster families that are
want to be able to help these
kids and their scrutinized to
the point.
That they say we're through. We
cannot do this anymore.
I do have to brag about one of
my family's down there.
I met them whenever I was first
campaigning.
They were successful.
And being a foster family, and
they adopted 17 Children. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
17 Children.
And
They lived very modestly.
But you know what the love was
evident They cared for those
Children.
They gave those Children a fresh
start in life and all those
Children.
Call them Mom and Dad. And that
is one success story that I will
brag about until
Time ends.
That Mr Speaker.
We do need to do an
investigation on C Y F. D.
It's not just the workers. It's
the whole program that needs to
be revamped, Mr Speaker.
I don't want to see any more
babies or young Children.
Lose their life because of
Things that are out of their
control that they had no control
over at all.
But whenever this program is not
working for the safety and well
being of those babies and
Children, there's a problem, Mr
Speaker.
I just needed to say my piece.
And I want this body to know
that there are big problems and
it's not just in my area, it's
statewide.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Thank
you very much to the next
debater. Generally, I want to
apologize and half of the body
for the common man earlier.
Uncalled for. I am sorry.
Gentlemen from Lee.
Pedigree. You have the floor.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
General lady yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr Speaker in general lady, Um,
I see.
Several different changes to the
law.
Um or the statutes, however, you
want to say
Say that, um
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
These changes require
Background checks on existing
See why FD employees
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. These, um these
employees would have already
received a background check. And
they would, um, and this is just
put them in line with with what
The FBI requires.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, Can
you simplify that for me? Is
that a yes or no? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen? Yes.
Thank you very much, Um
So, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
then it goes on to define
Who else would have to have
those background checks? As as
well? Would that be correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
So just for my own clarification
and just to make sure
Every employee within the C E.
D. C. N. C Y F D
Go through a criminal background
check.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Mr Speaker is that from the top
down
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, General Lady
for the debate related close.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I now
move that house Bill 152 as a
minute with an executive with an
emergency clause you now pass on
final passage of Senate Bill 152
as amended. It was an emergency
What's about to close.
What is our closed by would have
16 and affirmative zero in the
negative Senate Bill 152 as
amended with an emergency
classes duly passed his house.
Next week. It'll concurrence
calendar.
The gentleman from
Areva. Sandoval San Juan
Valenti, Are you ready on item
number two on the concurrence
calendar? Yes, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I moved that the house
incur in the Senate Amendments
to house
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
Substitute for House Bill 252 as
amended.
Two gentlemen to explain the
amendments.
Body. If we call last week, this
chamber passed the house version
of the tax bill.
Which included house priorities,
namely personal income tax
reductions crest for rural
health care providers removing
taxes on childcare.
And pre K and amongst other
things.
The Senate, then took it to
their side and added their
portion to a tax package, which
also included Governor
priorities. Those governor
priorities are reflected in the
handout that is in the large,
bold print font handouts that
are on each of your desks right
now.
Then that's meant to be a joke.
But this is what the lfc
provided me.
We don't have. We don't have
appropriations money.
For this kind of stuff.
But, uh, if you'll notice the
top portion of this is our house
portion
The bottom half are the Senate
proposals and I'll go over those
individually. Uh,
Here in a minute.
Overall, the total package as it
is was passed back from the
Senate totals in the out years
out years being 2028 renewable
renewable energy figures.
Will be there will be an
investment of $426 million in
renewable
Governor. Priorities in those
out years will total about $256
million.
Working families in the tax
package in the out years again
in 2028 will be about $671
Million and fire will receive
about $40 million of
consideration in this tax
package.
Initiatives that the Senate
added to the tax package include
again looking at your fine print
font document you have in front
of you.
The first one being Calf Canyon
Legal services. G R T deduction.
This was Senate Bill 174 by
Senator Romeo provide the
grocery seats tax deduction for
the sale of legal services for
those affected by the hermit
Speak Calf Canyon fires.
Maximum aggregate amount of
total tax credits may be allowed
and fiscal year is $5 million,
with the cap at $5 million in
the out years.
The second one is
Died. Diesel grt deduction.
Senator Bubka Senate Bill 118
creates a G R T deduction for
the sale and use of dyed diesel
special fuels from the grocery
seats and compensating tax when
used for agricultural purposes
with a sunset date of 71 2029.
There's a $10 million out your
proposed consideration for that.
Third. We have
Severance tax exemption for
certain projects. Senator
Gregg's Senate Bill 64.
Creates an exemption from the
severance tax that allows
stripper wells to recruit
investments made to wells for
compliance purposes.
Number four.
Special needs adoption. Credit
Senator Gallegos Senate Bill
117 increases the special needs
adopted child tax credit from
$1000 up to $1500. The credit
is, in fact, refundable.
That's estimated at a hit of
$800,000 in the out years.
Number five teachers supply
deductions.
Senator Brandt Senate Bill 171
creates an income tax deduction
for school supplies purchased by
public school teacher of up to
500 in tax year 2024.
And thereafter. $1000 in tax
years, 2025 through 2028 years,
looking at a cost of $650,000.
Six.
Geothermal heat pump credits.
Senator Souls. Senate Bill 40
creates personal income tax and
corporate income tax credits for
30% of the costs of installing a
geothermal.
Ground. Coupled heat pump up to
$9000 of a tax credit per
installation with an $8 million
aggregate cap.
Must be installed by 1231 30
2034.
The bill strikes an existing
tenure, caring forward provision
that makes it refundable.
Hitting the out years would be
$8 million.
Number seven.
E V and charging unit credits.
This is a shared proposal by um
representative Hawkman v. Hill
represented Corolla Senator
Tallman House Bill 140 Senate
Bill 315.
Creates personal income tax and
corporate income tax credits for
new and used Evian hybrids and
residential and public charging
units. The credits or refundable
and transferable to allow for
cash on the hood.
Transaction at car dealerships.
This will sunset at the end of
2029.
The hit and the out year. Now
you're being 2028 will be $56
million.
Number eight electric generation
single sales.
This is again a shared
initiative by representative
Ortez and Senator had a meal HB
118, or Senate Bill 280 to
remove the sunset of allowance
of independent power, wind and
solar electrical energy
generators to use single sales
factors in calculating the
amount of corporate income tax.
In the out years. It'll cost $10
million.
Number nine.
Armed forces.
Retirement exemption.
SBS 56.
And SB 125. This eliminates the
sunset.
On the military retirement pay
income tax exemption of up to
30,000 for military retirement
pay and ensures that spouses of
military veterans also received
that income tax exemption.
In the out years. It'll cost a
little over $13 million.
Number 10 geothermal energy
generation credits Senate Bill
58 creates personal income tax
corporate income tax credits
equal to 1.5 cents per kilowatt
hour of electricity generated
and has a cap of $5 million.
Each or $10 million. In total,
Those credits are not
refundable, but may be carried
forward for three years with a
sense it date of 1120.
32 the out year costs will be a
little over $7 million.
Number 11 advanced energy
equipment credit.
This is a shared initiative with
representative Serato and
Senator Shindo.
Creates a credit of up to $25
million for the equipment
purchased by manufacturers of
advanced energy products such as
solar and wind energy
components.
It will. Sunset December 31st of
2032.
Credit is transferable and able
to be carried forward for five
years with an annual cap of $25
million per year, And at that
cap, the out year costs would be
$25 million.
Number 12 foreign corporate
income.
Shared initiative with Senator
Worth and representative Cadena
ads for foreign corporate income
to the tax bakes and makes a
technical change to how some
taxpayers file
It will be in addition to our
revenue of a little over $1
million
Number 13 Solar Market Tax
Credit Senator Stewart Senate
Bill 121 increases the aggregate
cap of available of available
tax credits for solar system
purchases and installation to
$30 million from 2024 to 2032.
It allows taxpayers who will who
were eligible between 2020.
And 2023, but did not receive a
certificate do the cap.
To apply or re apply for a
certificate the cap on this
supplemental opportunity is $20
million, and in the out years
will cost a little over $32
million and lastly, we have
health services G R T Senate
Bill 36 by Senator Morris makes
technical fixes to definitions
of copayments for the grt
exemption.
On copays and deductibles. And
with that, Mr Chairman based on
the interactions that we have
had between the house and the
Senate, I would once again
request concurrence with the
changes made in the Senate.
There is debate will first go to
the gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa favorite presented
McQueen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, Gentlemen. Does the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from of all and sent a
faith.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
Yeah. These packages are mixed
bag. Um
It's not my favorite way of
legislating because
There's a lot of things in here.
I'd like an up or down vote on
that. We're not going to get it.
I'd like to ask a couple
questions about two of the items
in the Senate proposals.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
The first one the calf Kenyan
legal Services to your T
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, are we
basically given the tax break to
lawyers,
Speaker? Gentlemen, Gentlemen,
we can't hear you. You might
want to use the other
gentleman's microphone.
Apparently, we don't get
appropriations either.
I would like to thank my
neighbor Ambrose Castano for
allowing me to use this
microphone tonight.
But this allows
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
so victims of these fires won't
have to pay the grt for their
lawyer use in these actions. So,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, there.
Two types of lawyers. There's
contingent fee lawyers there's
billable.
Lawyers. I'm available lawyer,
So I get paid for my time.
Other people get paid.
Based on settlements a
percentage of the settlement.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
How many? How many? How much in
legal fees does it take to
generate $5 million?
30.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, there
is $4 billion in composition
heading our way and the cap is
at 20% of that for legal fees.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I can
only say
Wow.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, so that
one picked my interest being
them a lawyer, But the one I
really want to focus on is, um
The severance tax exemption for
certain
Projects, which
Those projects are apparently
stripper wells. Mr. Speaker
down.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um, is
there any
Is that tax break available for
any company?
Triple stripper wells, or is
there a
Is it targeted to smaller
producers?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
targeted for smaller producers
that produce less than 1000
barrels of oil per year.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, so I
was about to print the
These amendments are putting on
in the Senate tax.
Committee report. It was 88
pages. I didn't print that out,
Would you? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Would your experts
happen to have that language?
Accessible.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, while
they're looking for the
language like to introduce Izzy
Ishmael Torres, who is the chief
economist for the Legislative
Finance Committee, as well as
Mr Speaker and gentlemen on page
12 of the Senate amendments
close to the bottom item number
for the operator of the well has
total production in the Mexico
of not more than 1000 barrels of
oil equivalent per day.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I, um I
appreciate that.
I don't have a good sense of how
much that is.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. My
understanding is that
The stripper Wells. Um the
they're very low production.
Um
And so I, It's hard for me to
gauge
Where that hits in the hierarchy
of stripper well operators
because there are some
Who are very big
And there are a lot who are very
small.
But the stripper wells, the top
10 operators control over 50% of
all the stripper wells.
Um
In the state.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this
might be, um
Little too complicated. But can
your experts give me any sense
of how much
Typical individual stripper well
might produce and a
I mean, I
I believe it's well less than
1000.
Barrels of oil.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, based
on the knowledge that our chief
economist has he's thinking less
than
10 barrels per day.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, that
would suggest that this stripper
well
Oh, benefit with B operators
with, um, perhaps 100 wells or
less.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
expected to be the
Smaller, smallest 10% of those
producers who would qualify.
Okay, Mr Speaker to him. One
last question. The the Offset is
a total offset. It's not
80% of the cost or 50% of costs.
It's actually 100% of the cost
of the equipment.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is correct. And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, this equipment is
required by law Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you're
correct.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
for your answers.
There is further debate on
concurrency gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Chairman Will the
Channel man from Real or Reba?
Sandoval and San Juan. Yield,
please. Mr Speaker at yield to
the gentleman from Lee County.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
Looks like
Over half of the
Senate.
A tax incentives if you will.
Dealt with some form of
Renewable energy solar tax
credits.
Advanced energy tax credits.
Electric vehicles and whatnot.
That was not an emphasis.
In the package that the house
sent over
Can
Can you
Expand a little bit on why that
difference
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
can't speak to the emphasis that
the Senate in their proposals
provided in this tax package. I
can only reflect on what the
house sent over for the tax
package. And once again it was,
uh
The premier package. Part of the
House was the pit brackets
discussion that we had and what
it provided. And then we focused
on again everyday New Mexicans
in regards to rural healthcare
Grt deductions I mean G R T
exemptions for childcare
services, other things like
that.
And most speaker, gentlemen.
I consider that
Pit bracket adjustment to obey
the crown jewel. If you will of
the package that we sent across
And I see nothing of a similar
nature.
And the Senate package.
Do you concur?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
is
The nature of this tax omnibus
bill. I mean, we we sent our We
did our work. We sent our
initiatives over and then they
did their work and we left them
enough capacity to do that work
with and whatever their
priorities.
Ended up to be is their
prerogative.
It must speaker and gentlemen.
I can. I can see that I
absolutely can, but I don't say
Any fundamental reform.
Hmm. The Senate side of that
package.
I
I completely agree with the
gentleman from Santa Fe and that
there's only bus packages.
China right from me a lot of
heartburn. I do think
Or or enough differences between
the House and Senate side.
To justify a roll call vote and
I would ask for that Roll call
vote at this time.
Give you have a Roco.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That's all I had
to debate the gentleman from I
should I'm sorry generated from
Santa Barbara Luhan.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman
Yield.
Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um I, too am feeling some
heartburn with the process that
we've chosen to have an omnibus
bill with
With our attack with in creating
a tax package. I've had some
Some kind debate amongst members
about this, and those I feel
have more expertise, and I and I
have served on the
Committee for a couple of years.
Um
And today now conclude that I do
not like this process due to the
fact that we are
Forced in a sense not forced. I
shouldn't say that's a strong
word. Mr Speaker. I feel like
We should have these bills come
to us individually and vote
voted upon individually for
many.
Reason, so I would then concur
with my friend from Santa Fair.
My other friend, Um
Represent representative from
Lee County. Thank you, Um
And I just raised my hand. Mr.
Speaker for Roll Call vote. I
think we need to put it. It's
it's giving me some
Pause here to see some of these
things were making some inroads
here as we're investing in some
really good policy, my from my
perspective, but then
Looking at some setbacks and
So it's kind of like a council
out and the margins we we gain.
We then lose and
Maybe pun intended. We will not
achieve in it. Zero
By continuing in this vein, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Um
So can you educate me, Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, a little bit
on I will. I have line 18.
The severance tax exemption for
certain projects, creating
exemption for the severance tax
allows stripper wells to recap
investments made to wells or
Compliance purposes.
Mr Speaker.
What is what is the what are
they going to gain from this
from this?
Um
Piece of legislation. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and ventilated. Who
is they? Mr. Those who own the
stripper Wells. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker and
gently, they will receive the
exemption.
Speaker John What is that
exemption? Exactly. This is
What are the What are the dollar
amounts? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. It
would depend on the compliance
project that they are.
Engaged in
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. So
Then we are looking at a
Spectrum of or a gradient that
we don't even know about what
the what the outcome would be Mr
Speaker. German reserve a cap
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. At
this point, there is not a cap
involved.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, what is
the starting point?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. At
this point, the expectation is
about $4 million.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
And how many wells are there
that would earn if
Or clarify for me if you will,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen at $4
million per well.
Mr Speaker and gently, not pro
Well, but total
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. German $4
million
For all the super Wells in the
state, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentility. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. How many do we know
How many Super Wells we have? Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady, the
number that are economists bring
up is 14,000. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you for that,
Um
I think these stripper wells are
also referred to as marginal
wealth.
Is that correct? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. Yes,
ma'am.
And Mr Speaker. Do they read it?
Do they gain any subsidy from
the federal government?
Oh tax benefit or
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
They're looking, but none that
they're aware of right now.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I did look up
something that said that they
marginal well credit. Um it's
about $3 per barrel.
Of qualified crude oil and 50
cents per 1000 cubic cubic feet
of qualified natural gas
production.
That would be adjusted for
inflation.
And then I believe it's going to
be phased out, and I'm wondering
if that's why they're asking for
this. This tax.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
couldn't tell you whether asking
for it now, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I appreciate that.
Um
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, can you
online 15? We're looking at
creating a grt deduction for the
sale Use of died special fuels
from the gross receipts. I'm
sorry I'm squinting here. Mr.
Chen, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I'm
trying to read this feels from
the gross receipts and can't
Is it compensating tax when used
for agricultural purposes? There
is a sunset on this. Can you
tell me what died? Special
fields? They're They're just
they're meant. What What? What
is it died Special for you, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady died,
died. Fuel or dyed diesel in
this case are the ones that they
utilize on primarily AG lens or
those that are not on highway
travel. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen.
What is the Mr Speaker General?
What is it creates a grt
deduction. What is the grt Grt
deduction.
Mr Speaker, generally, for which
one for line 15. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. It's It's a full deduction
so they don't have to pay G r T
And like this, um
Appreciate that. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I I like a lot of
this and it is a mixed bag. I
get that and that's the way
we've been doing things, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and I know
that this isn't upon you. I
think you've done
I think our house has done a lot
of good things, too, and I feel
like
You know the way that we
compromise and negotiate and
create this package is really
concerning to me as a fairly new
legislator, Um
I'm really trying to comprehend
all of this. It's you know.
It's hard for me to digest and
so I feel like maybe in the
future we need to really look at
a better way of doing this. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I appreciate
your time. Thank you, mate.
Mailman from Sandoval,
representative Harper.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
kind gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval
And
That other county yield, Mr
Speaker, I yield to my friend
from Sandoval County.
Thank you.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I am extremely concerned.
And disappointed with what the
Senate did.
With the tax package.
And chairman. I want to echo
comments. We've heard this has
no reflection on you.
Mr Speaker and Chairman, You
have run this committee.
In a fair and honorable manner
you've you've given
Respect to members of the
committee, no matter what side
of the aisle there on
And if you operated with great
transparency
So, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen, I think
Uh,
I token, a sign of this great
leadership was the idea to hold
a joint
Peering between the Senate and
the House tax committees. So the
purpose Mr Speaker and gentlemen
was so that we could talk about
all the bills that were
considering
Together.
Ask questions.
And
And then go into our respective
chambers.
And develop a package that would
not be a surprise.
That would not have items that
were not vetted.
Um
And
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That's
not what happened here.
The Senate added bills that we
have never seen.
We did not discuss them in that
joint meeting.
And we have not had an
opportunity to vet them here in
the House.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I count
eight new items.
In this package.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Looking at this bill. Now it is
not reform.
Like the bill that we passed out
of the house.
But this is a complete giveaway.
It's a Christmas tree bill.
And this makes me sick.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, because
As a body for the last 10 years.
We've been working hard to get
away from this.
Um
You know, when I started here,
many of you know, my dad is an
accountant. And and he when he
heard I was giving the tax
committee, he says, you know
that joke Jason is
If you have a friend in Santa
Fe, or you can hire a lobbyist,
you don't pay gross receipts
tax, and I saw that my as a
freshman on the tax committee.
Almost every bill was asking for
an exemption or deduction or
credit and that's all we did.
and we just picked. You know
who's gonna who's gonna get a
present from Santa Claus this
year. Um
And our tax code because of that
looks like a block of Swiss
cheese. It is riddled with
special carve outs.
And
And so, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen.
Many of you will remember
representative Bill Makame Lee.
Um
He was a freshman with me on
that committee, and we decided
to partner together to try to
figure out what we can do to
fix. Mexico has broken tax code.
Um and he would talk with voices
for Children and I would talk,
you know, Tax foundation, right?
And we we worked with Richard
ankle, Um and Jim O'Neill. And
you know how and hacked all the
tax wonks and we started working
together on real reform and we
wanted to do was melt that block
of Swiss cheese.
And by removing all those
special carve outs, we would
increase the tax base, which
means more people will be paying
taxes.
But we would use that new
revenue to lower the tax rate.
And so that's what we did for
many years in the tax committee.
Um and
And I'll tell you we had great
legislation. We've made some
good changes, but
Because that was our purpose.
For many, many years, we did not
have all of these bills asking
for carve outs coming in front
of tax committee. There's
actually a few years where we
had two or three. It was it was
actually pretty awesome, and
they were kind of embarrassed
when the lobbyists would come
and ask for another carve out.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
now they are back.
Mm. Speaker. Gentlemen, that's
really disheartening to me.
Um
And and they're back because
Instead of focusing on your tax
reform, which you Mr Chairman,
and this committee are trying to
do. There are others who want to
be Santa Claus again.
Ms Speaker and gentlemen.
And I am very
I'm very sad that we have this
Maybe once in a generational
opportunity with these revenues
to do some real tax reform.
And we're gonna We're gonna lose
that.
That opportunity.
Um
And really, now is the time
Speaker and gentlemen, for
several years, we didn't have
any capacity to any tax reform.
I remember.
One year we had $15 million and
we're able to do some good
things with that $15 million
last year.
Thanks to LFC members and staff.
We had a billion dollars for tax
reform.
And that that bill was amazing.
We took
Motor vehicle excise tax and put
it to roads.
We took all of the liquor excise
tax and put it to Wi treatment
and prevention, Medicaid match
and drug courts.
We lowered the gross receipts
tax.
Um
There's a lot of great things in
that package that I'm sad. We
don't get to see
Um, but this year, we still had
200 million, which was huge, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's huge
In the grand scheme of things,
Mr. Gentlemen, I want to again
commend you.
We on the House side had great
reform in that bill, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, your pit bracket
reforms.
Um, that was I was really proud
of that. I agree with the
gentleman from Lee that was
probably the crown jewel.
Mr John. We had
What I thought was also very
important child texts, Um,
childcare tax deduction. Um
And we did some fixes to the
rural Healthcare Practitioner
Act must be gentlemen. We had
single sales factor.
Which was a real reform, which
would keep us from penalizing a
business corporation from
expanding in New Mexico.
Which is what we do right now,
And that just does not make
sense. Why would we do that? And
in fact
We are one of only five states
that still do it This way.
Everyone else has moved away
from the single sales fact I
believe that was a good use of
our funds.
And we only had one new item in
our package.
From last year, and that was the
fire recovery tax credit, which
we did discuss in that joint
meeting. We had opportunity to
get it.
I think it was good legislation.
But look at the Senate side.
I mean, this is a complete
giveaway.
Um
We're picking friends to give
money to this is not reform.
These are more holes in the
Swiss cheese.
And Mr Gentlemen, when I talked
about good legislation earlier,
I said, it's a bill that you
like 70% of
And you hate 30% of it,
depending on where you sit on
the in this chamber, what you
like and hate is different.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
This isn't all bad, but
I think I have changed now to
liking about 15% of it and not
liking 85% of it.
And I can talk about specific
items here, but
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
think you've got the point. But
Mr gentlemen, another saying and
kind of where I am most
personally hurt.
Is I had really only one
provision in this tax code, and
it was single sales factor for
everyone.
And gentlemen, my understanding
was that we would send over a
tax package.
And they would leave it alone.
And then they would send over
theirs.
And we would leave it alone. But
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, they
struck my provision out of our
house tax package.
And interestingly, they put in a
provision in there's which gave
single sales factor just to
renewable energy generation.
So seals found sales factors and
okay, but only for the few
winners that we pick, not for
everyone.
Right, Mr. Gentlemen, I think
everyone knows here. I try to be
fair, right? I don't pick
winners and losers. It should be
one way for everyone or not.
Um
Speaker. Gentlemen, As part of
this, I had a compromise.
I had included removing the
bottom bracket from the
corporate income tax as a
compromise.
Um
Mr and gentlemen.
They struck the single sales
factor, but kept
The removal of
The bottom bracket on the
corporate income tax.
Speaker and gentlemen, I am
tired of this.
I am tired of working in a
bipartisan way working to build
bridges working to build
consensus.
Building a compromise package
and then what ends up happening
is
The provisions that I am not
really excited about, but I
offer his compromise and up
Going through and becoming law
and the stuff that
I thought it was good tax policy
and fought for gets stripped
out.
And that's exactly what has
happened here.
So, Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen, I don't think
that's right. I don't think
that's fair.
Um
Mr Speaker For that reason
alone. I'm not going to vote to
concur.
But Miss Speaker Janet and
Ladies and gentlemen of the
House
I urge you also
Not to concur.
Because
What the Senate did was not
right.
They broke the agreement and
they do not control the
legislative branch in New
Mexico.
The House is a co equal branch
with the Senate.
And
The Senate just expected
Us to take what they are jamming
down our throats. We haven't had
an opportunity to vet it.
And the tax committee.
And I don't think that's right.
Speaker and gentlemen, we still
have time. There is plenty of
time in the session to meet in
the conference committee.
And work this out.
So speaking the only way and
gentlemen, I urge you not to let
the Senate silence your voice.
They broke the agreement.
And I urge you
To stand up.
For this chamber.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen from Santa Fe
represent Romero.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield Mr Speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I
just really want to, um, uh,
praise my colleagues here for
speaking boldly on behalf of
this. I've received many
concerns from constituents of
mine regarding what's in this
tax package and have had to
learn very quickly. Mr. Speaker.
What died? Diesel is and how
stripper wells work.
Um, because these were the
number one issue that I had
heard Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
about, um, what's going on with
these tax credits? Um so, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, while I
think there's several great, you
know, opportunities for us to
utilize some of these tax
credits. I'm really concerned
with what we're talking about.
With some of these exemptions
and let's just start with
stripper wells. Since I've
become a little bit better
versed in what we're doing with
these and looked up Senate Bill
Um 64 that is now in this tax
package. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I understand now that we have
about 13,000 active stripper
wells that are oil wells, um,
and about 14,000.
Other stripper wells. This is in
the F I. R for this.
Um, portion of the bill, um,
adding up to about 20% of all of
our active wells in the state
about 1.5% oil production, and
when we look at the 4 million,
um
That's proposed for this tax
package. 4.3. It looks like your
two year, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, this is to recoup
investments for those who have
already made these investments.
Who which I understand that the
state land office Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, flagged for the fact
that these once these stripper
Wells go into this sort of slow
production phase, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um they become a
hazard for our state, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, so the way
that constituents have placed it
for me is that this is a
bailout.
For the oil and gas industry, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, when we're
talking about the fact that not
only are we helping them recover
the cost on potentially a bad
investment, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um, there are
choosing not to plug these wells
do something that we need to get
done in the future, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and what approach
which would appropriately clean
up these sites but creating
essentially a legacy of problems
that we will have to deal with,
And that is
Clearly flagged by
Um, the state land office in,
um, the F I R that
It covers Senate Bill. Um
64 If my glasses are working, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, um so that
said, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
what was the rationale for
needing to include this when we
were trying to transition out
of, uh, non renewable energy
things that are caused costing
our state Mr Speaker gentlemen
that we would put up $4.3
million a year to year.
Um, to bail out this industry,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mm. Mr Speaker. And generally
that's a great question, And I
wish I could answer it for you.
But I wasn't a part of those
conversations in the Senate with
the sponsors and those committee
chairs on that side.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, that is
really concerning and when we
look at some of the great things
that are in here, um it gives me
extreme pause for the
constituents that are speaking
up, saying, When are we going to
get out of this cycle of having
to make these bad investments
when we have historic budgets,
and we're still continuing to
make the same mistakes that we
have year to year?
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. Now I'll
go to die Diesel, which we now
put up $10 million for
sunsetting again Died. Diesel,
which I understand is typically
tax exempt. But then again, it
creates an externality. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, which is
burned fuel, which then causes
problems for our state.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. So when
we're both giving $10 million to
this, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I
see that there are tax
deductions for health care. But
how are we looking at those
things in tandem, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen with the externality
that this is now creating
Mr Speaker gently, once again a
great question that died. Diesel
is simply looking at as I
understand it
as an incentive for those that
are still engaged in agriculture
in this state and their only
form of working their land is to
utilize large tractors that burn
diesel.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
appreciate that, and I did Look
up how these exemptions work. Um
I just feel that Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, when we're creating
these carve outs for certain
activities, we are also creating
negative externalities for that
that we're not also paying for
and putting up funding for those
negative externalities When it
comes to burning, feel that we
are now
Um, creating a tax exemption for
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
The only other thing that I
think gave me pause on this
list, which again we have to
speak up about, and I again
appreciate folks bringing
attention to some of these that
I believe go against our values
is the house and things that we
had already agreed upon that we
thought would be great for this
year's tax package.
Um and I will just also going
back to the stripper Wells. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, this is a
failed piece of legislation in
2023. And now we're hiding it in
our tax package is something
that will generally no one's
hiding anything. It's all very
public, and it's all been done
through a very open meeting
process, So no one is hiding
anything.
Fair, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think I'm just speaking to the
fact that in an omnibus when
we're not able to vet each of
these pieces individually, we're
ending up with a large package
that we have to speak up for
when we're looking at things
that have previously failed and
why those perhaps failed, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, the last
thing that I just wanted to talk
to is the teachers supply
deduction.
Um
Which is alarming in a couple of
ways. Not that I think that we
would deduct for teachers,
purchasing. Um
Supplies, but the fact that
teachers still have to spend
potentially 500 to $1000 every
single year, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen that we then have to
deduct it just so they can run
their classrooms. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, this while I'm
grateful that we would create
this, um, deduction for those
who are
Adding to the benefit of any
given classroom, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I just feel that when
we're looking at it again our
historic budgets that we would
be able to put up a fund. Um, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen for teachers
generally who need those
supplies and the fact that we
would simply deduct it? Um
again, I think creates a
perpetual problem that we should
be paying for as a state.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, while I'm
still considering whether or not
I can vote for this because of
some of the flags that were
raised to me by constituents in
those who are really concerned
that this could potentially send
us down the wrong road. I do
appreciate all of your work and
efforts and doing the best for
Our house and defending the
things that I think, show our
values, and I appreciate it.
You having to go through through
this, But I disagree with some
of the carve outs that are made,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and just
want to make clear to the body
that feel that this is something
that's sending us in the wrong
direction.
This debate Gentlemen from
Lincoln and representative
Vincent. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
This gentleman from Rio Rivas,
Sandoval and San Juan. You, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
counties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, question that I had
was on your bill page 35.
On Section two is talks about
qualified site built
expenditures.
And it talks about, um
Talks about the taxpayers prior
home was destroyed by wildfire
in the calendar years. 2021
through 23.
I was going to get attacks.
Break and I was just wondering.
So the calf Canyon Hermits Peak
fire was put in there. The same
fire in reduce. Oh,
Was the McBride fire, which did
receive some funding, and I was
just wondering why the McBride
fire was left out, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, they
would qualify as well under this
provision, Okay. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
How? How does that go? How do
you How does that work?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, it's
simply because their homes were
destroyed by fire in these
calendar years that are
represented in the bill itself.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentlemen. Appreciate it.
There's for you to be gentlemen
from
McKinley burn Leo to Valencia.
And San Juan representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. The
gentleman from San Juan Rio
Revolt and William Mr Speaker
Yield to the gentleman from all
those counties. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, you know,
there's a lot of controversy
going on on exemptions and
Tax credits and other stuff from
everybody. I'm hearing it from
everybody. And you know, on the
exemption sunset in the center
and our veterans exemption was
put on by the Senate and Tunable
25. I think
Anyone on 2020 25 is in the cost
990,000.
26,000,027 million in 28 13
million
Mr Speaker and fine, Gentlemen,
Do you know how many people are
in the military and the basis?
You're in the New Mexico right
now?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, my
experts are looking for that
data. But perhaps you may know
the number before we do.
No, I I don't know the number
but what I'm getting at Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, is a
You know all the lot of lot of
these people are going to retire
here in New Mexico.
After these bases, and when I'm
looking at
They're going to contribute back
to the state.
By the expertise and a lot of
stuff, you know, mechanics, HVAC
welders.
You name it. Plumbers,
carpenters. They're all there in
the base and if they retire him
to Mexico.
Mike. It's not a concern to me,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen that
there will be putting money
back.
Into the economy. The student in
Mexico so the money we're
exempting right now is going to
come back.
In. You know, I don't know if
double triple or whatever, but
it will come back to center in
Mexico and you know, and on this
exemption
And this son today and included
spouses now
So that includes more people
20,000 people on the basis in
So that includes more people.
20,000 people on the basis of
New Mexico City 5000 retire
here.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Now we've
got 5000 military and 5000
spouses. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, to the
math. Yes, sir.
You know, and what I'm looking
at, You know, I hear complaints
about
Your credit and whatever
everybody is not happy with
everything.
But we need to look at the big
picture of at the end of the
day.
What do you military people are
going to bring them into the
city in New Mexico?
Because once that exemption is
gone, I mean, the center has
gone. He's gone forever. And the
bases are not going anywhere. My
correct
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct.
And you know, and when I'm the
point I'm trying to get across
his. You know, this is an asset
for us, not a liability.
Because these people will stay
here in New Mexico because of
the tax breaks wouldn't be
giving them out. You know, we're
not giving many things to get a
break on taxes, but those taxes
were returned. Right back to
our, uh
Communities because these people
will stay here, you know, Buy
houses by businesses. To me.
That's a big income barrier, you
know, coming back into the
statement, correct.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Yes,
sir.
You know, I just wanted to make
that Mr Speaker. I just want to
make that point. Can I have been
hearing all the conversation
about
The good and the bad, and I
think this is one of the best
good that we have without being
said any comment on that.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
glad you appreciate that portion
of the tax package.
Thank you. And you know, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, thanks for
putting in the tax package. I
appreciate it, and I'm pretty
sure all the veterans will do.
Thank you.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's
further debate. The gentleman
from Dona Ana representatives,
small
Thank you, Mr Speaker with the
gentleman from Sandoval, Rio
River and burning Leo. You up,
Mr Speaker? I yield to my friend
from Dona Ana County. Excellent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Gentlemen. First I just want to
again compliment you and this
body in your committee for their
work. Mr. Speaker. I think it
shows very clear here. Although
Speaker I think it's clear that
our LFC college we need to print
on both sides.
And increase the front. Um
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, um, going
to some of the amendments, of
course, which is where we have
to stick. Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Would you say we have a diverse
energy state? Um, and in a
diverse state overall, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, I would agree
that we do.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I truly
do as well and it strikes me,
Uh, you know, raise concerns as
is appropriate or thoughts in
questions about the process, But
Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
New Mexico is an energy rich
state we have promulgated.
Yeah, yeah. Nationally leading
regulations around emissions, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen. And this
bill, I'll be it, perhaps in an
imperfect way includes sort of a
way to address those and help
bring these wells in the
compliance. Is that your
understanding, Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, That is my
understanding.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Think
acknowledging the imperfection
and the challenges in the
process, But at the same time,
this represents a part of our
state. A need, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, um, going on, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, This seems
to me to have some of the most
some of the strongest, if not
the strongest that I've ever
seen.
Zero emissions and clean energy
tax incentives that have come
before the body both from from
the original bill, and
particularly in what's come back
to us here in the house. Would
you agree, Mr Speaker, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, according
to our economists were looking
at upwards of close to half a
billion dollars in renewable
incentives in this tax package.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, that is
remarkable.
Ah, that is remarkable. And I
think, Mr Speaker gentlemen,
coming as it does, as we make
investments through our budget
as we see federal opportunities
this Mr Speaker and gentlemen
seems to touch many different
areas, including economic
diversification, particularly
with the advanced energy
equipment credit.
And so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
that
That's really attractive to me.
Quite frankly, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Um, as you know,
obviously, we're very we're
heavily agricultural state.
Uh, what does the dye diesel tax
the G R T credit? What is that
mean to agricultural producers?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I think for those
producers that are still in the
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I think for those
producers that are still in this
state, it incentivizes them to
continue their practices,
especially for those that are.
It's easier to sell your farm
and moved to the city and then
to continue to want to produce
the food for our people. And so
for this type of small incentive
that encourages them to want to
continue on in that practice of
agriculture. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
That that seems right to me. And
I know there are producers back
home.
Who will be excited to see that
should we choose to move forward
today? Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, this is
um all known. You know, we
stayed. It seems like
particularly in fy 25 well
within sort of the bounds of the
tax package and some of the
additional capacity.
That we talked about earlier
tonight when we did concurrence.
Would you agree? Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I agree, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I do too. I want to
thank you for that. I know in
the house. The discipline and
the focus on tax policy is
clear. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think even as we, you know,
Yeah, I work with the body for
whom perhaps approach things
differently. The discipline and
approach that you and your
committee modeled here, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen. Clearly have
I think I I would say influence
them positively in in their
approach. Would you agree? Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, you know
the practice and the process
that we've
You got here in the house?
Definitely. I would hope would,
um
They want a mirror on the Senate
side, but at the same time, I
think the most of what we've
done here in the house is
provide a transparent,
communicative bipartisan
platform for us to move forward.
and so I can only speak what
we're doing here in the house
That wouldn't happen on the
other side is their prerogative.
And I think I have to respect
that as well. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, really well said, and
Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I think I'll wrap up there and
and I think, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, sort of explain why I
intend to vote. Yes, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, think the confidence
that we have in you and your
committee and their approach is
born out again in the work that
we see, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Even though there are remain
clear differences. I see
movement towards a more open and
inclusive process, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, perhaps pulled and
pushed when the other chamber
sees open, transparent, um,
fair dialogue. I think there is
a move towards that.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, it
doesn't happen all at once, and
it does it And as you said, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, we shouldn't
expect carbon copies, But I
wanna acknowledge thank you for
your leadership and to sort of
showcase that even with
imperfections even as there are
things that that
Maybe don't quite fit or came in
different ways. This they're all
different parts of New Mexico
who benefit from this, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, it is within
our financial ability to work
with this and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, in some areas,
whether it's health care,
childcare, clean energy.
This does some of the most
exciting work the pit brackets
for sure, um, that that I think
that I have certainly seen And
so that's why I want some of the
reasons. Mr Speaker. Gentlemen,
I'll be voting. Yes, Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
There's what you beat Your lady
from brilliance and the world.
Representative Cates
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Sandoval healed,
Mr Speaker? I yield for the
generator from Sandoval. Thank
you very much. Chairman for
this, uh
Extraordinarily hard work.
Um, when I first looked at this
package, I, uh
I I saw that many things that
reflect our values. In our
culture. We have seven
Um, categories here on energy
efficiency and green fuels. We
have three healthcare bills
here. We're taking care of our
not just our veterans, but their
spouses. Um, I I see a lot of
our values reflected in this and
I very much appreciate this, Um,
Chairman lint.
Um, Mr Speaker and Chairman. I,
um I, too had concerns about the
severance tax exemption on, uh
On the stripper wells, But, um
as chairman, small clarified.
It is not
Perfect system.
But there is deeper
understanding. I rise to, um
To say thank you as well as I I
see that we have energy here. We
have health. We have three major
sweeping tax, which I'm sure was
is from the house and inspired
by the House team.
And I wanted to thank
representative Harper as well
because I know definitely that
was an influence there.
Um, I want to also thank you for
what I call our three
Orphaned.
Ah initiatives and I appreciate
these. These small the G R T
waiver for individuals with
disabilities to do home
modifications.
This is a very tiny amount of
money. It was in the tax package
last year.
Um, I It will change people's
lives, and it is not a giveaway.
I do not want it.
Pattern arised.
As a giveaway because it will
change people's life. And
although tonight we've spent a
lot of time and I hope you're
Googling it and learning more
about died Diesel
Um, died. Diesel our federal
government after World War two
did not tax it to be make sure
that our agricultural community
had his lower overhead as
possible, and our state started
taxing it another administration
ago.
So I, for one am very grateful
that this is in the tax package.
I believe Chairman Lindsey
wasn't it in the house is tax
package last year, Mr Speaker
Gentility. You're correct. Thank
you so much. And so this is an
opportunity for agricultural
community to know that we are
also
Keeping them in mind and that we
understand the margins in which
they're dealing with as well and
that in our state, we're going
to remove that, as in many other
states don't have that The
federal government weighed this
tax shortly after World War two.
So thank you very much.
Um, I I ask you, Chairman Is
this a tax package in which
you're asking the body to accept
Mr Speaker and gentility? Yes,
ma'am. I'm asking the body to
concur with the Senate changes.
Thank you very much. And thank
you. Thank you, gentle lady.
There's for the debate. The
gentle lady from Burnley
representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Does the
gentleman yield Mr Speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
Braulio County. Thank you, Mr
Terror. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, you know, I rise. 2.2
number item 13 under the Senate
proposals, and it's also number
26 on the list that you gave us
a key.
Hearing issues and I point this
out to you to say a big thank
you. There were many people in
my district who were not able to
get the solar tax credit that
they were looking for. They had
purchased solar panels early on,
and we ran out of money and they
would not happy and the fact
that you all have now gone back
and said we are going to cure.
This is absolutely wonderful,
and I think the people in my
district
Are going to be exceptionally
happy and not just in my
district, but throughout the
state, those who are not able to
get the tax credit my question
to you, Mr Chair, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is with respect to
the $30 million that has been
put in for this effort. Did you
all actually come to a, um
A conclusion that that was the
amount that was needed because I
don't want those individuals to
be disappointed again.
Mr Speaker and gentle Lady.
Absolutely. The L C staff looked
at this issue and agreed and
came up to the determination
that $30 million is, in fact,
the number actually is 30. So
that is absolutely great, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, because
you made a lot of people happy,
and tonight I can go or as soon
as we approve this and it's
signed by the governor to say,
you know, we've made it right.
So thank you very much, and I
certainly will be supporting
this tax package.
There is a debate on concurrence
deleted from Burleigh. Europe
presented Borrego.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general gentlemen from Bern, Leo
and all those other counties
yield. Mr Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Braulio
County.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr Speaker
remembers probably one of the
newest members on the on the tax
committee. But I do know a
little bit of, uh, of a little
bit about taxes because I'm also
a small business owner and I
have been a small business
owners since about 2010. When I
retired from the city of
Albuquerque.
Um And I know that taxes are
Not always an easy thing as my
my colleague from Santa Fe
mentioned this is a lot to
digest. Um, but I will say, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, um
The first of all I want to
recognize your leadership at in
our tax committee. Um
Having
Served on this committee as one
of the newer members.
Um, you know, it was often
really difficult to get there
and know everything we could
about each of the bills that
came before us and really
educate ourselves as much as
possible. Um, and then to
educate ourselves about the
process that occurred to create
this piece of paper that's in
front of us.
Which contains as one of my
colleagues said a lot to digest.
Um, when I look at the House
proposal, um I remember each of
these items that we discussed
and especially one of the things
that
You know I was remembering was
the pit brackets and how we had
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, our
discussion about
Sort of back and forth about the
brackets.
And how that would actually have
a positive impact on some of the
lower
Um, earning incomes in the
state.
And so I'm really happy to see
that that's still in there, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, um, also
the rural healthcare, which we
discussed in length, and you
know, we had our own personal
experiences, some of us who have
family in rural areas and are
especially, you know, I think
about Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
I think about the the hospital
in Gallup.
Um it's really, really
struggling. And I've discussed
that with my colleague from my
colleagues from Gallup of how
hopefully some of these things
will help.
Um, you know those hospitals
that are struggling in the rural
areas I see and hear the fire
recovery tax credit, which I was
happy to help. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, help the speaker
with you know, I was happy
because I grew up in northern
New Mexico. And and this is
something that I know that
people are struggling with.
With regard to the fires in
Hilda, Go and all the other
places that we know that have
really affected people in a
negative way, especially after
coming out of covid.
Um, Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um,
also that we addressed, uh
And I can I can't see this very
well. But
Um Medicaid and childcare and
knowing the process, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, um, you know, I
remember sitting in that meeting
with, um
The Senate and I thought that
was really interesting
situation that we were able to
go and meet with them and listen
to their thoughts as well.
When this Senate proposal came
to me, I started really thinking
about, um, the the wells and how
that affects this package. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen and Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, you know
that I was in the planning
department in Albuquerque for
many years and we did code
enforcement.
Um, that was part of what we did
and planning.
Um and we went after the worst
of the worst. You know,
businesses that were struggling
businesses that were failing
businesses that were just maybe
not doing things in a proper
manner.
Yeah.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, one of
the things that I wonder about
is if we don't help some of
these, um wells that have and
and
My colleague from Santa Fe
mentioned that you know, you
have to get really educated on
this stuff. Very, very, very
quickly. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, um
If we don't do something to help
these wells, are we doing a
disservice to those? Those
communities by not providing an
incentive to help them?
To come into compliance, and I
bring that up because of you
know my experience with code
enforcement and helping small
businesses if they had just had
sort of that little edge, the
worst of the worst will
definitely go away by default.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
because they will not be able to
survive.
They will go away by default.
The ones that can make it will,
you know, with a little help. I
think that they will, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen, they will come
into compliance, and that is
what the state needs. And so Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, I know
that this is not everything that
we would probably is the house.
Committee have
Supported
But
There are other things in here,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen from
the Senate that I look at that,
I think special needs adoption
Teachers supply donate
deduction, which are teachers
are struggling armed forces. Uh,
retirement and health services G
R T.
So you know, I think it's not a
perfect package. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, but the time that was
put into this
As opposed to the time that we
have left in this session. We
have a day and a half left.
Is it really in our best
interest and in the best
interests of the state to accept
this package, or is it in the
best interest to say no. And
then we run out of time, and we
don't have a tax proposal. So,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, um I
want to commend our leader for
for getting us to this point.
Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. There is
for the debate. Your lady from
Dona Ana representative Laura
Cadena. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman from Sandoval
Riyadh Event San Juan. Yield. Mr
Speaker, I yield to my Vice
Truman.
The generator from Dona Ana
County.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
want to wrap our conversation
here with sharing some of my
considerations over the last few
days and why I stand today and
support of our concurrence
motion.
Mr Speaker, Gentleman.
We are all navigating a
political landscape that's
complicated.
Um most of you all were in this
body at the end of the 60 Day
session.
When our ranking member and the
chair and myself went into a
conference committee.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. You'll
mail remember that we ended up
in that committee space for
separate times and we had
significant debate and dialogue.
We had meaningful conversations
about the policies that the
House had moved forward and the
policies that the Senate was, um
Proposing.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
were sharp. We were prepared. We
were valued. We were clear.
And in the end we lost and Mr
Speaker gentlemen, that reality
Hasn't changed. This is
politics.
Elections matter, Votes matter
Leadership matters.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, as I've
thought.
About
The Senate amendments that were
coming our way. And as I had the
room to present HB 252 in the
Senate Tax Committee on Sunday.
I had to really consider whether
or not I thought this was still
a package that was good enough
for New Mexico to keep pushing
forward.
And like, so many have shared
today what came out of the house
was about everyday working
families. It was about making
sure our little ones have
somewhere safe to be when their
parents are at work or at
school. It was about those home
modifications for new Mexicans
that have so little but deserve
to live with some dignity.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I did,
like many
Oh, my kids calling me to say
goodnight. She should be in bed
already.
Um I like many had questions,
and we did our best to reflect
those questions and those
insights and those
considerations.
To the Senate Tax Committee and
to the governor's office as this
Um, as we navigated the last few
days.
One little tiny shadow. I want
to give. Mr Speaker gentlemen is
to the work we tried to push on
the tax credits.
For those that were part of the
House Tax Committee. You'll
remember when that original bill
came before us. We had big
questions because it was a
refundable tax credit, and it
wasn't income tested.
And I appreciate the house
sponsor of that bill for coming
afterwards and expressing that
she was amenable to making that
a better fit for low income New
Mexicans.
So that the narrative we were
hearing the public comments and
support of that bill actually
reflected in the legislation
were preparing to advance. And
so, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
ultimately
There is still a $3000 credit.
For new vehicles up to $55,000,
and there's no income test, so
it's real that there will be new
Mexicans buying new E V s that
are going to get a credit that
they didn't need in order to
make that purchase.
But along that way, we also
bumped up the credit available
for a used car up to $25,000.
From $1000 to $2500.
Because we didn't want it to be
a token that maybe some lower
income New Mexicans might take
advantage of
But we wanted it to actually be
big enough to have an impact
that it might change someone's
buying power.
So, Mr Chair, gentlemen, That's
certainly frustrating.
Because
That credit got bigger, but it
got closer to what we thought
new Mexicans actually need and
deserve.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, I
think you and I were both blown
away by the emails. We got in
support of the Senate amendments
because there was environmental
advocates from all over New
Mexico that were so impressed.
By how many credits were in the
Senate tax package.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. We then
also got
The sledge of emails about the
stripper well issue and as we've
discussed over many days when
you look in the out years about
what those credits towards
renewable and environmental
impacts are worth, they're
coming in and out over $400
million
When you look at E. V s and
advanced manufacturing and
geothermal times, two and the
electric generation
Single sales factor. The
hypocrisy in that 1/400 million
This stripper well, piece
Is a change in the severance tax
bonds. We collect a 4 million a
year.
We may have a philosophical
debate about whether it's right
that we pay to bring these wells
into compliance.
But what about those new
Mexicans living near these
wells?
Sometimes we just have to do the
right thing.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, already
as we've stressed out over this
concurrence in this bill
We've already said moving
forward on that stripper. Well
piece. It's real that the
methane rules changed recently
and and the clean air standards
are getting stricter.
So maybe moving forward this
stripper while pieces no longer
prospective.
Because at some point you've got
to know the new rules. You got
to know what it takes to be in
compliance and then make a
decision on whether or not that
investment is a sound
investment.
But in the meantime,
It's positive environmental
impact to make sure
That was Wells get brought into
compliance for the new Mexicans
that live in those neighborhoods
in those communities that call
oil and gas country home and for
the greater good.
That we all are facing.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, all
wrapped with saying again
leadership matters,
transparency matters And as
you've reminded me about every
hour for the last three or four
days.
We can only stand by how we show
up.
And what we move forward.
The Senate has their prerogative
to do what they do, as does the
governor.
But I'm damn proud of the tax
package we put together.
And I am concurring today to
know that for our part, we
showed up for new Mexicans and
that we can move this policy
forward and do right by those
families that send us to Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr Speaker for
the bait. We are an emotion by
the gentleman from Green River
Sandoval.
Yeah, and San Juan to concur
with Senate amendments to house
Taxation Revenue Committee
substitute for us to 52 as
amended.
There is a roll call vote. It
would have yes, and the body
would have concurred with the
Senate amendments would have
known and the body would not
have concurred.
The vote.
Is now.
What about the clothes? What is
that close? By what of 39 in the
affirmative 27 in the negative.
The house has been curd.
And Senator amendments to Health
Taxation Revenue Committee
substitute for hours with 252 as
amended.
Go to the gentleman from
Burnley. Your representative
Cruise.
Are you ready on the last item
of the night?
Thank you. Mr Chairman will give
me that point, please record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing sent about
176, as amended on final passage
have been taken. It is not
subject to debate Amendment for
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. All
combat sports in New Mexico,
whether it's boxing. Mm, a bare
knuckle or wrestling are all
regulated by a body called the
athletic.
Commission and this act without
its extension will sunset in its
sunsetting. Then there would be
no regulation over any of these
particular combat sports, and
so, Mr Speaker, I'm calling you
Mr Chairman often called the
Chairman, Mr. Speaker, Mr
Speaker.
Without without extension of
this, uh, act again. I want to
stress to the body that there
would be no oversight of any
martial art in New Mexico. In
addition, Mr Speaker
One minor thing that needs to
happen is we tweaked it. Uh,
Senator Meyers does myself
working with the athletic
commission tweaked us so that we
increase some of the the fees
that were outdated since the
early eighties. And so with
that, Mr Speaker, we stand for
questions.
There is a great gentleman from
some 100% of lane. Thank you. Mr
Speaker is the gym them from
burning will yield
I yield to the gentleman, Mr
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Gentlemen
from burning. We have one
question for you before we
adjourn.
Regarding combat sports is that
include throughout debates on
the House floor, Curious
House floor member number one
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, we can
add that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen. Close Thank you,
Speaker. It's a body devote Yes.
That sounds to me like a motion.
I move Mr Speaker. I move the
that it be a do pass.
We're on final passage of
Centerville 176 as amended. The
vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
Was enclosed by a vote of 63 in
the affirmative. Three and the
negative Senate bill 1 76 hours
of minutes really passed this
house.
Generated from Leo.
Mr Speaker Now being 1159 am I
move? We adjourn until 1201 pm
order. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended in the journal Show
that all this president this
morning session of President
this afternoon session
Objection. His order.
Mr Speaker ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended into
the records show that the
journal has been read in full
and improved subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
order of Business Committee
objection of disordered
Generally firmer, Leo save
Casey.
Mr Speaker.
We go to that order of business
messages, objection of
disordered click to read message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the House
of the Senate has passed. House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 41 and returned
same here with
Respectfully submitted Senate.
Sheri Dillon Johnson, chief
clerk. Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed. Senate judiciary can be
substitute for Senate Bill 271
and request the concurrence of
the House.
Respectfully submitted. Sheri
Dillon wants and Chief clerk
message will be entered.
Your lady from Berlioz's. Oh, Mr
Speaker. I move and go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation. Objection is
ordered.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 271
an act relating to criminal
procedure requiring the court to
hold a person for a violation of
conditions of release to
consider modification or
revocation of those conditions
of release. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 271.
Institutional Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville to 71. I've been
retired by Telus referred to the
House Judiciary Committee lady
from Berlioz's represented
Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move and go to
that order, business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is so
ordered Lady from earlier
presented Thompson with an
announcement. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. The House Health and
Human Services Committee has one
memorial tomorrow, so we will
meet at 930 in room 315. And
remember, tomorrow was pink out.
Pink out day tomorrow, members
said no gentlemen from San Juan,
Rio Arriba and Sandoval,
representative, lengthening.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Announcement your house Taxation
Revenue Committee will not be
meeting tomorrow morning, but we
will have to come back into
committee, probably sometime in
the evening or afternoon to take
up the capital and
reauthorization bills. Thank you
Take note.
Any other announcements.
Remembers. We are almost at the
finish line. I want to thank you
all for a great day of hard
work. We got through a lot of
business today.
I appreciate as always the
debate. I appreciate the
conversation I appreciate
The work that we do together in
this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe Zamora
Judiciary Committee meeting
happening
Mr Speaker. There is the your
House Judiciary Committee will
meet at nine o'clock. We'll have
a couple of bills that will be
debating
Members. Take note,
lady and I believe you are also
adding Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville to 71 to your agenda
tomorrow. Any other
announcements?
Right members.
We will see you tomorrow we'll
do floor starting at about 10,
o'clock, and then we'll just
roll till we finished.
We're almost there.
You leave from early? Oh, Mr
Speaker of the House stand in
recess until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
Valentine's Day Ash Wednesday,
February 14th pink out Dave
2024 am
