If.
This.
As.
Okay great so again everyone I
just got word that we are live
And we're just going to promote
a couple of people.
Ready.
Right right we will now call the
house state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
meeting to order the correct
click to call the roll please
morning thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey I am madam
chair I'll turn my camera on
shortly.
Representative.
Here.
Representative.
Here.
Representative night.
Your.
Representative.
Here.
Representative.
Your.
Representative.
Representative.
Thank you.
I.
Here.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair we have a
quorum with nine present.
Thank you so we were before we
begin I have a couple of
announcements to make we are
rolling to wells house bill one
sixty two is rolled until
further notice.
That's house bill one sixty two
it will not be heard today and
it will be rolled until further
notice and that's per the
request of the sponsor.
H. A. R. four will also be
rolled until Wednesday for the
request of the sponsor so that's
H. A. R. for so those two bills
will not be heard today.
And with that we can began with
house bill one twenty four we'll
just need to
Get Representative Garcia.
And his witnesses into the panel
wrote so give us one minute.
Right thank you so
Representative.
Yeah we will continue with house
bill one twenty four which was
roled from last Friday to
address some changes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
only one of the S. that led the
US.
It's a beautiful day in the
neighborhood today madam chair
and madam chair you are correct
of house bill one twenty four.
it was the wish of the committee
on Friday to roll over this.
Legislation to have
Representative Eli me with my
experts to kind of work out some
issues showing up in your
analysis and we have done that
done chair by bringing forth the
this amendment to address one
key issue and also chair after
the committee has acted on our
amendment I would like to yield
to my experts.
At B. Ella the kind of briefly
reflect on clarifying the issue
the if for a issue in our
legislation which was also a key
issue of discussion in the
meeting with Representative Eli
so what that madam chair I would
like to have permission to our
present and amendment.
Thank you representative.
Madam chair you you I can't hear
you sorry we're dealing with
other issues with the webcast
and panelists so I was purposely
on mute but thank you for
explaining that I don't know
representative Ely if you also
want to jump in or Gabriela.
Yeah I madam chair for purposes
discussion of like to have
Representative Garcia presents a
sentiment to the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Yes thank you madam chair.
You should have amendment.
The number on the bottom is two
one nine four seven six point
one.
And the amendment is to page two
line twenty one on the bill and
that basically what we're doing
with the amendment is we're
defining victim.
And that some of us know victim
is already in state statute in
the victims of crime act so it's
explicit explicitly defined in
that act and that's all we're
doing with the amendment madam
chair and this was a.
naturally a point of discussion
on Friday with the committee and
that was also a recommendation
by the Attorney General so with
that madam chair I stand for
questions.
I'm sure since the amendments
not on the.
Bill could they read the
amendment verbatim so I can.
Understand what it says.
Thank you Representative Nibert
we can do that it's also in the
Here file but Representative
Garcia if you could.
Read the amendment allowed to us
please.
Surely madam chair
And
the amendment greens.
On page two line twenty one
strike crime.
And after.
Victim.
Insert.
As defined in the victims of
crime act.
Senator we are on discussion of
the amendment.
Members.
I was just madam chair I was
just waiting for representative
Nighbor to see if he was to.
Rigor out all right.
What is my here.
Thank you madam chair so the the
amendment simply deals with
subsection one of the and does
not deal with
or make any changes.
Two three which would be my
concern so if I read this
correctly.
All three categories have to be
met in order for the state not
to reveal that information is
that correct.
Madam chair
Let me read that item one as a
on a I don't want a section B.
as amended so now this section
reads.
Status as a recipient of.
Assistance for S. eight with
them as defined in the victim I
am at.
What we're doing with these with
these items.
In section B..
Is basically
The finding.
What sensitive personal
information means.
In relationship to at to an
individual.
In item one happens to be one of
three of those categories.
Okay madam chair that's my
concern
B. three is a standalone item
there and according to the
representative and that
information.
Is.
But for the conduct of business
in many
agencies and you are prohibiting
by this act the dissemination of
that information in subparagraph
three.
Madam chair representative
I don't think I can further
elaborate on your question but.
These three items basically.
I say that as used in this
section or unquote sensitive
personal information on quote
means and individuals and then
it goes into these three
categories.
I don't know if my experts that
B. and I. wishes to.
Kind of further clarifying
That aspect of the section in
our statute in terms of the
question that you're raising
come in I I yield to you if you
haven't anything else to add.
Thank you representative good
morning madam chair members of
the committee to answer
Representative night point
questions we we are not.
Madam chair you just did.
Yes ma'am I did nothing to.
Go we three from the sensitive
personal information you're
you're you're continuing to use
a broad brush that's going to
affect all agencies when you're
trying to deal with a specific
very narrow problem is as I
outstrip the other day and.
I'm sorry but there's a lot of
information that the public
needs and that the various
repositories of public
information
Have some of that information
that that.
Frankly you can't the.
It it will be almost impossible
not to do both so some of that
information on the requirements
of various forms what have you
and and my fear is that you're
going to.
Put up roadblocks to to business
that the use of public agencies
and public information and.
I know it's not your tend to do
that but that's what's going to
happen and I have a real
concern.
Representative Madam chair
representative Garcia and I'm
not sure if there was a question
there but can I respond.
I know to have been a okay they
respond.
Thank you I thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Garcia I'm if we're discussing
specifically the amendments that
we're proposing are amendments
is pretty straightforward in
terms of we are simply providing
the definition of a victim or
talking about a victim.
Of a crime and by citing to the
victim crimes act we are also
providing a definition not only
for victims but also for
criminal offense and that's the
only goal of this amendment I
think Representative night bird
is getting into the issue of it
broke and we are maintaining the
exemption from abroad but we can
get into that conversation after
we address the amendment.
The met madam chair I thought
the whole exercise to happen
amendment was to address the
concerns I raised last week
regarding the breadth of this
legislation and I was hoping to
see that it would get tailored
to a specific problem and
what they've done is is address
one of three categories that may
narrow it but it doesn't overall
reduce the breadth and scope of
the bill itself
and so and so we're prohibit
agencies from disseminating
Documents that have certain
information on it but that's I
would say vital to the ongoing
business in many instances of
particular agencies so
the you know.
I'm.
Please somebody look at it but
it certainly didn't get us where
the amendment doesn't get us
where I thought we were hoping
to go so I would speak against
the agreement.
Representative Rehm.
Yes madam chair at it kind of
echoed those same concerns about
the amendment as Representative
Nighbor in particular
we did not address all the
concerns that are in the FIR
the.
They're they're talking about
the there's confusion with the
government contact act.
And that we're going to create
of ambiguity in this fall on
other laws and it's going to end
up with the our employees are
state employees being
disciplined.
And.
Yeah the fire I accept the
amendment but it doesn't go far
enough.
we need to clear up these other
areas as well and I mean if we
need to go through again I can
go through them again but we
went through then quite detail
on on at our last meeting anyway
thank you madam chair.
Representative Eli.
I thank you madam chair so
what I'd like to do because it's
really to discussion yes I want
I I would like to be able to
talk about the discussion that
we just have Representative
night Representative Rehm but on
the and then that doesn't seem
like there's any opposition to
the amendment and other that
it's too limited but I would
like to at this point move for
the adoption of the amendment.
Thank Representative we have and
motion by Representative Eli to
adopt the amendment and the
second by Representative Chasey.
Is there further discussion.
Okay let's go ahead and take the
role in that amendment.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Russ yes.
Representative night.
Yes yes appointed.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Okay.
Here Johnson yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair with that
we have.
In the affirmative one and the
negative.
Thank you madam chair by a vote
of eight in the affirmative and
one in the negative we have
amended the bill.
And representative Ely you still
have the floor thank you madam
chair responding to
Representative Arbor
Representative right back bills
and it
that I I understand the concern
but I'm looking at paragraph
eight and
it does seem like paragraph a is
what we should be working on it
instead of the am I think we
could probably do that as it
goes to Judiciary but because
I'm not understand the problem
image paragraph patients and
state agency operational modest
words sensitive personal
information required by virtue
of the employee's position with
the state agencies anyone
outside the state agency except
when such as merger yes and then
we've got very broad language
necessary carry out functions
state agency necessary while
subpoenas required by the specs
the public records act we need
to see what we're trying to do
here is stop the various actions
of a single individual that's
really acting out side of their.
The scope of employment rather
than getting the end to the
middle of
sorry I'm getting this
distraction was fury other than
of what they're doing to carry
out their obligations so I think
the emphasis on paragraph B. is
misplaced we don't want
employees to be giving out this
kind of information
but we do want state government
of local governments to be able
to operate and it seems like
going forward we would be
working at paragraph eighty
instead of paragraph B.
but I appreciate the concerns of
both representatives Nighbor and
redeem and I think it's
something that we might be able
look at going forward thank you
madam chair.
Representative Rehm.
On the bill.
Yes madam chair
and perhaps the the you know
this is a discussion that you I
and I should have
Is that information that you're
the.
stating in paragraph a isn't
that already covered in the
government contact act.
That's what the FIR state.
Madam I'm not sure that question
is directed to me or to
Representative Garcia and
expert.
Representative I mean I yeah
you're welcome to answer or
Gabriele cancer as well as many
of you to go out on that one.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair yes thank you
for the opportunity to clear
this up
There seems to be a lot of
confusion about the if brexit
should within this bill the
potential impact of the
exception for EPRA has been
misunderstood and perhaps
exaggerated in some of the
analysis less far for this bill
first it does not require
disclosure of any and all
information that may be
possessed by state agencies are
known to state employees instead
it only requires release of
public records or written
documents and other physical
records such as photos and tapes
that are in the agency's
possession.
Also April does not impose its
requirement on all state
employees.
Rather it's only on the
particular officials who have
been designated as the state
agencies custodian of records no
state employee other than the
official designated custodian of
records is ever required Kerr
April to release any records or
disclose any information to
anyone given these limitations
the practical impact of the
bills exemption of disclosure
that are required by the
inspection of public records
records act is going to be very
narrow as Representative Eli
just explained and likely to
impede the accomplishment of the
school and again state agencies
won't have to change any of
their procedures in order to
undertake in requests and
responses if we're request
as was just mentioned this bill
arose from a concern I'm part of
the sponsor.
And our organizations and are
supporting organizations are
support our allies about
informal contacts and
communications that have
developed and occurred between
lower level state employees
within different agencies.
The primary objective of this
bill is to put a stop to these
types of informal exchanges and
this an appropriate
dissemination of people's
personal information
also there was a question or
comment mention about penalties
in the governmental conduct act
there won't be any penalties for
inadvertent disclosures of
sensitive personal information
this is this is we thought
pretty clear within our bill as
was mentioned in two thousand
nineteen the governmental
conduct act went under a number
of amendments and it was
carried by Representative Eli
one of which is that the newly
created bipartisan ethics
commission is to provide
education to all persons
required to perform duties under
the act it encourages voluntary
compliance and only seeks civil
penalties unless voluntary
compliance compliance has failed
so there's really a new effort
to educate state employees about
the requirements under the G. CA
previously before the two
thousand nineteen amendments
it's true the penalties were
mostly criminal in nature but
that has changed with the two
thousand nineteen amendments so
however now with the expanded
you see a state employees will
be informed and educated against
these types of inappropriate
disclosures which there simply
is no language within very
limited language right now
within the G. C. A. but it's
nothing specific in terms of
what is sensitive personal
information and also to just to
point out in a similar effort
the bipartisan ethics commission
included similar analogous
language within their model
ethical code for state agencies
that was adopted following a
regulatory process that
commenced this summer and ended
with the promulgation of
proposed rules within the New
Mexico register on last month so
hopefully with that madam chair
Representative.
As we're clearing up some of
this confusion in terms of the
it Briggs luncheon and also the
penalties under the G. CA thank
you.
Madam chair and the
Representative Garcia the other
thing that I would like to see
and then as soon as you go to
page one line twenty and a state
agency employees shall not
disclose sensitive information
we should have a I knowingly and
willfully standard to a specific
impairment
standard we don't have that in
this bill anyway I don't think
that you for dressed my concern
Senate.
Of the FIR is the is it from the
attorney general's office is
quite to the
explicit alignment on how the
disagree with this legislation
anyway thank you madam chair.
Raymond Representative Eli.
Madam I guess I still have my
hand up I'm sorry I would pay if
there's no further discussion I
would make a motion but I can
wait.
We have Representative neighbor
next and I will go back to your
for that motion.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair there's been a lot
of focus on your brought and
frankly I am more concerned with
with public records that are.
Repositories of public
information that are readily
accessible to the public without
having to go through a formal
inspection of public records act
request and the one agency that
I deal with a lot of.
Is a is such a repository in
that's the State Land Office
your State Land Office has.
Here practice one of one of two.
Agencies if you will that that's
whose records import
constructive noticed all the
world.
And.
The records of the State Land
Office and the records of the
county clerk are importing
constructive notice in other
words if you record something
with the commissioner of public
lands regarding they say oil and
gas lease of state agricultural
lease of state business ladies
that active recording of placing
it in their files is
constructive noticed all world
of the contents of that
document.
And many of those documents have
personal sensitive information
on the face of those documents
and.
Prohibiting the state land
office from.
From revealing that four or
putting into place a statute
that might chill their desire to
reveal that.
Does not move us forward and in
fact moves us backwards with
respect to the very purpose of
maintaining those records and I
am very concerned about the the
chilling effect that might have
one of those specific records
and so you know I was hoping to
see an amendment that would work
Kerr about the or would create
either bigger exceptions or what
more particularly focus this
legislation on the very.
The issue that you all were were
having last week.
And so the amendment really
didn't get us there and focusing
on efforts doesn't get my
concern raised nor the attorney
general's concerns addressed and
so you know I continue to to be
very concerned about this type
of legislation because I see the
effects of this stuff in my
practice of law examining public
records on a daily basis the the
Supreme Court number years years
ago came out with a with a rule
that said that that all
guardianships and
conservatorship show Big Sur
Questor.
So good District Court clerk's
could no longer allow people to
review of guardianship and
conservatorship and while that
may have been well intentioned
the fact of the matter is that
rural led to.
People who were subject to a
guardianship or conservatorship
not to receive the oil and gas
revenues that they were
otherwise entitled to because of
title of Sam or could not.
Clear of the title on that so so
there's unintended consequences
whenever we do those things and
hopefully the spring Ford has
dealt with that I've talked to
them a number of times and got
nothing resolved it but these
actions or or these well
intentioned efforts sometimes
have a negative reaction that
actually work people
Julie and I'm afraid that this
is one of those actions that the
is going to have some adverse
consequences to the ability of
people to receive documents that
they they should be able to
receive so that
Business can can continue to to
move forward and continue to use
those records and continue to.
they take that information and
and.
Deal with that that as as you
normally should be able to bill
deal with of when I'm preparing
a document and I put some of
this information in the document
is because it's purposely there
and clients want that
information reveal there's a lot
of
Lot of for a while and gas
leases and assignments of leases
and what have you that half of
their tax ID number on and to
save the state agency can't
release that document because it
has a tax ID number on it
defeats the very purpose for
placing it of records so I I'm
concerned about the brand I
don't think we got where we
needed to go on this and involve
a be voting against it once
again thank you madam chair.
This is they read me get.
Go ahead please.
Briefly madam chair because I
take a I took to heart the
concerns that Representative
neighbor raise not only today
but on Friday.
And I have a a phone appointment
this afternoon and I'll be
asking the State Land Office to
do a agency analysis on this
legislation and to reflect on
exactly what Representative
night Burke is addressing in
terms of the impact that the
house bill one twenty four will
have on the depository of
records and documents in the
state land office in
relationship to this piece of
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Representative.
I'm I don't their hands up so
I'm going to go to
representative Ely.
Madam chair I move a do pass of
house bill one twenty four as
amended.
Thank you Terry second.
Thank you representative vice
chair we have a motion by
Representative Eli for do pass
on health one twenty four as
amended and a second by vice
chair Johnson so we'll go ahead
and take the role.
You madam chair Representative
Chasey.
Yes excitement those.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Craig also yes I
like to explain in the.
Representative night.
No I don't need to explain.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative.
Representative.
No.
Johnson.
Yes please thank you madam
chair.
Yes it is only.
Have a.
Six.
Thank you.
We have by a vote of sixteen
informative and three in the
negative and before we called
about let's go ahead and go to
Representative Chasey to explain
about.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say I
I do think that I I trust the
sponsor wanting to get this
right and his efforts to speak
with the State Land Office today
and so.
I also hear what Representative
neighbor is saying because we we
took we still don't want to deny
people budget that they may be
entitled to so
I I think that we can continue
this discussion in Judiciary I
appreciate the efforts to try to
get it perfect here but even
when we have something that we
think is perfect the judiciary
Alice always.
It.
That we forgot.
So that's it Madam thank you.
Representative I'm next
Representative bagels thank you
thank you madam chair I just
wanted to also just stress the
point that I think that it does
need to be looked at in
Judiciary and I would like to
get the way and from the land
office I think I Representative
my bricks points were very
strong and so I I I did want to
say I did want to tell
Representative Garcia that I I
did hear that and I was glad to
see that he was doing a
balancing act and trying to get
the the legislative the
legislation cracked because this
could be a really important
issue and have unintended
consequences are I would sure
like to see had consented
Judiciary before my my final
vote on the floor thank you.
Representative again by about
sixteen affirmative and three in
the negative you have a do pass
on house bill one twenty four as
amended thank you Representative
Garcia thank you madam chair god
bless you all.
So we have a couple of them
excuse me we have Representative
Chandler that is juggling
between two committees right now
she has to bill scheduled this
morning so we're just trying to
get in touch with her to see if
she's available if not we'll go
ahead with the Representative
McQueen.
So just give me one minute
please.
Thank you for your patience
everyone.
We will now hear house bill
ninety.
Representative counter whenever
you're ready.
Representative Chandler you will
I'm.
Madam chair my apologies I need
I I'd like to add a couple of
panelist if we could there's a
gentleman named mark check and
he was a tax policy director for
the tax department and another
gentleman's name Santiago Chavez
Division property tax director
as well if you don't mind madam
chair.
And I will put my camera now.
Okay.
All right thank you so much and
thank you for your patience
madam chair and take thank you
committee members I am here to
present on house bill ninety tax
penalties and remedies this bill
amends the tax code to make
administrative changes and
clarifications the be the the
bill is a taxation and revenue
agency bill and it has been
endorsed by the revenue
stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee and as well as the tax
policy advisory committee and
the tax practitioner advisory
committee section one
streamlines and clarifies the
process for applying a tax
credit from TRD it specifies
that a tax credit application
must be complete before TRDs
timeline to approve or deny the
credit starts because TRD will
have a complete credit
application T. R. D.'s review
period so it shortened from a
hundred and eighty days two
hundred and twenty days.
Section two ensures that TRD
will be able to hold accountable
individuals who use software or
devices to artificially lower
their receipts into in order to
evade taxation.
Sections three through seven
make various changes to the
property tax code clarifying the
taxpayer protest process as well
as tax payer in TRD appeals
process sees for property that
is a state SS centrally by TRD
is property tax division and
with that madam chair I I
imagine there may be some
additional comments of that the
panelists me what made us to
share.
Right.
If you like to add more go ahead
and introduce yourself and then
add whatever you like to house
bill ninety.
Madam chair of honorable members
of the committee my name is mark
taken on the tax policy director
of recent tax policy director
tax and Rev I actually don't
have much to add to what
Representative Chandler already
stated but I'm happy to answer
any more detailed questions of
any are any members of the
committee may have at this time.
Director Chavez has anything to
say about the the property tax
provisions of that are part of
this House Bill.
Thank you.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I'm here for technical
assistance such as any questions
thank you.
Right thank you so before we
take comments from the public we
will run a poll around thirty
seconds and it is going to ask
if you are.
Give me one minute.
Great so now we have the call up
and if you're for or against
house bill ninety you now have
the opportunity to vote.
So you have about fifteen
seconds to vote.
And you have five more seconds
to go.
So we have ended that call we
have to.
In the audience members for
house bill ninety and one
against.
So now we are going to take
public comment if you would like
to speak on the bill
anyone opposing house bill
nineteen please raise your hand.
Again if there's anyone opposing
house bill ninety please raise
your hand.
Okay seeing then we will go to
those in support.
We have Brian.
Then doesn't.
You are now unmuted.
One.
I.
Excuse me would you speak up a
little bit we can't hear you on
our end.
One
of the officers the
administrator's office.
And I I just wanted to I'm not
really for or against the bill
it does impact the work of the
administrative hearings office
as it relates to the property
tax.
Wanted to be present in case if
there are any questions I was
part of the.
Bipartisan practitioner group
that to review this legislation
and address the concerns and I
think the property tax code
changes make a lot of sense and
clarify the appeal process so
thank you very much and I'm sure
if you have any questions about
the hearing process.
Great thank you we'll leave you
as a panelists that way if there
are any questions that you can
answer and you'll be allowed to
do that.
And so now we'll go to the
committee.
Representative Nibert.
I had something blocking my mute
button sorry the thank you madam
chair all right I just have one
question and that involves.
The provision on page three.
Why am six through eight.
A taxpayer who timely pursues
more than one remedy is the into
act the first remedy requests
and my question is why would we
want to.
A.
Ortiz remedy
why would we not allow them to
pursue multiple remedies and and
then select the one that they
prefer
I'm kind of confused as to why
we would limit them to their
first requested remedy instead
of letting them have some
options.
Madam chair if I could request
one of the panelists to answer
that question.
Madam chair representative
Robert I'll be happy to answer
that question for you generally
the tax code provides two
methods of appealing an adverse
decision which are there to not
pay and seeking administrative
review of the hearing or you can
pay the money and seek a refund
and file an action in District
Court and I believe that is what
that bill does if we go to the
language directly below the
lines that you cited.
US secretary of page three again
lines nine through eleven and
following down to line twenty
provide for the administrative
hearing process and number two
which starts on line twenty one
provides for a civil action
District Court so it's really
just an election of remedies so
that you don't have inconsistent
pardon me inconsistent the
decisions reached by either the
administrative hearing officer
or the District Court.
Answers your questions or.
Well madam chair I had one
question now I have some more
questions the.
It seems to me if the if that's
the intent.
It's really not the selection of
a remedy it's a selection of a
course of action and so why does
it not say the taxpayer may
pursue.
Either one of the following.
Purses of action one or two.
That that there by you know that
you're limited to one course of
action
so pursuing a remedy seems to be
a broader that been a course of
action and
Yes I would be more trouble with
that statement now than I was
before but it seems to me that
that may need to be rewarded so
that taxpayers now so you can
either do number one on page a
line line or you can do number
two on line twenty one but you
don't get to do both.
Madam chair representative
network
That I think a remedy is just in
this context a a special legal
term a remedy is the cut in the
course of action that you can
take is just legalese.
We can see about trying to
change that wording of that is
what you would prefer that would
be of course the up to the
committee to determine whether
they want to have that language
change but I think the word
remedy there is just legalese
but we take on board are you
Madam that it may be confusing
to an ordinary taxpayers.
Madam chair and maybe this is a
question for representative Ely
he to put him on the spot but he
knows more about remedies and
then I would know but but I do
know a little bit about causes
of action then and I've
certainly we're we're live
jammed away at all whether
that ought to be changed so that
it shows that the course of
action is limited not the
remedies Representative you
might alternatively secure.
Thank you I do wish to China in
our madam chair I in this
situation I'd really rather have
a sponsor talk about it and then
I'm happy to look at it the
sponsor would I think be a just
as capable of answering that
question.
Representative Jalan may I make
this suggested madam chair and
Mr representative Nighbor I'm my
co sponsoring this bill is
Representative Harper and what I
would suggest is we make some
notations and when we get to tax
committee if if it if it seems
appropriate to clean up the
language then we could do with
then with that be satisfactory
to you madam chair and and
Representative night or let's
talk Mr van doesn't can answer
this it looks like he's unmuted
himself all okay yes madam chair
members of the committee I
understand Representative nine
point point however I would just
point out in other contexts are
the tax administration act of
the language of our key is
remedy if you turn this seven
one twenty six which may be I'm
sure no one has in front of them
what section eighteen it it's
this provision is modeled on
what is already an existing law
under seven one twenty six and
in that context are talking
about a claim for refund and
they also use that same choice
of words which is you can.
Excuse me you can pursue one
remedy or the other remedies
being either go to the
administrative hearings office
too challenged the denial of
your claim for refund or file an
action in the District Court I
completely under understand and
agree with what Representative
night parties indicating that
remedy here might be too broad
award but I think it's being
used in this bill to be
consistent throughout the
remaining provisions of the tax
administration act as a term of
art.
So I guess I would just say that
to make the change the
Representative Liber said it has
indicated would involve more
than just the bill in front of
you you also have to look
through other provisions of the
tax administration act to make
that a consistent change.
Madam chair I I didn't have any
further questions I guess I'd
responded that I think
clarifying something in this
section that's being proposed
are you doesn't necessarily mean
we have to clear up everything
but but to me it ought to be
very clear that if you're the
remedies that you're referring
to our one to on page three then
we ought to make it clear there
we we shouldn't the we should
have a computer is a wine
region.
But I think it could be easily
are we ready to make it clear
that the taxpayer can choose.
Paragraph one online line or
programs to online twenty one.
One or the other but not both
so.
Hi.
I'm good with.
Would let them.
Under it and
decide whether they want to make
it the next committee but the.
I'm not sure.
Unless Representative Chandler
is going to be the sole lawyer
over there to make sure gets
worded correctly I'm not sure
that the tax committee
supporters to make some of those
changes but that's neither here
thanks.
Madam chair I may point out to
if I may point out to
Representative neighbor there is
an abundance of lawyers on
taxation and revenue.
Right thank you.
Committee members.
Madam chair of the work is
plethora of lawyers and
I would move to a do pass.
we have in past motion by
Representative.
And a second by Representative
Chasey.
Is there objection to the post
motion.
Okay excuse me that was
Representative motion by first.
Motion made by Representative
Eli this and I burnt.
Excuse me I'm sorry and a second
by Representative Chasey.
But it looks like Representative
neighbor is okay with that.
I'm do we need to call the role
in this.
Okay is there any objection to
the date has motion.
Seeing and hearing none.
You have a do pass on house bill
ninety Representative thank you
thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much committee
I'm back to my taxation
committee thank you so much take
care but like with all the
lawyers of their help it's
scary.
Great so moving on
in the agenda we are going to
hear house bill one fifty three
and we already have
Representative McQueen so
whenever you're ready
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
House Bill one fifty three is
designed to give the public more
relevant and timely information.
How we fund our campaigns and
how campaigns are run in New
Mexico.
This is.
By doing three things the first
is that the lines the reporting
calendar with the election cycle
so that the reporting dates.
Match up to the vents in the
election cycle for example
currently are general election
is.
beginning in November November
third this year thank.
The donations through the end of
the campaign.
Were reported till January
seventh.
More than two months after the
fact.
And so at that point a couple
things that happened one.
People moved on they're not
paying attention and to a lot of
us have received other donations
in the meantime after the
election.
And so what this bill does in
the best way to understand the
system understand the bill is to
look at the chart it was emailed
out yesterday hopefully you'll
receive that it has a side by
side comparison of the the
current dates and the proposed
dates which is a lot easier to
read than the language in the
statute.
What the bill proposes to do is
is have a reporting period and
on primary day so not do on
primary day because that would
be you know we're busy a primary
day I get that two weeks later
which is standard but the
reporting period ends on primary
day and then is two weeks later
so people for the general
election we'll see you who
funded your campaign for the
prior.
And then similarly a reporting
period would end on election day
again not to Alexion they just
analysts say.
Two weeks later and what what I
think will happen is you'll have
the post election Sir roundup
story in the papers where did
the money come from that funded
the various campaigns.
Rather than waiting till
January.
So that's that's the first thing
it that's the second thing it
does is just sort of simplifying
the.
We file supplemental reports
right before the general
election if we get large
donations it doesn't change the
timing of that in anyway but.
Under the current statute you
have to file supplemental report
in some races if you're at the
donation is over a thousand
dollars in in other races a
statewide races I believe that
the donation is over three
thousand dollars so the
secretary of state's office
actually has the set up in their
system so it's a donation of one
thousand dollars and one Peddie
triggers us you know what this
bill would do is simplify that
there is a thousand or more
because
for a lot of thousand dollars is
pretty big donation a thousand
dollars or more for any rates so
you file supplemental report as
we are already required to do.
And then the third thing this
does is but by ending
In the election cycle on.
This using our reporting on
election day and then having an
additional reporting period that
ended at the end of the year.
It sets us up for it a new what
I call a session supplemental.
As you probably know well we're
also due to the prohibited
period for state races.
The prohibited period starts
January first and runs through
the end of the session in the
language in the prohibit
prohibition is curious in my
opinion that doesn't allow us to
ask for donations but it allows
us to accept donations.
and I actually trying to change
that a couple years ago and
think it through and people said
well you know what there's
checks sitting in my post office
box when I get back from the
session okay.
So what this does is bite by
having a reporting period at the
end of the year it sets you up
to file a session supplemental
if and only if because it's a
supplemental you receive a
monetary contribution and accept
monetary contributions during
the prohibited.
And again you know this is for
for public consumption right I
mean if you're insane in the
session and your you know
reviewing bills the effects of
certain industries and checks
are flown in from that industry.
I think the public should know
about that.
And so this route this allows
that to happen you.
It is specified in monetary
contribution as opposed to
anything trying contribution.
Good because we know things
could be going on that could be
you know considered.
You know campaigning or you're
promoting different elected
officials on in kind basis and
you know it is just easier to
focus on the monetary practice
used.
so that's what that's what this
bill that I I mean I I think
this is an improvement of for us
I think you I will make sense to
me you might have to get used to
it but will know that know that
the reporting follows the actual
election cycle.
I think this will be a big
improvement for the public.
In that you have to answer any
questions.
Thank you Representative McQueen
we are going to go to the
audience first will conduct the
poll so those that are in.
Favor.
House Bill.
One fifty three and those that
are opposed to house bill one
fifty three can vote.
The poll is now open.
You have about ten more seconds
to vote in the poll.
Thank you for the call is now
closed by a we have a attendees
that are for and zero against so
now we are going to take
comments from those that are in
opposition if you would like to
speak.
Which I'm guessing.
We won't have anyone if you
would like to speak in support
of house bill.
One fifty three.
So we will first go to John
house you are now in muted.
Thank you good morning the.
The madam chair person and
committee members
I'm speaking as president of
Representative us New Mexico a
nonprofit organization that
supports various democracy
reforms and protections.
We know that the US spring court
and citizens United verses FCC
in twenty ten severely
restrained.
Our government.
To regulate campaign
contributions and expenditures
for the reason that have found
the state's interest was not
sufficiently compelling to
restrain the free speech rights
of people and entities.
in elections are you are you in
it supports this bill because
fortunately in the citizens
United opinion the the same
court that restricted government
from regulating.
Of health is a sort of
alternative to regulation the
right of the state to require
disclosure of information.
Learning contributions and
expenditures since then other
cases such as creating verses at
the scene decided in the DC
circuit last October have been
broadening that the disclosure
and transparency concerning
contributions and expenditures.
I know that both the state
ethics commission and The New
Mexico ethics watch have both
spoken out again in the press
to highlight the fact that are
the current
rules and regulations concerning
campaign finance reporting have
a lot of holes in it.
Of course Representative
McQueen has brought forth will
certainly help to close those
loopholes.
Thus I would urge the committee
to issue a do pass on this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr house we will now
go to Hannah Burling you are now
and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burlingham speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league's so strongly
supports this bill we believe
that methods of financing
political campaign should ensure
transparency and the public's
right to know who is using money
to influence elections thank
you.
Right now we will go to carry
Vasquez.
You're now omitted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Kerry
for us with the office of the
secretary of state.
And we're supportive of this
legislation first always we are
in support of promoting the
efforts of the sponsor for
increasing disclosure.
additionally we believe the
standardization of the dollar
threshold across all candidates
when required to file a
supplemental.
helps to simplify the
administrative efforts and
finally we recognize that all of
the provisions of this bill are
we are able to make with little
to no system changes in our
current campaign finance system
thank you.
Thank you no other hands in
public comment we will go to the
committee Representative right.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative McQueen
the I'm not against the
disclosure I just want to talk
about some of the dynamics that
is the.
Are going to occur so wishes
let's begin with the primary
election.
So you're moving the reporting
period up and the closure period
up.
Our.
We all have campaign donations
that are coming in intended for
the primary that are coming in
currently after the election
date.
So.
Those would now appear to be our
contributions for the general
election not for the primary and
I think that part
I think that unintended
consequence is one of the
problems of this legislation.
Our do you understand what I
mean and and how what do you
think of that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative green you know it
in my campaign.
If the money doesn't come in
before the per primary it's not
for the prior I mean I'm not
doing debt financing or anything
like that if I can use the money
in the primary thanks for the
general election so I get it
after the primary I'm locate
including in in a report that
goes towards the general
election.
Madam chair.
Representative McQueen with our
current rules I'm receiving
money after the primary and it's
still in the primary cycle
that's what I'm saying that
would now become money that's
going to the general if we if we
go to the general election then
it's even more problematic
because the money that I'm
receiving after the election
although it was intended for the
general now goes two years out
to the primary.
Madam chair representative right
That's not my understanding and
that's certainly not my
practice.
I I think we need to look at
that because I think it's.
That I mean you're bills well
intended I have no problem with
disclosure but I think what
we're we will end up doing is
throwing that money particularly
in the general way out.
Anyway thank you madam chair
that's my questions.
Representative Rehm
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative so
I heard you use the word except
when dealing with.
Monetary contributions during
the prohibited period.
And yet the language on page
four lines fifteen through
twenty one.
Use the word recieves.
And I certainly liked the
language that you stated
but not necessarily the word
that I see on the paper so it
seems to me that the intent is
for us to report.
Monetary contributions that we
actually accept during the
prohibited period and report
does not necessarily monetary
contributions that we might
receive but we return to the our
so called bill more I I know
that I have returned checks
during the prohibited right
because I just don't want to
deal with that issue.
other people
have other practices and I'm not
going to cast the stones but it
seems to me that are online
seventeen analyzed nineteen the
word receives the were received
should be changed to reflect the
actual acceptance of those those
monies are would you agree or
disagree with.
You're more.
Madam chair representative or I
I appreciate that comment in
this is this is part of the
discussion a couple years ago
when I I propose prohibiting
accepting the money and there is
a question about will what does
accept me like it if there is a
check sitting in my PO box and
yeah I'm lucky if I get by there
once we fees that is have I
received it and I accepted it I
too have
Sent checks back small checks
back during the prohibited
period because you know it
exactly I don't think we should
be taking money during the
present period I think this bill
you know two years ago there
wasn't a really good answer
about what was received in what
was accepted in I don't have the
answer today I think this bill
provides some leeway because
it's not a prohibition you're
not in violation for receiving
or accepting money you just you
just disclose.
and I do think you know I
personally think if you if a
check arrives in the mail and
you send it back I mean I
haven't reported that on the
campaign finance report.
Because it's just been rejected.
yeah and I I I think it's I
think there's some some great
area there but I I do understand
what you're getting in your
question I appreciate it I don't
have a clear answer because I
don't think there is a clear
answer.
Well madam chair and and
Representative
what would you be amenable to
maybe our.
Revising the language slightly
so online seventeen it says and
receives and accepts monetary
contributions are and then align
nineteen report all of the
monetary contributions received
and accepted that way.
If I receive a check but I
return it I don't have to make
the report if I receive it and
accept it deposit it then at the
conclusion of the prohibited
period plus seven days I have to
send them a supplemental report
because I don't want to have to
send them another report if I
don't accept of our.
How.
It's just another report and
it's basically costing me money
to file a report right when I'm
not even accepting the the the
money so
I I would certainly be willing
to to move that slide amendment
if you would our our.
Receive it as yes very much.
Madam chair representative I am
annual to that my preference
would be.
The before we do that and then
you give me the opportunity to
go back to the secretary of
state's office and talk it over
with them and see what the right
terminology would be and this
bill would go next to house
Judiciary that we are both on
as of to be able to work it out
with them and make sure we get
it right and we could add that
in in in the house Judiciary at
that would be acceptable.
Madam chair representative that
certainly is a acceptable to me
and I would be happy to
see that remained for other
language that reflects you don't
have to do the supplemental
report if you don't keep the
money the whatever word you
would choose to use that that
would be up for our my only
comment
I I I'm a little concerned with
having to file reports within
seven days of the election
because usually were were
Just recovering and usually the
work of the week after election
is not a good time to be worried
about a report for the I
understand your your there are
concerns are so thank you madam
chair.
Representative Representative
bagels.
Thank you madam chair and I was
just gonna on that point just
because seven days did seem to
be a tight tight timeline
Representative McQueen
many times when I have the
lecture my campaign I'm still
checking in with volunteers and
trying to get additional
information and no I've heard
people even out of my campaigns
and I have a check for you and
you know it takes you know a
little longer sometimes in a
week so I just wanted to throw
that out there for the
representative to to know that
that is a tight tight timeline
and as for my question I wanted
to ask if there isn't any kind
of fiscal impact
because it does say in the
analysis that was there would be
a and number of additional staff
for the secretary of state have
you discussed this question with
the secretary of state.
Madam chair okay goes
and your first point you know I
I appreciate that and.
You know I was here late last
night filing my finance
disclosure because I leave
things a last minute and
sometimes the the electronic
system is challenging.
so I got that done I do my
parties last night too so I've
I am in compliance
Yes you can be challenging.
Challenging report is the one
that comes a couple days before
the end of the campaign whether
primary or the general because
then you're in the thick of it
so I understand we're all sort
of a little shell shocked after
the election date but seventies
is a pretty standard period
as for the staff you know I I
want to thank the secretary of
state's office you know I've
talked to the secretary of state
or sell in your first because
and couple other people in the
been really helpful in.
Going over my proposal and
making sure you know there are
unintended consequences and
again the language right at
really appreciate that
when we discuss this you know
big knowledge that they're gonna
be a couple days a year since
for all of the following on the
same day.
They're gonna be really busy
because they get a lot of phone
calls and every cycle we had new
candidates and you know the
people running which is great
but there's there's a lot of
phone assistance your walking
people through the system and so
they acknowledge that you know
this gonna it's gonna make it
tough on them but also there's
nothing they can't handle and so
that the fiscal impact I guess
came from LFC but I would noted
that secretary of state's office
did not know of any specific
fiscal impact.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I always do
like to look at the the dollar
signs and so I I just wanted to
follow up with that that's all
like that thank you.
Representative Rehm do you want
a second time.
I didn't have your hand was
raised earlier chair of yes
madam chair and Representative
McQueen one other thing that
going to the section of
Representative Nyberg was
speaking at age for the wind
fifteen to twenty one.
I know that it's in another
section of law but I maybe want
to make more clarity in here
that you're receiving an
unsolicited of campaign donation
or you receive a donation that
you solicited prior to the
closure period but it's just a
comment I don't know if we want
to add a little more clarity or
not.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank Representative.
Okay what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair of the past.
We have a motion for the past by
Representative Gallegos and I'll
second that motion.
Is there any opposition to that
it has motion.
Seeing and hearing none.
You have a do pass showing all
members present voting voting in
the affirmative thank you
Representative McQueen thank you
madam chair thank you committee.
Great so thank you committee
members before we adjourn I just
want to reiterate to the like in
case you log on a little late
and a house bill one sixty two
which was supposed to be heard
today was roled by the Sanchez
request for the Sanchez request
until a future date and also
house joint resolution for was
roled and that will be heard on
Monday excuse me Wednesday.
So thanks to everyone for
joining us and we will insurance
thank you committee members.
Thank you.
