Members of the House roll call
is about to begin.
Members roll call is open and
Please rise for two days
indication offered to us by.
Representative Townsend
you for the state thank you for
the beautiful sunrise that
reminds us of your awesome power
and who is in control of this
universe and are you just ask
thank you for health in their
mind body and spirit pray for
provision over their finances
and of peace in their homes and
the re thank you for those who
are serving here and abroad and
S..
Thank good morning Mr speaker
and members of the house of
representatives Mr speaker I
know all of that we go to the
next order of business
we will be doing just bill
introduction and receive
committee reports and any
messages that we have will have
no votes this morning.
I'm glad that we were able to
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
House Bill three introduced by
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
fence appropriations and
finance.
and Rubio an act relating to
climate change solutions and
acting the climate solutions act
creating the climate leadership
council requiring the
development of the statewide
framework to address climate
allowed by and agencies existing
statutory authority to achieve
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions reductions and foster
inclusion in workforce
prioritize funding from the
clean energy grant fund amending
the definition in the air
quality control act to allow for
greater oversight of sources of
Indian Affairs.
pursuant to the income tax act
in the corporate income and
franchise tax act accelerating
the termination of the new
sustainable building tax credits
pursuant to the low income tax
House Bill fifteen.
Our house bill fifteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
House bill sixteen introduced by
Representative Roger E. Montoya
and act relating to the
Sixteen read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the.
Local government land grants and
cultural affairs committee and
Madrid and Sweetser and
actuating to public schools
requiring local school boards to
determine if public schools
remainder of the twenty twenty
twenty twenty one school year
for other school year if the
corona virus disease twenty
nineteen remains at ten a
pandemic levels in New Mexico
Twenty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee intense Education.
certain fines and fees relating
to crimes committed by juveniles
house bill one eighty three.
House bill one eighty three
Andr√©s Romero and act relating
to public schools allowing an
option to use equivalent
instruction hours for K. five
plus under certain circumstances
second and third reporting dates
house bill one eighty four.
One eighty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee and so I
McQueen and potentially leading
to point allowing person seventy
five years of age and older to
be exempted from jury service
without requiring an affidavit.
House bill one eighty five.
House bill one eighty six
introduced by Representative
Rehm and act relating to
taxation reducing authorized
One eighty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee that's taxation and
revenue.
intoxicating liquor drugs
prohibiting driving with certain
amounts of controlled substances
or medical live in the blood
providing that the ignition
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer public affairs
committee and Judiciary.
House bill one eighty eight
one eighty eight.
One eighty eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee and so
appropriations and finance.
to address the maximum allowable
salary salaries for attorneys
pursuant to the community
governance act attorney act
house bill one eighty nine.
printed and referred to the
local governments land grants
and cultural affairs committee
and situation.
House bill one ninety introduced
providing that incarceration may
not be treated as voluntary
unemployment requiring
justification for deviation from
the child support guidelines
modification of child support
order amending sections of the
mandatory medical support act to
change references to health
insurance to health care
coverage and references to
providing that retroactive child
support be limited to three
years house bill one ninety.
One ninety having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee institution.
act relating to corrections and
acting corrections ombudsman act
making appropriation house bill
one ninety one.
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Judiciary Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one ninety two
introduced by Representative but
that state government elections
and Indian Affairs.
House bill one ninety three
introduced by representative Ely
fire protection order act
requiring law enforcement to
take possession of relinquished
firearms under certain
circumstances changing reporting
requirements prohibiting use in
One ninety three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer public affairs
Committee institutionally.
to be used to provide assistance
to a bank is a community ditches
in implementation of a
negotiated settlement that was
reached in and education suit
One ninety four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
agriculture and water resources
committee.
House bill one ninety five
inches by Representative Lotta
and potentially leading to
special districts creating
Camino real regional utility
authority providing powers and
One ninety five having been read
twice by title is ordered
introduced by Representative ET
ESL and potentially leading to
regional housing authorities
removing certain provisions
requiring oversight regional
housing authorities by the
agencies increasing the amount
permitted for regional Housing
Authority to enter into a
contract mentor memorandum of
understanding or other agreement
without prior approval house
that the state government
elections and Indian Affairs.
House bill one ninety seven
introduced by representative
state engineer house bill one
ninety seven.
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
agriculture water resources
committee that's Judiciary.
department of public safety to
the department of transportation
house bill one ninety eight.
One ninety eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
and potentially leading to horse
racing amending the horse racing
Act providing for advanced
deposit wagering house bill one
ninety nine.
House bill two hundred
introduced by Representative
McQueen and act relating to
water amending the New Mexico
of New Mexico directing the
water trust board to evaluate
and recommend projects to the
Interstate Stream Commission
disallowing the use of funds for
agriculture and water resources
committee and some Judiciary.
How.
circumstances House Bill two oh
one.
Two oh one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee dense Judiciary.
children amending the department
of health act the bees and the
neglect act in children's mental
health and development
disabilities act providing
additional requirements for
Committee intense Judiciary.
House Bill two oh three
introduced by Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong and act
creating reporting requirements
making appropriation house bill
two oh three.
And so appropriations and
finance.
House Bill to for entities by
Representative Deborah A.
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
being a lot of eighteen eighty
nine chapter three section two
as amended house bill two oh
four.
House Bill to I introduced by
representative Thompson for the
tobacco settlement revenue
oversight committee and act
relating to tobacco products
House Bill to I.
That's commerce and economic
development.
relief act prohibiting
disconnections of qualifying
electric gas water and
wastewater utility customers who
incurred arrears during the
Corona virus disease twenty
block grant act creating a grant
program to implement energy
efficient efficiency measures in
low income households mandating
utility reporting of customers
utility service.
Directing the exchange of
information regarding energy
efficiency measures in the state
authorizing utility right
preferences for low income comes
Bill two six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Bill two oh seven
introduced by representative
Stansbury and for ari and act
establishing duties for certain
state agencies to develop a
report recommendations for
targeted plans to address hunger
and nutrition expand access to
food and promote food and
house bill two oh seven.
House bill two seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
agriculture and water resources
Representative Andrea Romero
Stansbury and then today and act
relating to missing persons
extending the missing and
murdered indigenous women task
force making appropriation
is ordered printed and referred.
To the state government
Alexion's and Indian Affairs
Committee sense appropriations
and finance.
consolidating provisions that's
specific to child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children into the state's Indian
child welfare act providing
additional requirements
nineteen seventy eight House
Bill two oh nine.
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee dance health and Human
Services.
House Bill to ten introduced by
Representative but out of an act
relating to inter governor
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee and state government
Alexion's and the Indian
Affairs.
House Bill to eleven introduced
develop district plans for
approval by the legislature and
governor providing duties
establishing requirements for
creating district plans and
House Bill two men and having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the state governmental actions
in Indian Affairs Committee and
situation.
University Carlsbad ranch
community college into an
independent community college
House Bill to twelve.
Well having been read twice by
House Bill to thirteen
introduced by Representative
Sweetser dal and some more of an
act relating to education
requiring school districts to
Two thirteen having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee that's
appropriations and finance.
representative Ely a concurrent
resolution amending joint rule
ten dash one for the first
session of the fifty fifth
legislature to provide that
request to draft or prepare a
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the rules in order of
business committee.
interstate forty from Montoya
two two can carry.
Hendron road in honor of the
Hendren family house memorial
three.
And capital improvements
committee.
To go to the next order of
business was speaker committee
reports.
Junction and so ordered.
Committee to Mister referred
house bill four has added a
consideration point thing with
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the Judiciary
Committee.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too has been
House bill thirty four do pass
and then for the Judiciary
Committee committee reports and
then received.
recommendation that a due
passed as amended an answer for
the state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
Committee report is been
received.
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill thirty one to pass
and then Judiciary Committee.
Committee for severities.
Mr speaker state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill sixty one has had it
seventy four do pass and then
for the Judiciary Committee.
House bill seventy nine do path
and then for the Judiciary
Committee.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
too has been referred house bill
fifty has had it under
Two passed as amended and thence
to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Mr speaker you're consumer
Public Affairs Committee too is
been referred house bill twenty
Do path and then to taxation and
revenue.
House bill fifty four do path
and then three for to state
House bill one nineteen do you
have an answer for Judiciary.
development committee to his
very first house bill sixty has
added under consideration a
person with recommendation that
it do path as amended an answer
for to the Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution one do
path of Amanda and thence to the
Education Committee.
Committee reports and then
received.
had it under consideration for
the same with recommendation
that it do have immense referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
House bill thirty I do have an
House Bill forty sixth two
pass an amendment to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill fifty three do have
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
thirty six have had it under
then referred to the taxation
and revenue committee.
House bill one oh two two passed
and then he appropriations and
finance committee.
Boards have been received.
twenty five has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and then for to the state
government elections ending in
Affairs Committee.
F. as amended and thence to
Judiciary.
House Bill forty three do you
have and then for the
appropriation for finance
committee media reports have
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
again for another limited floor
session pursuant to rule eight
dash nine next Tuesday February
one eleven AM of ever has a good
and safe weekend.
observe their thanks everyone
will see next week the house is
in recess.
