As US.
Madam chair Roybal Caballero.
This spans.
Chair one.
You.
Members and you can.
For Sir.
Representative were not in
uniform.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
We do have that so Mr chairman.
I Representative Terrazas just
text me and said he's having
issues getting on his trying
okay.
Aaron to proceed what we're
going to do it just a little bit
of housekeeping.
Representative Roybal Caballero
met our vice chair.
As a a milled NCS to president
so we would and will hurt last
in our room we want to win this
special ended in one twenty Hey.
So just for everybody's
information.
House bill one twenty is a
military spouse expedited
licensure which is my in my bill
and house bill one did this to
face minimum wage increase so
those two of Representative
Roybal Caballero the last on the
agenda.
And we are ready to start that
we we have a.
Representative do Andrea Romero
in the hot seat is years.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm doing
too many is that once for the
first time so please forgive me
I have multiple screens so we
will have a vote soon so I'm
hoping to be in those two places
at once thank you
everyone thank you Mr chairman
If your pardon from a crime from
receiving the governor's pardon
that absolves you and of that
a criminal conviction
essentially so you are no longer
convicted of that crime you are
free to go so as far as those
decisions and how they're made
from the governor's perspective
I think it's the case by case
basis and so that you understand
the process that we're
proposing is to ensure the board
still gets the discretion about
who gets allowed to provide the
provided a license of for
whatever job so if they do have
a reason to revoke that interest
they just need to say it and to
the person who's applying for
that position so they still have
the discretion we trust our
boards we trust the process and
that's why when it comes to this
we want to give them the power
to to make that decision for
what for the job that they're
providing a license for.
Thank you Mr chair hope that
answers your question
Representative
Mr chair representative metro
actually sports aren't elected
there there
because it seems and so
will point some of you know
who's in who's in charge at the
time that could be have an
effect
To this is it look at the region
just a little bit or is our
number one.
I believe that everyone should
have a second chance and and and
I believe that we should be
careful though how we do that I
mean at the same time with that
languages tell you that there's
also.
The repeat offenders in somewhat
sensitive things so I'm gonna
say this to say we have.
What station.
Trial of.
Earlier are maybe right and and
then this gets exposed through
up through a pardon or something
some other that's it and.
You know on I I hate to say it
but sometimes you see that they
are they repeat that offense and
then possibly work at a no this
is extreme a school day care
center something like that and
so I think that's that's one of
the questions that that is
really bothered me I I I again
you're just needs to be cleaned
up a little bit more and I've
got some of the questions but
that's my biggest concern is is
it's so open and so generalized
there is no
There's no limit and and I think
there are some serious crimes we
have two very much thank you to
consideration do you feel that
way Representative Romero.
Chair of one.
Mr chair at Representative
at all says it's precisely what
you just said those concerns are
money those concerns are are the
peoples and that's why we really
truly believe in the process of
allowing for that justification
to be provided by the boards it
you know that there are
obviously appointed to those
positions because they're
qualified there obviously those
who were working in that field
they know they feel they know
the culture they know the people
I'm and they definitely know who
they want or do not want in that
in those positions and so again
if those are those denials are
absolutely appropriate and in
the right circumstances but we
leave that discretion to the
boards and again Mr chair
representative I absolutely
appreciate your concerns as well
those were what we did wrestle
with to to come to this a
determination as to why this is
the best sort of framework for
for providing that pipeline
opportunity but still providing
a robust discretionary of look
at at any given applicant to
that position Mr chair
representative metal.
You have alternative what was
the alternative language could
you just tell me that certain
crimes.
I'm just waiting for a bill to
come up return.
Mr chair representative so we
are very specific about why we
are choosing that we don't want
to arbitrarily choose crimes
that we want to omit because
then it'll just become a laundry
list of things we went through
that and again it's important
for us to be able to trust in
that process you know we would
love to prevent every single
crime that you described
unfortunately that still comes
up in whatever you know possible
sort of situation that you could
imagine you know we we want to
prevent that from happening we
want to prevent any sort of
problem from occurring
unfortunately we're still you
know figuring that out from a
criminal justice perspective how
do we prevent of those problems
from happening from at right out
the gate that said Mr chair
representative this is about
rebuilding twice this is about
being able to provide those
opportunities for those who are
actually looking and seeking out
a different pathway and again
that discretion is left to the
boards to decide who's a
qualified candidate incredible
enough to be able to pursue that
position and and then you know
ensure that that the process
makes sense.
intake so Mr chair
representative role metal again
I know you're dressing
Reports and and basing them
responsible for this but I'm
more interested in the language
of the bill
and and and it.
I'm sorry it's just something
that that's.
I I know repeat offenders and
and in our area
in my district when I just it
makes me very uncomfortable with
certain because these are what
the most heinous crimes it is
what we're on party Mr chair
representative metal I'd like to
you don't have any alternative
when you were having this
conversation you to have a
alternative language for your
legislation.
Mr chair representative if you
have a a proposed change be
happy to decide if it's friendly
or unfriendly that said Mr chair
representative we're very
confident in the way that it's
worded based on all of the
different advocates that we've
worked with based on the
discussions that we've had with
the regulation and licensing
department we feel strongly that
this is a great pathway for
ensuring that exactly your
concerns would be addressed.
Mr chair representative Romero I
appreciate that I do want to
make it for the amendment I
think I just don't.
Our I don't know what the
district attorney's office we
would consider what he misses
and as far as the felonies and
so forth and again we don't
wanna get into the weeds but for
me just right on the surface.
Murder.
Right.
Most issue number child was a
pretty serious ones and would
you all consider.
Amending that that a friendly
amendment.
Mr chair representative no it
would not thank you.
Excuse me Mr chair
Representative Romero it's also
violent offenses you know I mean
that that that's really what it
is I really think we do need
before
I I really do I I I I'd love to
in New you know to see that
happen I will tell you from
first hand experience Mr chair
representative metal that I have
seen the
I've seen boards get weaponized
when it provisions and and and I
have seen them create rules
regulation to alter what is
happening in the current
environment that we're and I'm
talking I'm not talking
specifically now but I mean all
together my career at I've seen
it weaponized in the point where
you know we want to solar
establishments we're gonna alter
this where we're gonna we retain
that that's what I'm afraid of
of of of of four was not elected
who's appointed and you it's a
set of your peers it is with the
R. and sometimes in in some are
we clear up what sometimes that
there is.
And I guess competition that
could also alter.
That.
Process if that makes any sense
and it could be weaponized this
is
you do you see how it could be
weaponized Mr chair
Representative Romero.
Mr chair representative
this is been a long standing
process as far as how the boards
create that discretionary
process Mr chair representative
and with all due respect to the
boards they can come up with a
list of any crime any situation
that would basically defined why
they would not want to allow
someone so as far as weaponizing
that process Mr chair
representative I don't I'm not I
can't I guess I can't really
identify what that would be Mr
chair representative because
this is about providing jobs and
job access and opportunity and
again for the reasons that you
had stated if there is a board
that ever feels that there's
a candidate on worthy of that
position they can absolutely
denied application Mr chair
representative if if if that's
the weapon that you're talking
about that's absolutely there
are up to their discretion of up
to to to their decision making
process.
Yes ma'am I I just don't it was
up until now point weren't
allowed once you meet.
Mr chair representative middle.
Altogether they they've never
been able to make more than just
a rural this would be a statute
so for us to roll this back we
take another some of the
legislation
the other the other question
that I have was there was some
notes here Representative.
Sure.
So that was a little bit of
Person that I have here one of
the
some of the language was.
Instruction to public agencies
to exclude convictions that are
not recent enough.
If I'm not recently low enough
use.
We tried it all over again it in
it in we are then taken to start
reading.
We're language that was in there
Representative role metal it's
it yes instruction to public
agencies is to exclude
convictions that are not recent
enough or sufficiently job
related to our we.
Predictive of performance now
can you please define for me
what you mean by not recent
enough.
Thank you Mr chair thank
Representative just one quick
one I just wanted to clarify
that in statute twenty eight
dash to dash for section three
where the applicant employee or
licensee has been convicted of
trafficking in controlled
substances criminal sexual
penetration or other related
sexual offenses child abuse at
such a basically the crimes that
you were talking about our I
agree just this law is already
in statute so it remains the
sort of framework for this bill
and prohibits employment or
licensure for those types of
licensing or employment already
forgive me for not having that
statute in front of me before we
even begin that discussion but
they're prohibited from that for
your second question Mr chair
representative not recent enough
so essentially what we're
talking about you know you're
ten twenty thirty years removed
from a from a conviction you
know what's the pertinence of
that crime to where you've moved
on today Mr chair representative
this is about that again the
boards discretion for recent
ness and what that means for for
their discretion I can clarify
that I think if you have any
follow up.
Mr chair representative metal
again so.
The language is already there in
and I couldn't use you said it
so fast I couldn't write the
numbers down where it excludes
Sir certain crimes so.
My question
Mr chair representative
in no way shape or form is this
car being out we're getting
that.
Or soup or stew preceding that
that legislation.
Mr chair representative thank
you again for that question just
for your purpose it's twenty
eight dash to dash four section
three
Mr chair representative again
this does not this that is the
umbrella and the framework for
which this a new legislation
reside so it is not in conflict
that absolutely.
Vibes the important sort of
filtering that you're talking
about thank you Mr chair
representative.
Mr Representative role metal
again back to the language of
not recent enough.
I would like to see that better
defined that is so generalized
I'm not resetting after noon a
year five years you're telling
us that right now Representative
but but I mean it's just so
loose that the the language
that that it you know thank you
please understand I I I I want
to work with you I I do want to
help you just and and I when I'm
open minded what it does we'll
certainly look things like that
can be trusted in this as well
risen up was a year or six
months ago it is it is
will or he.
Order you got off on here she
got off on.
Appropriations okay will we get
your order transacted be very
easily
Redefined by someone or
interpreted I guess is a better
word
is there were do you agree with
that.
Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative that's precisely
at if this is a just
discretionary language again
depending on the type of crime
that we're talking about you
know you we really want to be
able to allow the board to
decide what is serious what
isn't again a lot of these
numbers that you talked about
are very arbitrary so between
one year depending on the crime
or ten years depending on the
crime again that's an important
sort of threshold that we want
the boards to decide and because
the criminal code is is so
complicated because certain
things exist in certain ways and
what the due time is again
depending on what that means you
know if it's something that is
is what we would seen as a
passive crime or you know
something like that that we
don't want that to prohibit
somebody from getting a job
again to the discretion of the
board to make that determination
Mr chair representative it's
important for us to not be
arbitrary about with that
measure means in in in being
able to make that distinction
thank you Mr chair
representative.
Okay so the only other
issue that I saw was that there
was some inconsistency between
section R. one B. four and
section three he.
The languages sometimes appears
to harmonize the language using
these sections the term
disqualifying.
I'm sorry.
Place.
Disqualifying conviction is
defined as a conviction for a
crime that is reason enough
sufficient enough and I think
there are some of that
but I noticed that the
conjunction and operates
differently president section
one is concerned with our what
to hire an agency may not
consider section three
Is concerned with our
disqualifying an act.
in order to be disqualified for
license conviction was people
present and of crimes related to
a job commission needs one but
not the other those conditions
and is this not disqualifying
get the applicant for public
employment the same conviction
the finance office qualified but
in agency that has a lot to
consider The convention the
conviction because it was not
both recent and non job related.
Mr chair representative again
that just clarifies in from my
understanding that that the
board does get that discretion
again they can create their own
once they can create the the
list that best identifies their
position are you know when it
when it's time for them to make
that distinction and that
decision making process they can
they can come up with literally
anything except moral turpitude
you know we don't want it to be
completely bank we wanted to be
specific but they can come up
with literally any sort of
reason as to why they want to
prohibit that person from
holding a licence we just want
to be able to give them a reason
and and to provide that process
so again I don't believe it's in
conflict even in the way that it
reads that still allows the
board to make that discussion
discretionary decision.
You've been very kind Mr chair
representative and and thank you
just give you and I'm just
trying to find out all these
things make sure that are making
a good decision are the only the
last thing was do you think the
board will be responsible
For.
was my question was do you think
they'll be responsible
To prove.
In any way shape or form of that
that that
An offense and other written.
last little question headed
here.
I'm sorry.
Los.
Okay here's.
I see here does might might feel
here that I have put the.
This is required of the board to
carry the burden of proof of
whether the Nile of the
licensure with based upon
criminal conviction.
Mr chair representative I guess
I'm just trying to follow what
you mean by that well it's just
I'll just say this I think it
just the burden of proof could
fall on the on the board to
To whether they were.
This.
We just go back do you think
that it could it could affect
our Fourteenth Amendment the
work would be our with there be
any conflict with the Fourteenth
Amendment I'll just leave it at
that.
Mr chair representative what I
guess I've just can you identify
what part of the Fourteenth
Amendment you're worried about
so that I'm.
Aware of how to respond.
Due process involved.
Due process of all I was trying
to pull it up on my phone.
The due process I'm sorry.
Mr chair representative I don't
believe so whatsoever this is
the part of that due process is
being able to live free we and
get on with your life after on
you've done your time in future
times to society for any crime
that you committed and this
allows you to move forward so Mr
chair representative if anything
that's what we're hoping to do
with this Mr chair
representative thank you.
Mr chair Representative Romero
you you're you've been really
kind and and and your answers
and god bless you and thank you
for for your legislation that
you or.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
I just have one question it has
to do with the analysis from
regulations and licensing
department.
I'm in the significance
significant issues that section
they were listed as section
three use the term disqualifying
criminal convictions and S. A.
C. ND also defines the term
paragraph P..
However in paragraph B. which
requires each board promulgate
and post a list of specific
criminal convictions that disk
it is popping up in.
The only reference to felony
conviction.
So to talk about.
In New Mexico in New Mexico a
misdemeanor offense includes
domestic violence and some forms
of criminal sexual contact
contact.
Session is to remove the term
felony and use the term
disqualifying criminal can this
yes use the term this call
disqualifying criminal is that
something that you would be apt
to do I guess Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that question so why we
say despite qualifying criminal
convictions very intentional
essentially what we're looking
to do is create a mechanism for
simply removing a lot of stigma
that budget attached to any sort
of conviction right so often
times we don't know what is a
second degree felony verses of
third or fourth or for but first
will leave their but that Mr
chair representative as far as
what we're seeking to do with
employment is it one of the
biggest factors in reducing
recidivism is providing that
pipeline so essentially this
language allows again the board
to distinguish what's what is
what what is verifiably
something that they want in that
in that field
so practice and what they would
want to eliminate so again that
language is very intentional to
give that discretion to the
board thank you Mr chair
representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I'm but if you
look at page three line twenty
on the bill.
It says.
The license okay so basically of
a previous felony conviction
felony conviction so that's the
only place in the bill is still
referring to a previous felony
conviction would.
Make it more sense to change it
to that.
I just lost it.
Disqualifying criminal.
I guess Representative that's my
question thank you Mr chair
representative the act the
answers the same again this is
the section that allows the
board to make that discretion if
they can come up with any less
that they want outside of even
the felony conviction as far as
being able to respond to any
application so Mr chair
representative again that
language is very intentional to
provide that access to
employment but still allows the
board that discretion.
I'm thank you Mr chairman I I
don't read it that way I'm sorry
eight I kind of feel like that
kind of gives it.
When my opinion
but I will take your answer
thank you Mr chairman I am for.
Nobody else in their hand raised
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Mr chair would cost.
I have a proper new classroom
representing Rubio was second.
Mr chair.
Proper second from last year.
madam secretary will call the
roll.
Yes Representative H..
Representative Black.
No Way my vote.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Terrazas.
Yes.
Representative are excuse me
vice chair Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Mr chair.
You too Representative also
please.
Process.
Yes.
Chair.
Yes.
I will tell please.
Six in the affirmative one in
the negative.
Zero six two one you're looking
extremity when you Mr chairman.
Well I'm sorry I forgot about to
go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Representative Romero please be
aware of I think I am all for
people being back to work I just
am just a little concerned on
that I'm just that.
Little technicality there so I
do hope you make it forward
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay let's go Representative
Romero you're on your way.
So.
The legislation made.
House Bill forty
is the one that is making the
newspaper for the last six
years.
Representative Brown and
Representative Dow.
The hot seat is years.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
afternoon to members of the
committee.
the popular title for house bill
forty nine is do not tax social
security income.
And I'm pleased to be co
sponsoring this with
Representative Dow
Representative Armstrong and a
few others.
The representative Armstrong can
join us at some point and if she
can't and it's just because
she's in another committee.
Mr chairman and members of the
house bill forty nine is really
all about fairness.
New Mexico senior citizens to
have a work history have already
paid taxes on this income when
they made contributions into the
social security trust fund.
And so the tax imposed in New
Mexico is a form of double
taxation and really that's just
not fair to these these folks.
So that is the main purpose of
the bill but there are a number
of good effects that would come
from passage of house bill forty
nine and will.
Talk about those in some detail
in in just a little bit of the
third point I'd like to make is
that senior citizens are saying
to us help us
a lot of people are struggling
to make ends meet and that's a
particularly hard struggle in
retirement when you're on a
fixed income and the cost of
living keeps going up.
So the bill is a straightforward
repeal of that tax it would it
would not be phased in in any
way I think it's important to do
this up front with it with one
one action and part of the
reason for that is it makes it
simple for people to understand
it's memorable and there's no
footnote like well we're gonna
it's going to be fit this tax
relief is going to be phased
over several year period I think
we just need to to do it and and
make it easy for folks to
remember.
A lot of us believe that New
Mexico can be more of a haven
for retirees and this bill would
help in many ways with economic
development in the state I'd
like to point out Mr chairman
members that retirees make
really great neighbors on the
whole there are biting mature
date they are often times the
volunteers in our communities
who are tutor students who are
service crossing guards and I
know that's not really happening
quite at the level would like
right now because of the the
pandemic there are also people
who serve as docents our state
parks and they're the ones who
help the rest of their family
say was driving children
grand children to and from work
but they need to go.
what I'm hearing Mr chair is
that there are just so many
retirees who just cannot make it
on social security income and
they they just need some help in
the average recruitment for
these research should be about
four hundred and seventy dollars
a year possibly as high as a
seven hundred and that's that's
not chump change to to our
retirees every dollar counts and
in their in their everyday
lives.
One of the things I'd like to
point out is the question that
we always get on this bill as
well can we afford it we'd be
losing some tax revenue and the
the fiscal impact reports
suggest in fiscal year twenty
twenty two would be less
revenues for the state in the
amount of eighty seven million
dollars but I'd like to point
out Mr chairman that these
fiscal analyses do not point to
the upside of the bill or the
benefits that would accrue and
the I think we all know that if
retirees have more income in
their pockets they can go out
and spend more visit restaurants
it just do those things that
that that everybody really likes
to do.
And it would certainly help with
you know those medical bills
that we all don't look forward
to and and we know that even if
you have if you have a fixed
income and you have something
come in like a plumbing repair
that you need on your place of
residence or maybe the rough
needs work or there's a car
repair that's needed or just
general maintenance of these are
things that are very hard for
some retirees two to four and Mr
chairman I I know there are some
retirees who really don't want
to talk about their situation
financial situation it's maybe
just a little bit hard for them
to discuss maybe they're a
little embarrassed
so someone talked about it and
someone that ideally Mr chair
retirees rest their retirement
years on a three legged stool
there really and this is the
ideal situation to have some
savings of to have a pension and
then social security is the
third leg.
But we all know that social
security of was not meant to be
the primary income for anybody
it was meant always to be
supplemental.
However today Mr chairman sixty
three percent or more of our
retirees in our state have no
income to live on other than
social security income.
And another shocking statistic
is that very few have even more
than ten thousand dollars to
their name and that's of all
retirees so that the picture is
really very bleak I think for
for people going into
retirement.
I also want to point out that
there's some expenses that we
often don't tracks very well and
that is there a lot of
grandparents who are raising
their grandchildren and that's a
big expense we ought to raise
children know that and so they
need to help and then also like
to point out that there's a
general perception that New
Mexico is not a very friendly
state to retire to.
And I kind of take a sense of
that I think I think we have a
beautiful state with so much to
offer.
But we do have some metrics that
indicate that that we're not
we're not the best place to
land.
And sometimes people actually
move away from New Mexico in
retirement because they're not
going to get taxed on certain
income in other states and we
are one of only thirteen states
that still taxes social security
income and we do it at a higher
level where we have the third
highest tax level in that
category.
So Mr chair I'm gonna at this
point turn this over to
Representative Dow for some
comments.
And issues there let her take it
away Sir.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
Unprecedented times in many ways
not only are we experiencing a
worldwide pandemic that has
caused economic recession we are
also facing what is called a
silver tsunami and for the with
five year twenty thirty for the
first time in the history of our
state of our nation senior
citizens will represent the
largest population greater than
any other age group for the
first time in history it's
always been children.
And those retirees are looking
and moving to states and using
where they will finish out their
lives where they will spend
summers with their grandchildren
when they will go out and fish
and hike and swim and they're
making those choices based on
how to get their dollars to go
the furthest so not only is
eliminating associate tax on
social security income a way to
alleviate the hardship on some
people who did not save as much
as they should it is a wonderful
way to attract retirees and keep
our New Mexico retired and those
that are looking on are you are
you are care retirements they've
worked in New Mexico and we
wanted to retire in New Mexico
and as a co sponsor of this bill
I have received I keep track of
the number of emails that I
receive from people saying.
We're considering leaving the
state for many reasons but one
of the reasons is all of our
neighboring states have
eliminated taxes on social
security income so I believe
that one of our expert witnesses
is going to talk about the rate
of return.
Being a senior citizen who comes
of the retirement comes with
benefits including health
insurance and how they spend
their G. R. T. in our
neighborhoods and in addition to
as as my co sponsor
Representative brown has a duty
to volunteer and give back in
their communities their
differences all of you the
friends of Navajo lake these
people are buying side by side
Arby's these people have
disposable income we want to
spend the entire state.
Some of the things that
differentiate us from our
neighbors were growing rapidly
is we tax there's a security
income and so we need to have an
attractive package and this is
the lowest hanging fruit we have
we're one of the few states that
used to tax so security income
and we do it one of the highest
rates in the nation and so I
believe I'm not sure informed.
You see is on is Representative
Brown.
I was gonna talk a little bit
more about the economic impact
yes Representative Mr chair
representative I just promoted
John Garcia to a panelist.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I would like to
introduce our expert witness
years John Garcia he has served
formerly as a cabinet secretary
for the economic development and
tourism department in New Mexico
so we someone are we all we all
want to listen to and that with
that let Mr Burciaga takeover
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
representative brown
Representative doubt thank you
for introducing this bill Mr
chairman my name is John Garcia
I was introduced earlier as the
I'm I'm a was in government and
I'm in is in business and
I don't want to repeat too much
of what was said because it was
well it was well spoken it's
true we are just one of thirteen
states that taxes.
Social security income and.
Maybe it's interesting for Mr
chairman you and in the
committee and others to know
that it was a it was out of the
something happened in nineteen
ninety trying to get to a
balanced budget for the for the
for a legislature and a bill was
introduced to amend and adjust
the.
You know that the the budget if
you will it was in the last
minute midnight judges came in
at the eleventh hour and added
of the to try to fix a thirteen
million dollars that thirteen
million dollar deficit they
added this tax on social
security and.
The problem Mr chairman is that
it's been very hard and
difficult to get off of that tax
ever since we've become
dependent as it as a state on
that money however we have
distinguished ourselves in the
country by being one of just a
few that the taxes retirement
income I I would I would like to
tell you also that there's been
a lot of big effort over the
years to try to we're one of the
only states in fact the only
state in the country that
doesn't promote itself to
attract retirees yes we have
some of the best quality of life
in America I I would put us
against the Arizona is very hot
in summer and Florida is very
humid in the summer and yet we
have four beautiful seasons and
when I was tourism secretary Mr
chairman
It was quite you know quite a
product to sell because it was
everybody just loved the open
space and and the quality of
life we at now Mr chairman we do
need to get a handle on crime
and we get our our schools
adjusted back these retirees can
help with that but
you know right now we're in a
situation where
because we do not do dynamic
scoring in the bill we look at
the cost that it would be to
government and if you look at
and it's in the FY are when they
try to you know put this against
the criteria established by LFC
it can't meet the criteria
because it it's never been said
that we would eliminate this
kind of a tax yet
the opportunity benefit of
having remove this tax seventy
seven percent of the wealth in
America is increasing retired
folks
They would bring with them that
well
their livelihood we want to
attract act itself The New
Mexico and clearly we need to
have the communities.
Available and ready for serving
in added population which is of
course help our senses to it
would transportation recreation
healthcare so there's not a lot
of communities I mean there's a
handful of good communities
Farmington Silvercity Rio Rancho
that would benefit tremendously
from.
Increasing population and what
will happen is the discretionary
spending will increase because
of their because of their coming
to New Mexico.
But what one thing about the
it's been stated by A. R. P.
that more than fifty five
thousand New Mexicans are the
primary care givers for
grandkids and I would anticipate
voices for children others for
whatever reason we'll say this
isn't a good thing which I don't
understand but at least I hope
they see that I mean there's
fifty five thousand New Mexicans
that are primary care givers for
children and I have to say to
them that.
Also everyone of these.
The seniors were once a child
themselves and I think I think
we should put some energy and
attention on this demographic
for sure New Mexico enjoys one
of the few of opportunities to
have military for established
military enterprises in our
state of New Mexico with over a
million people coming through
for training TDY and Services
and many of them to come to New
Mexico say wow it's a beautiful
state and then they retire here
we could we could focus that
marketing just on that
demographic alone it Mr chair
your committee has heard the
exemption for military retirees
the exemption for native
American retirees a subgroup
sent this would just be a of a
one time exemption of for all
the state you get on balance Mr
chair all I'll spare you more of
my discussion I'm happy to
address the FIR as well that Mr
chairman I stand for questions.
Mr chairman I don't know that
Representative Armstrong has
joined us so are we all stand
for questions
what we're doing.
There's again I have my I. T.
person here of J..
I would like to know.
Those that would like to speak
on this legislation that are in
the audience and I will bring
you in the either or or four or
a year is just I'm not going to
big side just to who speaks
first okay so I'll start at the
top of the list I have the
Mister Bill Jordan.
Mr Jordan's.
You can yourself you're ready to
go.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Bill Jordan New representing New
Mexico voices for children.
We stand in strong opposition to
this legislation I know it
sounds good and I know it may be
counterintuitive to think that
we wouldn't want to help low
income seniors.
This bill doesn't really help
them.
It simply is not targeted to
those retirees who need it.
Eighty six percent of the
benefit of this tax cut would go
to those making more than fifty
thousand dollars a year.
Primarily because New Mexico
already does not tax the first
twenty four thousand dollars in
income more than most retirees
get in social security.
Mr chairman why would you want
to give me another tax cut I'm
on social security I didn't
think I was going to live this
long so I started taking it when
I good.
The cost of this tax cut is a
hundred million dollars a year
that would have to come right
out of the budget for education
health care and public safety
because this bill doesn't have
any way to pay for that hundred
million dollars every year.
Our tax system is already
grossly unfair to low income
families and we cannot afford to
give another tax cut that favors
those who already make more than
the state median income.
If we really want to help those
who need it most we would urge
the committee to look at
increasing the lowincome
comprehensive tax rebate that
rebate gives two extra
exemptions to seniors it is a
much work targeted and cost
effective way to address poverty
among our retired family members
as Representative brown said
sixty three percent of New
Mexicans a retired New Mexicans
live only on social security if
that's all they're getting and I
think it's safe to say they're
not paying any state income tax
already because we don't tax the
first twenty four thousand
dollars.
That's exactly the point I'm
trying to make this bill doesn't
help those New Mexicans who need
it.
Mr Garcia also wonder cut their
argument by stating how much
wealth retirees would bring
here.
Why would we want to give
wealthy retirees a tax break at
the expense of our schools to
the tune of a hundred million
dollars every year.
I personally find it hard to
believe that many retirees would
choose to uproot their life
spent thousands of dollars to
move move away from family and
friends all based on whether
they're going to pay a couple
hundred dollars a year in
personal income taxes.
Well Mister Jordan if you can
bring it down and.
Okay we know this is a really
tough vote for many of you we
urge you to table the bill in
favor of a better more targeted
and cost effective approach
thank you very much appreciated
thank you Sir.
Mr Miller only.
Thank you.
Thank you and I want to thank
the sponsors and representative
for bringing this bill to your
committee chairman members of
the committee bill Lee president
and CEO The Gallup McKinley
county chamber of commerce for
reasons already say stated and
to be brief I just want to say
that the gal McKinley County
chamber of commerce stands in
full support of this this bill
and the economic impact that we
believe it will happen the
benefit will have and drawing
seniors to our state and with
that chair I'll keep things
brief and thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you Sir Mr bill Morris.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is bill Morrison I'm a
volunteer for a a RP.
Thank you for the opportunity.
FOR you Mr chairman and members
of your committee.
To testify today on behalf of
your pre New Mexico and our
membership.
We strongly support.
HB forty nine.
For some of the following
concerns.
We heard for many of our J. R.
P. members and others around the
state.
The.
Grossly unfair is this tax.
Restrictions on New Mexico
seniors in retirement benefits
could go to several central
issues the specially in this
time CPOs.
The COVID virus.
For the ever growing cost
prescriptions.
Cations will food and utility
bills.
New Mexico is the only remaining
state to tax social security
benefits of taxpayers with
incomes above twenty five
thousand dollars.
Single fire look filers and
thirty two thousand dollars for
joint filers.
It is important to note that
these thresholds were put in
place over thirty years ago
and have not been adjusted for
inflation.
Many retirees tell us what they
using their social security
payments.
Your healthcare for the role
parents.
There's.
Special needs children.
More often or taking on the
financial challenge of raising
or helping to care for their
grandchildren.
Social security retirement.
Can you start winding it down
please okay that your pardon.
Well I knew that down please yes
I make my last statement social
security retirement benefits are
intended only for those
individuals who have earned the
privilege to receive those
payments Matt includes those who
have contributed to the system.
At least forty quarters during
their lifetime of important
employment.
I urge passage of this bill
thank you for this opportunity
Mr chairman and members thank
you Sir.
This Gerald.
Good afternoon to you all right.
Yes great Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Sarah
fitz Gerald I'm senior vice
president at the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
thank you for the opportunity
other chamber strongly supports
this bill we thank all the
sponsors for bringing it forward
as you heard earlier our state
as one of just thirteen states
that tax benefits and then
fortunately impose one of the
highest tax rates on these
benefits in the country.
People pay income taxes on the
money they put into social
security and then there taxed
again as they receive these
benefits it just doesn't make
any sense we want to see New
Mexico become one of the best
places in the country to retire
and this bill brings us one step
closer to that goal so with that
we are the committee to approve
this measure thank you.
Thank you.
At this time having no one left
on that side I will go to the
members of the committee.
No I have anybody.
On the committee that wants to
comment or ask questions.
A couple of questions to ask.
Number one hundred ground rule
is willing to benefit the most
from this legislation what
income level but income level of
people living in New Mexico are
going to benefit the most from
this legislation.
Mr chairman and members you know
that's actually a kind of a
difficult question to answer
who's going to benefit the most
I think that depends on every
individual retirees
circumstances.
And for example some retirees
actually are still paying a
mortgage and spare tire make
yours or they have.
That's not what who's going to
benefit what was the most
benefit from the tax break who's
gonna who is going to pay less
taxes because of this
legislation.
I mean everybody's going to
benefit and they got extra money
in their pocket I mean don't get
me wrong thank you give me ten
dollars are no dollars up to my
sons and but.
Who is going to get the biggest
Representative tax break on this
legislation.
Mr Mr chairman I really not
trying to get based in my answer
but I just think it depends on
depends on individual
circumstances and if you're
talking tax brackets or things
like that I again I just think
it matters on on the you know we
presume sometimes that we know
what people need to live on we
don't understand the full
picture.
Everybody will benefit from this
some will be perhaps more
inclined to spend the money they
are not taxed or necessaries
some might use it for you know
things they would you know what
complex reviews but other things
like you know go to the movies
or do whatever but the it will
circulate back into the into the
economy and that lifts
everybody's
fortunes I think so that is the
best answer I can really give
you I just can't give you a cut
and dried answer on that I don't
think there is one.
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman.
It is proportionate to the
contribution those that put much
at as much and they'll you know
the then they'll the it'll be
proportionate based on their
contributions but it will be
extraordinary for locals that
have a lower income it as you
know retirees then.
If they use it for spending in
discretionary spending so it'll
actually a bigger bigger impact
on lower income in that.
Alright I understand don't get
me wrong I understand the fact
if you don't have to pay listed
in New Mexico seven hundred
dollars out of your pocket then
in state Ph.D tax I can
understand how it benefits you.
Don't get me wrong I mean I
received because I get social
security
retirement sold in the United
States income tax on my on my
social security because of my
income level.
Okay so my question of course
is.
Who is going and the reason that
I'm asking this question is just
the other day I pulled up a PAC
for former members of the forms
and I look at the tax brackets.
A version that is sixty five
years and older in the state of
New Mexico okay Celestion uses
somebody like me that is only on
social security and gives a
total of seventeen thousand
eight hundred dollars a year in
social security.
Yes the forty dollar rebate from
the state in New Mexico.
That person is not the taxes on.
Yes I do the lower the rate or
expanding your the remake.
What I'm saying is who is going
to benefit on this somebody like
me is no benefit on this because
I have a retirement and it adds
on to my social security and
what mostly happens is if you
basically if you have to file a
federal income tax on your
retirement.
And your social security then
you're going to have to file a
state tax return and pay taxes
on your social security.
Not everybody and then we just
explain this anybody who says
that they're doing this to help
the poor people of New Mexico.
I mean they're not doing this to
help the poor people in New
Mexico because of poor people of
New Mexicos are living on only
social security are not paying
taxes there you in getting
remain trouble stay there again
you think well I for the low
income comprehensive three maybe
thank you so let me we get money
back for property taxes the bay
under home because of the level
of being so.
So.
And the only reason that I say
this is because I really
enjoyed.
Okay the newspaper.
When dealing with the second by.
The one I can follow in the USA
today.
And.
In there and all you know they
were saying how we were going to
need to health of color by doing
this.
This is looking at these are
people with education.
That we have been made.
Print the newspaper and sell it
to me we're not.
One two dollars.
And then you do not realize that
we're people in New Mexico do
not pay taxes on their social
security.
Are you still who is going to
benefit from this this through
the reality is people that are
making least fifty grand a year
or more I don't want to even
give them the right on this.
This legislation but we're not
for the poor people okay.
Use.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
know I think about anything are
we talk all the time about need
to diversify our economy so
having retirees who choose to
live in New Mexico because they
make more than fifty thousand
because we have equalized gotten
one step closer to being as
attractive as Arizona you think
about the disposable income in
Arizona how it gets spent the
municipalities fearing that
their they are hold harmless
goes away looking for ways to
generate G. R. T. us saying that
our new economy is going to be
outdoor recreation it's going to
be tourism when we when you talk
about who's going to benefit it
is the poor people when people
come in for divine half million
dollar million dollar call it
economic impact of people paying
a tax property taxes in your
community so that they're
they're voting yes on school
bonds they are contributing
their expertise in the
community.
It creates economic growth and
we look back when we chose to
taxed security income when
Arizona chose not to when we
were very very similar in size
and meeting income.
Instructional interacting
retirees what can afford to go
every day and then eat out if
you could tip to the waitress
and contribute to a local
charity so when you talk about
who's going to benefit we New
Mexicans when people retire here
who have disposable income and
she's in our state to find your
are to be in our state to find
your side by side in our state
to
state rates it generates wealth
and
if you look at the disposable
income of retiring Arizona
persons retiree New Mexico and
one of the differences in
intentionality instructing
people who enjoy the outdoors
and incentivizing them to live
in New Mexico and this is not
even you know as a measure of
equity I suppose if you look at
the other states so when you
think about budget I think that
our local communities benefit
people with disposable income.
Live in our communities
contribute our communities
attend our churches volunteer
schools golf our golf courses in
our polls open keep our golf
courses he said that three times
to.
And.
Tax rate that's what I as food
thanks break okay who benefits
yes and I agree with you on by
the bill come in but then you go
ahead and do the thank you for
example Santa Fe.
Santa Fe.
Formal for people to buy a house
in Santa Fe years and years and
years ago and then the people in
big big money games started
moving in Santa Fe and there's
no way a poor person living on
the.
Twenty thousand dollars years
social security can afford even
rent a house in Santa Fe okay
and that's going to today's
world no not.
This was a wonderful little
community I mean are you I used
to out there wouldn't and judge
all of them as judge because you
deserve it would have the
dentist would reduce just a
small community nice
inexpensive.
The big money has come in.
Do we look forward to drives
through town anymore you know
soon us so so what we're saying
we're going to help the poor
people of the state of New
Mexico all I know when this I'm
in the state.
Part of the question okay so no
matter if this bill goes forward
or not we are not helping the
poor people in New Mexico we are
helping the middle eighties and
higher income by passing this
legislation okay and so much
about this.
That way and that is exactly
what happens okay this
unfinished okay I will go to
work Representative Rubio who
raised the.
All.
Ari it wasn't all of this is
right after you started talking
no thank you Mr chair and thank
you representatives yeah I think
that was just one of the and I
think the chairman clarified it
a little bit in terms of.
I know my parents are in their
eighties they get social
security that's the only thing
that they have as their only
income locally their house is
paid off in lake Arthur which
state paid off a long time ago
and so one of my questions was
related to that specifically was
how I I recognize in the bigger
picture in the bigger scheme of
things that over or over time
this might help the economy
overall but again if we're
talking about
The older and individuals who do
make less than the twenty five
thousand how does this bill
sort of incentivized their their
lives as opposed to what's
happening with those are that
are making over fifty thousand.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for giving a
concrete example that I would
get to that is our senior sites
where where the local community
is expected to contribute to the
cost of those bills.
No words come to Sierra County
into Silver City.
Chance to get where you can eat
for free.
These folks with disposable
income understand that they're
blessed they will go and they
will the same location is not
known among such people working
together in a community together
I have seen pay ten dollars for
meals us and we a hundred dollar
bill and then someone with the
fixed income who's who's not
able to pay me nothing and so I
think.
This is a community of people we
call many times the greatest
generation of all I understand
the value of community and that
it takes a village and these
people give act because they are
able so I I concrete example
would be people paying more
missing a real site for people
who cannot give a call or I
think about the people who
volunteer at elephant Butte
state park is that the luminary
a lot the fireworks show the
Easter egg hunt the clean ups
they work the stations that
entrance fees thank thank thank
you what the fees and they do
all of that they volunteer their
time and so they are keep we
have some of the lowest park
fees in the nation because of
those seniors were volunteering
their locating here for quality
of life and I think it.
It's hard to quantify what and
in the R. I. are never shows a
clear France is looking at the
states are like New Mexico are
choosing taxes security I don't
know much.
Representative owner are some.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
members so I don't believe
anyone of us who
anyone of a sponsoring the bills
over seven this is targeted
strictly at people below a
certain income level or that it
will you know that that we
should only do things that help
the poor
I think that's important but we
want to welcome all retirees to
New Mexico and they come for
different reasons some of them
actually are live and work here
and then leave for reasons are
sometimes related to just the
more I do that there they've
been tax bill be taxed twice in
New Mexico if they stay here and
and get their social security
income so at the bottom of this
it's really just about fairness
and I think Representative Dow
did a great job of explaining
some of the the ways we see the
upside of of having retirees
here and there are there's
something in social science
called may so facts and what
that relates to is just
perception and I think one of
the things we need to call that
in New Mexico is the perception
that we are not a state friendly
to retirees and this is one of
the reasons we can't we keep
getting our demerits on this is
because we're one of those
thirteen states that still.
Social security income.
So
there's a lot of good that can
happen here in you know I I want
to help everybody.
And and so I think this bill
would do that and it would it
would it would be manifested in
different ways and then let's
remember also Mr chairman that
there are a lot of retirees to
because they can't make it on
social security they're taking
us a job either part time or
full time in the time of their
life when they really want to be
are resting from from all their
labors they're they're back in
the workforce and they may
trigger you know at not being
out there with the right no
longer qualify for the exemption
because they're trying to get
enough money to to work in I
noticed recently at the grocery
store that a wall for bread is
three and four dollars so what
you think is poverty level you
know I don't know that those
numbers in that anymore we have
artificial members about this is
the poverty level we you can be
earning fifty thousand a year or
whatever it is and still be in
poverty.
Because you have expenses and
the cost of you know housing and
I'm one just one that medical
bill.
Share our can do you rent so I I
think we need to think about the
affect the good effect on
everybody.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair what real
slow.
If.
Thank you Mr.
So I was very once.
Perception of what I'm gonna say
something Mr chair.
Representative around so I have
I.
You don't have to file the
income income tax in the state
of Mexico you don't file a tax
who the feds great.
And so I get that that's no
problem.
And and for merry couple I know
somebody Mexico with four
thousand dollars that's from
merry couple filing jointly.
If you file single I can't
remember I think it's exactly
half of your well but I can't
remember what very quickly.
And I'm gonna get to my point
here a little bit it anything
between that.
That started at shin and the
appalled that in five thousand
four hundred ninety nine dollars
get get taxed if you're single
one point seven percent on top
of all of your if you're twelve
federal tax okay I'm gonna
explain that here then.
After you make fifty five
hundred dollars over that you
you hit three point two percent.
Once we have eleven thousand
dollars so now we're talking
about twenty three thousand
dollars it's four point seven
percent.
Please use the apply now here's
here's my.
chairman Mr chair and
Representative my point is this
is I've had different businesses
and one of my businesses I've
had several individuals of work
from and they're in their late
seventies.
The late seventies and
this was a prescribed he still
had.
Some medical bills and they had
some some financial burdens that
they had to carry and because of
that those expenses they had to
work one moment in particular
would work for me at the at the
funeral open the doors adornment
and then he also worked at
Walmart soon as you get a job
because you have to supplement
your income automatically have
to file a tax return and so you
can see how very quickly if
you've got a even a modest house
payment
it still have and I know people
that a lot of people still do in
their sixties
they retire and I think all good
I can't wait to retire and then
the they realize all my gosh I
can't make it because they're
not getting the full income
living on social security Mr
chair is is is definitely
At least in my experience
there's a lot of individuals
that struggle and they do have
to find a second job and that's
in to see them so Walmart and
CMR she older people working
around the community so for that
reason I think our it does help
it doesn't fit the framework
exactly are just helping the
poor in itself right seeing some
makes less than twelve thousand
dollars to get it is in our file
you can actually get a rebate
for the same time many of those
that's a standard your you're
just normal living on on the
small screen security budget and
I have to find out work I also
feel Mr chair Representative
round that this is a.
Most people are I got my degree
in accounting.
What people don't understand
understand we just said here are
just look at the bracket and
stared and whatever most people
don't understand that most
people just say bill proposal
taxes and social security they
just understand I've got to pay
taxes up I'm on my security so
just as a good message are out
to in addition some of the
message to people who are
wanting to retire here that
aren't so
well versed in the tax code the
last thing I want to see is is.
I lost my train of thought this
is something and it was the best
thing I was gonna say Mr chair
anyway I think that's important
for us to to to to support those
people and
I think of my last thought that
I didn't write down hello
and what was I would much rather
see our state.
The revenue to two incoming.
Good retirees
and invested in just in in some
of the Hollywood three hundred
million dollar
Tax credits are given to the
Hollywood I I would like to see
that that's my personal opinion
thank you Mr chair that's all.
Thank you Representative you
sort of fallen off the train.
Yes.
Just there's been some person
since the public comment was
being and chat I don't think
they raise this is happening
with the New Mexico business
coalition and he was raising his
hand at acting now I just wanted
you to know that there's someone
in chat saying they could.
I gave them about fifteen
seconds before I switched over
from those Chad to the
participants of the panelists so
are it was nobody up there when
I switched over so that's done
okay.
Okay thank you I will do the
committee now with your
permission.
And asked what is the will of
the committee.
Click a motion to pass.
The proper motion pro do I have
a second.
I second.
From promotion from
Representative Douglas says in a
proper second from
Representative PM on this.
When you call role.pdf.
Representative cash.
Representative Black.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes Representative Rubio.
We're going back in here can you
call Alex Representative
Stapleton yes.
Representative Terrazas.
Yes.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero no.
Mr chair according no.
We have four in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Okay ladies you're on your way
to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Thank Mr chair.
Where are we really makes.
This is my internet.
Yes Sir.
Okay.
At
one twenty.
The.
And then the all right.
Absolutely no
labeled people will serve no
we're here to students total as
we are continually and legal
I
was.
We can find everything that we
needed.
And the.
Thanks for.
One hundred and the.
I have a couple of people in the
audience that I would like to
bring in to testify.
And that is the.
Yes yes.
And the.
Representative Myers yes Mr
Myers thank you.
Somebody knows.
Are we ready.
Thank.
Yes Sir okay.
Twenty.
Is a continuation of what in the
last year House Bill thirty for
those of you who are you you
don't know house bill thirty
years so I guess I want to start
again.
House Bill.
Money makes a great.
More people and more
destinations in the US military.
House expedited licensure.
When
people that are coming into the
state of New Mexico the mother
military bases or from other.
Other
a single service jobs.
In New Mexico they come in the
movie because of the federal
jobs or because their military
positions during this thousands
in the ring their children this
allows him to do is bring their
licenses from those other
states.
President in deregulation in
licensing and in a hurry to get
licenses that they can work here
in New Mexico haulers files are
serving in the military there's
also offers the same thing New
Mexico veterans.
Here's we'll check in.
I
was just three years okay
because I really didn't think
that I was going to be able to
get away with it then I heard it
over and over again how much New
Mexico loves our veterans
and we bring in and we would
just that are in some just allow
veterans as a whole.
Be able to get their licensure
when I was costs to R. L. the.
Madam chair I will turn it over
to both of my expert witnesses
for tier one wants to go first.
Thank you.
But Cheryl Cole this is Paul
Cassidy and good afternoon to
the committee as well.
Right Meyers colonel miners with
the New Mexico military base
Planning Commission on and he he
will jump in.
As as needed and provide in
particular a lot of background
for us it is in terms of why
it's so very important.
To the department of defense and
our military partners and
residents here in the state of
New Mexico I think chair cone
for caring house bill thirty
last year it went of very very
long way
to helping the state in terms of
how the military scores us and
why that's important to me as a
member of the curtain
partnership committee and
commissioner on a New Mexico
military base Planning
Commission is we need to
preserve protect and grow our
military missions here well the
military.
Is a ten.
Awesome billion
sector that contributes to the
economy of New Mexico really
second to oil and gas and
certainly a higher than if you
can believe that the tourism
trade so it's important thing on
to test for and formality being
that I'm presenting the ability
to share portion is my last year
up almost two percent in the
bill are you here okay Mr chair
I'm still navigating between
both places but I'm here right
now yes okay you know something
happens well thank you.
Madam vice chair good afternoon
so what we would like to do is
continue to build on all the
great progress we made last year
we've identified three or four
things are really important one
is to try to make sure a license
can be turned around when a
military spouse applies for a
license within thirty days we
have that on the education side
we don't have it on the
regulation and licensing partner
professions side we've talked
with John Blair runs the the
licensure bureau there and
superintendent Trujillo as well
and they were very supportive
and helpful to us in this
process
another item is we want to add
Veterans to to the list instead
of just recent back veterans
which is what happened this past
year and and lastly with we
would like to add civil servants
are we hearing from the base
commanders know what colonel
Myers go into this a little more
he's talk to them directly on
this point it's important to
terms are recruiting those types
of folks to work.
Side by side with the military
personnel that are on our basis
in New Mexico we need the civil
service folks to come to the
state and they're they're more
permanent residents of course in
our military which are typically
in state for two or three or
four years possibly and they
come up they come and go very
quickly the other thing we want
to do is make sure that the
amount of information that has
to be filed say a an Air Force
family moved down from Florida
and they have a license approved
and in Florida they come to New
Mexico they shouldn't have to
produce all their credentials
they should be able to rely on
what another state has done and
although it doesn't waive the
need for background checks and
make sure that they're they're
in good standing they have to
provide evidence that that they
are military and in good
standing so those are the major
provisions.
A chapter sixty one is being
amended to include.
Thirteen professions that
somehow we didn't include in
house bill thirty including
things like nurses aides and I
can go through it if anyone
would like and particulars on
that accountants
and other professions we're
we're also attempting to amend
chapter sixty for our trade
professions to provide the same
benefits to military spouses
that are in a trade
Work work in the construction
areas and we need that in New
Mexico very badly and when a
military spouse comes to the
state they need to be put to
work as quickly as possible and
on the quickly as possible it's
important because the military
folks certainly Miller providing
a service to us they're they're
not really well rate though and
a family second income is very
very important to be putting
them to work as quickly as as
they're willing to go to work
when they when I hit our our
towns and cities where we have
Air Force bases here.
I'm I'm gonna pause and turn it
over to.
wires Mr or madam chair madam
vice chair.
Madam chair of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you on this very
important bill I'm the director
of the office of military based
planning and support I want to
provide some background on how
important this bill is to our
military connected families.
With an employment rate in the
United States peaked at fourteen
point seven percent this past
able to comment it's the highest
recorded right since nineteen
forty eight that rate is still
ten points below what are
average a military spouse rate
is which is about twenty five
percent of unemployment in
recent data collected also says
that since the pandemic
unemployment rates for military
spouses may have increased by
thirty and thirty five percent.
In addition to their high
unemployment rate recent
national survey showed that for
those that are employed thirty
five percent of those are
underemployed meaning they're
not advancing in their chosen
careers.
About forty percent of military
spouses have college degrees
compared to thirty percent
promotion civilian counterparts.
More than thirty percent of the
employed military spouses work
in fields that require licensing
or certification many are
teachers nurses counselors
doctors lawyers and all of these
require the licenses to be
renewed upon each move which as
Paul mentioned to be every two
to three years.
So I'm very grateful to
the continued and unrelenting
support representative I'll come
to our military veterans and
their families house bill one
twenty provide some really
critical improvements in
additional professions to the
important legislation he
sponsored and passed last year.
If passed this bill will bring
New Mexico our with war even
exceed legislation identified by
the department of defense as a
best practice in reciprocity for
licensure.
Maintaining traditional
employment advancing careers
while relocating every few years
In addition to taking care of
the the children while the
active duty members deployed for
constantly TT why or out of
state has historically been a
hardship for military spouses.
In the extremely difficult if
not impossible to overcome when
it comes to their profession
choosing the life of a military
style should not mean that the
spouse must give up career
aspirations of their own in
order support service number so
many strong support of this bill
it was a lot not only for active
duty military families but for
the total force which includes
our civil service members as
well and.
Provides a great incentive to
bring veterans in who have high
high degree of skill and
experience that many of our
installations need to fulfill
their critical skill positions
so madam chair Representative
o'connell I'll turn it back over
to you.
Thank you.
Was that I'll be in the
The presentation Mister Cassidy
Mister Meyers.
Madam chair I just want to
highlight that there is a
scorecard scorecard to mention
this earlier the scorecard is
now being produced it's about a
year old we currently are scored
yellow as opposed to green we
think this and our current
Marshall for to this gets us to
the green level with regard to
the reciprocity measure that the
military is using for basing
decisions on missions here in
the state of New Mexico thank
you madam chair.
Do and madam chair before we go
to the audience is the other day
I was speaking to a doctor that
is working at Indian health
services and he was talking
about leaving the state in New
Mexico because his wife was a
registered nurse and she
couldn't get her license years
just yet to practice as a well
he was a doctor or it is Indian
health services so this is a
price to more than just a
military I just want to add that
to all to make you madam chair
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and we now
are going to go to the audience.
And I am.
Those of you who wish to speak.
In support we you raise your
hand.
Good I see
Let's see the begin the first
one up it is Roger Greer.
Madam vice chair and members of
the committee my name is Roger
Greer and I'm here is the
volunteer state president with a
a RP Mexico A. R. T. New Mexico
was in full support of house
bill one twenty thank you.
Thank you Mr Greer.
And next in support we have I'm
not sure if it's a
In support I'll just keep
calling in bill Lee.
Thank you madam vice chair and
thank you to a chair I'll come
for bringing this important
piece of legislation to the
committee today bill the
president CEO of the gal we can
we County chamber of commerce we
stand in full support of this
this legislation not only does
it provide benefit to the to the
families who serve our nation
and have served but it also
increases the skilled workforce
in the state of New Mexico and
for those reasons and those that
were exemplified by the expert
witness witnesses and chairman
al cone we are in support thank
you madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr Lee.
And next on the list we have our
Walter Bradley.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
Representative account it's good
to see you again we met over
this particular issue about
three or four years ago I
believe what it.
And not over Clovis where we
have can enter forced place and
I'm glad to see them and I fully
support this.
We know that you're bringing now
to to finish the gap that got
started my.
hi gene this is kind of
difficult to.
Getting a just and this was just
last year getting a license in
New Mexico so now you're filling
in that gap and and when fully
supported I appreciate you and
your witnesses and obviously the
military veterans and and
service people that need to
utilize it thank you.
Thank you for.
And next we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam vice chair
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
house bill one twenty because it
enables the number of licensing
entities to accommodate military
service members and members of
their family during times of
transition when they're seeking
new employment and we believe
that expediting the process to
get a skilled workforce inner
economy will benefit New Mexico
additionally according to the
fiscal impact report PED has
said the New Mexico is
experiencing a teacher shortage
while the department already
waives fees and expedites
licenses for teachers this bill
could incentivize New Mexico
veterans military service
members spouses and children
with the fee waiver to pursue a
career in education thank you so
much.
Thank you Mr and
But see next we have Gary
Williams.
Mr Gary Williams.
Good afternoon madam vice chair
can you hear me OK yes we do
thank you very much ma'am want
to thank you for the opportunity
to speak today I'm Gary Williams
I'm wanted you associate state
director for AARP New Mexico I'm
also a veteran of the U. S. Air
Force I want to think of the
chair O'Korn mistrustful thank
you very much for bringing this
important legislation forward
again this year the R. P. is
proud of our support for our
military veterans and their
family members and we are very
proud your New Mexico to hold up
the tradition of that support up
for this very important group
over population for reasons very
clearly stated by Mr Cassidy and
Karimov's I want to go into
further details I only want to
say that New Mexico is very
supportive of this initiative
and we hope that we get to to
pass on this thank you very much
madam vice chair.
Thank you.
And
We had already heard from well
maybe not Mr of bill Lee.
Yes miss madam chair Madam last
year I've already spoken to
given my okay we need to
Let me see I have
Thanks.
Myself I might need your help
with this act another Dixwell
consent.
Yes ma'am okay Mr Dick Wilkinson
your next yes thank you madam
vice chair and chair
representative al cone this is
Dick Wilkinson I am made army
retiree and I'm also a member of
the deposit Democratic Party of
New Mexico military veterans and
families caucus I and I'm here
speaking on behalf of the caucus
to support this bill I my
personal experience in testimony
here's that I while I was on
active duty here in New Mexico
my wife is a dental hygienist
and we had to consider these
considerations when we look at
moving away from New Mexico we
also we did not move however I
understand the impact that this
makes to military families in
considering these and and the
choices you make as far as
possibility for income and you
know the ability for your spouse
to continue their career I know
this is not just impacted my
family but many of my friends as
they make these decisions and it
does absolutely way in to the
decisions when it comes to how
well your family will enjoy your
new assignment so of course so
we want to make sure that that
is that opportunity to work as
part of that fulfillment and
enjoyment for your spouse and
being able to do that quickly is
very important and it reduces
the stress around that moving
time that is extremely elevated
for families when they're in
these transitions so I'd like to
speak on behalf of this bill and
support it and I hope that it
moves forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Walker.
Are there any other errors in to
speak in favor.
I don't see any other since they
were are there any
persons wanting to speak in
opposition.
I don't see any hands up in
opposition.
Okay so
Mr chair members of the
committee are we're going to
committee.
Questions from the committee and
I have Representative.
Oops I lost track of who was
first I'm sorry Representative
Stapleton was ma'am I hate thank
you thank you Marcella
representative madam leader
Stapleton.
I'm.
Madam vice chair and Mr chairman
we we pass this bill before I'm
not in the form that is in now
but in some form we pass it out
of this committee before my
correct mmhm madam chair Mister
chairman.
Representative Stapleton up we
pass this bill out of this
committee like twelve times last
year we finally got into the
governor's office yes the only
thing is that this year we have
a add in what we didn't have
last year we had and we did
everything we did and we work
everything that we did we found
out that we were only half ways
does so we're backing in this
year adding to our house you
know thirty last year so madam
chair Mr chairman did the
government signed what we
passed.
Madam last year and that
Representative Stapleton test
result so madam so madam chair
Mister chairman you all and then
be in the form of a bill that we
passed in the governor signed to
add additional people to receive
this opportunity.
Yes madam vice chair and
representative of the test.
I'm madam chair and Mr chairman.
I'm you it's explained to me
specifically.
Who are you adding what group of
people you add in and why.
Madam.
Vice chair representative on the
number of Mr gas and your Mr
Myers to the review the exact.
Sure.
Thank you for.
Madam chair.
Cheryl Kuhn and
met madam leader nice to hear
from you and I want to first
before I go through the list is
just to tell you that after
house bill thirty had been
drafted and on its way to the
governor's office of the
military produced a best
practices document and so we're
incorporating the latest
information that we have from
the department of finance the
specific professions that we're
adding would be things that were
missed in sixty one three with
and and specifically as for
nurse medication aides and
hemodialysis and nursing aides
they were not included last year
and then there's also uniform
applications architects body
artists interior designers
public accountants funeral home
operators are licensed funeral
home folks utility operators and
in addition to that we're adding
up skilled
folks from the construction
industry there's ten different
classifications that are
included here and in addition
there are some things in the
education area which includes
administrators counselors aids
and other support staff so with
the help Legislative Council
Service they helped craft that
Madam leader so Mr chairman
madam chair and Matt Mr chair
and sits Mr Cassidy yes I'm.
All those people one category
for example are they considered
civil servants on the a
category.
If I mean.
Okay good question so we're
including civil servants within
the new definition that is
included here and if they fall
within these sections of law
that that I just mentioned that
address the specific professions
then they they would be able to
avail themselves of that.
So what is the definition of a
civil settlement.
A civil servant and hang on just
a moment bear with me.
And we.
This.
Yes I had it open here with me
please.
If you have please jump in I'm
looking at us.
Members your Mr chair
representative Stapleton I don't
have the official definition in
front of me but the civil
service is the civilian
component of the military.
So when we talk about a total
force for the military you have
active duty members you have
civil servants and then
oftentimes you can even include
contract
Components to that although we
don't consider contractors as
part of this legislation but
civil servants fall under all of
the.
Standard
Requirements of DOD service so
they they move
not quite as often as active
duty but they they could still
deploy they can still do all of
the geographical separations
that active duty waste
experience.
I'm miss madam chair and Mr
chairman.
How many.
What how many of the how many
what's you never total in terms
of indeed all these different
categories plus the civil
servants plus the veterans plus
the military spouses so these
individuals would not have to
pay for a license.
In the state of New Mexico is
that correct.
Later the only if they were
If they apply for it they're new
to the state and the provisions
are only good for the first
three years that they're in the
state.
And and after that miss madam
chair Mister chairman they then
would have to pay when they we
knew the first after the first
three years.
They get it for free but after
that I'm and and we have no idea
what the population is like only
when they come in New some
individuals that's already been
here miss madam chair Mister
chairman and have been here for
a I was six years old ten years
they can't go to M. B. D. and
says I'm supposed to get it for
free.
Is that correct.
I believe that is correct to my
knowledge and colonel myristate
disagree please so say if your.
I'm.
Thank you and the rest here
because you send a madam chair
and vice chair is not
Representative Stapleton you
sent everybody needs what was it
go to sorry it would be a sin
licensing and Division for a
license towards an occupation
okay sorry correct me thank you
for correcting me I'm okay so so
they go to the state to get
their license fall for business
purposes follow job
opportunities in the state and
so as they come in they will get
their license they can apply to
get the license to conduct
business in the state of New
Mexico and and and its effect it
becomes effective when this bill
passes and is signed and it's
only the first three years that
they here initially when they
come in they can get it and
after that when it's time for
renewal for that license with
them to continue to conduct
business they have to pay for
the renewal is that correct.
Madam chair Representative
Stapleton that is pretty much
correct the thing is you gotta
remember is that ring in a
license from another state
okay so when they come into
their licensing in the state and
they're going to the New Mexico
are of the regulation licensing
department the that license from
the other state and then they
have to then there are then they
are used in the license from the
state of New Mexico within
thirty days so they can continue
working in the field that they
were working on the left say for
example Florida and came to New
Mexico.
Okay.
Okay now I understand it more
clearly and I appreciate each
one of you responded to my
questions thank you madam chair
and Mr chairman thank you madam
leader you just make my life for
us.
Thank you.
Excuse me Representative Black.
Thank you madam chair Mr
chairman I don't have any
questions I just wanted to thank
you for bringing this
legislation forward I think it
is good legislation I'm as you
know home and are for spaces in
my backyard so I think this is
actually very good legislation
that will help out my community
greatly so I just want a voice
that thank you Sir.
Representative and next we have
Representative that last.
Good question madam chair and
and
Sure up so I'm I heard a mention
of you know directors or funeral
service practitioners so they
reciprocate to this to this
state.
And generally that those
licenses are renewed yearly
is it just because there are
some some licenses
Renewed biannually.
So what they get three
consecutive years.
not having to pay the fee is
that what I understand.
Yes Madam.
Senate to rass.
It's three consecutive calendar
years so they don't get the
benefits of three by annual
renewals.
And what happens if they have a
excuse me Representative madam
chair Rep.
The joke one.
Mr Cassidy what happens if they
have apply annual renewal what
is that do this.
My the in on insurance agent as
a biannual how would that be
worked out.
Representative Akan madam vice
chair and Representative tosses
but it would only be good in
terms of fee waiver for for
three years.
And I think what we find with
all of these professions at
regulation licensing department
they have rulemaking that
they'll have to set up and
administer and comply with what
this legislature includes in the
bill.
Sure Representative chair of
corn and Mr Cassie that's what I
was looking for right there
second thing is is this bill in
any way shape or form of relieve
them owe their continued
education
that is required to office three
years.
I'm sure I can I can go ahead
Madam H. and Representative
Ross's no it would not.
Do anything with regard to their
continuing education
requirements under their
professions requirements not
intended to.
Madam chair chair of corn and Mr
Cassie that's all I have a
wonderful bill thank you so
much.
Thank you for Representative are
there any other questions from
the committee motionflow do
fast.
Thank you there's no.
Second by Representative the
process.
madam secretary Lee Caldwell
what let me ask are there any
persons in opposition.
Anyone in opposition.
Anyone in opposition seen no
opposition Mr chair you have a
do pass.
Show all members present voting
in the affirmative all members
present voting in the formative
thank you is thank you.
Thank you.
On my last meal to I want to
know that.
Then.
I was basically in my district I
just needed to give you a hard
time.
We will go on to our next meal
off vice chair you.
What.
I am.
J..
Where you're renting.
House bill one can.
Thank you Mr.
Everyone is ready and I'm very
are you ready muscle okay I see
that all right.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
members of the committee today I
bring before you house bill one
ten.
Is an act relating to labor.
Increasing the minimum wage for
all employees in phases.
Providing for an annual cost of
living increase in that minimum
wage beginning in twenty twenty
five.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Workers really deserve to be
able to support themselves no
one should be working full time
and living in poverty.
In the past few months I've been
speaking to single moms in my
district.
Ever since the pandemic broke
and they've been terrified they
expressed to me that they were
terrified of losing or being
laid off from their two or more
jobs and they were earning seven
dollars and fifty cents an hour
minimum wage and had to rely on
tips jobs in two or three part
time jobs just to be able to pay
their necessities and so Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
All these.
Calls to my constituents
throughout the past few months.
Make me harm really truly
understand how they felt because
I to at one time was a single
mom.
And I too had to work two jobs I
work during the day.
And I clean hair salons after
going to evening schools I did
that until what well late into
the night and I did that only
because.
I was able to.
Not only pay for my our
immediate rent and child care
for my son.
But even after paying that I
like the single moms in my
district we only had enough
money to cover food and then the
transportation costs getting to
and from my screen and to the
jobs I held and then to back
home.
And so.
It may be recalled that these
are under regular conditions.
We were not living Mr chair
members of the committee under
pandemic.
So when I heard the stories over
and over and over again Mr chair
members of the committee I could
not imagine.
How terrified.
These individual hard working
individuals single moms in my
district.
I felt I could not imagine.
Low wages hurt all workers Mr
chair and Mr and members of the
committee.
But particularly more so they
are damaging.
To our communities of color and
more so under women of color who
make up disproportionately the
share of workers for it this
time and always actually
severely underpaid.
Which is directly a result of
structural income inequalities
that we've had to face for
generations.
So Mr chair and members of the
committee this bill offers a
stable and predictable have for
workers and businesses moving
moving us forward from twenty
twenty five on.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I'd like to introduce.
We can bring our on miss Suzanne
Reagan who's a senior programmer
with the bureau of Business and
Economic Research and she will
on sept with me as an expert
witness and if she'd like I out
call on her to give a brief
overview and then we both will
be available to answer any
questions but if you'd like
mistaken we go away for
questions if you'd like whatever
your pleasure.
Mr chairman.
madam vice chair thank you for
few minutes you're all trying to
be rude three.
and Justin noted Q. statistical
items to to bring to your
attention New Mexico's poverty
rate is eighteen point two
percent from the American
Community Survey as when you're
estimates for twenty nineteen
the only state that is below us
in poverty is Mississippi at
nineteen percent.
The best poverty rate in the
United States is that New
Hampshire and there's just have
really happened with ours at
seven point three percent.
that that number poverty is
something we really need to
address in New Mexico and it's
probably more than just a
minimum wage bill but a minimum
wage bill is a good start the
median earnings in New Mexico is
thirty thousand two hundred and
seventy six for twenty nineteen.
Mississippi's had twenty nine
thousand Maryland at forty five
thousand is the highest earning
the highest highest earnings are
easily fifteen thousand dollars
more years than what our median
earnings are in New Mexico I'd
like to point out that our
meeting earnings of thirty
thousand two hundred and seventy
six dollars works out to be
about fourteen dollars and fifty
five cents an hour.
Are you NM BR of Business and
Economic Research several years
ago we participated in a study
of the Santa Fe living wage
there's a lot of data in that
survey and I'm just I don't
really have time to really go
into details but briefly what we
can say is that when you
increase the minimum median when
you increase the minimum wage
the economy does okay and
workers incomes do improve there
are few things that you do see
is that our carp counter
intuitive one of the things that
does occur when you increase
minimum wage is you can see a
decline or decrease in those low
wage jobs
and that's just the the factor
of balancing of small businesses
budget.
But we do see an increase in
wages
And I think that's all omitted
bore you with we statistics but
I would definitely here and
available to talk about the
stats.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Mr.
Before I turn it over to to you
I'd like to go ahead and just.
Mention that by raising the
minimum wage to fifteen dollars
an hour we're talking about
raising and lifting hundreds of
thousands of workers in our
state.
out of what they have
experienced as decades of pain
the quality they've been
underpaid workers and mostly
those that are underpaid and
have faced generations of
inequality are represented in
our State Farm native and Latino
Hispanic populations Mr chair
and members of the committee we
will stand for questions at
this.
Okay.
The
The attendees of the audiences
speak and we will call on you to
speak among us keep your a
common down to two minutes or
less so possible.
And
Mr John shops.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I will definitely
I try to keep my remarks brief I
represent the our state
federation of the New Mexico
state federation of labor
AFL-CIO
and while we do represent tens
of thousands of workers
throughout New Mexico many of
which are fortunately I do make
over minimum wage due to their
abilities to collectively
bargain as being a member of the
union we certainly also have
unionized workers who do not
make more than minimum wage as
well but regardless of that we
are firm believers that are that
all workers deserve to have a
fair and a living wage R. one
that they could you know raise a
family off of and not be taken
advantage of so for that reason
and I'm sure a whole host of
others that others will
mention we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward and
encourage the entire committee
to support this bill thank you.
Mr.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Jackson the registered lobbyists
for disability rights New Mexico
there are several provisions in
this bill that we we like and we
support of that to be agrees I
want to just mention one of them
which is the essentially the
very last thing that this bill
does in section three it repeals
an existing provision of state
law that's fifty dash four dash
twenty three of the MSA the that
provision allows the state to
issue certificates that would
allow employers to pay some
people with disabilities less
than the minimum wage
fortunately this provision of
state law has never been used as
far as I know so I think it's
appropriate to repeal it and
that way you also sure that it
won't be used in the future so
we encourage your support of
that provision as well as the
other provisions of the vice
chairs bill thank you.
Thank you we'll go to project
meant.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members good afternoon
object that with the New Mexico
business coalition we represent
hundreds of businesses thousands
of New Mexicans across the
state.
Our focus is to make New Mexico
a better place to do business
they'll help.
All families and all members of
support one another.
Up on this bill we stand in
opposition for number iterations
of the blade to increase in
revenue that this bill would
create we believe is offset by
lower employment levels because
employees.
Employers rather companies have
a choice many would cut back if
the employers of.
Employees were
granted fifteen dollars an hour
of.
I know that's not right now it's
in a couple years now but
fifteen dollars an hour for
example the smaller towns like
Silvercity or damning or root
tone.
Rural communities I think would
be unaffordable for a lot of
these.
Lawyers.
plus this bill includes high
schools and tipped employees.
Tipped employees are against
raise the minimum wage because
they make more money.
The minimum wage if.
This bill was enacted they would
make a less than they're making
now so it's very unfair to
tipped employees in restaurants
for example.
Up to players others companies.
I think we all know it been
devastated by COVID nineteen.
This increase I think would
cause salt on the wound stop in
a.
Upbringing of the economy that
we so badly need so we stand
opposed to the bill thank you.
We'll go to ask you way more.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce I represent
businesses all over New Mexico
and in every industry we oppose
house bill one ten and I cannot
stress enough the devastating
impact the COVID has retail
businesses across the state
particularly the small family
owned mom and pop businesses
these folks have already paid so
much for having to be shut down
or adjust their operations and
to ask them to yet again pay
more by raising the minimum wage
is just too much if we keep
applying too much pressure on
them there will not be jobs to
pay anyone even the expert
witness from UNM so that there
will be a decrease in low wage
jobs are these the same people
this bill aims to help.
The fiscal impact reports say
the servers and other tipped
workers who typically make more
intense than they would under
the minimum wage might actually
be disadvantaged as customers
would stop tipping this bill
also undermines the compromise
that was struck very recently
went in twenty nineteen the
legislature adopted minimum wage
step increases and those went
into effect in just January
first twenty twenty this bill
does not give businesses the
chance to get back on their feet
as it goes into effect in July
twenty twenty one house bill one
ten will stall New Mexico's
economic recovery so I
respectfully ask you to propose
thank you.
Thank you.
In the bill will.
It's.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members my name is for the
regular and I'm turning the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
on New Mexican what at least on
New Mexican workers regardless
of age occupation deserve it
just ways to provide for
themselves and their families on
New Mexico's minimum wages
incrementally increased over the
past few years it is set to stop
increasing after each is twelve
dollars per hour January first
twenty twenty three according to
a study by MIT the living wage
Albuquerque for example is six
eighteen per hour for a family
of four that has two working
parents this means that working
parents in Albuquerque to
children with speech make at
least sixteen eighteen per hour
cover basic family expenses such
as food and medical care is we
just significantly higher than
the current minimum wage to
fifty per hour and the minimum
wage that will be offered by
twenty twenty three in New
Mexico twelve dollars for out by
increasing the minimum wage to
fifteen dollars per hour you
Mexico will significantly
improve its low wage workers
taxes providing basic needs for
themselves and their families
thanks B. one one zero also
eliminates Senator minimum wage
excuse instead of justly without
resistance Senator low wage
workers.
For example many are coach
workers at directly work with
livestock dairy products core
package agriculture products are
excluded from the minimum wage
is excluding preclude without
reason hundreds of workers it's
thank.
Finally H. B. one one zero and
the minutes the sub minimum wage
for secondary students and ten
minimum wage for all workers at
thirty dollars support tips as
you all know Mexico has some of
the highest rates of poverty in
the nation obligating many low
wage workers New Mexico start
working while in high school and
adults with jobs so that such a
state jobs that are more
flexible than other
opportunities by eliminating the
sub minimum wages Mexico ensures
all workers regardless of age
occupation received New Mexico's
minimum wage thank you we sent a
strong support.
actually may all.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
express my support for living
wage.
In time that ways to not impact
us my name's asked below the
small business owner and an
expert on job helping with focus
on creating living wage jobs for
people with disabilities so in
many ways
This bill speaks my life's work
because I'm in this fight every
day.
First there's no doubt the
minimum wage was always meant to
be living wage.
Every contemporaneously record
shows that the minimum wage was
established decided based on
income measured not just a roof
overhead that complex.
The economic policy institute.
Tells the Los wage for single
parent one child New Mexico's
twenty dollars an hour yet today
at least two hundred fifty
thousand workers in New Mexico
make less than fifteen an hour
many of them are single parents
or dual income families just
trying to get by.
The painful irony is that the
tax here all year about how the
heroes or essential workers all
risking their lives for wage
that barely keep some of the
homes.
Now on its business it's been
American way for a long time and
as a business owner myself I can
say this is not an honest about
tenure wages your workers a wage
that leaves them struggling.
A fifteen dollar minimum wage is
necessary to secure freedom for
workers and a critical piece of
this bill that ensures that
freedom is the automatic
adjustments.
Painful lesson this year
watching Congress debate have
supporters terms pandemic.
And that is a good policy works
for the benefit of the people in
the media it doesn't need it for
after the already hurting our
workers should have to wait year
after year to see an increase in
their pay.
With no automatic costs just
into minimum wage just loses
value every year Tyner living
wage to the cost of living
measures are working Mexicans
receive a fair wage for the
work.
An honest wage index the cost of
living workers just make sense
and Stepanek's go to lead the
nation in making an economy that
works for us all to build broad
prosperity I appreciate your
time.
They were hammering nice New
Mexico dot org.
Good afternoon.
Members of the committee my name
is Abraham Sanchez I work as a
community organizer with that
that students of the New Mexico
and today I'm joined by one of
our leaders from hatch New
Mexico he will actually read a
statement in support of HB want.
My name is Oscar Madrid I was
raised and and actually for many
years of my life I work minimum
wage jobs including detailed
best food and the Chilean onion
fields and hatch Representative
see most of our members of my
family working alongside me for
low wages as we harvested food
and what is the for that that of
many people.
For those of us from the hatch
well we realize that the real
treasure Committee was not the
rich would surely that grows in
our valley it is essential
workers to show up every day and
work very hard I've first hand.
I see firsthand the difficulty
of trying to raise a family
working long hours in the field
for not much money it is
upsetting to see our wage laws
to meet our culture workers and
treat them as second class
workers we don't deserve the
same pay as other jobs the work
we do in the field is values any
other valuables any other work
in our state I'm asking the day
that we support HB one ten stop
excluding our central
agricultural workers from the
equal pay that they deserve I'm
tired of seeing hatchery belly
chili in the news and our
magazines and knowing that
workers like me and my program
the receive such low wages for
working in the fields and I say
we should be proud of not just
our agriculture almost more
importantly for how will we take
care of our workers this
opportunity to do that thank you
for your time today.
Thank.
Sue Smith.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Allison
Smith I'm the registered
lobbyist for The New Mexico
restaurant association according
to the department of workforce
solutions the leisure and
hospitality industries continue
to report the heaviest
employment losses with a drop of
twenty nine thousand one hundred
jobs or thirty point four
percent compared to our previous
years our favorite sit down
restaurants are going to have a
difficult time reopening after
the pandemic this means tens of
thousands of people will remain
jobless two hundred restaurants
have closed permanently that
means five thousand New Mexicans
will not have a job to return to
when the pandemic as over fifty
but fifty two percent of
restaurant say it's unlikely the
restaurant will still be in
business six months from now
with business conditions
deteriorating many restaurant
operators are anticipating
additional layoffs in the coming
months forty three percent of
New Mexico operators expect
their staffing levels to decline
during the next three months
that is what New Mexico
restaurants are facing now add
to that an increase in the
minimum wage that will place
additional pressure on an
industry already struggling to
keep their doors open and to
keep the employees they have
passing this legislation at this
time could be the final straw
for independent restaurants
already considering a move out
of state where conditions are
more conducive to success if we
lose more independent
restaurants we impact our
tourism economy our ability to
employ New Mexicans and truly
impact the ability of our local
restaurants to hire employees
who are just starting out their
careers we respectfully oppose
this legislation thank you very
much for your time.
Mr Lee.
Thank you Mr chairman chairman
of cone representatives members
of the committee bill the
president CEO we got we can we
County chamber of commerce
during this unprecedented time
when pandemic has really taken
its toll on our business
community Representative over
three hundred and fifty
businesses here in the Gallup
can we County area already sadly
with the new stepped increase in
minimum wage we've seen
employers that have to make the
difficult decision because of
the pandemic in the economy that
it's created have to lay off
workers already increasing the
minimum wage will do nothing but
further burden the small
business community and make it
harder for any kind of recovery
and although this bill goes
through twenty twenty five and
has stepped increases the
indexing and the recovery that
is predicted to come is going to
take at least five years in New
Mexico and so for these reasons
we respectfully oppose this bill
and thank committee and you
chairman for your time thank you
Sir you.
Lines.
Thank you.
Yes thank you.
I'm going to be speaking today
on behalf of two different
organizations first on the
registered lobbyists for the
disability coalition which is a
group advocating for persons
with disabilities of all kinds
and on behalf of those persons
with disabilities we stand and
very strong support of the bill
particularly section three which
would repeal section fifty dash
four dash twenty three of our
current statutes which
authorizes of sub minimum wage
for persons with disabilities as
Mr Jackson said earlier we're
not aware that this is ever
actually been used so it really
shouldn't be on the books
there's no point having things
on the books that aren't being
followed but also it's bad
provision so we really support
getting rid of it we thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward
I'm also the registered
lobbyists for the care givers
coalition which represents the
people who provide services to
people with disabilities and on
behalf of that organization I
want to point specifically to
the change on page five of the
bill which would eliminate
section eleven of the current
definitions of and would bring
group home workers in group
homes for persons with
disabilities within the
protection of the minimum wage
act.
And on behalf of both those
organizations I want to say are
very strong support for all
workers receiving a fair wage
and the protection of New Mexico
law so we urge your support of
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you more on rental.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Laura
Ryedale and I'm with.
And with
retake our democracy I'm sorry I
had a moment hello we strongly
support this bill and urged past
wrote thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Jason Espinoza.
Chair of the committee Jason
Espinoza stage director with the
national federation of
independent business.
Mexico and we do respectfully
stand in opposition to the
legislation I won't repeat many
of the points that I know many
of my colleagues on the business
side of me on this bill but just
point now some of the the
hardships to when we look at the
impact of minimum wage increases
on small businesses such as
child care facilities or small
health care providers which
primarily rely on either
Medicaid revenues on the
healthcare side or childcare
subsidies which are determined
by the state you know one of the
issues is already about the low
reimbursement rates and low
subsidies that cover the actual
operations of those businesses
this would further exacerbate
that issue and and we fear then
increase access to childcare be
decreased access to health care
given the increased cost if
there is not at the same time
and increased revenue stream
through Medicaid reimbursements
as well as child care subsidies
and other businesses senior
health care centers that rely
and have contracts with the
state so you know we look at the
impacts that and New Hope the
committee takes into
consideration if they do move
this forward the need to look at
how this impacts the contractors
get if there is no increase in
that contract to accommodate for
this increase thank you chair.
Thank you in the room.
If any of you can just sell your
indigo.
Mr chair.
Thank you for the opportunity to
comment this afternoon to your
of our New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau registered
lobbyist I'm like all New
Mexicans The New Mexico
agriculture producers have faced
challenges as a result of the
pandemic Mexico's agriculture
and food industry is still
adjusting to the twenty nineteen
amendment to the minimum wage
act that will increase to
Mexico's minimum wage to twelve
dollars an hour by twenty twenty
three house bill one ten removes
the agricultural exemption
and our agricultural producers
will have little control over
how to observe this cost.
The agricultural producers that
we represent have relatively
little control over agricultural
markets where you or I might
choose to pay more for specific
food product from one seller
compared to a similar product
from another seller buyers of ag
products pay essentially the
same price for New Mexico
agriculture products such as
Connor chili whether they choose
to buy it from one farmer his
neighbors farmers and producers
are price takers and therefore
accept their income for the year
based on what the markets decide
to pay for those drugs this is
important to note for house bill
one ten because the cost of
labor increases our New Mexico
farmers and ranchers will have
to pay more to produce the
products that they cannot
guarantee will generate more
income on behalf of our state's
farmers and ranchers in the
agriculture community I ask that
you vote in opposition of this
bill thank you.
Mister Rogers
will generate your and robs.
This thank you Mr chair
committee members I am the
executive director for the New
Mexico Chile Association enter
your specter very oppose this
bill.
The New Mexico agriculture and
food industries including our
chili producers are not
financially stable enough for
another phase minimum wage
increase.
The New Mexico Chile industry is
a very labor intensive business
and there's very little
technology that can substitute
that can labor used in the
industry.
As defined just that our farmers
are price takers meaning they
can increase the price because
they sell.
Most of our farmers and ranchers
in the state already operate at
a loss and increased agency
labor costs will force many to
either stop growing their food
or Wirth bankruptcy this will
damage our food security in the
state of New Mexico and maybe
forces into buying our chili
from our neighboring
country of Mexico.
An increase minimum wage also
heard a few manufacturers
processors distributors and
value added sector.
R. J. Prosser's in the state are
already struggling with the
phase minimum wage we're in
right now.
This recent increase in January
has cost one of our largest
processors in the state an
additional seven million in
costs.
Some of our major food
manufacturing companies are
already looking at relocating to
another state or Mexico just to
be able to stay alive and keep
the doors open.
This will damage the state's
economy as a whole and because
many New Mexicans their jobs.
With the prices remaining
artificially low an increase
minimum wage will force our food
production to the point where it
is cheaper to buy for Mexico and
that includes chili.
Eighty percent of Jerry consume
in the US is already coming from
imports and not from Mexico or
not from New Mexico.
This should be scary for
consumers because there is no
ETA in foreign countries as
specific best said labeling for
Krauze is unregulated in
regards.
We respect right hand asked you
to oppose this bill thank you.
We won't.
You.
Mr chair and looks like Michelle
Wallace does not have the proper
zoom.
The error message I'm getting
I'm sorry Sir.
Thank you
Mr long term.
Read the at this time.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee order Bradley
lobbyist for the.
Dairy farmers of America and
like his the people before me
have stated.
There is also do the pandemic
taken a huge hit we've had to
lose a unfortunately a few of
our.
Producers who had to shut down
some operations but
one one schools and restaurants.
I think that they've taken that
affects ours are supplied our
prices were also a commodity.
Price to.
And we're culture industry and
and the commodities controller
price in one
We are how to work as they are
now of these prices are
tournament and cut making the
adjustments to that are under
the current law.
Are just now starting to take
effect and and that's making us
the.
Very nervous about better
pricing so.
With all due respect for those
remarks aboard and then maybe I
would ask the committee to
oppose Senate bill one ten it's
a killer thank you.
Thank you okay I I don't have
any more hands raced to my
correct.
My okay you can really go to
committees and.
I have Representative Black.
Are you ready.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and representative I guess my my
biggest issue is I'm looking at
that the F. I. R..
It talks about on page four.
I'm.
Rings attached to you know I I I
totally understand that the
premise of wanting to raise
minimum wage to help the single
mothers who are are working in
in trying to to go to school and
trying to provide for their
children I totally understand
the concept I'm but I think my
biggest thing is are we are we
basically.
Are we clear effect because we
raise the minimum wage to
fifteen dollars an hour then
does that then make these single
mothers in eligible for WIC for
child care assistance for of
food stamps or snap benefits or
anything like that
Mr chairman
Representative I've had has that
conversation occurred could you
could you touch on that please.
Mr chair representative.
I have a difficult time
answering that question for
number of reasons I feel it very
offensive.
To all individuals who are
seeking to work and who seek to
support themselves.
And who seek to have a better
life.
As independents.
And free of any sense of
dependency but other than their
hard work and being an example
to their families to their
children in pursuit of jobs in
pursuit of careers in pursuit of
whatever they choose to pursue.
And not be dependent so that
goes counter.
What I know.
To be the case when I know to be
the case.
Is that by far individuals
single mothers hard working men
and women on students are that
are in school.
Persons with disabilities who go
way out of their way to be able
to learn as much as they can so
they can make a living from
themselves farm workers who work
diligently and laboriously to
put food on our table.
It it's difficult for me to
comprehend.
your question you know in the
manner in which to be fair
so I would say that.
That's not the that's not the
concern the concern is that we
need to give our populations are
hard working families a living
wage that's they have to be
given the integrity and the
dignity of having the ability to
work and to be paid.
What they bring as valuable
they're the workers as we heard
it many to in the testimony
there are the care givers they
are the janitors there the farm
workers there the
The maintenance workers they are
the young high school students
trying to pursue a job work at a
job so they can gain an
apprenticeship in our knowledge
and skills to go on to school so
Mr chair and and Representative
by far the desire of our working
class the desire of our working
poor is to seek.
Viable.
Future.
To see.
In the best manner optional for
them that's their choice so when
they do seek employment and they
do seek that path to success for
themselves and their families
then we need to ensure that they
seek it with the way just to
give them the ability to live
beyond their means thank you Mr
chair and representative.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Percent excuse me I'm.
I see I do honestly see your
point on that
Mr chair representative.
I I'm just having a hard time
may I would hate I would hate.
They.
We would do this and and.
I without a comprehensive I I
personally would like to
comprehend stated say if if at
the minimum wages X. amount of
dollars.
And you were single working at
which I appreciate everyone that
works works hard every every out
of business that you that you
just described but that my
concern is that.
That it may harm this by raising
this much it may actually hot do
more harm than good so I guess
that's all I have
Mr chair representative I I I
just feel like I'm I'm that's
really my concern is that it may
do more harm so thank you.
thank you Mr chairman I see that
mistreat and how to handle I
don't know sure to support.
Mr chair and representative of
regional black I just wanted to
address the fact that a lot of
the programs that you mentioned
such as WIC have a lot of
different criteria and often
times wage is one of the
criteria but it's not the only
criteria that is used to.
Make sure somebody's qualifies
for the that a.
Thank you next Representative
tell us us.
Representative thank you so much
for our.
Bring this up as Mrs Reagan had.
And I know she brought up in the
most are there since brought
that up that there are different
requirements for working so for
I'm gonna tell you as as a
businessman I remember when I
first started my car wash and I
I was just getting started and
all building up my staff I got
to a point where I could afford
someone to answer the phone and
I've never to to tell you the
truth I never paid minimum wage
to my employees their full time
because I expect more of that
okay and so I always try to make
my employees.
Given that extra of okay so that
I could retain them and so they
can feel that they're part of my
company now.
What's up Mr chair
representative what Mrs R.
Reagan stated that that there's
different requirements I had a
secretary that I hired she was
trying to get into assisted not
assisted living but
for housing
through.
Some
through affordable housing to to
help through the state and I
give a raise.
They were disqualified her from
her house and.
So I'm my point is we have to be
careful I mean sometimes it even
though we're trying to help
people are sometimes I was
paying her extra work because of
her wage it automatically
disqualified her from that are
you aware of any such things
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair and and Representative
do you mind repeating that last.
Part of your question.
You're on mute Mr
representative so I had a woman
that I had hired to help with
the funeral another funeral car
wash and I never pay minimum
wage but I gave that a person
raise to retain them to keep to
to help them.
When I given that raise.
Thank you back in Sir I can't
take that raise because I'm
gonna lose my housing.
hot.
So this is a real real encounter
that I personally have had I've
seen it happen and so what are
these in our it's important I'm
just just stating this it is a
real problem I know
Representative Black brought up
the point eight what will it do
there is in effect now let me
tell you
Mr chair
Meister hello.
I believe we should work all the
time I'm working myself I work I
work probably seventy eighty
hours all my life I'm I'm I'm
used to that.
Proud of earning a living but.
My point is that we're not
addressing and you didn't
address is that there will be.
There will be a consequence to
that our mother that are you
know that that or that family
that.
It affects affects them because
they make that the higher wage
I've seen it first hand.
Mr chair and representative.
The
I'm glad you bring that up
because that's that's a.
That's often uses a real
negative narrative in order to
fight against providing living
wages and on the fourteen are
populations on the same fair and
just
Income.
That they.
Thank.
That they qualify for and I say
that Mr chair representative.
Because we all know what we
should know.
That when you receive public
assistance of any kind public
assistance is based on many
factors.
And so public assistance will
adjust.
Income winds and all the other
factors accordingly.
I would venture to ask Mr chair
and representative.
Excuse me I'm sorry dry a little
bit dry I would venture to ask
back.
I think the preference.
Would be.
The ability to be able to earn a
living wage.
The ability to pay once.
Roof over their head be able to
pay for their on Google to get
to and from work the ability to
take put food on the table pay
for childcare.
All of those.
Day to day living expenses I
would venture to say that most.
If not if not all but most
individuals would have pride and
joy in being able to self
sustain themselves if in the
position we're in the process of
self sustaining themselves Mr
chair.
Subsidies are required to help
these individuals especially in
and we're talking to a large
extent single parents single
single mothers and single
parents who struggle if
subsidies are still required in
order for them to make their
transition to independence and
self dependency then that's what
those put them support and
that's what they're there to a
system they're not there to
knock people out just because
they're seeking to support
themselves they're not there to
are not people out of the line
for assistance just because
they're seeking a better
education for a better means to
live by they are they're just
that they're public assistance
subsidies aimed at assisting our
families to ease from.
Whatever their situation was in
order to seek the subsidies into
more productive self reliant way
of living so they're they're
they're not there to create
dependency and any dependency
that's been created Mr chair and
representative is because of our
unwillingness to consider.
Increasing wages to just and
fair it quality related issues I
mean we are systems and
structures and it's because
we've created that dependency
and what I'm reporting Mr chair
and members of the committee is
that we need to start talking
about how we're going to create
independent.
Ways.
Ways to living independent
pathways to living and give our
hard working populations the
choice.
To to follow those pathways but
not to create dependency I don't
think it's for us Mr chair and
representative to be increasing
our coffers at the state level
just because the feds give us
money.
And and we can subsidize onto
the degree that we can I don't
think that's our intent I think
our intent is to create those
pathways to self determination
and self reliance into
independence and to give our
hard working essential workers
on the the the flexibility and
the option to make those choices
but not have the option Mr chair
representative to be forced to
have to create and stay
dependent on on on us thank you.
Mr chair representative okay I
do hear you I agree with us
trying to now keep in mind first
of all I have nothing to do with
the previous legislation that
has trapped people and get them
dependent on this is my first
year in office but I'm gonna
tell you that
What I am statement is true a
hundred percent I have trouble
hiring I have had people refused
to work additional hours I've
had people refuse to come and
work what I've offered you the
twenty dollars an hour to work
on and certain err in certain
parts of my business so I'm as
much as you your I agree with
you that we should encourage
them to live on their own and
have tried to be in their of
their own your I'm in I have a
business that the unemployment
rate is twenty percent.
I can't find someone to help me
with with certain aspects of my
job I have I try to pay more
than that for
in in in other avenues well
getting into details are and
it's not it's not working so
there is a portion of the of the
of of the work force it doesn't
want to work I mean we also have
to acknowledge that I would like
to see and I'm gonna ask you
this so in your bill are you
saying that your reform not only
are you asking for minimum wage
increase are you reform those
things are holding up the other
facets of hard and other
assistance programs is that tied
into your legislation.
Mr chair and Representative what
this bill does is increase the
weight dean dollars an hour
making it a living making it
effective in twenty twenty.
It's related raising cost of
living on from there on index
and that's what this bill is all
about this bill is not associate
with anything else and Mr chan
representative I will say that
you're your story is different
from my story I spent many many
years as a labor and community
organizer and I've heard over
and over and over again how at
work amongst the workers that
are fighting and I want for so
many years just to be able to
elevate their positions and so I
you know I I don't know what
population you're talking about
and I don't want to and printer
intrude on your personal
experiences but by far.
I as an organizer I can tell you
that there been movie after
movie after movie.
There is a current the
nationwide right now to increase
the federal minimum wage to
fifteen dollars an hour so if if
there's a federal movement
that's been in play by our work
workers across the country then
why can't New Mexico take the
lead and do that and raise the
minimum wage and be the model
for the rest of the country
enjoying the other states that
have done so so Mr chan
representative that answers your
question if this bill doesn't
direct address any of those
issues it's strictly a minimum
wage taking us from where we
leave off from a very good bill
that was introduced in twenty
nineteen that takes us from
twelve dollars an hour where it
leaves off and in twenty fifth
twenty five Texas immediately to
fifteen dollars an hour and then
there after adjust according to
cost of living index and I think
that that's
that that I don't think that is
what this bill does and so I Mr
chair and representative
that's that's I can't tell you
anymore.
Mr chair representative call at
all I see your point I know that
you're trying to get us to
fifteen dollars an hour and and
and I'm gonna say I have worked
for minimum wage at three
dollars and thirty five cents an
hour so I have worked in months
to the employee other employees
of the people I've I've I work
very hard in in and I've been
unemployed making that minimum
wage I made a stop groceries
were for a sec rosaries I've
worked in many many things so
I've been working for them you
know just just.
To what you're describing so I
understand I've been there now
to your fifteen.
Our.
And then back to what I was
seeing.
One thing that I I will say
Mr chair.
A couple of your own thank you
for not right to question my
integrity I will not make up a
story just to try to to get my
point across these are real
things in my community and in my
district now back to what I was
going to say is fifteen dollars
an hour I heard of Mr chair
representative Colorado Mrs
Reagan.
Described that.
We need to get fifteen dollars
an hour so that we can meet you
said it yourself president of
Colorado that we need to leave
the country well I can tell you
that I I just a simple thing us
if you don't look up to see
which at first of all we can't
be compared to other states.
I've been to New York California
those wages the wages are
different there because it's a
whole different economy the the
the average rent a look at the
average rent in New York.
Yes twenty five hundred dollars
for a studio apartment three
thousand dollars for a one
bedroom.
Are you can get a hold of pretty
big house here for for that type
of money so my my point is we
cannot have.
Raise minimum wage look I feel
that everyone should make a good
wage I I've already expressed
that.
As a as an employer myself I
don't pay minimum wage because
expect more my employees in that
I think it's to me personally I
think it's I don't like started
telling them that because expect
more and I want to feel
Courage to do better on the
apartment company and so
So so here's here's what I think
the elephant in the room as the
vote in the room is what we
raise minimum wage.
This is what happens the guy
that's making a minimal wages
making twelve dollars well right
now we're at eleven something I
remember thank I think it's ten
fifty Arnold could not be that
but this is a it's eleven
dollars.
We go up to fifteen that's a
four dollar increase.
We can do is not one nineteen
thank you guys gonna walk twenty
three to twenty three twenty
seven so for.
Creates inflation.
And the elephant in the room
that we're not discussing is
never brought up yes all are all
what we just talked about
earlier which are all the people
that are that are dependent on a
fixed income.
Only get social security and I
can assure you they're not going
to get a raise like that so when
they go to the store I don't I
don't care what business it is
when I was washing cars if
you're done this to me my
fifteen dollars and I was
charging to wash the outside of
part in five dollars extra to
backing inside which now would
be about twenty five dollars
would increase.
Here's the thing when they go to
the store Representative going
to be more expensive no it's
going to be more expensive that
will treat that the same all
month long both people are on
fixed income to go to to on
Sunday for lunch after church.
They may not be able to afford
it if you raise elevated like
that.
Businesses today under this
under this pandemic this is the
time long time is wrong they're
already struggling you heard the
the restaurant association
expressed that they're that
they're struggling to do
business and so that being said
you're just we're just adding if
we passed legislation like this.
What we're gonna do can afford
it it was like when I can afford
to make my my I could barely
afford to make my my mortgage
payment.
I could I could afford to pay
hours so I would work more over
eighty ninety hundred hours a
week to make a difference and I
know first hand because I've
started businesses from the
ground up my wife and I would
say our business till midnight
in our children would sleep on
couches are their homework they
would do their homework there
and it's with the coaches in our
lobby so I understand how that
is.
I am sorry but I.
Mr chair representative all of
it all is well intended as this
is there are unintended
consequences they're gonna
affect our these are the people
that we're talking about the
single mothers that will be it
will affect their coverage and
those four dollars that they're
going to get extra you're not
going to want to work extra or
they they may not be able to for
that because the the loss of
their.
That's what they're getting nine
hundred percent agree with you
people have been held down and
held on Tuesday in certain ways
because of legis previous
legislation is holding them in
those in those spots to be other
reform that works there people
out of that not just holding
their if you go one dollar
Pueblo fifty cents over that
**** because you Office system
I've seen it I I mean I hire
people so
I I I I I really feel that
that's off on a talk to to do
during this time and at this
time I'm gonna yield thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative tell you.
Thank you Mr.
A correction I do often say that
my and my name is Representative
Roybal Caballero I use the
double last name thank you.
We'll do that next time thank
you know.
Thank you okay we.
Anybody else on the committee
you don't have of one to three
nobody else wants to speak up on
this I just have a couple of
comments to add to this you know
one of my first jobs were I made
the money I got money in my hand
but when I was in high school
and it was clear yet.
Thanks for the whole day two
dollars two dollar bills and
send me lunch lunch was worth
more than two dollars.
For me anyway later on when I
went on to graduate high school
and work and I guess I would to
college and I was working in the
gas stations are like four by
lunch.
The ninety cents an hour.
One into the military I drafted.
Was eighty eight dollars a
month.
The game was eighty eight
dollars cash every month when I
was in the military thank you
home.
One door construction my brother
and two dollars and fifteen
cents an hour.
So.
Getting that is we have
increased over the years but we
are not increased from nineteen
sixty nine when I was in college
good day.
The increased almost thirty
times compared to only ninety
cents an hour.
The minimum wage is ninety cents
when I was there we should be
read about twenty to twenty four
dollars an hour my rate was
Reagan.
Senator minimum wage should be
today.
We're seeing here.
Used open any nobody everybody's
as we can do this because of the
pandemic last year we couldn't
do it because I don't remember
what two years ago to minimum
wage bill and we just could not
do this because it was going to
kill all our businesses
everybody was going to shut down
and we're really suffering
children the young people that
are working on jobs eighteen in
the honor when they cut him down
to just eighty eight fifty an
hour eight twenty five an hour I
mean I know a lot of these young
folks who are the main providers
in their house.
Only ones that have any income
and now they can make you see
boxes something in our.
And the mother's meal of
mother's ruin anything else is
to hear that somebody says well
they're not going to have a.
Free housing.
Stamps.
There's or the other.
What I see anything else how
brought a person is
twenty dollar bill on the
counter should the slapping an
EBT card into the machine
the inference in that person's
heart when they are paying
because of the work and they
earn this money rather than
getting it in the the card to
the state.
So when you think about what is
a good inclusive.
Well I.
You should.
Date.
Government subsidies but what
are you going you're going to
ride.
Pride one of want to continue
living and they wanna continue
working harder and harder to
provide for themselves and their
family so that.
I have Madam last year.
And I will go to the committee
what is one of the committee.
I have improper new fashion
Representative Rubio though I
have a second.
Thank.
Understanding the representative
asked welcome ma'am
Representative thank you.
Madam chair in which area would
you call the roll please.
Representative fast.
Yes Representative Black.
Now.
Representative Garcia S..
Representative Hernandez.
So.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
One of the tricks we my vote.
Madam chair wrote Representative
Roybal Caballero yes.
Mr chair Alcorn yes.
All.
We have five in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Representative to string you out
I would know of for the.
Problems that it'll cause for
those who are elderly or fixed
income social security the
single with those that are
answered social security that
will not be able to that we are
going to struggle to pay the
difference this will cause
inflation in our state thank you
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you so is a I believe it
was a five to three vote thank
you.
Yes.
You have a new pass my last year
and we are done for the day and
it will my right.
What.
Members of the committee on
behalf of on all the workers
that had their voice of.
Representative today thank you
very much.
Okay me ready for Thursday and
believe Thursday just a quick
announcement Thursday vice chair
on the amendment of the chair I
am going to be a.
At the meeting in the money
second shot for the hello my
life wrestle from Thursday I'm
not going to be safe okay
I will try.
To.
I'm years as running around but
I I hope I can be here with you
Thursday thank you.
Anybody have anything to and
before really you.
Yes.
Everybody thank you.
