Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative lu Han.
Care.
Representative one so I am.
Senator.
Representative Serrato.
Here.
Mr chairman.
Senator.
Members we have a quorum.
I.
I kind of a.
Mr.
Mr Herbert for Representative
Cook.
They have the same hair cut.
Let us and when I first looked
at the screen naturally with my
glasses on I can't see close up
that that that's why I take up
my glasses sometimes members we
have a quorum
And first of all one of the
other that the US it's a
beautiful day in the
neighborhood and
I wanted to let the committee
know that our first bill house
bill one ninety to extend Human
Rights Act to public bodies
Representative but ran us I will
not be putting on her bill
today.
I even though she did bring a
the amendment forward.
She felt that the in
consultation with our experts
that it needed other amendments
so we're kind of rolling that
over to the appropriate time.
And it's important for the
committee to understand that
whenever we have a roll over I
have a three strikes you're out
policy.
What does that mean it means
that you have three attempts.
To reschedule a bill on this
committee.
And at the and if you if you
need to do it once like
Representative but it has been
we'll we'll roll it over
reschedule or second time.
If you come in again on the
second time in you tell me that
you need to reschedule a second
time well roll over again.
And we'll reschedule for the
third time.
So we have you on the agenda for
the third time and if you don't
show up and you say percent of
STI anymore time to work on my
bill I Callum.
Sorry three strikes you're out
your bill is not ready for prime
time come back next year.
And so you know we get a sponsor
every opportunity to reschedule
but I feel that when it comes to
three times are there definitely
is something not right with the
bill and it's not ready for
prime time so having said that
we'll go to
Our first bill on the agenda
Representative these out of.
Regional Housing Authority
changes Representative is out to
put on your bill.
Mr chairman committee members
when a status.
I'm presenting house bill one
ninety six this is related to
the regional Housing Authority.
What this bill seeks to do is a
man the financial and
operational oversight to be
conducted in compliance with the
federal.
US housing act of nineteen
thirty seven in conglomeration
with the US department of
housing and urban development.
Changes being proposed in house
bill one ninety six will
eliminate the need for state
funding for oversight purposes.
Mortgage finance authority
reports the intent of house bill
one ninety six is to address the
re done to oversight occurring
by MFA and the department
department of housing and urban
development.
Mr chair at this time I would
like to introduce my expert
witnesses I have Mister Chris
Herbert he is the executive
director of the eastern regional
Housing Authority miss Rebecca
Velarde who is with the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority and Mr Julian Barella
who is the division director of
the Pueblo can't of public
housing working with the
department of housing and urban
development Mr chair at this
time I would like to have them
brought in as panelist and I
would like for Mr Herbert to
start off explaining why this
needs to happen.
Thank you very Representative
these out we do have the three
individual.
On as analyst and we'll go to a
your first expert Chris Herbert.
Senator you're free to elaborate
on the legislation before us.
Member of the committees are you
for hearing this today
the the bill and is as it is
before you
Based in the face oversight over
the regional housing.
the regional housing authorities
went under NMFA's oversight
regionally in two thousand seven
and then another amendment in
two thousand nine
which in two thousand nine that
region the regional housing
authorities were reduced from
three from seven regions two
three.
But in two thousand seven MFA
was made an oversight due to the
fact that there was some
inappropriate activity on the
part of one of the regional
housing stories page did not
have federal programs which is
not operate in the federal
housing programs therefore not
oversight that has been
eliminated due to the
consolidation that occurred in
two thousand nine.
so what this bill addresses is
distracting interface oversight
and leaving that with the with
the.
For urban development the
federal agency.
Regional authorities our state
created entities that operate as
elements of local government
they however only operate
utilizing federal funds
operating the federal housing
programs.
So the there were there were
tendency occurs in the fact that
you methane does set some are
functions that that had already
to us that's oversight is
intensive
it encompasses both operational
physical property management
budgeting are audits we will
continue to have to to buy with
all state regulations that any
element of local governments
such as counties or
municipalities would have to
including our annual audits.
And and so that this just simply
weaves the the oversight of the
regional housing authorities
with.
which is who we are.
For.
Okay thank you.
Yes.
You're you're you're volume just
shot I don't consider be there
at the end so I don't know if
you want to do an adjustment but
we did hear I did hear your
closing statement in terms of
your all and that you would like
to move on with to the next
experts is that okay
Representative we sell.
All okay our next.
Rebecca the latter day.
Rebecca feel free to elaborate
on the significance of the
legislation.
Mr chair members of the
committee chair back of a large
a and the director of policy and
planning for the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority what
this bill is not on our mortgage
finance authority legislative
oversight committee approved
legislative agenda we were
approached about this bill by
hide and the regional housing
authorities due to the
duplicative oversight and staff
has been working closely with
the regional Housing Authority
and hide and Representative
itself on this bill MFA is been
happy to serve in the oversight
role that we've that we're
getting in that proximity two
thousand and nine and we have a
lot were too closely with the
regional housing authorities
that being said we do recognize
that a lot of our oversight is
highly duplicative with the US
department of housing and urban
development which is the true
oversight agency as they are the
funder of the regional Housing
Authority and is putting a lot
of undue burden on the regional
housing authorities so the staff
is very comfortable with this
bill and with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you Rebecca
next will go to
Julian but a lot.
You're free to live right on the
significance of legislation.
Chair Garcia
but a lot division director for
the public housing office
located here in New Mexico I
know that great young men of
director of the Oklahoma New
Mexico Film Office along with
Leri read us build office
director for the Albuquerque
office is listen in today as
well.
I'm honored to have the
opportunity to talk about the
regional housing agencies on
their roles and impact that
they've made towards housing
families of relationship with
the regional housing authorities
and consolation ship with MFA.
I'm honored to work with all the
executive directors as Chris
Herbert speaking today for
eastern regional Housing
Authority captain to mark those
our western regional Housing
Authority executive director
Terry Baca as our executive
branch from the northern region
they do work diligently to and
to all in compliance working
plans with the roles
responsibilities that we provide
them
These efforts won't change for
any of the modification of the
region housing law as a matter
of fact it'll probably as miss
Florida Senator better align
them with the rest rest of the
house reporters in New Mexico.
one thing elect mentions and
incredibly proud to say that in
one serviced of the region
housing authorities have the
most successful consolidation
program in the nation any
housing authorities throughout
the whole United States hands
down.
through this consolidation
efforts of reason Housing
Authority has been able to
sustain housing in rural areas
where housing is most needed.
By modifying the wording up to
the regional housing law it will
better align the region housing
there is with the rest of the
house authorities in New Mexico.
But it also restructures a
relationship with them as with
MFA by eliminating possibly any
duplication of efforts as
mentioned as well as lemonades
any conflict that there may be
a lease continued of the
continuing efforts will also
help the region housing
authorities any future
development.
Relationship with MFA has been
great are we continue will
continue that relationship in
future as we always have will
also continue our oversight and
monitoring of the housing
authorities.
Does changes to the New Mexico
region Housel so ultimately that
says is your support for
mentioned.
Thank you tuning in
Representative ease out that
does that on your experts are do
you have anything else to add to
the The presentation.
I hope the committee has picked
up on what Miss Galardi said
where it this is All duplicative
and what we're trying to do is
seats that burden throughout the
New Mexico mortgage finance
authority Mr chairman of.
Our regional Housing Authority
is overseen by housing and urban
development they do have to
follow all those guidelines and
this would streamline their
ability to be able to help these
people that the especially in
our rural areas so Mr speaker Mr
chair are excuse me Mr chairman
members of the committee at this
time we do stand for questions
thank you representatives out
and thank you experts
or you're a.
Representative presentations on
the significance of legislation
committee we'll go to the
audience.
And
of those of you attendees
that are I will be going to both
those that are in support of
legislation and those that are
up post and what we will do is
that you have a survey in front
of you.
And
I want you to day at thirty
seconds.
And
And make your choice of whether
you are in support or you you
are in opposition.
And
married do they have that little
bit of circle that they click
on.
I don't see it on the screen.
I don't know if that poses a
problem chair and members of the
committee I apologize but the
wrong the poll for the wrong
piece of legislation was shared
so we're going to re launch the
pole with a representative you
cells legislation here okay
thank you for that
So that's kind of a.
Take that whole house bill
ninety two off.
And that's going to put up the.
for a one ninety six.
Okay there we go Mr chair and
members of the committee it
should be on now.
Get Gabby do they have that
little
That little circle that they
click on or or not.
For interpretation.
No in terms of their choice it
just sit it provides it's
multiple choice so you would
just click on the button for
support or opposition yeah I
don't see the button though but
maybe the attendees do.
There are votes coming in Mr
chair good okay those of you in
support of legislation on the
survey on the call mark the
support those of you in
opposition
mark the opposition.
And we have fifteen seconds.
Five seconds.
Eight always closed I see R.
six in support.
And one in opposition.
those of you in opposition.
That
Wish to address the committee
now is the time and you need to
hit the right hand icon at the
bottom of your screen so that we
can pick you up
As an attendee who wishes to
speak and we have
We have
the state.
Yes.
It do we want to bring up or
panel is speaking or how how do
we do that that.
Mr.
Of the committee is allowed.
Panelist.
Yes.
What we're getting.
Background noise.
Everything I say other goes it's
not.
So Gabby is a is a the auditor
ready to speak yes Mr chair.
Mr chair mistletoe was that it
was indicated that it be able to
be moved over the panelists as a
I'm testifying in official
capacity but certainly if this
is a the way you want me to
present I'm happy to do that.
feel free Mr auditor.
Your honor.
As Mr chairman and and missiles
thank you very much for
assisting me in that regard I
want to just thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's not to be before
you my name is Brian Cologne the
state auditor of New Mexico it's
been seven hundred sixty five
days of awesome and service and
one of the things I get to do is
provide insights as to the
impact of potential legislation
and how these potential changes
affect our office in the work
that we do in embracing
accountability transparency and
excellence in government so Mr
chairman it's an honor to be
before you and thank you for
asking for offices input I will
say that the the the sponsor
this legislation Representative
is L. and her experts have
worked with our office and
discussed with our office the
implications in the intent of
this bill we certainly and I
voted in your poll Mr chairman
a stand in support of the
legislation with some particular
clarification we are I'm also
joined in the audience by my
deputy state auditor Natalie
court of a CPA and one of my
chief financial officer meet
must cut in the US so we
appreciate the leadership that
they provided on this issue we
we just want to make sure that
this bill was congruent with the
federal oversight provided for
these entities we believe that
having spoken with the
distinguished concert of the
legislation and her expert that
in fact that the final
legislation will provide that
oversight we also want to make
sure that.
Well the intent was was a had
good intentions behind it in
terms of having us.
Representative for those
entities that continue to fail.
To have clean audits that we
actually remained at recommend
and oversee a corrective action
plan we made clear to the
sponsor that because of the
standards that we have in the
process that we have to embrace
as the auditor we're not in the
position of actually presenting
a corrective action plan or
implementing a correction act a
corrective action plan.
What we do is we have findings
Mr chair as you well know and
members of the committee you
know that we have findings and
then the.
Leadership team the the
administration management
proposes corrective action
within review that corrective
action as it's presented and
then we can provide guidance as
to whether the corrective action
has been implemented.
On the next audit.
But because we're an oversight
and because of our auditing
standards of professional
standards we're not able to
actually be the ones to present
the corrective action plan that
has to come from management and
then we approve of the findings
and the corrective action plan
as presented by management or
what we also call responses Mr
chair to those findings.
and then we provide that
continued oversight so we just
want to make clear with that we
certainly don't stand in
opposition to this legislation
we congratulate some
longstanding success
particularly with southeastern
district of their longstanding
success in providing this very
very important work
administering and implementing
and deploying these federal
funds that are very very
necessary having grown up I will
tell you in section eight
housing myself and eating a lot
of assistance from the
government we know how important
in a very personal way these
projects are with these regional
Housing Authority so I think the
leadership of that is done a
good job with these regional
housing authorities we know that
the historical perspective
hasn't always been positive with
reset regional housing
authorities I look to some
leaders that are here today that
have done in fact a stellar job
in this space and we appreciate
the oversight that the federal
government provides and will
continue to do our work but we
just want to be very clear on
what our capacity it and are
auditing standards.
Is and that we are always happy
to provide any any guidance in
support along the way but Mr
chairman that is why I was a
joining you this morning members
of the committee and I certainly
am available for questions and
any further testimony that you
would wish for me to have I'm
sorry I was able to be here
right at nine o'clock I know the
agenda that seems a little bit
and then I put something from
nine to nine fifteen compressing
my schedule in a way that didn't
allow me to be here right at
nine o'clock so I apologize for
that Mr chairman members of the
committee and the honorable
sponsor representatives out.
Thank you.
Mr state auditor and and your
your as the money was timely so
we you didn't miss out in any
which in any way whatsoever
on go to others that are in
opposition.
raise your hand.
I don't see any.
We'll go to those in support.
those in support that wish to
raise your hand I mean that wish
to
address advanced to the
committee in terms of support
for the legislation.
Raise your hand right now those
that wish to speak.
Gabby I don't see anybody you.
Now Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Okay
so those and support that we're
shown on the panel as six
individuals are.
Do not wish to directly address
their comments of support to the
committee so we'll go to the
committee.
Amber questions discussion.
I don't see any there we go
Representative Fajardo questions
discussion I'm sorry you awhile
to find the right hand icon I
just had one quick question and
it actually has to do with the
FIR.
And you have to give me and all
my gosh I lost enough money on
my screen I'm I'm Representative
Mr chair and representative sell
I'm on the FIR it talks about
I'm not sure if you read it to
the very last that means on
there it talks about
The approval from an appropriate
agency of the federal government
as they because there are
hundreds of different federal
agencies and Representative is I
just don't know if you saw that
and if that's something that
needs to be addressed
I need to be defined if you
could if you saw that if you
explain that.
Mr chair representative part of
it.
And you're right that last
statement.
Where it says appropriate agency
of the federal government is bay
because there's hundreds of
different federal agencies
yesterday whenever the secretary
whenever secretary Cologne and I
were visiting along with his.
Sectors.
I don't know the complete real
title of for sorry about that
but when we were talking about
this also including Mr Herbert
in the conversation I think a
lot of that was put to rest
because if there is a funding
that's whenever the state
auditor's office does go in and
not necessarily as as secretary
climb sent the findings would be
reviewed by the New Mexico state
auditor and they would give
recommendations for corrective
action I would not actually come
up with a plan that would be
left up to the of regional
Housing Authority and Mr chair
if Mr Herbert and Mr as
secretary clone would that like
to add anything to that I would.
I would offer them that
opportunity now.
The gentleman feel free to to to
add on.
In terms of
The question that Representative
Fajardo pro.
Many Representative.
All right.
The the issue that the state are
brought up is is salient that
the last paragraph in which he
talked about the the issues of
the state are up.
Recommended corrective action
the it that actually misstates
the process processes that are
in our Chris excuse me I think
that the the question
Representative Fajardo had was
the item on the FY are coming
from the Attorney General that
basically says that on page five
between nine twenty two and
twenty three
the approval from foreign code
appropriate agency of the
federal government is thank
because there are hundreds of
different federal agencies
That's what we're trying to kind
of address.
This.
In regards to the those two
paragraphs that were added
it is banging into a degree
those for paragraphs are not
entirely.
necessary because of that the
federal government already has
statutes and regulations to to
require us to provide.
Any information they want with
we would we would be work
federal.
To provide so we could look at
and and I don't think.
The regional housing authorities
nor would they have issue if we
modify that two years.
In order to define that were
clearly we will respond to
and and the IRS because we do
work with them in regards to tax
credit.
So those would be the two season
going to find that were tested
and Mr Stewart her I'm so sorry
but you keep coming in and out
so I'm hearing and I am the only
one that's only hearing part of
that I don't know maybe if I can
get to our auditor Cologne maybe
he can.
And I'm sorry I'm having a hard
time hearing.
State auditor again new chime in
on that question in terms of the
the aging suggestion
in terms of
The the the add on to the bill
in terms of up appropriate
agency of the federal
government.
Online
twenty two thank you states that
it's vague because our there are
hundreds of different federal
agencies.
You have anything to add to that
Mr state auditor.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative Fajardo
The server was absolutely spot
on in his comments and let me
just reiterate them hopefully
specifically I would just say
that.
My position and our position in
our office would be to strike
that language and I think Mr
Herbert had been alluding to
that he in fact was clear in
what he said and we can current
we agreed in our discussions
that the agencies that really
over legislative oversight our
our hood HUD housing urban
development and the IRS and so
those agencies need not be in
this in this particular piece of
legislation and they really do
cloud the conversation in my
opinion I think the Attorney
General was spot on and actually
pointing that out and I don't I
think that the honorable
representatives L..
Did not object to our
conversation about potentially
removing that language snort and
I think Mr Herbert was
indicating that he didn't
believe that the our regional
housing authorities would object
to that either so certainly to
clarify and then not have any
ambiguity or confusion it's
probably best that Mr chairman
members the committee
representative hard though of my
home County Valencia County we
we we would stand to or would
suggest that the committee
consider striking that language
and just for clarification Mr
chairman members of the
committee with the respect to my
team I would just say that the
incredible leader that was being
referenced by the honorable
representatives L. earlier was
our deputy state auditor of New
Mexico Natalie court of a CPA so
thank you members the committee
for give me that opportunity.
How does a great job everything
else has been accurately
representative
been presented by Mister Herbert
and.
Your testimony thank you thank
you Mr Representative Fajardo
you still have the floor thank
you thank you Mr chairman I
think you Representative I'm is
it I couldn't find out where
this bill is going to next is
that is it going to I can't is
going directly to the floor or
it is the second many assignment
I think it goes to the house
Judiciary okay.
So then okay so this is
definitely one of the one of
their strong point I'm okay so
I'm assuming that will be fixed
yes prior to Judiciary it sounds
like it's all agree Matt that's
just a small thing that used to
be backs so okay thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you but
we all agree great thank you
Representative Ferrary the next
we have Representative Roger
Montoya amuse yourself
Representative with our there
you go.
Question Mr chair and
representative is L. and all the
folks on on this call it's is
indeed an honor to chime in I
would like to commend
Representative is L. on this.
Legislation forward because it
seems that it's it's essentially
streamlining it is clear provide
for me adequately that the
federal oversight is.
Is read removing red tape any
time we can do that and help our
rural communities.
Which I represent I am all for
it I have a question for
Representative is L. as the
first time legislator I'm
particularly attuned to the
constituents services and really
paying attention to those voices
was there
a situation that so that was the
genesis of this bill at the
ground level I just kinda want
to know why you brought this
forward I understand the
implications of the federal.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative mon twentieth I
have worked with Mr Herbert now
for.
My gosh since I first came up
here then that's been seventeen
years ago Chris I think.
They do an excellent job down
there in our area they help
people enjoy.
have pride in ownership okay
whenever the problems came up in
two thousand I mean a casting
what year was that Chris I can't
member there was problems it the
oversight was put into place.
Or nothing like that could
happen again our southeastern
area has not had any binding
said if memory serves me right
is Prius we we are fine but we
have not had a the modified.
On it at all.
And I'm very proud of that fact
whenever we have entities such
as.
Yes that are actually out there
working with the people I think
it is still are that we do get
this done of the duplicity that
is taking place here it will
help streamline that process for
our rural areas.
And also.
As you heard
Staying when we get back to my
list here my notes that I may Mr
Lartey talk about three The New
Mexico mortgage finance of it
will save them a lot of time and
it will also save them money in
any time that we can.
Help save money to be used
somewhere more beneficial to in
the state I think that we need
to do this thank you very much
for those questions.
One thing I have is the you
still have the floor Mr chair
and representative is L. that
that is the end of my questions
I I would like to give a shout
out to our state auditor brand
Cologne for showing up it's it's
a timely way and clarifying so
beautifully what this issue is
about I yield back to our chair
thank you.
One twenty.
Next we have a Representative
Representative buset Act all.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have one brief question and and
I'm I've been answered and that
a mistake I I don't think it was
though will there be any Rolf
with MFA for these are AJ's
anymore or they just out Senator
process.
Mr chair I'm going to let Mr
Herbert or Mr Lartey answer that
question for you if I may.
To the committee Representative
we would work with the MFA
utilizing their products to do
development.
and come the development meeting
building projects in our area we
would still continue to work on
those lines this would just
eliminate the oversight.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you next we have a
Representative Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative is L. I
just have a quick question this
one point four million state
funding that MFA received is
that for employment of people
that oversee.
the rural development housing.
Mr chair.
Representative Castellano I will
refer back to my expert witness
Mr Herbert.
Members of the committee
representative this is the the
money that was provided the MFA
and and.
Rebecca can chime in here she.
They use some of that money for
their their staff to do their
oversight they also provided
funds to each of the regional
housing authorities to provide
things like cleaning and travel
for board members
governments say they provide
technical assistance so they did
provide some funds to us for
that out of those funds as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee as an echo sorry.
They did did you redistribute
bass majority of those funds to
the regional housing authorities
to help them with training and
development I believe we took a
very very small amount of admin
but the vast majority went to
the regional housing.
Mr chair Rebecca Chris and
resentments out thank you
because my that my concern is
just you know the way COVID has
had a lot of agencies just you
know making sure that people
don't lose their jobs as a
concern of mine and and thank
you for clarifying that it's
doesn't seem like it's going to
have an impact on any employment
in and that's a great thing so
thank Representative is out Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative I don't
see any other hands on the
committee
I'm I would like to address the
concerns on the F. I. R..
And
The under technical issues on
the F. I. R..
Which is page two.
the proposed replacement
language quote state auditor
shall recommend corrective
action to be taken is unclear.
that basically shows up on page
seven nine seventeen.
And and then it goes on is the
intent for the state auditor to
recommend corrective action be
taken by the Housing Authority
or is it the intent for the
state auditor to provide a
recommended corrective action.
And then it goes on and says it
would not be appropriate for the
state auditor to specified or
provide corrective action the
housing authority would be
required to do so.
indices as in accordance with
federal regulation.
and then the second item on the
technical issues as
it is unclear who will monitor
the regional Housing Authority
once the office of state auditor
recommends the corrective action
and.
And then the.
Item three says
Language in section.
At eleven three eight dash
thirty each would likely for two
modified audit opinion.
End of quote rather than quote
qualified unquote in that we
qualified shows up twice on I
M. P. H. seven online twelve and
nine fifteen and then we have a
and then lastly that there there
may need to also incorporate
coat disclaimer of opinion
unquote depending on the intent
of the bill but it doesn't
really say where that.
That statement.
Can't but will be placed in the
legislation and then we go to
our.
To the AG.
Which basically looks at I am
seeing on page five line twenty
two and that sentence starts off
with without the prior approval.
Of.
The appropriate agency of the
federal government no regional
Housing Authority shall and
actually I don't see.
used to be item eight in the old
bill.
And
And I am C. falls under section
three on page four.
Stating section eleven three
eight thirty dash etcetera
secretary for the is amended to
read.
And then it has eleven right
three eight dash thirty federal
compliance financial and
operational overs.
And it has a in terms of
screening what that is B.
planning your site and see what
we come to that language so I
guess Representative these out
I guess I need clarity in terms
of what the fiscal impact
statement is reflecting in terms
of the role of the auditor.
and and if what existing your
bill is not what is being agreed
upon that we need to kind of
make those changes.
and so on I'm asking what those
changes will be.
The so can you kind of respond
to that Representative he's out.
Mr chairman I will be glad to
members of the committee I never
the chair is referring to the
fiscal and impact report and he
starts off with the Mr chair if
I may.
Did you start off with page
seven of the bill was paid sixty
five sixty use me.
Yes some of that language has
been stricken Mr chairman of.
This.
Because of the regional Housing
Authority falls under the
guidelines of the of.
Housing and urban development.
Which is a federally run.
What we're as can is for this to
have the oversight through HUD
instead of the New Mexico.
Mortgage finance authority and
Mr chairman of the.
Session that we had with the
state auditor yesterday and his
deputy secretary I think we all
came into agreement that the
only area that does need to be
more clarified would be on page
five.
And that page five line twenty
one without the prior approval
of.
The appropriate agency of the
federal government Mr Herbert
pointed out And secretary clown
pointed out that that does fall
under the guidelines of housing
and urban development and the
Internal Revenue Service Mr
chair and.
Members let's see what was the
other significant issues.
Brought to our attention there
so we're just trying to get this
more streamlined and Mr chair to
add more to this I would like to
refer back to Mr Herbert and
To.
The secretary.
Of the.
All the.
And
also to miss Florida use will of
I would like to interject any of
their comments into it.
Okay.
I recognize as of the most
I'm
here now in terms of age I.
Nine twenty two.
And a section C. and as we know
section C. used to be section
eight.
But you added the necessary
language to kind of come into
compliance with right.
The results are accepted due to
kind of really.
transparent when and
so if if I if I take a correctly
we would probably do something
like on nine twenty one without
the prior approval of the.
Housing and urban development hi
and Internal Revenue Service no
regional Housing Authority shall
not apply.
Pretty pretty pretty much is
that close to what we're trying
to do with that portion Mr
Herbert and you respond to that
or Mr but I'm not or is that are
there just on that one issue and
move over to the other one after
we reset.
Chair.
And members of the committee
if I could if I could proposed
perhaps a way to clarify that
even further would be to take.
Thank.
H. I.
The one and maybe perhaps change
that to
that the regional housing
authorities will comply with all
federal procurement regulations
and standards that would cover
all of those aspects under that
and then you could eliminate
State one and two because those
are already covered under
federal procurement regulations.
Okay that that makes it clear.
That verifies that.
This and
Now.
Let's move over to.
Age seven I empty.
And what's being proposed.
Is
On nine twelve.
That qualified.
The change to modified audit
opinion.
And we make that change twice
online well and then nine
fifteen.
So that'll read.
They do on the part of re don't
Housing Authority to correct any
modified audit opinion.
Any modified audit opinions
within.
One year of the release of the
arctic char result in the
abatement of any state funds
until such corrective actions
are taken if the regional
Housing Authority shall we see
the new language.
A modified audit opinion.
There we just kind of do the
modified.
For more than two consecutive
years.
And this is the kicker.
You have on there the oversight
agency is struck that we know we
know who that was but then.
You're putting in this section
that you're amending.
State auditor for the first
time.
There's no other mention of
state auditor in the bill.
Only up to that point and then
that sentence reads now if a
regional Housing Authority
should receive a modified audit
opinion for more than two
consecutive years the state
auditor shall recommend
corrective action to be taken.
And we heard the comments of the
state auditor that they're not
in the position of president
corrective action plans so we
need to hear from the auditor
with the language that I just
read.
Read up on or we would do we
need to change that last the
last the portion where it says
the state auditor shall
recommend corrective action to
be taken and if that's not
correct then what do we change
it to.
Mr chair if I may whenever I am
reading in that particular
section on page seven starting
online eleven
he there all night language here
failure on the part of a
regional Housing Authority to
correct any qualified audits.
There that's not an opinion
right there that is just a
qualified on that there was a
finding here it that's my
opinion that might be
interpreted differently through.
Mr Herbert Mr Velarde or the
state auditor.
But I think that that language
in my opinion and I would like
to hear from them over this that
that is permissible and whenever
you go down to the line in that
in.
If a regional Housing Authority
should received a qualified
audit opinion.
Because if there is a finding
that means that there is an
opinion through.
Here it states the state
auditor.
That they would recommend the
corrective action be taken to
the Housing Authority am I
reading that wrong chairman Mr
her response Lartey a.
As secretary Cologne.
Madam.
And representative
That's what we need to clarify
we need to know this committee
needs to know if that language
on on section he.
Is basically what we want in
there.
And if it's not.
Do we need to put in the
suggests that language that in
the FIR which is changing
qualified to modified audit
opinion.
And changing qualified again
modified
Our opinion and if if
the language in regards to
corrective action by the state
auditor yeah that's it it that
language holds or do we need to
do something else so I'd like to
kind of have Mr Kirk on.
And also the the the auditor so
that you can clarify whether we
need to do anything to this
language on on page seven I'd M.
he or make those additions that
are suggests that in.
The FY are and taking into
consideration the auditors
initial about testimony that is
not in a position to
do I'm presenting corrective
action plans so Mr Herbert will
we'll turn it over to you to
kind of reflect on that and then
will recognize the.
They are trickling.
Members of the committee.
Yes I read through this.
He a couple of points
the the first sins which talks
about on online eleven talks
about the failure on the part of
regional housing authorities for
acting qualified which the
current terms modified rather
than qualified.
Within one year of the release
of the show result the abatement
of the state funds until
corrective actions state is
really
Two plus
Of of language because the
reality is is we don't receive
regular state funds and so it
there's no sense that there's
usually no state funds to work.
There so that that statement.
She should be stricken.
And then if the regional housing
then following on line fourteen
if I regional Housing Authority
should receive a what should be
modified audit opinion for more
than two consecutive years the
state are shall recommend
corrective action okay this
could also be struck technically
because Recology is is that if
we have a qualified audit if we
have a modified on it will
require us to be in recovery
agreement will require will
require action on our part
Representative that anyway on
top of the fact that what is
required of us as in the at any
element of local government
under existing statute we will
be required to respond with
corrective action to the audit
itself as the art was submitted
to the state are.
So I in my opinion do entire
paragraph of he could be sure.
Representative I mean a state
auditor Cologne can you also
reflect on on
On what I brought forth in terms
of
trying to that give some
consistency in terms of
Hi to me and and where it does
make mention to you
and also the corrective action
the issue.
Mr chairman and members the
committee thank you Mr chairman
your your brought clarity to the
conversation an important part
of where we're at where we need
to be I would just say that if
we are going to leave the
language it it should be very
precise and should be modified
audit opinion or disclaimer of
opinion those those are kind of
the magic words in our auditing
world and and in fact I just
just to be very clear you know
those terms of art are important
and they do matter and and the
term qualified businesses
referred to an opinion.
it does refer to the opinion not
necessarily a finding so I just
want to kind of make sure the
record is clear on that and so
the the the other thing I would
say is that I I think I can
stand with Mr Herbert in saying
that that striking he is
probably going to be the best
approach in this legislation his
representations that he's made
up to this point most recently
are accurate and I do concur
with those representations we do
have that oversight
we don't know we needed this
legislation or in this
particular section of of our of
our codes and and statutes we do
have that oversight we could not
provide the corrective action
plan we can approve the audit as
it is as the findings are
responded to by the management
team of the agency but we cannot
as you Representative accurately
Mr chairman and restated
accurately week we cannot
provide know what those
corrective actions it should be
we can only approve the audit
and the.
Responses to the audit findings
as presented by management so so
I do concur with Mr Herbert on
striking ET I I don't believe
that this lessons oversight just
to be clear and Mr chairman for
members the committee for I see
a lot of great representatives
on this committee that I know
are very always concerned about
oversight this is not a decrease
oversight and I just want to
restate that very clearly and
simply this does decrease red
tape costs in terms of labor and
overhead of time of the staff of
these regional housing
authorities but it does not in
decrease oversight and I just I
as the state auditor that's
important and and just include
you Mr chairman if you'll allow
me just to be clear I love the
cabinet.
On the executive side and they
have some great secretaries
there but thanks to the people
of New Mexico who adopted our
constitution the office of the
state auditor is a
constitutional office it's an
independent office I am an
elected official statewide in
New Mexico I am the state
auditor New Mexico and I'm
humbled to be able to be serving
for the last seven hundred and
sixty five days a Natalie
Cordova who is a CPA.
is been incredible with me from
the beginning of the journey and
she is deputy state auditor of
New Mexico just in case there's
any lack of clarity there well I
respect all the cabinet
secretaries we are an
independent constitutional
office and I'm honored to be
your state auditor thank you
thank you Mr Senator and thank
you for those of for those of
points of clarity so this is
what not this is what I'm
proposing.
If we were to have to make those
substantive changes.
in terms of amendments.
Both to current page.
I.
In terms of the eighteen
questions and on item any.
I would have the sponsor Raul
this bill over.
Have him adverse ground with the
the staff of the auditor
and the expert witness and.
Come to a.
The a compromise amendment.
Well because parties agreeing
destroying.
Item C. item item do.
We don't need to roll this bill
over we can do a simple
amendment.
I remember and I would like to
kind of recognize Representative
Fajardo to make that amendment.
Which in essence basically would
be striking.
item C. H. five nine twenty one
and section he eight seven nine
eleven.
Representative Fajardo can you
onerous in terms of making
motion yes Mister chairman I
motion that we make the
amendment as previously stated
As our second.
I'll second that motion to
German thank you is there is
there questions discussion on
the amendment.
Representative these are yes I
would I would recognize you in
terms of the.
Mr chairman I do have excuse me
one question on page five you
said that.
Online twenty one.
Thank you are striking all of
section C. is that correct yes
the recommendation by your
expert.
Okay they would what we need to
go back on page six and right
now
I do.
On page seven three letter well
no because that's been stricken
okay.
So we would need to read a
letter.
The area on page six take it
back to see then is that correct
yes and that would be that would
be up to.
To our my staff okay know that
on the committee report and the
remuneration remembering
etcetera so you're correct
Representative was out Mr
chairman thank you for
clarifying that for me thank you
for Representative.
If there's no further questions
on the amendment is their
opposition to the amendment
seen on the amendment passes we
have a.
Representative is that we have.
The of of the bill as amended
members is there for the
questions discussion on the bill
as amended Representative
Fajardo.
Mr chairman I would like to make
a motion for do I do pass on the
pass motion on house bill I
forgot what it is.
When
one ninety six as amended.
We have a motion by
Representative Fajardo and
second was that Representative
Black yes Sir.
In a black a second thought
further question discussion
members.
I see none is there opposition
to the do pass recommendation
seen none that the record
reflect that all those present
voted in the affirmative
Representative is out you have a
due pass recommendation as
amended on house bill one ninety
six.
Mr chairman members thank you
very much it's always a pleasure
to do business with you Mr
chairman right wise
Representative thank you.
Members I'm going to turn the
chair over to Representative
Serrato.
Our vice chair what I put on the
next bill.
Representative also right so let
me know when you're ready.
Great I'm ready now
representatives are at chair if
you're ready to present your
bill I'm really this is eighty
one eighty nine is that correct.
Yes that's correct madam chair I
have a two experts that I'd like
to bring over to the panelists
list and that's
Again her acne Act.
And David.
May not be this.
It looks like we have Mr packing
Act over and.
Mr Senator should be coming soon
yeah and Mister Bentley this is
here as well.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair.
And the thank you members
House bill one eighty nine.
Is a.
A piece of legislation in fact
the.
What we're doing is we're
amending kind of existing law.
In the community governance
attorney act which is a mile my
up my house don't be so
legislation created by the bank
rec interim committee in
collaboration with the Land
Grant community.
And
Yes in some.
The community governance act
that we passed in two thousand
nineteen it was a rocket docket
Bill.
Provides for legal services
free legal services to land
grants I think yes and no yes.
And the concept is very creative
and state of the art.
Madam chair
and
The reason for this piece of
legislation initially was that
the the main need of our land
grants since the creation of the
land grant interim committee in
two thousand and three.
Was the need for legal services.
We don't we don't have really
a pool of talented.
Legal experts in our state that
are specific the trained in Land
Grant law.
And so from the very get go of
our committee in fact that first
year.
As chairman of the compare the
interim committee I met with the
dean of law the dean of the law
school.
Along with my vice chair and
members of the land grant
community to stress the need for
the school to create a lot at
Land Grant clinic curriculum
similar to the Indian law
curriculum that they have.
And and we met with the two
prior beings of the law school
after that we will basically.
We came on board because the
prior deem
moved on resigned.
But.
The reason for the legislation
is Lee is that it's also legal
services.
The store if we had in the main
expenditure the main cost of our
land grants and many times that
grants have to go out of their
way to kind of Hey there turns.
And what's happened in the past
they've had to sell.
The land in many instances to do
that.
And naturally when that was out
of the out of the the play plan
they did other initiatives thank
fund raising efforts by selling
this year or
or or selling this or selling
that to make ends meet.
And so that's what led to kind
of this initial piece of
legislation and
And and the the legislation is
really creative I have to thank
mark Edwards Legislative Council
services in terms of really kind
of coalescing this concept of
how we provide free legal
services for our land grants us
that yes of course on yes and
the essence of the legislation
is that it would we would
provided tuition waiver or third
year law students.
We pay all their expenses and we
would then have them at Pronger
graduation getting a law degree.
go into a two year program
residency with the sponsoring
organization and provide free
legal services or land grants a
second call on us for two years.
Maybe they would meet the
criteria then of
the
The the the the the credit the
loan that was given them to
finish the last school with and
basically
be waived.
and
Also
Brings us to the bill before us
there is language in the
legislation written legislation
that really kind of.
We need to amend to avoid the
disruption of employment of
these community governance
attorneys that will be sponsored
by an entity to provide legal
services.
And I have with me Madam I mean
yes madam chair game but Techni
Act.
And I I brought him as an expert
witness to kind of give the
committee which for the most
part we have many new members
and rookies.
Kind of how the initial piece of
legislation was unfolded.
And and the role that you want
them School of Law played in
kinda anchoring that
implementation of this very
important piece of law and then
David what kind of reflect on
the bill before us in terms of
how that impacts.
the community governance
attorneys from fulfilling their
term of employment how this
bill.
Rectify sent again.
You you're on your on.
Thank you Representative Garcia
madam chair members of the
committee for the opportunity to
speak with you all today my name
is Kate to sinak and I'm
associate professor at the UNM
school of law where primarily
supervise our natural resources
and environmental law clinic we
provide pro bono services to a
wide variety of underserved
communities including land
grants to say kids which are an
important part of our docket and
through that work we know that
there is a dramatic lack of
legal capacity to provide pro
bono affordable legal services
to these communities we also
work closely with legal services
organizations like legal aid
they David Benavides is here
today to to talk about their
work and how it relates this
bill.
To to just as Representative
Garcia asked to talk a little
bit more about the specifics of
the existing community
governance attorney act program
and the steps that we've
collectively taking his
community to implement this
program.
As Representative Garcia
mentioned this was enacted in
twenty nineteen legislative
session and it does provided
tuition waiver for up to two
thirty year UNM law students
that would then be forgiven for
those lost students if they
provide two years of pro bono
legal work benefiting land
grants say guess in Cologne yes
one of the criteria in the
current bill is that when those
students graduate and take these
to your community governance
attorney officials they cannot
be paid any more than fifty
thousand dollars and annual
salary I'll leave it to Mr
Benavides to address how the
current.
Bill in front of you and then
that.
but
what I do want to mention is
that they're at the bill
establishes several roles to
lead implementing agencies the
higher education department it
also establish a community
governance act commission that
would selected students and
enter into contracts with these
with the NGOs that provide legal
services and would host these
recent graduates these community
governments attorney acts Act
can you give us twenty
attorneys.
The bill also established a non
reverting fund that would pay up
to fifty percent of the salary
of these community events
attorneys and and it would
provide that fifty percent to
these pro bono legal services
introduce at this point however
and unfortunately the fund is
not successfully had funds
deposited into it.
That being said thanks the work
of Representative Garcia and
other legislative force in the
twenty nineteen session there
was appropriate a substantial
amount of funds with the intends
to support this program but
unfortunately DFA ruled that
because of the exact
appropriations language that got
inserted those funds could not
actually be deposited into the
community governments tree Act
funds.
I'm that being said after
discussions with Representative
Garcia out with HEDT with
stakeholders AGD figured out a
way to spend that two hundred
thousand dollars to support
legal services pro bono legal
services for these various
communities including
importantly supporting seven
fellows who worked at three
different organizations that
were lost students and they work
for six weeks last summer my
understanding from David and
from the New Mexico acequia
Association and from our work in
the clinic was that it was a
very positive experience for
everyone I know that the
students I learned a lot and I
understand they provided so very
important pro bono legal
services for Land Grant acequia
communities so that was a thank
you good highlight of what this
program is intended to do I'm
without additional funds you
know it and fortunately this
this program will be able to be
implemented but I would like to
note that the the bill has
already had an important effect
as your Representative Garcia
said I know that that part of
the intent of this bill was to
increase the pool of lawyers and
soon to be lawyers that have
experience and expertise in this
field and so not only do we have
lawsuit instead are being
trained through their work with
New Mexico legal aid with this
thank you so ciation and others
but also the community the land
grant council which has been a
key player in all of this work
New Mexico legal aid
sages Association and the law
school have come together to
develop a program a day and a
half program that we had hoped
to put on last March it would be
a continuing legal education for
law students attorneys board
members of of land grants to say
case and maybe even Legislature
course if you would be.
Interested all about Land Grant
acequia law now unfortunately
that had to be postponed
indefinitely due to comment but
we are still planning on putting
that on and that's intended to
be the start of what we hope to
be a regular weekend I'll class
hosted at the law school on Land
grant it is taking a loss to
help develop that body of
lawyers who understand the
specialized unique field and to
help meet the legal need so with
that I'll stop there and thank
you for the opportunity.
Thank you madam chair if you
could recognize a our next
expert madam chair thank you I
was reading this please feel
free to to testify on the
screen.
Thank you madam chair can
everyone hear me yes we can hear
you thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is David Benavidez I'm a staff
attorney with New Mexico legal
aid and for thirty years I've
provided proponents Services to
I think is an land grants and
other attorneys in our office
have provided similar of
proponents Services
working with gonna colonus in
the southern part of the state
and the central part of the
state
And I would like to just explain
the purpose of the bill it's
very simple it is to address a
single problem with a single
number in the existing law and
that number is fifty thousand
fifty thousand dollars so the
the bill had or the law as it
exists right now has a maximum
salary in the statute of one of
the reasons for the maximum
salary is that the state
provides half of that salary and
so there's a need to not have
the salary be excessively high
and
But if an organization
exceeds that salary in terms of
employing law graduates then
then students can't be placed
with that organization under
this law.
and so over time as you can
imagine the as as starting
salaries increase in these
organizations
the number of organizations that
a graduate can be placed with
would dwindle and the goal of
the law which is to which has a
again mentioned was to place
graduates with a variety of
organizations that have
significant experience in
providing these pro bono
services to these communities
the number would dwindle to the
point where it would defeat the
purpose of the law
so
instead of enacting of Bill.
Every few years to change that
number two to move it upwards to
keep that fifty thousand dollar
figure to keep pace with
starting salaries are with this
bill does house bill one eighty
nine is it allows the commission
that's create that was created
by this law which is the
community governance attorney
commission
to adjust that figure upwards
so that
So that again so that
organizations like New Mexico
legal aid and others
continue to be able to allow
students to participate through
employment in our in our
programs.
That's all I had Madam chair of
I would be happy to answer any
questions the committee has.
Thank you madam chair with that
we stand for questions thank you
Representative stand to get your
witnesses all know open it to
the for public comment and I for
those right here right now in
about nine attendees
get real if we can have that
that survey poll pop up I
attendees you'll see a poll pop
up and it'll ask if you support
this legislation or oppose it
Gabrielle can you let us know
when that is posted or when I
goes out.
Okay so it just popped up on my
screen it says are you in
support or opposition of H. B.
one eighty nine community
governance Attorney so I will
give you guys a few seconds to
to vote again if you support
this legislation please take
that box and if you oppose it
please take the second box.
And I think we can go ahead and
close up that pool.
So we have one built in support
and opposition still there are
those in the tendons that to
oppose this bill and would like
to speak please just mark the
right hand button at the bottom
of your screen looks a little
hand.
I'm not seeing.
Any folks that would like to
speak against this bill
if they do any pop up all
everyone now on now we can turn
it over to those that are in
favor of this bill that support
H. B. one eighty nine if you
like to speak in support of this
bill please at press the right
hand button at the very bottom.
Give folks a couple seconds to.
To raise their hands.
We're not having any others no
comment looks like from the
public on this Representative
Garcia but now I believe we can
turn it over to members of the
committee members the committee
if you all have any comments
today please feel free to press
the right hand button and all
can call folks in the order that
you welcoming.
I will be turned over to
Representative Montoya
Representative amante please
feel free to yourself.
Representative LuJuana desire
handle this officer is looking
at that the Scottish green.
Madam chair representative slash
chair Garcia members of this
committee I represent district
forty.
It's rural we have many land
grants many us thank you us
associations and the the
critical work that they do.
Is too often under
Representative.
I commend the work of Gabriel.
Has the Senate is that correct.
Yes the fact that you are
cultivating literally a new
generation of lawyers is
commendable and direly needed I
think that this is a really
terrific bill it's expanding the
opportunity for these rural
communities to have the legal
support that they need and I'm
gonna stop there I I I just I
can't see anything.
The right propose in this piece
of legislation thank you so much
and I yield back Matt madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
Representative lu Han I will get
your cases well.
Madam chair thank you
Representative madam chair point
of order yeah Representative
Garcia.
Madam chair that there was an
individual of the ten being with
this hand
He took it down now I don't know
what we want to go back to the
audience apparently Mr to let
that was not in attendance when
we were taking comments
is that is that possible manager
to kind of go back to the
audience and recognize indeed
yes we that should be possible
of Representative want to come
back to after does that work.
Great wonderful thank you so I
believe that get your merry can
we move Mr or doctor that over
Mr actually you can unmute
yourself and share your comments
please keep them to that two or
three minutes.
Thank you madam chair
Again my name is art direction
at the I'm with the New Mexico
land grants council and I'm just
here to speak in support of this
legislation on behalf of the
council hi this is something
that we have been working on for
several years as as the sponsor
indicated it's very important
for our land grant communities
second communities as well
schooling communities to have
access to these legal services
we unfortunately have more legal
services needs and we have
currently have resources to meet
the demand for and so this is an
important tool to help meet
those demands as well as provide
those educational opportunities
so that judge is our future
judges a practicing attorneys
I'm have the opportunity to sort
of learn and understand these
community institutions are are
very important to our state
that's all I had chair thank you
thank you Mr.
wonderful so I'll turn it back
to the committee Representative
huh.
Thank you chairman
and I just wanted to sponsor
to chairman of Garcia for
bringing this legislation board
fully supported I think for that
is just stated by Mr to that the
and also by Representative
Montoya and everything in it and
our expert witnesses this is
this is this is important as
learning as new members are so
of and from a past a
experiences of being from
northern New Mexico understand
the land grants in understanding
the issues
in our capacity which is beyond
a lot of what I know how to say
that the legal issues and
everything that they are faced
with I just want to say thank
you for bringing this forward I
want to thank David been of the
this
or you for many many years and I
just want to thank you for your
service and everything that you
do for our state in this area
but many other areas as well
long poverty is is really
stepped in and helped our people
so thank you for your service
work and and Mr Gabriel.
Yes yes
we do need thank you for thank
you for your service and and
putting this together working
together and fully stand in
support of this legislation
thank you and.
Thank you.
Thank you representative on I'm
I don't see any other comments
from the Committee I I do have a
couple of questions
Representative Garcia and I
think this is
something that I'm sure you all
kind of looked at but I'm just
curious to questions one what
happens if the lawyer in their
first you know that this thirty
year lawyer in their first years
doesn't get that doesn't pass
the bar or things like that to
the how does that work with this
fund how to do that immediately
paid back that kind of thing and
then Q. I'm just curious how
does this will already work when
there are disputes within the
land grant itself on the I know
that sometimes can come up
and I'm happy to our if there's
any questions on that I don't
know if you're expenses because
I either of those issues.
Madam chair there is language in
the original bill that deals
with the forfeiture.
With the of the.
The law student not coming
through in terms of the contract
agreement
so there is kind of a repayment
process
if that happens and in regards
to your second question
In terms of the conflict within
the land grant
I'm not sure of what exactly but
if I if if David.
Which is the kind of reflect on
that feel free to David.
you madam chair our
representatives thanks for the
question of it's it's a vexing
question having done this for
thirty years
I think each organization for
example I work with you Mexico
legal aid we determined early on
that we would be always
representing the entity
of the acequia itself for the
land grant itself as opposed to
individuals who may have an
issue within a second or or Land
Grant we're we do a lot to try
to strengthen the leadership in
the governance and the
understanding of the leaders of
these organizations in terms of
what state law requires and and
that type of thing and so I in
terms of our own organization
that's how we that's how we do
those kind of internal issues
now we work under contract with
the Land Grant council with the
organization that are to go
archer let the.
It testified on behalf of and
under that contract the land
grant council makes the
determination based on land land
grants that approach them and
prioritizes the legal needs that
come before them and I and then
I implement that so
so we have some internal
policies in terms of our own
organization by ten con
sometimes our contract work has
this
has other entities prioritizing
early work for us and who gets
the representation.
Thank you Dave
Representative madam chair.
You so much so I if you would I
I believe that's all the
comments we have right now
Representative of course yes so
if you'd like to offer any final
thoughts on here that we can go
to the committee.
Madam chair
you know the only closing that I
always do is that you grant me a
do pass recommendation on this
legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman what is
the wish of the committee.
Two passed on the Senate bill
one ninety six.
The motion madam chair.
Madam also a ninety one.
Yeah.
Us so we have a motion by
Representative lu Han for a two
passed her house bill one eighty
nine and a second I believe by
Representative.
What I have Representative
Castellano is that right yes
madam chair thank you so very
clean call the roll or I.
And actually I are there any is
there any opposition to this to
to to pass.
Seeing none let the record show
that this past unanimously thank
you.
Chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Members that does it for our
agenda for today and
that we have a full agenda on
Tuesday Representative a.
And act on the hundred you have
a question.
Why not clarity sorry I I was
looking at a different notify
to.
Bill number.
That is no problem and I'm glad
that the.
The legal situation kind of
worked out for us today the
secretary will be sending out a
link before the hearing then
setting thirty minutes.
So that seem to work out fine.
thank you members are enjoy your
day have a blessed thank god
bless you thank you members.
Yes.
