Here.
Madam chair Thompson I'm here
aren't we.
Thank you Allison so what we
have everybody here and we're
just gonna go ahead and jump in
with the with medical
malpractice with Representative
Eli so the floor is yours
Representative madam chair
members the committee thank you
so much I'll be brief and I'm
gonna turn it over to Google my
experts house bill seventy five
does one simple thing it removes
hospitals from the patient
compensation fund in order to
restore it to its original
purpose to protect patients and
their physicians by way of
background in nineteen seventy
six the New Mexico legislature
responding to a crisis
physicians could not
get medical malpractice
insurance legislature created
the patient's compensation fund
which provided compensation to
patients who have been harmed by
medical errors physicians paid
money into the fund and the
patient was restricted them and
how much they could recover in
compensation for the harm that
was all working and then in two
thousand sixteen the
superintendent of insurance I
should say the prior
superintendent insurance
Franchini acting on his own and
without any crisis or reason to
do so top decisions away from
juries in determining what harms
patients should be compensated
and instead gave hospital
corporations a sweetheart deal
some people because of the
smoking hot deal by allowing
them to enter the patient's
compensation fund and restrict
what they compensated harm
patients hospital corporation
CEO SantaFe they're making
millions of dollars each day off
New Mexico patients and that
every day the Sweetser money
profits back to their out of
state corporate headquarters we
are pleased to have the support
for house bill seventy five more
than thirty.
Five hundred New Mexico patients
the senior citizen law center
and the New Mexico Center on
poverty in addition we conducted
some polling at least seventy
four percent of New Mexicans
want the patients compensation
fund to be restored to its
original purpose to support New
Mexico doctors and patients not
to protect big corporate
hospitals from paying their fair
share for harm patients now
madam chair members the
committee at like to turn this
over to my experts I first would
like to introduce and have them
share their experiences she's
how medical errors impact their
families lives and all first
turn to in net Gonzales why now
is on right just on indigo.
Ms Gonzalez.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for hearing me today my name
is Annette Gonzales and I am the
eldest daughter of floral loose
Errol.
My mother.
My mother was very energetic and
happy.
Person who love life.
She was the wife of fifty six
years on mother nana and great
nana.
We were raised in a close knit
family and saw each other almost
every day.
We all work so our kids would go
with non after school.
Mom always had dinner for all of
us except for Fridays because
Friday's work for bingo night.
At four thirty she was out the
door holiday gatherings we were
always at mom's house barbecues
Frito pies for Super Bowl
thanksgiving with Turkey and all
the trimmings and Christmas was
speaking be school check those
spots delete those and a full
day of tamale making.
In late December of twenty
fifteen one was complaining
about peeing on her right side.
At the E. R. she was diagnosed
with an aneurysm in her aorta.
From there she was transferred
to a hospital who prides
themselves.
In being the best when it comes
to cardiac emergencies she was
admitted and the next morning we
met with the cardiovascular
surgeon.
In this meeting her doctor
showed us an X. ray and
explained that a student needed
to be installed in order to
correct the problem he also told
us that this was a very common
procedure and that he had
performed hundreds of them mom
agree to the surgery and it was
scheduled the afternoon of
December thirtieth her surgery
went as expected and mom had
done very well and she was
expected to be released the very
next day where she could.
Ring in the new year at home.
This is where our lives will be
forever changed.
At six mom called my sister
power paddy telling her that she
could not feel her lakes Patty
called me and we arrived at the
hospital shortly after seven.
The nurse tending to mom
couldn't tell us anything except
that her doctor was notified and
that he was on his way.
Patty and I were still in the
room as her doctor examined her
this is when we learned of the
CSF during.
That was placed during surgery
imam spine which require close
monitoring to keep the fluid
from reaching a debt a dangerous
level.
It turns out that the nurse
assigned by this hospital to
care for my mom was not familiar
with the type of dream.
Nor has she ever been trained so
instead of asking for help she
decides to clamp the during
shot.
The fluid levels got so high.
Thank her spinal cord was
suffocated because permanent
paralysis from her way stem.
I can still see the look on my
mother's face when her doctor
told her that she would never
walk again.
And to this day those words
haunt me in my sleep.
I was in and out of the hospital
with one complication after
another and two other surgeries.
Five months later mom passed
away on the morning of Saturday
may seventh the day before
mother's day in the home where
we grew up and where we all
these gathers.
And why.
Because the hospital failed maam
why not providing their medical
staff with the necessary
training to provide proper care
to their patients.
How how how does this happen I
will never understand it and for
that there must be
accountability.
Our family does not want to see
another person suffers our
mother did and another family
suffer the heartbreak is we have
so to date I am my mother's
voice and I pre that you will
support this bill.
Thank you.
Madam chair I have one more set
of experts it's a husband wife I
think they're both yours sure in
as respect Sir.
Going.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair members the committee
thank you for your time today.
are you know sharing Is story
started back in two thousand and
fourteen
and actually started before that
we we tried to start a family
for many years and I went
through various various rounds
of infertility treatment before
before we were or finally
successful share came pregnant
in two thousand and fourteen
and actually very end of two
thousand thirteen I think with
twin twin girls and
We were we were both terrified
and excited
to to be welcoming this family
Into our lives and you know the
the pregnancy one very well
Things went really well both
both of the babies were growing
while.
And you know all along in the
pregnancy the the second baby
Athey was was great she was she
was in the bridge position the
whole time we had sought out a
doctor who was
Touted as an expert in between
deliveries and we also sought
out a hospital that specialized
in burning so with all the
very comfortable with our
choices.
The decisions decisions were
made that that a vaginal birth
should be attempted of both
babies
You know at that point we we
really just wanted to trust our
doctors and trust a hospital
that that they knew what was
vast and and we we did a half
priorities about how are babies
came to us we just want to.
And
and when it was time to deliver
sherry was induced she was in
labor for for I think almost
forty eight hours
Our first baby Maisie was born
healthy and and without incident
What three hours elapse between
twenty that burst in the second
birth and and our daughter Effie
Was.
That they attempted to deliver
her actually for for three hours
before a conversion the
emergency C. section was call
it was it was far too late she
she was fixated and the and the
birthing process she was revived
at birth and and survive with us
for almost a week.
And none of these things have
happened we we should not have
been we should not have been in
their attempting a vaginal birth
and certainly once that decision
was made
in in a hospital in the biggest
city in New Mexico full of
medical experts that should not
have gone on for three hours we
we there is no reason we should
not have brought home two
beautiful baby girls and and not
just one and I cannot express to
you.
The pain and the damage that
these that these things cost
You know every every holiday
that goes by is filled with such
sadness and grief but also such
joy for the daughter we have and
it's it's just so impossible to
to balance these things there's
I have never felt so alone in my
life and so isolated
And and there is nothing I have
to help to hold your child as
they passed from this life to
the next as for it's it's truly
the worst thing.
And it didn't need to happen and
it's happening because there is
there is no access to justice
now and there is no
accountability people are quick
to offer sympathy but it's not a
sympathy we see we see action
right I don't want my my child's
death to have been for nothing
hi I want the systems to change
and they they have to change for
me every time now I go to a
doctor I spend I spend the night
before scouring the NM courts
website to see what it is I
don't know because I I can't
trust the system and I don't
trust the system and that's a
terrifying thing to be to be in
the care of others and and not
be able to trust them.
With that I do I do want to
share picture quickly and I know
sherry wants to share some of
these these are daughters this
is this is amazing who is home
with us and this is FE
you know they were they were
beautiful baby girls both of
them
And and I would like Cherry to
share her perspective as well
you know as as a father I think
to not be able to pack protect
your child is just
and it's the worst.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee
sharing as as our side.
As his wife and
I just wanted to share a few
additional things while we were
at the hospital after all of
this happened.
there was no.
There was no one there to help
me because of all the trauma I
couldn't breast feed I wasn't
producing any milk there's no
lactation specialist there was
no social worker to help with us
we asked for a priest to come
and baptize our babies they
couldn't find a priest right
away but they were able to bring
the bill they brought the bill
to our room right away no
problem with that but they
couldn't get us anything else
they also were able to send risk
control to our read twice a risk
management I should say well we
were there.
and I mean it just really did
not feel
They made it they made me feel
like it was my fault at one
point there was a statement that
I had pushed hard enough.
there was I you know we have
been prepped for a C. section I
asked multiple times about a C.
section I insisted to be prepped
for a C. section I insisted to
be in the operating room I was
told that a C. section was and
I'm necessary major up domino
surgery in my situation and I
was told that it least five
times and so to then be made to
feel like it was my fault after
the fact was really difficult
for me I mean I'm their mom I'm
supposed to you know I'm
supposed to protect them I'm
supposed to be able to do what's
right for them and I can't I
have the same situation as our
does our other daughter we went
to the we had to go to the
dentist and she was going to be
need to be anesthetized are but
you know take some medication
and I freaked out need to cancel
the appointment because I'm so
afraid of trusting the system
and they need to be held
accountable I also had injuries
I could've lost my life that is
one of the things that could
have happened by the choice the
doctor made and I have lifelong
injuries and I'm gonna have to
deal with them more entries that
impact my everyday life impact
my work
impact it yet just everything
and
I also.
Yeah I guess I just wanted to
say that you know I mean every
birthday is.
The best day of our life and the
worst day of our life I mean
every time every year and it's
just so difficult for ourselves
but also for our daughter Maisie
I mean she lost her sister.
Madam chair with that we will
stand for questions.
Thank you so much and
particularly thank you to your
witnesses for.
For their stories that.
It made us all cry.
So I'm I see.
I'm I'm gonna ask if you are in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand and you can find
that under the participants link
at the bottom of your page so if
you are in opposition to this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay that looks pretty stable
okay now if you would like to
speak.
I'm in opposition to this bill
please keep your hand up if you
just wanted to be counted please
take your hand down and I have
some some special request to go
out of order so Alison I think I
share this with you so first we
will have Dr gallant and I don't
know if I pronounced that right
but Dr gallant.
it looks like I have the.
So this is more power than I'm
used to it looks like I can have
people I'm.
Okay but I lost him how are you
are you did you find him yes Sir
okay okay whenever you're ready
Dr hi can you hear me now yes
wonderful thank you good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me I'm here to speak in
opposition to house bill seventy
five on behalf of the New Mexico
Medical Society my name is
Dionne gallant you said my name
perfectly thank you I'm a
graduate of Albuquerque public
schools in the U. M. school of
medicine have been in practice
in Albuquerque for nineteen
years doing primary care I'm the
current president of the New
Mexico Medical Society I just
want to talk a little bit about
the importance of the patient
compensation funds none of us
disagree with us we are on the
same page and agree completely
are the number one concern of
all of us and certainly the
physicians is the health and
safety of our patients in the
rare unfortunate case where a
patient is injured by
malpractice the patient
compensation fund which is a
component of the NMAA is the
safety net the not only pays for
economic and non economic
damages but also ensures past
and future medical expenses are
paid what we're concerned about
is that removing the hospitals
from this patient compensation
fund will cut a hole in the
safety net we're worried that
patients will fall through and
suffer as a consequence the
patient compensation fund is
able to pay the past and future
medical expenses now because all
health care providers covered by
the NMAA pay significant
surcharges into that P. C. off
any legislative changes to the
NMAA should be focused on
improving the financial
stability of the PCF so that it
can continue to cover the cost
of medical care for injured
patients I would recall that the
superintendent of insurance the
custodian of the PCF has done
extensive work in preparation
for this legislative session I'm
doing a follow up phone the
follicle process analyzing and I
just would call out a few of
those conclusions for the
committee to to remember.
the recommendations of the OSI I
work focused on ensuring that
the PCF is sufficiently funded
in order to continue its
important work and the OS I
concluded that continued
participation of hospitals in
the PCF will prevent adverse
impacts on PCF solvency there
are number of particulars about
that can be read that can be
read in the US I report I won't
go over all of those but they
are all all enumerated and very
specific by the superintendent
of insurance and they are it
built around this idea of of
protecting the PCF.
Of the second really big point
is that the OSI is recognize
that because so many physicians
in New Mexico are employed by
hospitals the majority of those
physicians will lose their NMAA
coverage of hospitals were to be
taken out of the act which will
negatively impact physicians the
patients they treat by reducing
access and the PCF itself with
fewer surcharges paid.
So I just Google last points out
because patients have three
years to bring malpractice
claims the PCF will be left
paying hospital claims for the
next three years even if the
hospitals were removed from the
fund along similar lines for
turns up at a hospital loses
access surcharges there would be
no way to recoup those losses so
the physicians other healthcare
providers would be left holding
the bag the OSI concluded that
removing hospitals from the fund
would adversely impact the PCF
and The New Mexicans served by
the PCF so I'll conclude with
this New Mexico Medical Society
opposes house bill seventy five
because it is not supported by
data and will adversely impact
patients the PCF physicians and
other healthcare providers
covered by the MMA let's not in
in a time of unprecedented
stress upon our medical system
let's not cut a hole in such a
critical patient safety net
thank you very much I appreciate
the time to speak to you.
Thank you doctor up next we have
Troy Clark.
I am now here can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you all right
try to.
Get used to the timing of all
this.
I appreciate the opportunity
madam chair members of the
committee to present my name is
Troy Clark I'm the president and
CEO of the New Mexico hospital
association and on behalf of our
forty six a hospital association
members are patients we stand to
strong opposition house bill
seventy five.
We do agree that it's time to
modernize medical malpractice.
Through comprehensive reforms as
recommended by the OSI as Dr
Gallup has.
Revert to and we have sent
legislation supported by Senator
products and current and it does
just that however house bill
seventy five does not this house
bill seventy five would
eliminate hospitals for the
medical malpractice act and
nation compensation fund
hospitals have been included in
the MMA since its inception and
to its original purpose and now
have participated in the PCF for
several years and for good
reason if hospitals order
removed from the act would
result in an undercutting of
patients from the patient
centered protections the PCF
offers it will also create more
barriers to access to quote to a
quality health care system and
also exacerbates solvency and
the PCS office doctor gala just
mention.
I've tried to move.
My comments so I don't double up
on some of the things that
doctor gallon descent but I'll
just make references to comments
that he has made already for the
in consideration of time.
Excluding the proposed exclusion
of a I'm sorry the proposed
exclusion of hospitals has five
critical implications that we
feel the committee needs to be
aware of.
First the hospitals if excluded
from the MMA and PCS were denied
patients that lifetime benefit
that the PCF provides that
benefit coverage for all related
medical expenses is only
available to those patients when
their provider or hospital is a
qualified provider under the MMA
and contributing to the PCS Dr
Gallatin shared some of the
details about when there is a
bad medical outcome how that PCS
is the safety net for those
patients.
Second inclusion of the
hospitals insurers that our
state's smallest hospitals can
remain open providing access to
quality care to their
communities and to the regions
if hospitals are excluded from
the MMA and from the PCS it
wouldn't take much for a small
or financially fragile hospital
to go under due to a judgment
that is beyond their physical
capabilities.
This means the hospitals
patients would have to seek care
elsewhere potentially traveling
hours to other hospitals in New
Mexico or even possibly seeking
care out of state.
Third hospitals helped keep that
PCS solvent Dr Gallo just made
mention of the OSI's.
Report and that hospitals are
the largest contributors to the
fund making up about half of all
current surcharges collected to
help maintain solvency for that
lifetime benefit of patients
that we have managed this is
shown in the OSI report that we
provided to you in your exhibits
multi actual financial position
of the the staff as well as CI's
I'm sorry OSI's projection of
what the potential would look
like for the remaining members
of the PCS if hospitals were
eliminated from the fund.
For New Mexico hospitals do
employ a large percentage of the
state's practicing physician
this reflects the current health
care delivery system eligible
for overtime and as Dr Gallup
mentioned the removal of the
hospitals and the physicians
with which the employee from the
PCS is detrimental as we have
mentioned to the patients and
their ability to access that PCS
as well as to the hospitals
themselves.
The last five all hospitals
regardless of ownership status
service New Mexico rest as New
Mexico's residents many in rural
and underserved parts of our
state.
The hospitals throughout our
state are made up of academics
state owned investor owned and
not for profit hospitals each is
a critical component of the
access to care for the health
system in the state of New
Mexico regardless of whether
they are owned by an out of
state investor or are in New
Mexico based entity which the
majority of our hospitals in the
state our hospitals owned by out
of state businesses to bring
economic based on percent of the
state the generate jobs for New
Mexicans and most importantly
they need J. keep Mexico health
care in the state.
If we're not for this investment
many New Mexico communities
would not have access to the
vital hospital and physician
services in their communities.
We thank you in the committee
for your consideration of our
comments and our expertise we
respectfully request that you
oppose house bill seventy five
will remain on the line to stand
for any questions the committee
may have thank you.
Okay thank you next we will go
to Linda Siegel and I'm going to
ask people to try and keep it a
little more brief than that
thank you and just as a
technical thing I'm not
generally are witness are are
people speaking from the
audience do not have their video
and I received a text asking why
the last that Madam chair had
one I don't know I'm so just one
of those one of those as soon
things that that.
Gremlins I'm just going to blame
everything on grandma and so so
one difficult.
Are you hearing me.
We are now thank you Linda okay
Linda Siegel and I'm here
representing the New Mexico
nurses association The New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council and the American college
of nurse midwives New Mexico
chapter and.
We also oppose this bill I've
spent two decades in multiple
legislative sessions trying to
convince the medical society and
the trial lawyers that advanced
practice nurses just like
physicians should be included in
the medical malpractice that.
SiRNAs certified registered
nurse anesthetists are already
included in the act but no other
advanced practice nurses now for
the first time in all those
years the medical society and
the various nurses association
and the hospitals are all on the
same page the act cannot be
sustained if the hospitals are
removed from the patient
compensation fund you have heard
from my colleagues why this is
true but you have today before
you.
Your bill that is likely to blow
up the entire men now after
sharing that no one is going to
receive the benefits of its
patient protections as well as
its limited legislative
protections.
I appreciate in value the work
of trial lawyers their job is to
go after the bad actors but the
bad actors are such a small
percentage of all the doctors
and nurses who are truly our on
the frontlines risking their
health and sometimes their lives
to save ours sometimes providers
make terrible mistakes and some
are even negligent but again the
vast majority of providers and
hospitals do their very best to
help all of us when we are
patients this act and the PCF
exists to make sure if there is
a successful lawsuit that those
patients receive the ongoing
medical care they need
hospitals need to stay in the
act and we need to cover the
health care employees that work
in that hospital individual
nurses are being sued personally
even though they are hospital
employees because they are not
named as qualified health
providers under the act as you
have heard the OSI has looked
carefully at these issues over
the last month's asking for and
receiving input from many of us
that are providers as well as
non providers instead of
financially devastating the PCO
and leaving the positions of our
state to pay for it with
dramatically higher assessments
we need a comprehensive re write
of the act as the superintendent
of insurance has recommended in
his report to the governor thank
you members of the committee.
Thank you Linda and I'm gonna
again ask people to be a little
bit more brief we have a long
agenda today and so next we're
gonna go to John night.
John you're gonna need to unmute
yourself please.
John night are you there.
I'm gonna make a judgment that
he's having some technical
issues so we will skip over him
and come back so John hopefully
you can get your issues worked
out and I will come back to use
the next we have rob black.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is rob black I'm the president
and CEO of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce New Mexico
as an acute shortage of
healthcare professionals today
especially in our rural
communities.
Last week I was please to
testify on behalf of the bill
from Senator towards the to see
Pino we will forgive medical
school debt for practitioners as
an incentive for them to locate
and work in rural New Mexico.
Is this a number of reasons why
we have a shortage but one of
them is the concern over
medical.
Medical malpractice payouts in
New Mexico.
We certainly agree the injured
people should receive
compensation but we need to make
sure we don't disrupt our health
care system.
That is working for the other
ninety nine percent.
If you if you move hospitals out
of the fund raise the cap our
rural hospitals will be
incredibly vulnerable to
litigation.
They don't have the margins to
absorb a large lawsuit and they
could be closed and reduce
access for New Mexicans.
We're concerned that the only
result of increase of of this
will be increased costs medical
costs for New Mexico health
hospitals.
Making medical care harder to
find and making it much more
difficult to recruit and retain
qualified medical professionals
here in New Mexico respectfully
ask that you oppose H. B.
seventy five thank you.
Thank you I'm I'm gonna try and
go back to John night since he
still on the screen John have
you if you are there please that
say something on mute yourself
and let us know.
Okay I'm gonna put John in the
at the at the in the caboose
position put him back at the end
of the line and I'm sorry about
that John so we will go to JD
Bollington.
Getty okay are you there Jay Z..
You are okay okay go ahead I'm
so sorry I agree comments my
name is JD Bullington and I am
speaking today on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce and six rural hospitals
in New Mexico that are located
in Las Vegas Roswell Carlsbad
Los crucis Hobbs and Deming.
And madam chair members of the
committee house bill seventy
five is a simple bill would
tremendous ramifications it will
have devastating consequences
for physician and nurse
recruitment for health insurance
cost increases and for those two
reasons alone it's not going to
be very good for the vast
majority of patients we
recognize the law needs to be
reformed and we are supporting
similar legislation that follows
guidelines from the
superintendent of insurance in
the New Mexico hospital
association and the nurses
association thank you.
Thank you J. D. will go to
invest the Santa.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak
with you this afternoon Dr best
to set of all.
chief medical officer for public
health system I was born and
raised here in New Mexico went
to school in Las Cruces and
graduated and came to New Mexico
did my training here practiced
for almost thirty years right
here in Albuquerque.
I think it's very important that
we understand that doctors now
are very much part of hospitals
it's really impossible for us to
separate doctors that are
employed from hospitals and the
majority of our employed
physicians throughout various
systems in the state are very in
trouble part of taking care of
our patients we are challenged
in New Mexico to keep physicians
and to be able to have positions
stay from various reasons that
my colleagues have already gone
through it is very important for
us to keep systems healthy and
to be able to provide care and
access to the rest of the state
and to be able to really look at
what we have to do to be able to
continue to grow our medical
practices within the state much
of that is due to hospitals if
we're bringing in new physicians
for instance we brought in three
hundred thirty six in the last
six years if we're to bring in
new technology so that patients
don't have to leave the state so
we're transferring patients
earns honor Colorado to get care
but they should be able to
receive right here in New Mexico
so it's exceptionally important
do we keep our our facilities
healthy including our smaller
rural rural hospitals which as
several of my colleagues also
have commented that they would
be a very large risk if this
bill was to be an actor.
We would really like to say is
that again we're collaborating
that that this comment time very
carefully very closely with the
state department of health with
the city to do all the things we
need to do to take care of New
Mexicans are frontline workers
are there putting their lives on
the line pretty risk and we need
to be able to support them
through our hospital systems and
keep our hospital systems help
the.
This fund is exceptionally
important for the patients of
New Mexico want to keep the fund
tells the and so again as stated
previously we would.
Like to say that we oppose this
bill for the reasons that we
feel that it would jeopardize
our ability to keep the peace
you have solvent and to be able
to make certain that we're able
to maintain recruit and and help
maintain position presence
throughout the state I
appreciate you asking thank you.
Okay thank you Arthur Sanders.
Saunders I'm sorry.
hello it had me rejoin after
all.
I'm did did we cover house bill
one forty at.
Thank you Allison.
Okay Alex and I see webcast at
the bottom of the attendees list
does that mean we're good to go
yes okay yes eight that was not
too bad and hopefully you all
did what your mother's talk to
never pass up an opportunity to
go potty.
And at least that's what my mom
taught me
okay.
I have okay so we have seven
people with their hands raised
so I have John night on here but
I have also received a text that
John night is on a different
bill so John knight if you do
not want to comment on medical
malpractice please lower your
hands.
Okay that seems to work thank
you so now we will go to Boise
to Almer.
Hello this point armor.
What did you have a comment on
this bill yeah I was in support
of this bill thank you for
hearing me and I just wanted to
briefly talk about my case when
I went to the hospital.
And it was for gallbladder
surgery.
But a CT scan showed all kinds
of other issues with my liver
and the.
The simple gallbladder surgery
converted to a.
A big liver surgery with another
surgeon stepping in to.
six what the other surgeon to
surgeon cut my hepatic artery in
my
A lot of my bile ducts and yet
to repair that so I was in the
hospital for eighteen days in
the ICU twenty eight days total
there are all kinds issues one
filed out over time that a major
surgeries.
The hospital here in Albuquerque
sent me to
Finally so they couldn't handle
it anymore in a semi to Dallas
they were in a jet.
When over there they did another
two major surgeries on me there
are finally.
All the other by looked out of
my liver because of their
mothers on what other repairs
kind of failed on it and
Pretty much forty five days in
hospitals over over the saying
are.
One FOR surgery in Albuquerque
turn into a twelve hour surgery
to repair what the surgeon did
to me
and.
I was placed on a liver
transplant list for a while in
Texas before that six the bile
duct.
In a blood tests all well over
twenty years and up.
When should you know every few
days in the initial letter every
few months and weeks after that
and finally fixed it but I still
take a medication for
the compensation is really
necessary for these kind of
actions.
Surgeons and hospitals well mess
with and I am during the time I
was in the hospital I had a bad
blood transfusion of VRE
infection chest strain arterial
bleeds like that's just a
handful of things thank you for
hearing me.
Thank you point next we have
Patricio Kantor with.
But you'll need to on mute.
I was just asked to and mute
myself but I'm not Patricia I I
actually I apologize I thought I
would have my video on but for
some reason I can't get my video
to work but you can see my
husband standing next to me so
that's probably good because
that is what I'm I'm speaking
about can you guys hear me yes
we can hear you go ahead great
so in two thousand twelve my
husband at the age of forty
eight about one thirty in the
morning woke me up saying that
he just felt like something
wasn't right have some
indigestion and thought that I
should drive him to the hospital
I drove into the hospital and we
were in the E. R.
they did some few tests
determined that.
Most likely he had pneumonia the
flu is going around right then
and there otherwise healthy then
coached we own land we have
forces very active then
so but did have allergies so
kinda an okay new mon you we're
gonna go with that so it Madam
up stairs for observation.
And at six thirty in the morning
he had a massive heart attack he
had a widow maker heart attack.
They came and they took him to
another area I guess I see you
they asked me if I had anybody
to call at that point.
I had my senior in high school
and my daughter who was in
seventh grade.
And I'm at that point I was made
aware that there was no
cardiologists on call to the
hospital cardiologists was on
vacation.
And our brand new castle out.
Nobody to work it.
How to wait for a jet because
the weather was too bad for a
helicopter we finally got.
To love it.
About the for about four hours
later where they were able to
put his tension but the damage
was already done.
He only has anywhere between
twenty eight.
Thirty four percentage action
fraction right and what that is
is the amount of blood flow and
oxygen that generates throughout
his entire body.
So this happened in two thousand
twelve at the age of forty
eight.
So I'm sure you can imagine.
If you live hopefully a long
life at some point other organs
are going to start to be
affected by this.
Six months after the heart
attack we were told he should
get a pacemaker and update you
later put and simply is a
lifeline to get him out of this
world area that there was no one
qualified to take care of our
handle this cardiac care.
Again a pacemaker to fifty later
at the age of forty eight.
Thank you later have eight
ensure hard that now require him
to.
Monitor his lifting you can't
lift more than fifteen pounds
with this left hand which means
you can't throw bills to pay
help us.
You can't be around a welder so
simple welding that just done
around our our land you can't
do.
I'm and just thought that the
cardiologists was on vacation
and.
Nobody thought to put anybody on
call this all could have been
avoided.
I also found out later that.
Protocol she wanted I believe it
was called I accept he was given
not which would have broken up.
The the client third there would
have been less chance of damage
because he wouldn't have the
lack of a blockage for as long
as he did.
So if you would just please
consider posting so that
somebody else just not to every
day wake up and wonder if this
is the day.
Husbands liver kidneys if you
look at Pfizer's ice more yellow
than yesterday.
He's on a lot of medication and
we're very thankful that he's
still alive.
But his quality apply.
And our life has been changed
for for.
So please please consider
approving this bill thank you.
Thank you Patricia.
Thank you so much next we have
Dominique dupont.
Yes hello I'm good afternoon
everybody my name is Dominique
du Pont and I'm a native New
Mexican born raised and
currently living in Albuquerque.
I am in support of house bill
seventy five.
Eight years ago my husband and I
decided to start our family we
had a wonderful pregnancy and I
wanted to labor on my daughter's
due date.
Later went very smoothly and so
abruptly it didn't.
This is where our story starts.
All I was experiencing
unrelenting back to back
contractions which deprive my
babies right of oxygen for about
twenty minutes until she was
finally born.
My daughter Josephine Anna
dupont was born lifeless and was
immediately taken to the newborn
intensive care unit where she
spent the first nine weeks of
her life.
We have no idea what was going
on or what was or wasn't normal
it wasn't until several days
after her birth that we learned
about the grave medical error
that occurred and I called my
daughter's permanent brain
injury.
We learned that I was given an
extremely large and inaccurate
inaccurate both of a dangerous
medication that than cost my
hyper contraction.
The medication wasn't an on
label back a complete breach of
safety protocol.
We later discover that there
were the players of systemic
failure in the hospital in the
lives of many of their patients
and my family was the
unfortunate one that fell victim
to the pervasive negligent.
Almost seven and a half years
old she after April coffee
cannot walk by herself or talk
very easily this really impaired
and have some pre processing
disorder and require assistance
for every aspect of her daily
life.
Her conditions are life long.
We love her so much and are so
grateful that you survived her
horrific for.
What happened to her was not her
fault.
It was not our fault.
It was the hospital fault.
It was preventable.
She will forever live with her
significant disabilities and my
family's life will never be what
we vision eight years ago when
we decided to have a baby.
I hope this tragedy never
happens to anyone else and that
large corporations like the
hospital where she was boards
are held responsible for their
actions.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Dominique I'm Michael
read P..
My name is permanent Michael
read he said I know if I'm not
out of place here
we have you up go ahead things
are they
Michael disappeared on my screen
so Michael we did not forget you
but I I'm gonna turn this back
over to Alex and Alex so so I
don't go for anything up so go
ahead Nicholas.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas Cordoba I'm an attorney
at the New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty.
We at the center support this
bill for the reasons stated by
the sponsor.
This is a serious issue in New
Mexico.
Patients who were harmed by
serious medical errors find
themselves and their families
financially devastated from the
ensuing entries.
We agree it's only fair to
update this law so these large
corporations can play that can
pay their fair share and so
patients can seek compensation
commensurate with their entries
thank you.
Thank you Nicholas but see.
Madam chair I was able to grow
Michael P. O. okay okay Michael
whenever you're ready.
Okay hearing yes we can hear you
all right madam chair and
Representative Eli thank you for
sharing this bill my name is
Michael Radtke and in two
thousand thirteen I was twenty
five years old and I was
diagnosed with compartment
syndrome in both of my legs
which is a condition that
usually is formed by blunt force
trauma but it just sort of
randomly appeared in my legs
after.
I was doing some exercises with
the for service because I was
working as a wildland
firefighter wildland
firefighter.
During this time as a single
father and I was in the hospital
for about two weeks where I was
I'm sort of undiagnosed you just
kind of passed around for a
couple of days before they told
me that I was going to be
discharged and right before I
was discharged state had a
orthopedic surgeon come look at
my legs and.
I
minutes before us supposedly
they are saying now you gotta go
to surgery and I was brought to
surgery just in in in the Nick
of time and over the course of
ten days iris had a.
Three hundred additional
surgeries this left me with that
huge loss in my physical ability
and I'm never gonna be the same
and because of the misdiagnosis
and sort of negligence that it
had occurred I was really
brought into some unnecessary
suffering our.
Understanding that this was a
negligent act I.
Proceeds to recourse in in my
time.
I because I've been physically
damaged you know I.
During the course of money.
Lawsuit it was a.
This is very insulting to feel
like it was my fault and that I
was putting in that I created
this position on myself and in
and that there's something you
know more than I should have
done and.
This I just the insult to injury
that comes with having to fight
for some sort of recuperation
from you know something is.
It's going to be with you life
long is is is just very painful
and and dramatic in its own
sense and you know speaking to
the ethos of this matter I'd
like to think that in now.
Hospitals should you know value
care over the logistics of you
know this solvency in I I
implore the committee to support
house bill seventy five so that
other patients and other people
don't have to go through that
sort of insult to injury that
comes with.
Going through a situation like
this thank you for your time.
Thank you Michael and that's all
we have for public comment.
So Representative Eli did you
have something.
I know madam chair I did okay so
we will go to the committee so
please raise your hands
Let me get back to the right
screen I'm okay so I see
Representative Lord.
Yes thank you madam chair I want
to make sure you can hear me
okay some habits of difficulties
today of all things on my end
well it we understand that the I
don't know if you're in the
capitol looks like it but I am
in the capital kind of crash so
I'm.
And you and we go ahead okay
thank you so it it's always hard
when you have to ask analytical
questions on and emotional issue
and I would never want to
discredit people who are telling
their stories so I understand
I'm trying to get to the heart
of what this bill is so madam
chair I do have a question so
the medical malpractice act that
currently gives a hostile.
At six hundred thousand dollars
is that correct.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative it
cut out just a little bit but I
think I caught the question so a
qualified health care provider
is entitled to the benefits the
act that would include a
hospital should be six hundred
thousand dollars plus medical
bills as their encourage.
Okay thank you.
My other question is if we
remove this then there's really
no limit right there's no cap on
that that they could sue for
whatever amount is that correct
madam chair Representative
that's correct but I want to
point out that that has been the
case for our something like
fifty years
I'm not quite but close to fifty
years we're hospitals.
Go out and practice purchased or
private insurance and that
system works very well
and it's only been changing as
the prior superintendent
insurance start leading
hospitals in so yes that's
correct okay thank you on that
madam chair
so the question is for this
medical malpractice act that is
for the hospital only or does
that also apply to the doctors
that work within the hospital.
So.
So yes yes the.
The short answer that in this is
it's any doctor that wants to
become a qualified health care
provider can do so under the act
until two thousand sixteen
hospitals had not applied and so
we're not letting them and by
the way I I do I do want to say
that when we're talking about
limits remember juries are
restricted to awarding actual
damages and so that's the
limitation is we're leaving in
the hands of jurors and
medical malpractice cases are
notoriously difficult to bring
the vast majority of medical
malpractice cases
are are incredibly difficult and
do not result in verdicts that
are
awarded to the changes last time
I looked it was something on the
order sixty three percent were
to transfers so we are limited
in terms with juries will do and
then of course judges get to
review what the juries are going
to CF the jury has been out of
whack and can't grant what's
called motions for a minute or
so I want to make sure that
switched out that answer thanks
thank you Representative thank
you madam chair some chair
representative another question
I have is is this going to apply
to all hospitals in New Mexico
will it just be state or
private.
Madam chair state hospitals are
currently covered by the tort
claims act so they are under
like for example a U. N. NH is
under the tort claims act of
private hospitals currently have
this choice of opting into the
system into the medical
malpractice system that's what
we're trying to the medical
malpractice act that's what
we're trying to remove them from
and so but not all private
hospitals are in the act for
example and I've got to get
together with Scott Scott skin
was talking about San Juan
County regional Medical Center
my understanding is looking at
the data they're not within the
medical malpractice act I could
stand corrected from that once I
talked to Scott what's your
number private hospitals in New
Mexico that are not in the act
so it's not all of them it's
only those that opt into the
act.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair I think the last
question have released right at
this moment is so it when
there's a lawsuit and it's
something that revolves around
something that happens there we
go and I can see me and thought
something happens in the
hospital the lawsuit so somebody
has the ability to sue the
hospital and the doctor or the
anesthesiologists separately is
that correct.
Madam chair representative yada
yada depends on the situation of
course but yes I if the facts
support they can do that.
I think that's all the questions
that I have right now but thank
you.
Thank you Representative lord
I am not seeing any more
questions but I I'm I do have a
statement to make
And I lost my only brother with
six girls and one boy in my
family at the age of forty nine
from he had a he was he had a
heart attack in that what when
he was in the gym and he was in
the bathroom and
We don't know exactly what
happened but he had a huge team
of Tom on the back of his head.
So he was brought into the
hospital administered the
cardiac surgeon came out to talk
to us she said well I didn't
know if he had insurance are not
what you did so I used a cheaper
student in his heart that I
would have had I known he had
medicine and in no that was that
was a little bit concerning to
begin with that people get
medical care based on their
ability to pay but he did get he
did get the he did get a stent.
And my sister in law was allowed
in to see him and she came out
and said you know he doesn't
look good he's got a huge lump
on the back of his head and I
thought how can you see a lump
on the back of the head when
someone is in a hospital bed.
Well I went in and indeed you
could and.
Being a medical professional I
stayed with her that night and
we watched.
The problem is grow and grow and
grow and I kept asking the nurse
what what about what about what
about it and she's that we're
watching it we're watching at
work watch and and to this day I
don't know if they would have
simply done to Bergholt to
release the pressure on his
brain if you feel I is not.
We decided to.
Disconnected from life support
when we were told it was.
We
have never done I see you for
cardiac care she was a pediatric
nurse she didn't know what she
was doing.
all night can you call somebody
watching or watching it so I
lost my only brother at the age
of forty nine.
We talked to an attorney and we
did we ended up not filing the
suit because she said it's real
as as was said before it's
really hard to prove that it
wasn't a heart attack that
killed them his death
certificate.
Essentially term I'm right
injury and heart attack they
they didn't determine which one
killed them so these things
happen I'm so.
I see Representative Pettigrew
I'm sorry I thought I could get
through this without crying I
guess I can't so I'm going to go
to work Representative
Pettigrew.
Well that's gonna take me a
minute alone first.
Thank you madam chair.
And thank you for sharing that
story
I'm gonna echo what
Representative Lord said earlier
this is tough to to break into
the details when when it's such
a.
Motional issue.
So.
My business space on first
second see if I can get through
this okay.
In the research that I've done
on this.
As I've been provided
information that basically shows
that I bring in the hospitals
and that is actually what she's
the patient care fund and
actually what keeps solvent at
this point in time.
Madam chair is if our.
The president one of the experts
to speak to that I would
appreciate it.
Yeah I'm not sure that just is
not correct what really is
happening is the hospitals gone
as I mentioned this sweet deal
we are their actual experiences
in terms of PLC to buy
themselves are sure it's
companies prior to admission to
the act have not been included
in the actual studies that have
been done so we believe that the
surcharges that had been
assessed on these hospitals with
far too low and as these claims
are being paid out we're gonna
see that fund the deficit of the
act fund the patient's
compensation fund goal larger
and large so quite the opposite
version initial intrusion of
cash because claims are being
paid out as claims start to
develop and then they're paid
out that one is going to get
deeper and deeper into the hole
and what we're telling the
committee madam chair
representative is stop digging
we've got to get them out of
this act before the doctors
Frank they're going to have to
pick up a large part of the
liability once there is an
additional assessment done on so
we don't think quite the
opposite we don't think it's
saving this fund it's gonna make
those funds are in Salt thank
you madam chair representative.
Thank you very much for that
response
Madam chair and representative
The data that I'm receiving from
next person I reached out to.
Conflict that and and so thank
you that's the conversation for
a later date.
One of the comments made in the
initial presentation madam chair
what does that.
Seventy four percent of New
Mexico supports the US.
I'm concerned that because
that's not the whole
overwhelming.
numbers that I received.
But closer to.
Fifty fifty based off the
numbers on the emails in the and
the phone calls that I've got
and.
I actually have an email here
madam chair from.
A coalition that includes the
New Mexico Medical Society.
The New Mexico nurses
association the New Mexico
cessation of the substation of
nurses anesthesiologists The New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council The New Mexico hospital
associations Presbyterian health
services in levels health system
and oppose this bill.
And.
And so that concerns me when the
majority of the medical
community that.
And I understand that I come
from an area where
my hospitals under the tort
reform so.
I kind of don't from an overall
standpoint I don't have a dog in
this hunt and so with respect
Miner.
But that being said.
I do want if possible madam
chair an answer on you know from
what I understand from reaching
out to the multitude of
attorneys that the deal in
medical malpractice.
Thank
receive.
About thirty three percent.
the payment.
How does this bill impact.
How attorneys how much more
attorneys are going to be
receiving that take this thank
you madam chair.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I understand the
question I want to be very clear
about something I do not do
medical malpractice work
all right
are it has been I think thirty
years since I did any kind of
medical malpractice work on
madam chair representative be
happy to hear that I many years
which my focus to suing lawyers
out the the benefit of
Of of any kind of protection nor
should by the way there was
never a crisis for lawyers
insurance but the bottom line is
is that lawyer fees whatever
they are is about access these
cases are incredibly complicated
and very expensive.
And if lawyers cannot be page
are you are going to have people
who have tremendous medical
crises harm for medical
negligence that will not be able
to hire lawyers and so lawyers
to work on a contingency fee
because people moderate and low
incomes would not be able to
afford a lawyer so I can't speak
to lawyers fees but I can tell
you that's not what this bill is
about anybody that knows me
knows that the reason that I
push these pieces of legislation
repeatedly have nothing to do
with lawyers who Y. su by the
way and I have to do with
protecting patients and in this
case frankly patients and
doctors and I will tell you all
of the twenty five hostage
receiving the benefits of this
act right now where it's on the
backs of the patients because
they are not receiving full
compensation our multi billion
dollar corporations and we are
subsidizing our our resident to
subsidize number and our state
government maybe subsidizing
some of these patients
eventually when they go on the
doll as opposed to the people
that cause them harm so I just
want to make that clear and I
Madam chair representative it's
an excellent question because I
want to take out any notion that
I would have a conflict I do not
I'm a sole practitioner so my
partner I. ready partners
easiest partner meeting in the
world and so it's just me and my
wife was in law has now retired
so I want to be clear there's no
personal component for this this
is surely directed to the
benefit of patients and their
doctors thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you thank you very much
Madam chair representative for
that response and and.
Very.
Surely if there is any
application that you're pushing
this for personal gain I I
apologize for that I just I've
seen so many bills over the last
well my my my huge history of
since January nineteen so here.
just it it.
I I had that question and it
wasn't it wasn't directed toward
you and any any any means or not
the and and and I personally
have to tell you that you know
the biggest fights that I have
is with the guy and more so I
get the I get the meetings one
on one okay.
Representative I just wanna be
clear I I didn't take it that
way you just gave me the
opportunity to lay that out so
that you would know and I think
it's important for members the
committee to note so I I didn't
take it that way but I.
Thank you Madam Representative.
Thank you very much.
I do have one last question
madam chair
one of the one of the witnesses
in the beginning made the
statement and in.
I guess I need to be walk
through this.
They need to access to justice.
And my question to that is.
How.
Does this bill.
Solve that issue when the issue.
In my opinion.
Would.
comes so much deeper than that
this to me it's like you know
With a good analogy on this
right now but the ability to sue
somebody.
I I I can't make make that
mental leap that that solves the
issue
the thank you know I live and
and that in the world.
On the engineering side we're in
at any given day I have to I
have to
At any minute be able proves
that I did work.
That would have been consistent
with anybody else in the
industry giving consistent
Similarities within that and so.
I don't understand how is it and
put it any point time I don't
make that decision I do the best
thing that can do a follow my
ethical codes of practice I do
everything I can to be right and
I don't worry about the lawsuit.
I worry about what is the right
thing for my client what is the
right thing to do and and my
following the ethical moral and
characters to guidelines and I'm
supposed to do so access to
justice solve this issue for me.
So madam chair representative I
I gotta tell you that's how I
would it sounds like you and I
have kind of the same moral code
you know you try to do the right
thing and
and do the right thing by other
people reach lawsuits workers
your I I take it on madam chair
Representative the your engineer
let's let's make the assumption
that you support a family of
four and through no fault of
your own you have a medical
crisis you go to the hospital
and the hospital totally boxes
no question the committee Matt
medical malpractice and you will
never work again you will never
walk again you can barely
talking six hundred thousand
dollars money that wouldn't
cover the first couple of years
what we're talking about the
fact is you would have a
lifetime of your family having
to support you instead of the
other way around so yes I
understand that there is you
know lawsuits sometimes have
kind of a bad connotation to the
but the fact is I tell my
clients is all the time I am
very mature as I think most
lawyers are that I respect in
filing lawsuits here difficult
your time consuming emotional
there backwards looking but
they're also necessary I believe
in this process and when the
case is right you have to do it
otherwise what happens is you
and your family would be on the
stage done and that's not right
either because the people that
actually cost you go harm get
subsidized because it gets limit
and we're talking about a long
time billion dollar companies
that are spending most of their
money to their corporate
headquarters out of state that's
just plain wrong and so I'm very
much I've had this conversation
not just with clients but also
with your age and how important
lawsuits are in terms of people
being able to see seek redress
does it actually so all.
The problems no does it
discourage bad behaviour on the
part of the hospitals you bet if
they know they're exposed the
other thing that it does is it
helps hospitals set up systems
that will protect patients and
frankly their doctors so that
they don't get sued if you start
to put limits on it they just
built into their business model
so for a variety of reasons it
is a good idea to make hospitals
fully responsible for the
damages costs to their patients
what Representative on madam
chair that answers your question
thanks.
Madam chair I promise this is my
last question
and and I do appreciate this
and.
And this is for whoever wants to
respond to as well.
From from my my research and
development.
Provided by a whole bunch of
people
This is been going back and
forth for a multitude the years
and.
One of.
We say this right.
Have we exhausted all resources.
For negotiation.
And coming up with another
solution before we wrote a bill.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative answers yes
thank you madam chair.
If you have more Representative
Pettigrew.
Okay.
Madam chair I yield back thank
you okay that thank thank you
I'm so I just I just have a what
I hope will be a quick question
representative Ely.
I mean the superintendent of an
insurance have the authority to
do I mean that seems like a
major major change for one
person to have the power to just
say okay we're going to let
someone else into this fund that
had been established
legislatively and I know I'm not
trying to get anyone in trouble
or anything I'm just curious if
that's something we need to
think about for the future in
terms of someone having more
power than than we intended.
I'm madam chair that's an
excellent question and the
answer is it's at the New Mexico
Supreme Court
that issue is currently being
litigated as to whether the
superintendent follow the
administrative procedures act
and so we I think the short
answer to your question is don't
know yet but don't think so my
personal opinion for what it's
working as no he acted outside
its authority.
And and and Representative Eli I
sure hope so because I hate to
that that that that's something
that someone has the power to do
but with that I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair and move the two
passed okay thank you that was
represented by that I do I have
a second.
Second madam chair
Representative Romero Allison
will you call the roll please.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative ward.
No.
Representative Pettigrew.
I share more.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes
Representative Pettigrew are
you.
Has anybody oh gosh I'm seeing
both Representative Lord and
Petr grow with their I hope we
didn't have
Lord you have not heard anything
from Representative Pettigrew
that he lost disconnection or
anything along those lines have
you I have not heard anything
madam chair he is not here in
the office so I cannot guarantee
that he did not lose connection
there because it seems to be
losing connection all over in
Santa Fe.
Okay well I guess that
we it it will be a three to one
it and the fact that what we
regardless of how he votes will
not change the outcome I'm gonna
go ahead and move on and so we
have a a do pass on house bill
seventy five thank you all so
much and I really want to thank
the the
The witnesses and the public who
who
Did something that was really
hard I I I can tell you it's
really hard and we appreciate
hearing from you and now we will
now move on to house bill ninety
nine which is representatives
Herrera and rebel come together
all they can be promoted to
promote I don't know if that's a
promotion or demotion.
Panelists.
Keep me on I'm going to assist
I'm gonna go after okay okay.
Thank you okay and and
Representative I'm sorry I
didn't and Representative Ely
will stay on so okay I see I see
the
sponsors of the bill.
So
I will turn it over to the
sponsors of the bill whenever
you're ready Representative
herec have and
I there she is okay that's this
moves around too much and
Representative Roybal Caballero
whenever you're ready.
Thank you madam chair you hear
me.
We can hear you you can't really
see me very well but I am you
need a ring light.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I thank
you for the opportunity to place
H. B. ninety nine before this
committee it's actually a fairly
simple bill it simply immense a
small loan act and the
installment loan act nineteen
fifty nine by crossing out the
number a hundred and seventy
five percent and inserting
thirty six percent.
It's interesting when I first
told a group of freshmen
legislators in two thousand
nineteen I was trying them a
hundred and seventy five percent
rate to thirty six percent they
said why so high why not fifteen
percent.
The reason we're recommending
thirty six percent is because
that is the interest rate at the
department of defense of the
military lending act allows
small loan companies to charge
young men and women serving our
country when military personnel
get trapped in these loans they
can't be deployed so it was
really a response to the
national military readiness
situation this directive was
passed in Congress in two
thousand six as a way to prevent
abuse of long rates and to
protect protect young families
Montoya I agree thanks Mexico
should do the same.
When I first began to think
about this in this bill it
didn't seem like such a heavy
let I think the most people
would come to a logical
conclusion and say that of
course we should set this right
at thirty six percent.
I think that I'm sad to say and
then down then up there is an
entire sub industry set up in
New Mexico to counter the
effects of small installment
loans I'm most of our major
County cities and colleges have
now set up long companies within
their finance departments to
help people get out of these
crippling loans
hi in two thousand nineteen
we had a total of five hundred
ninety two thousand three
hundred ninety eight loans I
handed out small loans handed
out in the state of New Mexico
this isn't a problem it's a
financial epidemic.
Opponents of this bill say these
loan installment companies are
needed small businesses the
service important message in our
state.
Our local businesses hiring
about four hundred and fifty
people in server great maybe
that's what they'll tell you.
There are approximately now five
hundred sixty one small
companies in New Mexico what you
need to know that is
approximately eighty five
percent of the storefront
lenders in New Mexico are out of
state corporations seventy eight
of these out of state
corporations Astor France have
the pen enforcement and
supervisory and regulatory
actions against them by the
federal consumer finance
protection for your all right
very to that is that C. F. P. B.
and they continue to operate New
Mexico in June of two thousand
eighteen US security finance had
fifty four store fronts title
Max and fifty fourteen
storefronts and ace ace cash
express had in store prints I'm
gonna read your report from the
June eighteenth CFPB enforcement
action against these companies
for improper debt collection
that violated federal law let me
just just listen to this
security finance improper
collection efforts to collect
delinquent debts including
physically preventing borrowers
from leaving their home visiting
and cop calling virus place of
work well knowing that this
contact could endanger their the
borrower's employment security
finance violated the fair credit
reporting act by regularly
providing inaccurate and
incomplete information about
borrowers to credit reporting
agencies that's potentially
adversely impacting credit
scores security finance was
ordered to seize illegal
collection practices and correct
inaccurate information provided
to consumer reported reporting
agencies security finance was
ordered to pay five million in
civil penalties I don't Max was
ordered to pay nine million
Senator penalties ace cash
express was ordered to pay five
million and refund borrowers and
five million and civil
penalties.
This bill will tell you that
this business is a high risk
business and they pay higher
rates to recover their costs
fifteen states plus the district
of Columbia and our neighbors to
the north and west Colorado and
Arizona have set their rates at
thirty six percent why can't we
do that.
To compound the situation the
level two literacy rate New
Mexico is forty six percent
almost one half of our
population is unable to do
simple math that means most
people who sign these loans
don't even know what they're
signing it's a perfect storm
created by out of state
corporations frankly as a state
legislature in his local
municipality there are some
businesses that you don't want
to encourage state law has a
limit on the number of liquor
licenses that are allowed in the
community cities discourage
Mattel's allow sex trafficking
and they discourage strip clubs
just so you understand the
enormity of this problem that
new of the enormity of this
problem New Mexico has has an
installment loan company for
every three thousand eight
hundred nineteen residents.
Just for comparison there's a
McDonald's for every twenty
three thousand two thousand
ninety eight residents that's
about right for Espanola we have
about eight or nine I
installment loan companies in
the city of ten thousand and
there's one McDonald's the city
of this bill is about ten
thousand the counties about
thirty thousand I don't think
that small loan companies with
interest rates at a hundred and
seventy five percent our
businesses we should encourage a
harm communities and they harm
families it's important to note
that I'm not asking that we
closed down these businesses is
businesses are allowed to stay
in New Mexico with the passage
of this legislation they just
have to cap their interest rates
at thirty six percent.
In closing madam chair I'd like
to remind this body the law on
its majesty prevents the rich
and poor alike from sleeping
under a bridge for stealing a
loaf of bread New Mexico state
law in its majesty allows the
rich and poor alike to borrow
money and an interest rate of a
hundred and seventy five
percent.
Madam chair members of this
committee change is long overdue
I'd now like to introduce my
fellow legislators who are
standing with me I in this
legislation and have been
activists in this movie for many
years I'd like to now introduce
Patricia Roybal Caballero and
then after that day many thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee I
love this committee.
I served on it for many years so
I love it thank you so thank you
to Representative and then a
four once again trade
continuing
the momentum that is absolutely
necessary more now more than
ever in order to be able to help
us help our community stop the
predatory practices that we have
seen amplifying during this
pandemic.
Horrible pandemic unexpected
pandemic that open the door for
for the predatory practices to
unfold that declare themselves
and portable ways we all know
that in order to be able to
build assets families must be
financial state financially
stable and for low income
families this usually requires
increased income decreased
household costs or both and for
low income individuals or those
without a developed credit
history the savings offered by
employer based lending models
and low interest loans can mean
the difference between financial
security and financial ruin.
I want to point out again that
during this so pandemic and the
unexpected economic downturn
reducing the interest rate on
small loans from one seventy
five percent to thirty six
percent it's time we are now
more than ever in a state focus
survey of a hundred and twenty
eight New Mexicans conducted by
our fair lending partners
seventy six percent of
respondents stated that they
live paycheck to paycheck and
fifty three percent stated that
they had to take out a loan to
cover unexpected expenses
related to the pandemic.
In requesting feedback from the
Sixtyeight percent subset of the
respondents thirty nine percent
stated that they use payday
loans to bridge these income
gaps it is unfortunate madam
chair and representative and
members of the committee that
we're faced with a state that
has been increasingly.
Leading towards more and more
impoverishment and thereby
making our hard working.
The population more vulnerable
to this type of predatory
practices.
Madam chair.
And Representative and members
of the committee it's very
important to note the note that
throughout the years there's
been a very strong movie.
And it's been led by members of
the New Mexicans for fair
lending coalition prosperity T.
works and the number of
community grassroots
organizations throughout the
state that have dedicated
themselves to ensure that we
stop these type of predatory
practices and that we allow
income equality across the board
and that we give fairness and
fair play in all of our
practices including the lending
world so it is extremely
important that we continue this
moment that we continue the path
forward on behalf of our hard
working families to have
articulated to us over and over
again I have Madam chair on as
representative Adam mentioned in
her community there are payday
lending under a number of
different names and disguises on
every other block not only in
the southwest area of
Albuquerque but there are
throughout the south valley and
they did not shut down during
the pandemic in fact we saw more
and more that's why I said in
disguise madam chair because
there are some with with titles
and names that if you don't
explore further you won't know
that that's what they're doing
and so that the secretary of
agency related to these
predatory practices is something
that we need to really address
and now more than ever we've got
to create the structural changes
within our laws in order to be
able to do that so madam chair
and representative thank you for
all invited me to join you once
again and sponsorship of this
bill and I hope that the
committee had welcomed the
committee's questions and I hope
that we're able to move forward
with this bill thank you.
You lie.
Thank you madam chair I know
you've got a full page and I'll
be very brief I know that
Representative right how did I
has mentioned the military
lending act which is benefiting
seventeen thousand seven hundred
forty one New Mexicans with
thirty six percent cap on loans
somehow the loan companies are
able to accommodate that in our
prostitution tree forty five
states plus the district of
Columbia cap of five hundred
dollars six months loans are
with the median is thirty eight
point five percent New Mexico is
at the very bottom not well
third from the bottom hundred
show with a hundred seventy five
percent only surpassed by
Oklahoma and Mississippi for two
thousand dollar two year loans
on New Mexico is the very bottom
the median story one percent of
course were one seventy five
madam chair this is not as I've
heard it described access to
capital this is access to debt.
We are assigning New Mexicans
to long periods of time in dat
money that they could use to
support their families are grow
their businesses invest in your
community it's time that we put
a stop to this and the thirty
six percent cap is the
appropriate measure is been
tried now in state after state
is a growing movement and it's
time we get with the times thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative Ely
we're gonna try something new
here and just because we we can
so at the bottom of your screen
is a place that says polls and
I'm I'm gonna ask Allison
because I there goes so
What do they do they click on
okay I guess everybody's
figuring it out because the
numbers are coming up so we will
give you a few seconds to what
are.
Okay.
Well it's.
People can't make up their
minds.
So needless to say it it's
looking very close.
Okay we will end the call well
I'm it says in progress but I
think we are we are good so so
we will end the whole and now I
will ask you first if you are in
favor in the opposition to this
bill.
Sorry I was just I didn't get
the results until just now thank
you madam chair okay okay so I'm
for those of you if you can't
see the votes it's fifty fifty
right down the right down the
middle so I'm going to get rid
of this screen.
And
Hopefully and so we will go to
the audience for public comment
so we will start with people who
are in opposition to this bill
so please raise your hand again
that's under participants
And this is in opposition so we
will start there and
I will start with Maryland back.
I apologize your honor I
apologize I was actually trying
to let you know that everyone to
take a call on that I didn't
know if that was just for
legislators or for everyone
that's what I was trying to
raise my hand okay okay I'm
sorry
I'm not interested in this bill
the next one I will be okay okay
well paying on their.
I have Ramon Sanchez.
Can you hear me we can hear you
go ahead.
Madam chair my name is Ramon
Sanchez I'm an attorney here in
Albuquerque with Sanchez married
as an aerial and my client is
consumer installment lenders
association.
I want to give you a little bit
of background after the.
Information just received from
the sponsors of the bill.
I want to point out that.
We stand in opposition of course
to ninety nine in twenty
seventeen.
Yeah we met with the advocates.
We work together to come.
And the clothes payday lenders
we out limited title lenders and
we at that time establish the
one seventy five a P. R. cap and
created a mandatory litter
literacy fund which I'm not sure
the sponsors are aware of.
Excuse me in twenty nineteen our
industry again.
We're left with a.
Nonexistent payday lenders.
And the thirty six percent was
introduced our Representative
Louis introduced house bill one
fifty which was a compromise
matter that we all agreed upon
it was difficult for everybody
for both sides to accept in fact
the.
One of the sponsors here said he
had to hold his nose when he
voted for that bill because of
the one seventy five but it was
also difficult for us.
Premised on an agreement that
the industry would provide
additional data relative to
industry business and practices
at each model of that would be
given to FID needless to say our
industry had to renew their
computers of upgrade stuff to
do this at a cost of this but.
You know the purpose of the bill
was to be able to objectively
evaluate empirical evidence and
not rely on conjecture to draft
legislation and we had expected
that for the next the
legislative session twenty
twenty two.
the evidence would be based
would be based on intent
the industry recognized the one
seventy five was a transitory
figure and we knew that it was
going to be revised at some
point.
Also we we went along with that
we had the agreement.
Now there's been some talk about
the impact to people in the
state and I want to let you
thoroughly know what the
economic impact would be of this
industry left the state madam
chair there are issues heard
about thirteen hundred ninety
five employees I guess they
pointed out the number of stores
but let me point out there about
fourteen hundred employees in
New Mexico.
Excuse me their average salary
runs around forty six close to
forty seven thousand dollars a
year and
that comes to a total
compensation within this state
within one year to about sixty
five million one hundred seventy
three thousand dollars that
includes benefits compensation.
When you look at this the
company and the employee
benefits paid to the state come
to around six million dollars
six million your take three
hundred thousand dollars okay.
And we have leases paid to
landlords annually in the
vicinity of sixty million
dollars are we have total
economic package total economic
package for this industry is
close to nine hundred and
fifteen million dollars.
you know in addition to that the
literacy fund that we were
talking about we establish that
in twenty seventeen there's been
about three hundred twenty five
thousand dollars that the
industry voluntarily agreed in
twenty seventeen to set up and
used for a financial literacy.
There is a point of reference.
Be something that would.
Our great.
Using it was a
it was done way back when the
Richardson administration was in
place and the then lieutenant
governor are headed up.
It is clear as you will hear
from others
that the thirty six percent will
result in closing installment
lenders that have been in
business here since the fifties
and the sixties I mean over
fifty years they had no problems
no one came after months of the
payday lenders payment the state
and destructive this but again
we are not by the numbers we
never have the.
So close in fact installment
lenders are being wrongfully
linked to payday lenders which
we work with the support of.
Destry eliminated in twenty
seventeen.
I've heard it said.
That these businesses are taking
money out of the state and
that's the reason they have to
leave here I think you heard
from the figures I just gave
you.
That there are a lot of
employees were getting benefits
madam chair I would of rest case
so to speak and thank you for
the time you've taken to the
members of this committee and
again we stand in opposition to
house bill ninety nine thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you and before I call on
anyone else we haven't set up a
timer but if we need to we will
so please we still have
For more bills so.
This is not the time for your
day be for for America's got
talent or anything like that so
so please keep your keep your
but your comments to a minute or
two thank you next I have hobby
error.
I'm a you I am I'm not even
gonna try that one so hobby year
go ahead.
This you are on if you can on
mute.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
Can you.
We can hear you.
Okay.
My name's how we are
I live in Los crucis New Mexico
and I look for some.
I know what it's like to live.
To live paycheck to paycheck.
I personally struggle to
establish my credit.
In my early twenties.
I remember when I needed to buy
credit for my daughter Brianna.
It was easy to walk into a bank
and get along.
The scene the wording of because
I do not have any open lines of
credit for established.
The other part was that I had
been the.
Job for three years.
In that it would make a
difference.
Citizens bank turned me down and
it was not a good feeling.
I turned to licensed federal
credit union and they asked me
for deposit to be a member.
I think we understood that it
will not be able to get what I
needed for my on.
This has taught me that if it
doesn't come easy.
I did not have anyone who could
help me.
And that's when my friend Sam
recommended personal credit
plans.
I was already investigating.
But one.
Anyway this.
The manager took my information.
And told me that I did not
qualify for five hundred but
that she can start at two
hundred.
She educated me on the credit.
And tell me that since there so
since forty three major credit
bureaus I can status my credit.
I took the two hundred dollar
bill.
And we're not used use furniture
for my daughter.
Always make sure my payments
were.
On on the due date of the for.
First personal credit plan.
Help me establish credit and I
was able to get approved the
Vance.
I say personal credit plan.
Because you for you don't forget
those who help you.
In nineteen ninety eight.
My friend sent recruited me to
work for.
In the smartphone industry.
I started my career.
It's been twenty three years.
What we do and how we can help
communities.
I can speak on how we've helped
our customers to the pandemic.
If you allow me to.
Thank you have your what we
really need to move on but thank
you for your state we will move
on to Tony Tanner.
Whenever you're ready tell me.
Tell me that your woman could
you hear me yes we can go ahead
chair woman members of the
committee my name is Tony Tanner
one of the owners of Tax Court
finance we oppose house bill
ninety nine is presented.
We're small family owned New
Mexico business operating in
Gallup Farmington since nineteen
eighty nine.
We've been in business for the
past thirty plus years because
we offer products that work for
our customers before the price.
I appreciate the work committee
members do it representing
others today I'm here to do the
same I represent the several
thousand clients will not be
able to do business with us
should this bill pass because it
will eliminate their choice as
will no longer be in business.
Also may view the limitation of
these loans as a grant for the
people utilize these products
it's far from a wind it's a
choice Representative from them.
We appreciate the ability to
work with legislatures have
consumer advocacy groups to to
to review says in the industry
but not to eliminate it.
Madam chairwoman I want to thank
you for the committee members
from opportunity to speak today
on behalf of our business more
importantly on behalf of the
consumers research thank you.
Thank you tell me we now have
Andrew Morrison.
Can you hear me now madam chair
yes we can.
Madam chair members of Eddie my
name is Andrew Morrison on with
frontage manage ment we've been
doing business in New Mexico for
twenty five years and we've
never had an enforcement action
and action brought to get by the
C. F. P. B. no we make loans or
an incident APR of up to five
but we compliment thirty six and
so I.
I wanted to respond to some of
the more egregious errors and
distortions oceans of I think
New Mexico follow up article in
the Santa Fe reporter.
Andrew we're getting some
feedback from you thank things
are being is there any chance
you have to.
Now I'm hearing from me to you.
Years after what I'm gonna ask
you to do
and it is may be wrong or not to
log out and log back in raise
your hand again and we'll see if
we we were having a hard time
understanding what you're
saying.
Okay I'll I'll leave and come
and come back in okay thank you
you okay so we will go to David
Emery.
Yes good afternoon can you hear
me yes go ahead David thank you
a good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is David Emery I am the New
Mexico regional manager for QC
financial I've lived in our
beautiful state for twenty two
years Mexico is my home this is
where I put down my roots this
is where I will retire I love
our state if you would let me
tell you a bit about our
business
in New Mexico we have nine
locations throughout the state
and we employed twenty four
happy and successful New
Mexicans as team members last
year we were able to approve
eleven thousand one hundred and
eight requests for loans in
those request we've helped our
fellow New Mexicans Hey from
everything from home repairs to
holidays the kings and yet as if
you would please permit me to
illustrate an example the
typical five hundred dollar loan
and the cost to our customers I
would appreciate it a a five
hundred dollar loan taken out
today and paid back in thirty
days would have the total
interest cost of sixty six
dollars and seventy four cents
if that won't work to run the
full term meaning six months the
total finance charge on that
loan would be two hundred and
seventy three dollars and
thirteen cents with the total
the payments being seven hundred
seventy three dollars and
thirteen cents now if I could
also please share with you one
example of a customer who was
named Andrew.
Andrew was a single father who
is recently divorced Andrew
found himself in a position
where he needed to purchase some
specialized medical equipment
for his daughter and the place
is hot water heater in this home
and you thought he had an ace in
the hole the thought to be able
to easily borrow money but when
he was unsuccessful in his
attempt to borrow money from his
employer who by the way is a
major bank in the metro area
Andrew turned to us and we were
successful in helping Andrew now
if Andrew is able to borrow
money from the bank being an
employee of the bank how
difficult would you imagine the
situation to be for all of our
New Mexico friends of these
types of situations we
understand it's important that
New Mexico needs to be cleaned
up and rein in the rogue actors
but it's important that people
like and you have a safe
efficient and practical way to
have their needs met if the
regulated industry goes away as
a result of this proposed
legislation the need will not
unscrupulous offshore lenders
will continue to offer loans
outside any regulatory
environment week you see
financial welcome being part of
the conversation regarding
future regulations thank you for
your time today.
Okay thank you and I'm gonna
remind remind people please try
to keep it brief if everybody
goes on five minutes we're gonna
be here a while so I don't want
to have to cut people off but I
will so please keep it brief and
we have Jason Weaks next.
Thank you madam chair members
committee Jason Weaks
Representative QC holdings on
the contract this for them.
As most you know access to
credit for New Mexicans is
difficult to combine short term
installment loans are offered by
this industry how many families
access much needed short term
credit the industry is
responsible for thousands of
jobs and eliminate industry
would be another blow to our and
fragile con we appreciate the
intent of the Sanchez promote
fair lending practices but
imposing a thirty six percent
APR on small short term loans
would essentially force the
small letters out of the state
eliminate the availability of
credit for a large segment of
our population well the current
hundred seventy five percent APR
may not be a viable long term
interest rate for short term
loans New Mexico imposing a flat
thirty six percent APR on all
small tools isn't either APR as
a general rule does not work
well within the context of small
short term loans as it
represents an annual interest
rate does not translate well
into loans with smaller terms
are shorter terms to pose a
statewide thirty six percent APR
for term loans will make lending
to folks with lower credit
scores almost impossible this
will cause some of those people
to seek alternative loans online
that really are not subject to
any consumer protections at all
what we really do believe this
issue needs to be addressed we
we we would urge the committee
to wait so that we can figure
out what the results of the
contemplated study that's based
on actual industry data have to
show before we take our next
step nothing is gonna change
between now and next year on and
if we offer some additional
consumer protections to
individuals private perhaps we
can get to a point where next
year we can sit down with
proponents of this bill and come
to an interest rate that is both
of both allows industry to stay
in business in the state and
allow us access to credit to
exist but offer some additional
protections that satisfy some of
the proponents concerns and
questions with this these types
of short term loans so for those
reasons we stand in opposition
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Danielle our low.
All right you guys hear me.
Yes okay thank you madam chair
and members of this committee
and Danielle fake we are low and
I'm senior vice president for
the American financial services
association we've been around
for over a hundred years we
represent creditors in the
judicial installment loan spaces
wells mortgage vehicle finance
other sales finance and payment
cards are members of all bank
and non bank we do not represent
payday lenders or title Anders
thirty six percent cap in New
Mexico means that four in ten
New Mexico adults will be
ineligible for safe and
affordable installment credit
and speaking of thirty six
percent thirty six percent is
exactly the number the
percentage of New Mexico adults
who have a credit score below
six hundred and forty six
percent have those credit score
below six hundred fifty HB
ninety nine would completely cut
off state regulated affordable
installment credit to almost all
of those people the lead in New
Mexico will be just fine as
they've always been because they
can qualify for the type of
larger loans necessary to break
even at thirty six percent.
Just briefly addressing the
banks will step in math the idea
banks and credit unions can pick
up the slack from established
license non bank lenders is a
pipe dream listen I love banks
by background in banking we have
lots of banks as members but
banks are not the business of
making small dollar loans and
we're not aware of any banks in
the business of making small
dollar loans at thirty six
percent if you don't want any
state regulated small dollar
loans in New Mexico this is the
bill to accomplish that goal
thank you so much we've also
sent a full letter to the
committee with a complete
comments on this bill.
Thank you and just a reminder to
it let's try to keep it a little
brief Catherine Christiane I'm
sorry about the pronunciation
there please pronounce that for
me correctly.
Thank you madam chair is
Catherine Christiana you did
pretty well and I'm still
learning how to pronounce it
myself
good afternoon madam chair
representative my name is
Katherine Christiana and I'm a
registered lobbyist for all
plans we respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill ninety
nine opulence is not a payday
lender they make installment
loans that are under written and
have no fees at all opulence
also presents for applicants to
lenders with better interest
rates first so that we may
obtain a loan with a lower rate
if they qualify the typical
length of their loans as for
nine months in the typical size
is fifteen hundred dollars
uplands also reports to the
major credit bureaus helping
consumers build their credit
they also believe in the
importance of financial literacy
and offer financial education
via their all Q. website we are
experiencing historical
unemployment rates in New Mexico
due to the pandemic this is the
worst time to remove credit
options from people who need it
most eliminating this industry
would also placement issue all
fifteen hundred New Mexicans out
of work who are employed by
these lenders additionally we
should await statewide study
directed by this legislature
before changing regulations in
order to understand the universe
of landing in New Mexico why
hospital ninety nine is aimed to
create a more equitable New
Mexico the proposed rate cap
would leave New Mexico consumers
worse off and immediately cut
off access to credit for
millions of New Mexicans setting
up thirty six percent cap also
drive consumers to pay day and
tribal lenders where these
regulations don't apply for over
one hundred years traditional
installment lenders have
consistently provided consumers
with reliable community based
small dollar credit that is
a sensible and affordable giving
borrowers a tried and tested
mechanism to safely manage their
household credit the fiscal
impact report from house bill
ninety nine it knowledge is this
by stating installment lenders
can provide.
Access to credit for borrowers
with subprime credit scores who
may not be able to access
conventional bank loans or
credit cards however as few
indicates well there may be bad
actors in the installment loan
space New Mexico should look at
creating a safety valve with
consumer protection president
steering that would allow those
who qualify for a loan at a
lower rate to obtain it and
those who don't the opportunity
for that the opportunity to
apply for a loan at a higher
rate thank you again.
Thank you we have Dennis are.
Madam chair can you hear me I
can hear you okay I'm sorry for
the confusion there thank you
very much my name is standards
are I represent access financial
services.
I've been doing so for fifteen
years I have not here on behalf
of access to ask this committee
to support a hundred and seventy
five percent interest rate or
any other interest rate but I do
believe there's so much
confusion when this subject
comes up every time the only way
we have resulted in the past is
by gathering all the
stakeholders in the room
sometimes for many weeks to
reach conclusions and and come
up with compromises that work
for everybody a few points that
I'd just like to clarify so I
don't repeat what others have
said.
There are no legal payday loans
left in New Mexico if payday
loan operators are still out
there they're on the internet
they're operating illegally.
Secondly during this pandemic I
worked closely with the
governor's office to ensure that
all of my clients stores and the
stores of many of the people I
know who've spoken today we're
shut down the entire time it was
a great inconvenience to our
customers many of whom
complained but none of the ones
that I'm aware of we're open not
saying that some may have broken
the rules but as a general rule
the industry was shut down.
I'd also like to mention that
thirty six percent APR on a
typical I more four month five
hundred dollar loan that my
client makes would produce
interest of nine dollars and
fifty one cents a month that's
not even one hour of minimum
wage work to try to service
alone we know change needs to
come we understand that there
needs to be further development
of the loss and we expected to
do that as a result of the
twenty nineteen legislation
carried by Representative Lewis
we all also believe waiting for
that data does not have to come
at the expense of the consumers
and that immediate measures can
be taken which can protect
consumers to allow us to sit
down with all the stakeholders
over the next six months and try
to develop a rural and a law
that works for everyone thank
you very much.
Thank you Dan and we have Andrew
Morrison.
Can you hear me now.
President with we can hear you
you still have a bit of an echo
so we'll give it a shot and see
if we can understand you what
what what I'm gonna do is.
Commutes the for the
zoom just use a phone call what
would you would you have.
I think that's probably a good
idea we'll see what happens but
generally if you have a zoom on
your phone and your computer or
they're close to each other you
get a horrible echo so you just
need to get get out of one of.
But now we can't hear you so
miss miss madam chair I think if
we allow his zoom a phone number
to be allowed to maybe we can
get rid of the echo or he can
hate if you can hang up the
phone and
Computer audio that might work.
Well that's where we had a
problem before.
Mr Morris thank you just let us
know the last four digits of
your number so we can enable the
idea.
Mr Morse we can't hear you so if
you could just whatever you were
doing before when we could hear
you what the echo if you could
do that again and give us the
last four of your phone number
we will
enable that to be your your
voice.
Nine nine three one one.
It Debra M. can you give a
little I think hang up for our
okay okay can you hear me now
yes that's much better thank you
okay good.
All right well this so I start
from the beginning again.
Yes please.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee my name is Andrew
Morrison from the management
we've been doing business in New
Mexico for over twenty five
years and we've never happened
enforcement action brought
against us by this year the nor
do we make loans may be are a
hundred and seventy five but we
can't make them at thirty six
and so I.
I just wanted to respond to some
of the more egregious errors and
distortions in the paper I think
you Mexico on a follow up
article in the Santa Fe
reporter.
The.
The the nearest example with
which the thank you Mexico peace
begins would already be illegal
under the twenty seventeen to
all a five hundred dollar loan
with six hundred dollar monthly
payment bank talk about is
fortunately no longer allow the
maximum payment under the
existing goal on a four month
loan is less than a hundred and
seventy five.
It does however raise other
issues like default interest and
we'd love to be able to sit down
and discuss those down the road.
Secondly that catalog of state
so the rates they charge
apparently taken from the NCLC
chock full of arrows and
completely misleading according
to this chart for instance
thirty six state cap rates on
small loans but ninety percent
or below.
And yet thirty two states allow
payday or title loans with eight
yachts in excess of two hundred
percent putting New Mexico
really among the lowest caps in
the nation the highest.
And of course all the other
states have unlimited rights via
so called tribal internet payday
loans.
They claim banks and credit
unions will make the loans after
they run outside of business I
was delighted to read about the
work of the Guadalupe credit
union but one exception does not
make a rural banks have
repeatedly said they will not
make these loans the FDIC
organized a pilot program ten
years ago which is of the turtle
creek.
They are banks to make small
consumer loans thirty six not a
single bank made a profit on the
loans and non set they would
keep doing so after the trial
this is not surprising a recent
study by the federal reserve
calculated that the smallest one
at which a lender could break
even at thirty six percent was
around two thousand five hundred
dollars.
In twenty eighteen pew
charitable trusts work with US
bank to offer installment loans
the API's for again in the
nineties unless the borrower
agree to a pay day style ACA
derangement New York well over
two minutes can you please wrap
it up.
Well I'd I'd very much like just
to finish the point if I may
because of so much confusion
yeah.
One of the major points I have
to make is there is confusion
between eight P. oz and
impressed throughout and I even
heard it in a in a one of the
the comments earlier this today
it really is disappointing that
anyone would put out papers or
even newspapers promoting an APR
happy if they don't even know
what an APR is on page twenty
five of that paper under the
heading of thirty six percent
cap for New Mexico is urgently
needed thank you Mexico launches
into an account of what the
future will trust recently
passed in Virginia.
Saying we can follow in the
footsteps of Virginia.
What do you do that was to allow
an interest rate not on APR of
thirty six percent plus a
monthly handling fee to cover
the fixed costs of the loan and.
And you are doing public comment
not testimony so I really need
you to wrap it up.
Okay final point and referendary
in polls suggesting that people
support cap off famously
misleading it all depends on how
you frame the question if you
ask people if they want cheap
and Phelps say yes of course if
you occupy you want to put the
loan companies out of business
and have no loans on non that
might be safe and affordable
they say no we ran just such a
PO in New Mexico five years ago
and but ninety five percent
that.
Thank you very much okay we're
going to move on and we hope to
if you are in support of this
legislation please raise your
hand.
Okay so we will start with Larry
her brand and
I'm trying to be nice to people
but that doesn't mean that you
can do your your doctoral thesis
here
we we just don't have time for
it so please go ahead Larry
thank you madam chair to
committee Larry around
registered lobbyist with the
city of Los crucis of the city
council adopted a resolution in
support of the legislation to
cap small loans and in fact with
a brand new city council this
turned over it reaffirmed the
position taken the last time
legislation was introduced and
so we support the caps on the
small loans and I was proud to
learn what we were working on a
resolution that the city of Los
crucis is actually an entity
that is adopted the program to
help their employees with loan
repayment programs through
payroll deduction so that they
can so they they do not have to
go out and get these types of
small loans we appreciate the
Sanchez in the committee's
report support of this
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Larry I'm now we have
doctor Terry Greer.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Terry
Greer hi we are Representative
A. A. R. P. as the co chair of
the consumer advocacy team thank
you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the
A. R. New Mexico members we
stand in strong support of house
bill ninety nine.
The people who need fast cash
right now need your help they
are so strapped for cash that
they do not stop to think about
the serious consequences of the
high interest rates and the
compounding is interested that
is part of that right they also
don't think about the fees that
go with those interests.
For this for the good of our
members A. A. R. P. supports
house bill ninety nine and we
ask you the committee to do the
same thank you very much.
Thank you doctor now we have
Christina Fisher.
Can you hear me Madam.
Yes.
Great so I'm Christina Fisher
and the associate director of
the New Mexico and I'm speaking
today on behalf of the New
Mexicans for fair lending
coalition which is a group of
about twenty eight advocates and
organizations including the
central long poverty the native
American voters Alliance
prosperity works and others we
are strong supporters of capping
the annual interest rate of
small loans at thirty six
percent and we really want to
appreciate the Sanchez
dedication to this reform
we very much I urge the
committee to pass this bill and
we hope that we'll have a chance
to work with the Sanchez on some
a handful of amendments in the
next committee if if this
committee sees that descended on
essentially to make sure that
this bill achieves our shared
goal of capping the interest
rate thirty six percent as
effectively as possible I just
very briefly those amendments
are actually already included in
another bill introduced by
Representative server and
robocup aero house bill one
forty nine which is mirrored on
the Senate side by a Senate bill
sixty six and addressed by the
governor and there are three key
things that those bills do that
this bill does not yet do that
we hope to work with the Sanchez
on first ensure that that thirty
six percent cap is all inclusive
so we want to make sure that
thirty six percent really means
thirty six percent and so house
bill one forty nine includes
some language to say all fees
and costs associated with the
loan are included in that thirty
six percent so that we can tack
on additional fees that could
easily take us back into the
triple digits we think that they
are of triple digit interest
rates should come to an end a
second piece is we'd like to see
the universe of small loans
included in this bill go from
everything up to five thousand
to everything up to ten thousand
we're seeing more and more
problematic loans especially car
title loans they go above five
thousand dollars and then that
takes them outside of this
framework in the thirty six
percent would not apply.
And finally the last piece we'd
like to see that is included in
the one forty nine and not get
in house bill ninety nine is
anti invasion language and so we
learn from the lessons of other
states some states that have
tried to impose a thirty six
percent cap have seen lenders do
some creative maneuvering to try
to repackage their products and
practices so that they fall
outside the definition loans and
so we'd like to see some
language to tighten that up and
make sure that they're included
so once again we support this
bill we urge the committee
supports and we look forward to
working with the sponsors to
make this bills effective as
possible and really appreciate
their leadership on the issue
thank you madam chair committee
thank you we have the New Mexico
chapter of the national
association of social workers.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Shelby
greaser and I'm representing the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in support of HB ninety
nine as these current interest
rates hurt New Mexico since
further and drive people into
poverty thank you.
Thank you I'm Kathleen Burke.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can right I'll be brief I
support this bill and I think
Representative forever and what
Baca bureau for sponsoring it as
an adjunct I ask that you please
support the public banking act
as an alternative for providing
loans to New Mexicans who
otherwise would have been forced
to rely on loans with exorbitant
interest rates from rapacious
lenders I thank you and I urge
the committee to give this bill
a do pass thank you madam chair.
Thank you
okay.
We have okay I'm currently
creating Hafer and I'm sorry if
I did badly with your name.
That's okay madam chair
Madam chair members of the
committee Carla crew have for
the center for civic policy I'll
just keep it brief we sent in
support of this legislation and
encourage our members to vote
yes on thank you.
Now that's the way to be brief.
Samuel Nevares.
Yeah hi god good afternoon thank
you so much hello I heard
someone say that they charge
these A. P. R. because it
contributes to the economy but
I'm a twenty seven year old male
here in New Mexico and the
majority of the people that
I've.
Network where they get these low
them they sometimes go through
these situations where they can
pay off and then we'll take you
to paycheck trying to get these
loans paid off and they're
overpaying for being over cat
calculated at thirty percent
will help a lot of New Mexicans
are because that would give them
the ability to pay them off
after and they believe more
people to get the loan so they
can support their families
instead of focusing on top
overcharging one person a Max of
one hundred and seventy five
instead of being animated so I'm
as part of it thank you.
Thank you Samuel I'm an ice pack
my short term memory is not what
it used to be after Morris and I
believe that's who we had on
before correct.
Yes okay so I guess is handed
not get taken down so I'm we
have Paul Gibson.
Sorry for a second I need to yes
my name is Paul Gibson I am the
co founder retake Our Democracy
you take our democracy is a all
volunteer statewide organization
with twenty five hundred members
and we work with our allies
across the state to identify
bills we will support on each
year and this year we identified
twenty bills we call in
transformational bills and this
is one of them we've been
advocating for reform of the
predatory lending industry for
five years I've personally sat
me hearing some small loan
reform many many times and
listen to this industry
representatives misrepresent
their business practices I don't
need to articulate all that is
wrong with their messaging fair
lending coalition expressed this
perfectly so I'll spare you the
time I also in our organization
also does for for H. B. one
forty nine and SB sixty six as
this.
Moses important loopholes that
could be.
Remain in the bill effectively
with HB ninety nine so thank you
very much for your service and
we support HB ninety.
Thank you Paul and that's all I
have for public comment so we
will now go to the committee for
any questions.
Okay Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
says everyone who presented we
know this is a there's a lot of
advocates on both sides as per
the poll so want to thank
everyone for participating
that said madam chair I wanted
to talk to the sponsor about
house bill ninety nine and and
we did hear from public comment
about house bill one forty nine
that you're caring both and we
just wanted to hear about sort
of your look at the I think the
changes that you're trying to
make since they both pertain to
we're calling payday loans and
how it how it affects consumers
and and why you're approaching
it that way.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Romero and I'm
sure everybody kind of looked at
that with the there I browse
raised a little bit but you know
I I I.
I promoted this legislation in
two thousand nineteen and I
understand very well that the
small loan installment industry
is a very formidable opponent
I'm just going to land on the
line and there are you know I'm
not saying everybody's bad in
that movie everybody's doing
their jobs but I think it's
incumbent upon us to really look
at what this does to our
citizens so do I support one
forty nine yes I drop that bill
to I think it is the better of
the two bills
but I've been around long enough
to know that my side doesn't
always win.
I I introduce H. E. ninety nine
as as as really an alternative
plan I wish Senator Neville
souls all the luck in the world
and caring
Senate Bill up the mountain and
planting the flag on top I
really do and if that wins and I
told him I would I would carry
it in the house however.
You know things don't always
work out the way you want them
to so I do introduce this bill I
tend to I hope it will get
passed through this committee
and you know I'll hold them I'll
see what happens and I hope the
Senate bill wincing comes over
to the side of not we have
another plan we have another
plan I and I will amended before
it gets to Judiciary it'll
probably be a different bill
than it is now and we'll do what
we can but my my ultimate goal
is to lower the cap on these
rates thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that I think
just working through some of the
the questions and and in
particular having the governor's
office on board with one forty
nine I just commend you for the
work that you've done and I know
this isn't the first time that
you've carried this bill or
version of it so I really
appreciate your course we share
our districts touch one another
in particular in the city must
be on the Rio read the area and
if you have been through their
Espanola valley you will see
that many of these
opportunities are basically back
to back to back in that
community and unfortunately some
of the most vulnerable are
preyed upon for these
opportunities and I think may
get stuck into a situation that
maybe years and years out
but they cannot pay and they
cannot meet the demand of some
of these terms in agreement so I
absolutely appreciate what
you're trying to do in creating
those protections thirty six
percent is higher than credit
card still it's higher than a
lot of the the opportunities
that we have for credit as well
and and I I absolutely empathise
with the sort of quick cash
opportunity but it's not ideal
when it's putting folks in in
such a dire situation
economically for so long so I
commend you again for caring
this bill and and for one forty
nine as well and look forward to
seeing how it all plays out and
hope that your strategy works.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
Had I not had in.
Internet problems between the
last at the end of the last bill
in the beginning of this one.
I would I would say in the media
motion to table this bill.
And
The reasoning behind that is
from the from the long history
of the school just my research
on the long history of this.
From eight to ten years ago all
the way through two thousand
nineteen with the with the
passing of a H. B. one fifty.
And
Visions that were made in H. B.
one fifty the fact that we have
almost two hundred thousand
dollars available to FID for
For consumer training for for
borrower training that has not
been used.
The front and agreements that
were made with with respect to
waiting until we got the
analysis from the twenty twenty
information before any changes
were made to this great bill but
that doesn't change the
agreements were made a handshake
is just as important as as
assigned piece of the action of
where I'm from.
This this takes.
To a point where.
We're we today we've accuse
people of them predatory.
We are potentially impacting the
nine hundred and fifty million
dollar economic.
Impact have an economic impact
on the state and we don't even
have the results of all the
documents that were agreed to be
gathered in the two thousand
nineteen.
H. B. one fifty.
And we don't have the analysis
from this bill is too early to
quick and does not take the
documentation that was agreed
upon.
From two thousand and seventeen
all the way through the two
thousand and nineteen bill.
With that I would move to table
on point right there.
And and with that being said if
if the motion to table does not
Kerry here I'm gonna have to I'm
gonna have to those no I don't
disagree that something needs to
be done.
But doing something with no
documentation makes no sense
whatsoever.
Your the.
We know the documentations
coming in July.
It was originally supposed to be
completed in April.
We're now told the
documentations not incremental
July I've I've done the research
of asking questions.
People on the.
So with that said.
This bill needs to be tabled.
We need to wait for the for the
data was agreed from the two
thousand nineteen bill.
And with that I yield back my
time thank you madam chair.
Thank you being no other hands
raised I will open the floor for
a motion.
Madam chair I make a motion to
table okay we have a motion to
table do I have a second.
Thank you.
With that Representative Lord.
Yes that was me thank you okay
I'm sorry I'm looking shifting
around and I forget to look at
the right spot so okay we have a
motion to table Allison will you
call the roll please.
Representative Ferreira's.
I'm sorry I'm a little I'm a
little bit confused madam chair
so right now if I can not wanted
to be able to a vote no or am I
able to to pass.
So you don't want it table you
vote no to that so you are
voting on the tabling motion do
you want the table a motion to
to win for lack of a better word
okay I'm sorry about that he has
no.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes the table.
I share more of.
Madam chair Thompson.
Yeah.
No to table.
We have a tight let me and.
Madam chair forgive me sorry.
Okay.
I know you are you are trying to
present a bill in the committee
so this is a motion to table
house bill ninety nine.
Madam chair may I vote yes you
may.
Thank you madam chair I will
vote noted table.
Okay Allison did you get that.
Yes I did okay so by a vote of
three to two the motion fails
and so we are I will entertain
at a different motion.
Madam chair movie to pass okay
we have a motion for two passed
right here second.
I will second.
Okay.
Ellison we call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
No.
With sorry.
Representative.
The no explanation.
Thanks chair.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
So by a vote three to two our
help bill ninety nine has a do
past and will go back to
Representative Lord and that had
a group for an explanation of
their vote yes thank you madam
chair but I wanted to say is I
actually talked to
representative that had worked
on this for years this this
this bill coming to where it is
now and apparently we're not
getting all the empirical data
with this and those are ready
and industry re meant to reduce
the APR from one seventy five
thirty six they were just
waiting for the data we didn't
need this right not right now
and the data was supposed to be
here I believe in April and
that's been the moved to
possibly Jim so that's why I'm
voting no on this thank you.
Thank you Representative Lara
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and again
I'm just going to echo exactly
what Representative Lord just
said there was no reason for
this bill agreements made should
be kept.
And and.
This this is completely
unfortunate bill and should not
have ever been brought to us
thank you madam chair.
Thank you okay we will go on
with house bill one forty
Representative Baksh.
Representative back did you have
an expert witness we need to
lead and.
Yes I have an expert witness and
he's in already okay okay so
whenever you're ready go ahead.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members and thank you
for letting us president I'm
here to introduce house bill one
forty the purpose of this bill
is to eliminate mandatory
sentences for many
cases virtually every case
except for first degree murder
and D. W. a Y..
This is simply an issue of
principle where criminal justice
experts agree that mandatory
sentences have unintended
negative results for the system
and allowing the system to work
fairly promotes confidence in
the system this bill is very
straightforward it simply
eliminates the mandatory part of
sentences and leaves the
penalties in place this is not
to argue about the harshness
over length of a sentence only
the judge should have a say upon
hearing those interested in the
particular case including the
prosecutor the defense attorney
and victims.
A mandatory sentence doesn't
allow for the interplay but
rather to starts the system by
removing the discretion of
lawfully selected judges and
transfers it to prosecutors we
expect our judges to listen to
both sides of an argument and
make a reasoned judgment about
the penalty.
Prosecutors use penalties as a
leverage in plea bargaining
potentially causing more unfair
results when they circumvent
mandatory sentences to gain a
conviction of something else.
I want to be clear about one
thing.
This bill does not seek to
lessen or eliminate penalties
it simply eliminating the
mandatory nature of penalties.
We pride ourselves in this
country about making
individualized decisions about
people and this bill protects
that concept and provides for a
more rational and fares more
rational and fair sentences that
do do not distort the judicial
system.
I would also like to make clear
that this bill is not deceptive
for hiding something it was
drafted with game and fish
penalties violations
in the order in which is the
statutes of here.
And
And help their healthcare
organized so with that I would
like to introduce my expert
witness
Mr Michael staff out.
And
Perhaps he has something to add.
Thank you madam chair members of
the community the committee and
thank you Representative that.
I'm going to echo in some
respect what Representative
bashes said this bill is
actually one step.
And the in the pursuit of.
Criminal justice reform that we
have all been
hearing about stand talking
about in thinking about over
especially the recent and at the
last few years this is a reform
measure that makes the.
Come out justice system.
Sarah more accurate in having
more appropriate results.
This bill is not about what.
The Senate should be whether
someone should be sentenced to
the penitentiary for.
Excuse or or or whatever that's
not what the bill is about this
bill that that can be argued and
and should be that is a little
bit about source of argument
that should be made separately
in terms of what is an
appropriate range of sentence
for any particular crime but
this bill is really about.
How was the decision made and
who decides
Our system is a as
Representative bash eloquently
said the that we talk about all
the time about individualization
and having having information so
that we can make.
Make good decisions that we have
full information I have data and
research and we have and we try
to make an individual decision
about individual situations and
no two situations are exactly
the side so we we can't paint
with a broad brush and think
that every every.
Every crime is committed as bad
as a crime might be isn't all
the same that they all get
treated exactly the same
When we decide we we are
deciding Garcia our system looks
at we have a judge who sits a
sentence based on the range set
by you by the legislature.
The legislative body does its
best to try to try to reach
reflect what is a legitimate and
appropriate sentence in a range
of situations so we have a range
of possible sentences in order
to do that the judge bases the
decision on several things.
One is of course the whatever
the circumstances of a
particular crime are because
each each crime has different
circumstances even if they have
the same basic elements of an
offense there are different
circumstances and and no one is
exactly the same as as another
the second is the there are
victims who are involved to
have different.
Different situation summered
some are have different damages
are have different harm have
different attitudes about the
situation have different
responses and victims native is
under our constitution victims
are to be considered as well and
of course.
Also the judge
It needs to do to needs to
consider the circumstances of
the individual defendants who
has either been.
found guilty or has pleaded
guilty to a particular crime and
because we we have to make
decisions about it particularly
individuals this person
redeemable or do you think that
perhaps there not that we this
person need help in a particular
direction to they need mental
help to any substance abuse help
that they need.
Or what else that what do they
need do they need to be
incarcerated for the rest of
their life for for most of their
life.
There everybody every individual
defendant has a different
circumstance that needs to be
considered
So and so the question is what
did a particular person do why
did they do it why did it come
about on this stage what is what
led up to this and what kind of
life they had before what kind
of life we predict that they had
have in the future
So so who is this person I
thought it was interesting to
hear a I thought the
Representative pedigree was
quiet yeah we're taught many
different bill before but he was
saying.
Doing something in making a
decision without research with
that data is wrong to do and
that's that's what the that's
right that's what the
legislature essentially tries to
do it I know they're trying to
everybody everybody's well
intentioned and try to do the
right thing with when they say
anybody convicted of a
particular crime will have this
sentence it ends up having
abuses resulted abuses and not
and then and fans the
legislature is unable as much as
it wants to as much as well
intentioned as as it is it's
unable to accurately predict
what any particular situation is
going to be in the future can't
know what the circumstances
can't know who is involved can't
know what the particulars are
you can't.
When and when you have a
mandatory sentence.
You are kind of pretending that
well everything fits in the same
in the in the same situation so
yes this is a.
The biggest problem is a big
problem with mandatory sentences
is it takes the decision making
away from that entity that we
trust to make those decisions
that is the judiciary.
and gives it to essentially the
prosecutor so the prosecutor I
know prosecutor I haven't talked
to any but I'm certain it will
propose will oppose this but the
problem is of course nationally
they would because you're gonna
take leverage away from them
because mandatory sentences are
routinely used as leverage to
plead to something different.
People cannot defend its often
cannot take the risk even if
they have a meritorious case
cannot take the risk of going to
trial and losing if they're
gonna be.
Senate have to serve whatever it
is eighteen years or however
many mandatory years in this and
so they often perhaps we
disrupted even the didn't even
did so the the decision making
process in the system is
distorted it's such huge it says
the the the leverages put in the
wrong place what we want to do
is have what two sides the
prosecution defense and of
course the victim as well all be
heard in the referee of the
judge make make decisions
anything we wouldn't have Tom
Brady make decisions about what
the penalties are in again and
that's just a game it's a that
tortured metaphor but we
wouldn't have one person make
those decisions in a game that
we shouldn't do that in our
justice system as well and so in
there are many.
The entities throughout that are
considering this many states
have lessened their mandatory
penalties with with no are.
President Biden has spoken to
the elimination mandatory
minimums and I think it's time
to to eliminate those this time
I would.
Stand for questions if you have
any madam chair and members
thank you.
Thank you I'm Representative
bash did you have anything else.
If she's available Andrea Romero
representative Andrea Romero is
a co sponsor of this bill and I
don't know if she has anything
to add with your permission.
Yes please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and and art into
our experts I'm signed on to
this bill for the reason that I
think we've already heard
strongly in support of reforming
our criminal justice system I
think there still room from and
for improvement we've heard a
lot about this bill as well I
think we're open to
opportunities and ways of being
sure that everyone's made safe
but again we want the due
process of the law to to really
shine through as far as what we
intend for for everyone stay in
court and for the folks that
certainly should be able to
provide be provided an
opportunity to defend themselves
in the court of law so madam
chair representative I just want
to put forth it again we're
we're trying to reform the the
mandatory minimums that we've
discussed and that's the
universality that approach that
we've we've really provided here
thank you madam chair thank you
representative.
Okay thank you so I I'm just
gonna take a ticket chairs
privilege I have gotten a ton of
emails that talk about this bill
being a Trojan horse in that
that starts with game and fish
and goes to criminal sexual
penetration and let me say.
That's not it that that is not
what this bill does it in to
read our bills the only thing
that's new is where it says new
material or where something is
it has a line through it or is
underlines often has a line
through it that is going to go
away if it's underlying that is
new language so this was not an
attempt to put anything through
by putting game and fish that's
actually how our laws are set up
on the books right now so any of
you who are who are really upset
that that this is an attempt to
put
put really at in under game and
fish that that is not the intent
at all that's just how are how
are are booked for lack of a
better word are written so so I
I'm sorry with that confusion
So at.
So I will let's go to the poll
so hopefully you all know what
you're doing so on the bottom of
your screen is a poll madam
chair and just it just in the
due process of everything since
there are some changes that we
would like to make to that I
would be able
okay with smoke moving to table
right now to make those changes.
I'm Representative fashion and
Romero what we could do instead
is to just not not take any
official action just to roll it
to give you a chance to work on
the amendments that you might
have and so we we will not we
will not hear public comment at
all because if we table it we
will hear public comment but if
you are still working on it I
suggest that we roll this bill
and tell a future meeting if
that is not unacceptable to the
Sanchez.
Madam chair yes.
I would I would second that
motion with with the addition of
okay comments be brought to when
this bill is free heard.
Correct that that will be that
will be how it will go we what
we will allow the Sanchez to do
a brief introduction and we will
go we will go back essentially
and start with the public and
the public comment but at this
point I don't feel like it's
fair to take public comment on a
bill that may be markedly
different so we will just it
with the sponsors permission we
will just stop this right here
we will roll this bill over to a
future meeting and allow them
time to our to.
To work on it and I also am
concerned that I have gotten a
lot of emails and a lot of calls
with people who were really
upset in that they didn't
understand how this works and I
am the first one to admit that
it on first glance it looks like
an oh my god kind of moment but
when you understand are crazy
system it's not quite so much so
Representative Pettigrew did you
have something else.
Sure yes a point of order
emotional and was made in the
second was was followed I think
vote follows based on the rules
of the committee right there was
no motion here yet because that
we hadn't taken public comment
yet.
So.
I'm sorry madam chair I thought
I heard Representative Romero
make motion.
Madam chair representative I
would get was a suggestion at
the time just because we do want
to be able to work on it I
understand madam chair to the
anything that is tabled is
always temporary as well but
that said I think rolling it and
working on it at this point in
time madam chair representative
when that.
I think that would be the
appropriate way of dealing with
that in particular why I
interjected madam chair
Representative parent Pettigrew
was so that we could save the
public some time and ourselves
sometime on debating knowing
that we do intend to make some
changes having burned a lot of
in but thank you madam chair.
Representative Pettigrew that's
exactly right rather than take
public comment on a bill that
may look markedly different and
and waste people's time I I
preferred that we not actually
do the vote and and hear the
public comment at this point but
do that the kind of unofficial
roll it over at the request of
the Sanchez so that's where we
are now so thank you
Representative fashion
Representative Romero and
Michael stout so we are going to
roll that over until a future
date and so now we are going to
thank you madam chair you think
members.
I'm house bill one forty four
which is representative I think
my wants are lining up
Representative Dixon are you
your Representative Dixon if
she's here you let her in.
There she is.
Representative Dixon whenever do
we do have a an expert witness
you need in I do have several
and hopefully they're in
in the it would be a branch more
Jason Weaks and then to make on
ago.
And I know Brent is in
Jason is logging in and I think
Manda is already.
And then
I have the co sponsors
Representative my Estes and
Representative Rehm and so.
By may need additional guidance
because we do have an amendment
madam chair so.
Okay so let's see.
I think we are waiting for some
of your X. I. C. one expert
witness everything keeps that
what can I see your post Sanchez
and and for those of you who are
raising your hands please don't
rush to raise your hands because
I will call on you I will give
you a chance I promise because
we will do up against the bill
and for it so if you have your
hand raised already we won't
know which way you want the
fight so I promise you this
committee so far has been able
to allow everyone to speak you
will get your chance to speak if
you get too wordy I may have to
do what put a clock up but but
so just keep your hands down and
when the right when the time
comes I promise I will allow you
to speak so go ahead
Representative Dixon I think do
you have everybody in that you
need.
I think madam chair we can
probably go ahead and start
But given the amendment if you
could guide me in the
appropriate order let me go
through Representative Pettigrew
I saw his handout so thank you
madam chair point of order
please
I I don't have an amendment for
this bill was it was an issue
twenty four hours in advance for
the
Committee agreements.
Miss madam chair Representative
Pettigrew it was it was sent
directly from the drafter to the
Committee.
Representative Dixon is it is it
is substantive amendment.
It is okay.
Okay let me let me ask my
analysts did you all receive the
amendment.
I am seeing some shaking madam
chair from inject I talked to my
analysts and she never received
the amendment and I haven't seen
it either thank you.
Okay okay we have had some
issues with among others with
getting things that disseminated
so unfortunately I'm we are
sticking to the twenty four hour
rule so I'm it.
It's it's up to you you could
move forward with the bill as is
and Amanda before your next
committee or we can roll you and
Representative Representative my
Estes if you're if you're on you
may want to come on and and
advise your co sponsor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
honorable members I I think of
folks are here folks here to
speak for again such as this and
have the hearing and and have
the Committee take action on it.
we could explain the amendment
or not but I I would suggest we
move forward I think I think it
has relatively strong support
to.
Okay well in that case
Representative Pettigrew.
Sure we just rolled right bill
House bill one forty based on
some subject significant changes
that are going to happen.
Unfortunately the bill right
before house bill ninety nine
went to vote even the the
Sanchez agreed that they were
gonna have substantial changes
before it makes the next
committee I think we're getting
to a point madam chair that we
really need to have these
conversations you know it are we
going to follow one forty at or
we're gonna follow ninety nine
or we can follow one forty four
how are we gonna set this and
and and a call I apologize I'm
I'm I'm working and I don't have
a whole my emotions of some
point but the the.
I'm getting confused on on how
we how we handle rules.
Representative Pettigrew I'm
free it's it's the Sanchez how
they want to handle things
So it.
Wait what we will be passing or
cabling is the their bill as it
is right now I'm a frequently
happens that that as things move
their committee substitute that
sometimes almost completely
change a bill in the next
committee and and that that's
just how our system works so I'm
I am the only hard and fast rule
that we have at this point is
twenty four hours notice on an
amendment that makes the
substantive change and the
sponsors have decided to not
bring that amendment forward so
we are moving on with the bill
as it is if it's on passable
without that amendment in this
committee that it's passable
without that amendment in the
committee I'm it's pretty much
up to the Sanchez how they want
to move things so it's not
really up up to me as the chair
or up to us as a committee
except to say it's acceptable to
move on or it's not.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you okay go ahead there
are more I'm sorry
Representative Dixon and my my
S. that go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
And members of the committee the
purpose of house bill one forty
four property damage by theft is
to create a just and balanced
statute that specifically
criminalizes the combined acts
of theft of regulated material
in the resulting criminal damage
that has a rule that has
reasonable criminal penalties
including the requirement to pay
restitution.
Metal theft is an ongoing
statewide problem and the issue
isn't just the loss of the metal
but also the significant
property damage that results
from both attempted and
successful acts of that.
Two examples around two hundred
to five hundred dollars of
copper wire was stolen from a
Santa Fe church around Christmas
twenty thirteen that staffed
because more than eighty
thousand dollars in damage when
the boiler cracked.
In Albuquerque.
The city experience sixteen
thousand dollars worth in copper
theft from street lights in
February alone accounting for
twenty six percent of all
maintenance costs of street
lights in in the last two years
the city's total copper theft
bill has topped eight hundred
thousand dollars and those are
just facts of city owned copper
utilities and private businesses
have been hard hit as well.
Metal theft is a frustrating
challenge for businesses the
community and law enforcement
due to the costly damage to
property even when relatively
small amounts of regulated
material are stolen.
When individuals attempt or
succeed in stealing regulated
material attached to a building
or other structure typically
cause significant criminal
damage to the owner's property
which is all which is almost
always far exceeds the actual
value of the metal taken.
Are creating without this a
specific statute that
criminalizes the combined act.
or attempted theft of a
regulated material and the
resulting criminal damage many
of these cases go unprosecuted
and there's not a significant
statutory determined.
Deterrent sorry.
And with that madam chair and
members of the committee if I
may see if my co sponsors would
like to say anything and then
introduce our expert witnesses.
Go ahead Representative Mathis.
Thank you very much of Madam
chairman of all members so just
just briefly you know stealing
is larceny it's a crime to steal
it's known as Larson in our
criminal code and so if if if
someone were to steal the
battery out of my car we
wouldn't charge them with
criminal damage you know the
cost of repairing my car would
be charged with stealing this is
a weird space in which you could
steal three dollars for the
copper.
It costs tens of thousands of
dollars were the damages and and
without you knowing your
intended your agenda isn't it
damages so it's so as a couple
damages that larceny this
captures that.
In a very clear way and sends a
message to law enforcement that
this is a very serious crime
because of the the heck the
havoc that it creates on
neighborhoods and on and on the
cost of repair so we would ask
it's come it's come to this
committee in two or three
iterations the past couple three
years we have some great legal
minds looking at it now and we
think we
We got a fantastic compromise
and not and I hope I hope the
committee supports thank you.
Thank you and then whichever of
your expert witnesses want to or
or I'm sorry Representative
remind you did you have
something you wanted to add.
Madam chair and members of the
committee there's not a single
one of us who hasn't been
contacted by a business and our
district that's been affected by
this we're finding individuals
are stealing a few hundred
twelve dollars worth of copper
out of the power box for a
business but causing thousands
of dollars of damage and so we
need to address this to go ahead
and stop this type of crime
thank you.
Okay thank you and now
Representative Dixon whoever you
are.
Madam chair I believe that men
to Madonna goal is an expert
witness and I don't know if
she's been moved from attendees
to our panelists I think Allison
is working on that right now.
And then the other expert
witness
Brent Moore if he's already a
panelist perhaps you could go
and then into thank you I see
Brandt go ahead Brandt.
Madam chair members of the
committee I appreciate your
indulgence.
My name is read more of a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico association of realtors
we work with the metal recyclers
on a compromise approach
unfortunately that the full
parts of the compromise didn't
reach the committee in time and
we definitely want to be
respectful of this committee and
their opportunity to weigh in on
the proposal the portions of the
amendments that the realtors
asked for in the sponsors that
agreed to and that the other
members have agreed to are in
the amendment so we're more than
happy to proceed through this
committee but we do want to want
to provide information to this
committee to know what that for
compromises so definitely don't
want to do real things but do
want you to understand is what
the criminal provision this
criminal provisions in civil
provisions that we've all come
together and agreed to in order
to address copper so I
definitely don't want to slow
this down because it's a
meaningful improvement to the
law and to and it will address a
very specific problem that we're
seeing in our communities so I
can address the Civil questions
and I believe Mr weeks can
address the criminal provisions.
Yes and madam chair I believe
that Mr weeks it is on also.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you
Representative Dixon so yeah I I
speaking come specifically to
the criminal portions of this
legislation I'm a registered
lobbyist for the medical metal
recyclers
really the issue is that we
wanted to create a comprehensive
statute because prosecuting
these two lateral statutes has
been difficult for prosecutors
it's been hard for law
enforcement officers to craft
Committee plants that are
sufficient
so what we're trying to do is
create a criminal approach the
that takes into account two
types of independent criminal
behavior both larceny and
criminal damage because in this
unique circumstance criminal
damage is often the thing that
costs more than on the actual
value of the metal the material
taken so that's why we're doing
this the statute is targeted
it's targeted so that that we
can both prosecute this and this
pretty serious problem that
quite frankly the minute place
utility companies thanks
homeowners wings home builders
and we need to do something to
directly address it as part more
said there's some civil stuff
that we're gonna add as well to
serve a comprehensive package
quite frankly it's industry us
to regulate industry to a
certain point which you don't
often see but you know it this
is an industry that saying Hey
we need to we need to actually
that out these bad actors and
stop something that has a
significant harm to our
community also creates very
equitable penalties on some of
the amendments adjusted the
penalties a little bit but in in
total there are very equitable
penalties were not trying to
throw somebody in jail for three
years or nine years because they
are geisha property crime with
that I'll turn it back to
Representative Texas she has
anything else to say.
Thank you madam chair I think at
this point we could
then the zoom and it would be
great if she could provide just
a little bit of the history
behind this thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
we have been working on this a
lot of us for several years and
it is great that it is now
finally coming together to where
we have halfway the combines
property damage and that to me
tempted metal that in in one
statute we think that this is
going to just really helpful for
us more successful and more
robust prosecution we have been
seeing that the victims
stakeholders are very broad
diverse group there in the
public sector private sector in
just runs the gamut and the
thing is is in the property
damage that has been so chaotic
and so devastating and almost
impossible to address or redress
so the criminal portion of this
the point is to find it that way
we can have everyone more
interested and more confident
about being able to.
Forward in addressing and
frankly frightening metalcraft
the second portion of the bill
goes in the amendment speaks to
the recycled metals act which is
the governing act where are
metal recyclers we appreciate
the frustration out there with
the thing to stakeholders and
asked such work with the New
Mexico association of realtors
come up with some some changes
that we think provide clarity in
is.
Further means the intention of
the legislation arms I know
we're going to our next
committee please now this bill
is providing availability of
hollow yeah we're going to be
able to help neighborhoods
businesses.
The service organizations just
everyone in terms of.
Trying to get ahead in the
middle.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so we will go to the
audience we will try our fan
fancy new act Tory again will do
the poll so I'm Alison Alison is
just to on top of things so
please our.
What I'll give you a few more
seconds to vote.
Okay so we have a.
Ninety one in favor ninety one
percent in favor and nine
percent in opposition so we will
close the poll.
And now we will go to public
comment so on on the bottom of
the page under participants if
you are in opposition to this
bill and would like to speak
please raise your hand.
Okay I'm not seeing anything
there so if you are in support
of this bill and would like to
get public comment please raise
your hand.
Okay we'll go ahead and get
started we'll start with that J.
D. J. D. Bollington.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to confirm this is we're
now house bill one forty five.
We know we are on house bill one
forty four I'm sorry I apologize
Is I I thought you know to going
on is tested by by.
Okay that's probably partly my
fault Allison you know we might
want to think about somehow
having a.
Just the bill number some more
up so when people are doing that
they can I I don't know how but
just for future reference so
people are and are more clear
about what bill were aren't and
I apologize if I have been
confusing my husband says I'm
confusing all the time so so I'm
just take it take it with with a
grain of salt so next is Kevin
Groenewald and Kevin I hope I I
should know how to pronounce
your name but obviously I don't.
That was good.
Good afternoon members of the
committee and madam chair my
name's Kevin grow wild on the
CEO of the New Mexico role after
crop Association and I'd like to
thank the sponsors for bringing
forward this bill this has been
an ongoing problem for probably
fifteen to twenty years then
copper prices started rides.
We see we see damages were they
cut out the ground network at
substations that will cost tens
of thousands and hundreds of
thousand dollars damage and
sometimes so result in your very
like the power out.
On the ground wires off our
power poles which creates a very
unsafe situation for our line
crews that go out and
The service those lot of times
in million might not known that
the polls are grounded and you
know just just in general we've
been trying to get a long place
that actually has some teeth in
it probably fifteen years so
thanks to sponsors to bring this
forward the call stands for.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Now we have in M. A. R. Santa
Fe.
Madam chair of this is us
Stephen I am the CEO The New
Mexico association of realtors
can you hear me yes we can hear
you all right thanks this is
been one of our our priorities
are commercial law all lenders
residential as well it's become
a very big issue and has
Representative Rehm did mention
of thousands of dollars of
damage to.
To a lot of these buildings and
then they turn around selling
for peanuts and then get a slap
on the wrist so we've been
working with the responsible
metal recyclers initiative and
not we think this two pronged
approach one with the criminals
and one that can tighten up the
restrictions that the metal
dealers have hello Bob put on
and not so we stand in support
of this you know once the
amendments go in the next the
committee thank you.
Thank you I'm bill Kerr.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is bill Kerr I'm the operations
manager for acne are to meddle
in Albuquerque and founding
member of the responsible metal
recyclers initiative speaking on
behalf of our organization
members companies we stand in
support of house bill one forty
four because it creates a
criminal statute that we believe
will be effective in fighting
battles that we also work
closely with the New Mexico
association of realtors and
support the proposed amendments
to the sale of recycled metals
Act thank you for your time.
Thank you Michael right.
Thank you for hearing me here my
name is Michael right from the
executive director of the New
Mexico roofing contractors
association
as that I'm also in charge of
keeping the construction
industry's crime Alliance moving
which is a piece within the City
of Albuquerque
has a program that works with
connect A. B. Q. and we've been
working for years with the PD
and for a couple of years with
the responsible the metal
recyclers group to try to move
the legislation forward that
would support.
And help.
Make it possible for the
responsible metal recycling
companies to do a better job of
helping ensure that criminals
who are trying to sell stolen
materials are
Are being held accountable and
are able to be held accountable
so we stand and great support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you I'm mmhm Michael
d'antonio.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
I Mike utility with the Xcel
energy we are fully support this
bill no the metal surface copper
prices go up metal staff seems
to also increase and many of our
substations and other facilities
have copper you have been
vandalized.
One of the no faxes that on the
customer side the meter there's
a lot of sense does well and a
lot of damage and unfortunately
some of these folks have been
severely injured or even killed
trying to steal copper from
lives.
The equipment to and so anything
that deters the safety of our
our folks out there political
plus also
Hey discourages this is the work
will be it's part of thank you
for.
Thank you that is all the public
comment so I will go back to the
committee for any question oh
wait let me see okay never mind
I thought hand that but then it
went away so Representative
Romero Representative
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam members of the committee
and thank you for the public
comments we chatted through a
lot of this through the interim
and I've had discussions with
the construction industry the
realtors and I so appreciate
the intent of the bill
unfortunately I think with the
way that it's currently written
in it's eight so lacking in a
lot of the questions that we
typically ask and this committee
and in particular you know
You know from the analysis that
we have in and some of the
questions we have on creating
new crimes to be able to prevent
some of these things from
happening
you know the the question goes
back to how do we actually
prevent this from happening by
creating this crime so madam
chair because you know because
theft is already a crime you
know being able to do that even
with the recycling situation you
know we battle this out quite a
bit on this committee as far as
how to be able to balance that
that interest with wanting to
prevent that from happening but
actually preventing it from
happening and typically the
increase of of of the the
penalty is not preventive for
that so how does this bill how
can we justify this billing that
way without seeing some of the
substantive changes that the
that Representative Dixon had
referred to at the beginning of
the meeting I'm just concerned
that the way that it's written
right now it's unclear.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to referred
to either my co sponsors for an
initial response thank you madam
chair Representative Romero
Representative Dixon no great
question great question.
The of the punishment should fit
the crime you know the
punishment should fit the crime
I think on the poster child for
no new crimes in the legislature
but in less and less it's
absolutely necessary my my
philosophy is if it's wasn't a
crime under years ago it should
be a crime today illicit deals
with technology or or modern set
of circumstances a car computer
or this particular situation the
crime today if I still.
You know two hundred forty nine
dollars worth of copper the
crime is a petty larceny.
The equivalent of stealing a
pack of cigarettes from the
Walmart.
The damage done could take out a
whole bread for for a night it
could cost the company three
hundred thousand dollars to
repair it's the the the the harm
done to society does not is not
reflective in a petty larceny
charge and so what this does is
this as
and it's not going to
demonstrate the if the DA were
to charge from that was the
price lose because there's no
intent to damage your agenda
isn't to damage your agenda is
to steal the copper and sell it.
So what this this bill gets at
that particular set of
circumstances where they're
stealing you know what about for
the copper they're not it's not
a dealer and was not a petty
misdemeanor misdemeanor but it
is in fact a major crime that
that this is going on and should
be treated up by the cops DA's
judges accordingly you know it's
a fourth up and I think we we
solve crime that hospital to not
necessarily in the criminal code
charges with you madam chair of
general Merrill but I believe
that that this this is necessary
on the necessary to have on the
books thank you madam all right
yeah.
Share
You madam chair representative
on that that same vein I think
the the question is about the
damage to as to how that will be
calculated my asked that
question Madam chair
representative because.
We know that not many people
aspire to be copper thieves
that's not the intent of how the
why these crimes appear before
us often and and I know in our
community it's their crimes of
of poverty their crimes of
addiction other crimes they get
committed under the guise of of
other circumstances
I think that as far as the end
product of of the motivation to
be able to sell it and how that
occurs a the intent of the bill
is absolutely there I'm chair
representative but when it when
it comes to some of those
preventive measures we're at the
taxpayers of New Mexico are
going to inherit a lot of these
questions on damages with the
folks who are committing these
crimes how are we going to
calculate that Madam chair
representative.
I'm Madam chair representative
if I could turn to our expert
Jason Weaks.
Thank you.
Madam chair Representative
Romero in calculate damages
based on what the stated damages
from the property owner are
property owners going to assess
the damages and given statement
about the damages certainly that
information SB included within a
criminal complaint to get past
the initial where are the
charges sorry my my daughter's
in the background seek me and
hearing some yell yelling and
trying to occupier with the with
the cartoon that only works
sometimes it any rate that's how
they'll calculate the damages I
mean is it going to be a
statement from the property
owner yes but typically it is a
statement from the property
owner and you can go towards
their market value and you can
do a whole assessment to to make
sure that the property owners
not inflating the value it'll
work much like record criminal
damage to property statutes work
in the state you know the the
property oral say Hey this is
how much it's going to work cost
to repair and replace and I
think that's the language you
use is repair the damage so it
will be a a cost driver based on
how much it'll cost to repair
and if that goes above twenty
five hundred dollars which would
include the actual underlying
value of the the regulated
material then it'll be a felony
and some of the equipment
cleaned up some of the issues
within the the bill we just some
oversights on drafting so you
know we'll created such a petty
misdemeanor for misdemeanor and
then just a felony
and anything below twenty five
hundred will be a lower offense
anything about twenty five
hundred or twelve hundred above
the old family hope that answers
the question but it'll be
calculated in much the same way
that criminal damage is
presently calculated under the
current criminal damage statute.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative and chase and I
think that so it sort of gets me
caught back up and that level of
why we are creating the new
crime again if we can go through
that process of getting damaged
calculated and yet now again the
motivation on theft and whatnot
I see Representative my S. this
working with me on this question
so if you wouldn't mind
responding Representative thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative role metal right
now all.
You can't charge them with
criminal damage there's no
intent to damage the property is
not their primary.
Focused that so you have the use
the larceny statute and the
Larson and the the the larceny
statute.
is a reflective of the of that
criminal damage amount.
So it's kind of this weird like
previous madam chair present
preventive previous bills we
kind of did this morphing of the
crippled image statute on the
larceny statute and we've tried
to do different creative things
to capture this this collect and
we think this languages by the
best we've we've had before this
committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative oh sorry.
Madam chair Representative
Romero I think Representative my
sis is absolutely hitting on the
key of this right I go and I try
to steal something I cause
criminal damage I'm not going to
get charges criminal damage a
miniature for larceny and then
an officer tries to write it up
as a felony within the criminal
complaint with the fair market
value of the relevant material
is a lot less than significant
permanent damage hi costs by
trying to take the regulated
material so really these cases
are basically going unprosecuted
at present which in all honesty
creates a problem because we're
not protecting developers were
not protecting folks are going
to invest year we're not
protecting public utilities and
so that we want to opt for that
protection so that we can push
forward with economic
development we create a
situation where we punish
offenses would punish
individuals for committing the
specific type of offense which
quite frankly the president
really isn't being prosecuted.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative injuries and for
that response.
I'm still trying to understand
the deterrent effect though and
that's where I'm really stuck
with with part of this Madam
chair representative and experts
is that I I and I spoke to the
realtors about some of this I
think in interim session what I
would I I had asked what it have
we ever tried putting up a sign
or something on a on a job site
saying you know you're going to
prison for a hundred years and
it's a you know fifty thousand
dollar fine if you're caught
doing this is something that
corresponds to the folks who are
doing these kinds of crimes as a
deterrent from doing that does
that work does the fence around
the job site work you know
thinking more creatively about
how we prevent folks from
creating those crimes and we
don't want to add any additional
cost to the victims of course of
these crimes as well but that
said I think Madam chair
representative we have to be
more creative about that
deterrent effect when it comes
to this I I understand the
intent of the bill and I'm still
wrestling with my position on it
just because of you know
creating more crimes without the
deterrent and if we did have
something like posted.
That talks about the penalty
perhaps for that crimes of the
to see if that was more of a
tern deterrent I think that
would be even more of a way for
me to at least say that folks
knew that maybe you if they
chose to do this or didn't do it
knowing what the crime would be
if there was something presented
that they that they would now
know that the additional added
You know it criminal prosecution
to that to that crime in the
intent that they didn't have
perhaps previously but now that
they do was attached to that as
well so again I'm wrestling on
the the deterrent effect and and
how we might be able to to do
that more responsibly with those
those areas those job sites
leaving my family works in
construction this is a this is a
nuisance it's terrible it's a
cost and the victims of these
crimes are are absolutely having
to increase their spending on
something that they never wanted
to have to so I I'm again I'm
wrestling I'm all see at how the
how the vote goes thank you for
presenting this I agree with the
intent wrestling with that with
the deterrent effect thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam vice chair
Representative Lord.
Yes I'm thank you thank you
madam chair I am incredibly
frustrated because it's been a
couple times I didn't get all
the information on a bill and I
went checked my email I do not
have an amendment I checked to
the file share do not have the
amendment I checked with my
analyst she does not have the
amendment and my system does not
have the amendment I was
prepared to vote yes possibly on
this bill but without knowing
all the facts I it leaves me in
a bad position and I really wish
you would roll this over so that
I could have made a decision
what's best for my constituents
and what's best for the state
but I don't know even know what
the amendment is so I just want
to express my frustration
I don't know the amendment is
thank you Representative Lord
I'm not sure if you heard
they that the amendment did get
out but it didn't get where it
needed to go so that the
sponsors have decided to move
forward with that bill unamended
that this what we're looking at
right now is the bill as it is
written and we can make you know
what we we can I can ask if the
Sanchez maybe want to roll it
until Thursday and get the
amendment and or we can
we are.
actually Representative had a
group so I'm just throwing it
out there what our options are
you can choose to roll what we
can but or I will entertain a
motion so I will go to
Representative Pettigrew and and
perhaps that.
You all can think about how you
want to go forward with this so
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one or two comments number
one I I am in support of the
bill is written and and.
I made some calls Stearns during
some of the United I have has a
chance resentment but that being
said.
We do need to have that
conversation maybe just as a
committee before we start the
next meeting on how how we're
gonna.
You know.
Percy but.
That means.
I was and and and and still am
in favor of this bill as
written.
One of the comments that I do
want to have because this just
came up.
And and response to former
committee members comments in in
house bill ninety nine.
Right before we voted yes on
house bill ninety nine the work
Representative that was
presenting for house bill ninety
nine made the statement that
lawsuits from our law and
lawsuits are necessary to create
deterrents.
The committee voted to pass that
bill.
Now we're having to may debate
and we're debating on whether or
not lawsuits and criminal
activity.
Go hand in hand.
One of the corporation the other
one to big corporations so
that's not the that's not the
things float flown together here
so I'm trying to figure out how
we're making and and I
understand everybody's supposed
independent.
But.
We both yes on one bill.
Where we need to have a law we
need to be able criminally for
soon people.
two bills later we don't want to
have a long where we came from
we pursue people madam chair I'm
just I'm kind of confused thank
you madam chair.
Representative Pettigrew I don't
think you're alone in your
confusion so I'm going to go
back to the Sanchez and and
asked if you want us to go out
if you want me to go ahead with
the motion or if you prefer to
just roll this bill get the
amendments out this evening to
our analysts are two hours then
to all of the members and then
we will put you I'm at the top
of the list on Thursday if
that's how you would prefer to
to move forward.
I'm chair I think that of the
that would be the best course of
action okay thank thank you your
yes I we're we're we're all kind
of.
We're all in this together and
we're we're bailing as fast as
we care and sometimes the whole
in our boat gets to be too much
and so we will roll with and and
I will I will just say this I'm
please get get any amendments to
allicin
and if you don't it's Alison
linking but she's the committee
secretary please get your
amendments to her and I'm gonna
make it public now Allison as
soon as you get an amendment.
Please send it out to all
committee members and all
analyst and then we will have it
we will have a out a way to
track that so so we are going to
roll over one forty four and now
Representative Dixon you are on
again for one forty five and we
will move to that if you have
any other witnesses you need to
bring on board or co sponsors go
ahead and but I want to know who
they are now.
I thank you madam chair I do
have to expert witnesses we sent
their names and Damon Martinez
from APD and
Also a commander of
Luke language from APD.
and also madam chair I did just
forward the amendment to Allison
so if she can confirm receipt
that would be great okay thank
you and and I and just for the
public and for committee members
I we did start out with the
different committee assistant
and so I was in and I have never
even actually met in person
because she replaced the former
Canadian assistance so we are
still trying to trying to figure
out our rules and routines and I
apologize if we drop the ball
but that what's what's the model
of the committee everybody.
Be gentle on yourselves and be
gentle on each other so that's
what we're gonna do we make
mistakes we're going to move on
so whenever you're ready
Representative Dixon.
Madam chair representative and I
don't see anyone by the name of
last name Martinez in the
attendees.
Representative disputed.
Sorry thank you is the commander
up on as well I'll text to them
but I think we're fine could my
co sponsors Representative Rehm
and he is very familiar with
this bill so okay so why don't
you go ahead and get started
Representative Dixon and then
we'll have Representative Rehm
follow up if he needs to
okay I just got that our tax
let's see if I can find it
It says Representative Thomson
we are being evacuated from the
city because of a bomb for at
we're going to APD to logon so
I'm it's just fun and games
every place so I think it's one
of those days where everything
that could go wrong is and so we
will let you start
Representative Representative
Dixon and Representative Rehm
and hopefully you are your
experts will come on if not we
will take a bio break or
something until they get on some
so go ahead Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I'm here to present house bill
one forty five which deals with
chop shops according to the
national insurance crime bureau
New Mexico's auto theft problem
as well now since twenty sixteen
Albuquerque has ranked per
capita number one in the nation
on the national insurance crime
bureau's annual hot spot vehicle
that report moreover New
Mexico's twenty eighteen autos
theft rate per capita with
around double of that of Arizona
and Texas.
It's much smarter for law
enforcement to trace and
identify the parts of a stolen
car as opposed to an intact
stolen car that's what makes
chop shops so lucrative.
Topshop strip and dismantle
stolen vehicles for parts and
then resell the part.
They're a critical step in the
auto theft food chain.
This bill amends the criminal
code to making to make owning or
operating a chop shops illegal
the legislation creates a new
crime knowingly dismantling
stolen motor vehicles and the
crime will carry the penalty of
a third degree felony.
The goal is to deterrent and
prosecute thieves and help
eliminate demand restoring
vehicles by adding this crime to
statute we can provide law
enforcement with an additional
tool to crack down on auto theft
and chop shop owners.
Although law enforcement can
currently charge criminals under
the racketeering statute it is
much more complex and difficult
to prop up process this bill
allows law enforcement to charge
criminals under this new statute
but does not preclude preclude
them from charging criminals
with racketeering if and when
appropriate.
If we don't pass this
legislation we will lose the
opportunity to effectively and
efficiently reduce crime not
only in Albuquerque but
throughout the state of New
Mexico and with that madam chair
I'd like to turn it over to my
co sponsor Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative I think you did a
very good job of explaining the
problem I've been a or I was an
auto theft detective VRA did
prosecute
racketeering they're very
difficult cases
this gives us another staff if
you will in between
the organization and
racketeering.
I want to address a couple
issues that have come up in the
FIR one of on that they said
there's no definition of high
staff component level hi staff
component label when you lift
your head you'll see the serial
number of that vehicle on the
hood and on the two fenders
those are placed on at the
factory and if you go over to
page two one eight you'll see
other distinguishing number or
identification mark that's what
that is so it is defined as an
industry words that that we
years
there's a discussion about
double jeopardy RDAs will go
ahead and address that with the
public defender if there's a
double jeopardy is your and so
it would be solved that way.
And
What we're really looking at and
what this is targeting is big
business the biggest Topshop
idea did a hundred eighty
vehicles in six months so
they're stealing their make a
lot of money this is
disassembling them and selling
those parts around town.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you have you heard from
your ex.
Okay well wake up I'm.
Just.
Yes I'm I have not heard from
them but I think we can continue
to okay
okay so we will now go to the
audience I we will use our handy
dandy new poll and so it gives
you a chance to vote whether you
are in support or against staff
against this bill so go ahead
and and now.
But just hear from you.
I'll give you a few more
seconds.
Okay so we have sixty three
percent in favor and thirty
eight percent in opposition.
So are you will I will now go to
the public for comment so if you
are in opposition to this bill
and would like to speak please
raise your hand.
Okay I'm not seeing anything
there if you are in support of
this bill and would like to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay
we have JD Bullington who was
now here on the correct bill
right J. D..
That's correct madam chair go
thank you.
This is JD Bullington
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we want to thank the sponsor for
bring this forward madam chair
members the committee one of the
ways that crime becomes a
lifestyle in Albuquerque is by
starting off of auto theft so
with respect to this property
crime which is often coupled
with the violent and dangerous
acts the chamber believes a
quote anything and everything
thing we can do end quote
approach is warranted there is a
link in the criminal chain here
that is getting creased without
repercussion and that is the
chop chop chop shop operations
that play a major role in the
auto theft problem in New Mexico
we strongly urge the committee
to pass this bill thank you.
Okay that's the only public
comment I have so I will go to
the committee for questions.
Okay Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I remember this
bill from your predecessor and
I I we absolutely know this is
such a major issue in particular
in the Albuquerque metro area I
I my family member my brother
he's a he's a policeman there
and the chop shops as they've
identified or the real issue and
this is just you know personal
you know stories and the things
that we've heard is that it's
it's really on the market side
of things that sort of Dr some
of that page previous but with
the metal situation I think this
is one of those.
Your indicators where folks are
motivating the sale of of stolen
cars and chopping them up and
selling them for parts and
that's been really identified I
would love to see
some of the data on that so I
can back it up and you know
family stories and and what not
just to be able to talk about
some of those lines other than
just you know sharing my
personal understanding of of
what's gone on in that area and
that that that's really who we
need to hold accountable so I
appreciate your approach and the
bill and and and thank you for
bringing it forth again and with
a lot of those changes that we I
think wrestled with I think was
it just last year so that would
madam chair representative I
think just some of the questions
on the defining Topshop and who
we are really targeting so that
we have that sort of
understanding of the current
criminal enterprise and and how
to look at it more directly and
would love to have some but
clearly in which from what I
understand from what we see so
far in the bill
and then Madam chair
representative if you want to
speak to that please yes a let
you respond.
Madam chair I'll go ahead
responded that and
Representative Romero the big
difference between a shop
Topshop and an automotive repair
shop is in a chop shop we
disassemble the vehicle and we
never reassemble and so if
you're an employee and and
they're taking vehicles a
partner never put them back
together you had a pretty good
idea of what's happening there.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm so that said
I think how do we identify that
from I know that law enforcement
kind of finds these in the
shadows when they are following
those folks moving forward so
Madam chair representative how
are we distinguishing those
enterprises and how do we do
that in statute Madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair and representative I did
want to let you know that are
experts are now on the line and
this might be it I think
Representative Rehm can answer
but they might also be able to
give some up to date statistics
and our shares shed some light
on that thank you the Allison do
you need the names again R. G.
are you able to let them in.
madam chair I do see it there
Martinez.
They may be together.
So so Daymon you are on and
please let us know with if
there's someone else that we
need to allow entry in but go
ahead.
Madam chairwoman of with me this
tonight is commander Luke long
language Montana Jones and
detective Taylor and I'm sorry
we had to literally switch
buildings in the last five
minutes so we're instead of
coming from a larger TV you were
talking to you from a laptop so
so little bit limited but we're
here to speak and if you could
just repeat the question and we
will refer you to the
appropriate expert in a row.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair
Representative do me just
restate the question is that
what I'm we're trying to do okay
SO two two parts one is if you
can speak to any of the data I I
just shared a an anecdotal story
my brothers in law enforcement
so we do talk about the issue of
chop shops and that the market
really does drive the crime
because it's so lucrative and a
lot of the the car theft is
because it's so easy to find a
place to top of the car and sell
it and before you know it those
parts are long gone can you
speak to any data regarding that
sort of anecdotal story is to
what what kind of numbers were
talking about and and how to
identify those top jobs
specifically other than the sort
of one offs when they're able to
identify
those those areas and how it
will help this this statute in
particular how it will help with
preventing those crimes are
finding those market bases that
are generating that opportunity
for for car theft.
Okay madam chair woman and a
distinguished members of the
committee my name is Erin
Johnson lieutenant with the
other police department I
appreciate you giving us the
opportunity to speak this
evening
as far as that question and I if
I can repeat it to make sure
that I that I understand
correctly.
We're asking specifically what
kind of information is out there
to assist law enforcement how do
we identify these locations that
the H. shop shop is essentially
occurring is that correct.
Yes that and you know why the
statue helps.
Prevent those types of market
related crimes
verses what's currently
occurring as far as your
criminal investigations of
yielded.
Okay I understand thank you very
much so.
Namely what we get is is we have
law enforcement resources that
we can use in partnership with
the national insurance crime
bureau who
They notify us of vehicles that
have that where chop shop type
activities occurring there's
there's bread crumbs that
essentially leave law
enforcement to chop shop
locations or chop shops
throughout the city
and there's calls for service
that that will also points to
that direction I think.
For maybe the ease of of
explaining it.
I can start with explaining why
this bill would assist law
enforcement and then we can move
I can prove to detective Taylor
who is the subject matter expert
on identifying chop shops and so
I don't want to miss
speak in that matter but with
the chop shop deep can structure
bill excuse me can do for law
enforcement is it provides the
tools necessary
to.
To essentially address this
issue now I know that everybody
is aware of this after the issue
that it has been in the state of
New Mexico and you're correct
Representative Romero in talking
about.
That the.
The ability to operate chop shop
the market that that it touches
definitely drives the crime and.
Currently since there's nothing
on the books to address chop
shops there's really no there's
nothing on the books to to limit
or to prevents that crime from
from occurring other than some.
I guess you could call them
related statutes but they
they're not effective in
addressing chop shops an example
of that is is you know whenever
we talk about stolen property
possession of stolen property
that is a crime that can be
charged but is not effective in
an addressing and preventing
chop shops because chop shops.
has a pyramid of victims and
what I mean by that is a vehicle
that is chopped up and then
those parts are sold to two
other either no buyers on on the
great markets or even on you
some of the internet markets
that are out there these are
unsuspecting buyers who will
then use those those parts to
put them in their vehicles and
those those unsuspecting buyer
buyers can be victims later on
and so not only is the victim
who got the vehicle stolen from
them then it chopped up is that
arm our source income but then
you also have so many others
that can be putting the stolen
parts unknowingly into their
vehicles they will be secondary
be it that comes as law
enforcement is endorsed by
statute to seize those vehicles
now.
In the interim the people who
are chopping up these vehicles
and selling those parts there's
nothing currently on the books
there's no teeth
with the statute that is
allowing law enforcement to
address it and Furthermore
there's nothing on the books for
our for prosecutors to the use
that they can apply towards the
criminal elements and in these
organized criminal elements who
are chopping up vehicles and
then using
the money to for their crimes.
So when I apologize we're
walking from one building to the
next running up some stairs some
little out of breath right now
but I would like to take this
moment if if you allow it to
pass the computer over to
detective Taylor we can discuss
how we identify chop shops.
Yes chair and members the
committee
names David Taylor of and that
of the detectives since two
thousand twelve.
The.
The opportunity to investigate a
few shops shops so I'm
largescale some of the smaller
the smaller scale
I can give you a few examples of
how these enterprises these
Google enterprise operate.
there is different types of chop
shops so maybe for cell but
switching.
Where.
The.
Have a salvage title to a
vehicle that's obviously no
longer operational.
Say they have a salvage title to
a two thousand ten Chevy pick up
what they'll do is they'll strip
the numbers off that salvage
vehicle.
And then I'll transfer those
numbers on to it like vehicle
that they still another two
thousand ten two thousand eleven
something close within that
model year.
At that point when they transfer
that vehicle or sell it to
whether it's they're doing it to
hide the identity from sail lien
holder or they're going to sell
those vehicles to make a profit
which their profit margin is
very huge because of course this
spent no money to still the
vehicle and then once they take
the the the numbers off that on
the stolen vehicle they're able
to insurance so that with a
salvage title.
That maybe at a lower rate say
this Celebi ical for nine
thousand dollars to unsuspecting
victim.
And then when that victim of
save specifically in Bernalillo
county goes to register that
vehicle and takes it into for
emissions testing we monitor
those emissions reports and we
see that the then number that's
on the on the desk or third in
the the on board diagnostic the
computer of the vehicle is
giving out a different band.
The we investigated I've
investigated probably sixty of
those kinds of cases are ready
where a Vince which vehicle is
been sold to unsuspecting victim
and when we get that emissions
report we can see that the Vince
from a salvage and then that
will be do then is coming back
to a stolen vehicle at that
point in we do on those of
freezes there.
Ability to register the vehicle
and we have to go speak with
them and seize their vehicle now
because of the storm vehicle us
sometimes those vehicles are
insurance pay outs and no
insurance companies a victim of
there for passing on the cost to
us because they're paying out
numerous lawsuits.
And then we have the.
The ones that maybe they had the
vehicle paid off and now a
victim it has paid liability
insurance maybe and get the pay
out and now we're taking the
vehicle from one person giving
it back to another the original
victim and now they're they're
vehicles worth less of for one
thing because it's been been
switched and we have to take off
the false numbers that have been
applied to the vehicle and then
put in New Mexico sign number on
it which creates more hassles of
for them in the long run.
another type of operation of
investigated
is called of vehicle stripping
we had a rather large case.
The individual here who would
still of certain types of
vehicles which he was very good
at working on
and just take these overnight
within the night time he having
surgically stripped down.
With all the doors the trunk the
components the.
Stripped off of it they made the
the major components like the
engine and transmission and turn
this subject would then abandon
those vehicles is operating
Marco truck and we don't those
vehicles
Then they get call then of
course an officer responds out
and then recovers that vehicle
has taken out and see I see on
that point these of this
criminal enterprise would follow
the vehicle to the salvage
process.
because of the the amount of
stripping that's been done the
vehicle gets to carousel which
and they would purchase that
take the vehicles back to their
shop reassemble them and then
selling the salvage vehicles
that they have the title and at
some point maybe throughout the
process able to wash that title
and once the salvage and even
make more money off the vehicles
with those vehicles being
reassigned well by someone
who's.
Not a qualified or insured
mechanic and then passing that
on to the an innocent purchaser
you're buying a vehicle that may
not be up to federal federal
standards as far as safety
anymore I don't know what that's
going to do to someone driving
the family around and that
vehicle or what safety measures
are no longer on the vehicle
just due to the reassembly
process.
Thank you Taylor and if I could
just circle back with one last
thing
the chop shop Bill
would provide the tools
necessary not only for law
enforcement but but also our
partners in the prosecution side
is well with addressing the
individuals this is a as a
secretary Taylor hopefully was
able to Representative to
everybody is that this is a very
complex and organized criminal
ring and there's a huge profit
margin and on the other side of
the profit margin is the
citizens of New Mexico who are
having to pay for
this particular crime and and.
Most notably is anybody that
pays me in New Mexico insurance
or or auto insurance in the
state of New Mexico is paying
for this type of crime through
insurance premiums and without
law enforcement having the
cheese or the tools necessary to
address this particular crime
without the prosecutors having
the tools to address this
particular crime speaking of
chop shops
the victims are not only being
victimized the first time.
Often times the second or third
time but then they're being
victimized with paying insurance
premiums and I would be remiss
if I didn't mention that so
thank you again for the up to
speak.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative and detectives
and experts
this is so important I think to
what we have to address as far
as understanding that entire of
line of of what's happening it
really helps me walk through the
complexity I mean this is so
sophisticated
it was your mind what folks will
go through for it for some of
that and I think with this bill
particularly it does identify
where the the low hanging fruit
is as far as where the we're the
victims get at what you know
where that's where the
challenges on the market side
and where we can actually target
that
for for meeting exactly what
we're trying to do through
through creating those those
criminal statutes that are a you
know identifying exactly where
the problem is so I support your
bill as far as you know what
would be intent and what we're
looking at is and in particular
how thank you for the for
walking us through the the many
many complexities and challenges
of of of how to get there and I
appreciate and commend you for
the for identifying that and and
really going to the source of
the problem so thank you madam
chair and thank you everyone for
indulging me on the questions.
Thank you Representative Romero
I am not seeing any other hands
so I will entertain a motion.
Motion to do past okay so
Representative Pettigrew on the
motion to have a second.
I will second Representative but
address
I can't see everybody will go
ahead and do a a roll call vote
go ahead Allison.
Representative Ferreira's.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Thanks chair Mero yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Okay so by a vote of five to
zero you have a do pass on house
bill one forty five but I'm just
going to throw in there that I
am a little concerned about the
double jeopardy but I totally
trust the people in Judiciary to
rake you over the coals on that
and everything else because
that's what they do so I have no
doubt that that our colleagues
in judiciary will make sure that
we are not.
Not doing something that we
should be doing so congratulate
is this your first passed in a
in a committee Representative
Dixon.
it's actually my second oh okay
but we so you all report but we
won't make you perform for us
this time.
Okay thank you all thank you
madam chair and committee
members and thank you so much
for the expert witnesses and I'm
I'm sorry you had to have that
kind of excitement about thank
you for for joining us but we
will move on.
Yes.
Okay okay.
So we will move on to our house
bill one fifty six which is
Representative but address and
Representative do you have an
expert witness that we need to
allow in.
You I have a Alexandria Taylor
of money a whole set Rodriguez
because these.
And I also have Kim stark but
I'm not sure if she is
available.
I think that
Let me see if if I see the stark
on here online I'm sure we don't
have to start in here but we
have your other to expand access
okay so Representative but it is
are you OK to start with that
with who we've got it maybe
maybe one of your contracts
you're you're missing out our.
I would Alexandria did you have
to have something yes Madam
chair representative but as I am
sorry to interrupt it's going to
be next to DO instead of Kim
stark thank you.
Thank you Alexander with.
So I'll send you my next.
very is okay so go ahead
whenever you're ready
Representative about us.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
In the summer of two thousand
sixteen hours geocaching with a
friend.
A geocaching if you don't know
what it is it's a bit of a
treasure hunt if you don't know
what's going on they could look
a little bit suspicious.
We were in a park looking for
this treasure.
As I was looking under a bench I
noticed a police officer drive
up.
We were the only two people in
the park I became really
nervous.
I told my friend that I thought
it was a good idea to just get
out of there.
We got in the car and the
officer followed us.
He pulled us over about a half a
mile down the road.
The officer came to my side of
the car first the passenger
side.
He said they received the call
that two people were smoking
marijuana in the park.
I immediately stated that we
were smoking.
He cut me off and said I can
smell it in the car where is it.
I didn't lie to him told them
that there was a backpack in the
backseat inside the backpack was
a pipe in one bowl of marijuana.
He got the bag and pulled out a
bag or got the backpack and
pulled out a bag with exactly
what I said and it a pipe and
one unburned a bowl of marijuana
we were not smoking.
He asked me for the rest of it
was he said he knew there was
more.
I told him what was in the bag
had a strong odor and if you
opened it.
And you would see that he
insisted I was lying I insisted
I wasn't.
He said you know I'm I could
arrest you for this.
I said you would seriously
arrest me.
Are you seriously take me to
jail for half a gram of weed.
He told me to get out of the car
so I did he walked me to his
patrol car and told me to spread
my feet so we could search my
pockets I did he then kicked me
in my foot and ankle.
Hard to separate my feet
further.
I said what the F. ma'am.
He pushed me hard against the
car and put handcuffs on me he
told me I was under arrest and
put me in his vehicle.
The car and an air conditioner
work on when I got in.
He walked around and turned off
the air they want to talk to my
friend who was still in her car.
I later found out that he was
telling her not to hang out with
someone like me.
It was really hot in the car.
It was the middle of the summer
my adrenaline didn't help.
We got in the car I told him
that I was ha so he turned the
heater on.
I was crying and sweating.
I told him that he was
contributing to a problem in my
neighborhood.
I also told him I bet your lapel
camera isn't on is it.
My breathing was getting heavier
and I started to hyperventilate
I told him I have heart
problems.
And I feel like I'm gonna pass
out.
He pulled over on the side of
the road.
He opened my door I was still
handcuffed he pulled me up by my
right arm.
I couldn't get my feet out and
under under me.
I fell face first into some
loose there my face was full of
sweat and tears.
It was now mud in my eyes my
nose in my mouth.
The officer called an ambulance.
They came in the paramedic asked
me what happened as I was
explaining I can remember
another paramedic asking the
officers what it happened.
I was driven by ambulance to the
hospital.
When my breathing and heart rate
were stable I asked the nurse if
I was going to jail.
She said she had no idea what I
was talking about because I
wasn't brought in by an officer.
I remember saying that if I was
going to jail I would have been
handcuffed to the hospital bed
and I wasn't.
I didn't report this incident to
anyone.
Because I was really scared and
I was also on the wrist all the
relieved that I wasn't in jail.
Sexual violence is also an under
reported crime victims of police
sexual violence or even.
Less likely to report because a
police officer's position of
authority and abuse of power.
Victims of police sexual
violence are more likely.
To be the more vulnerable women
and communities of color.
L. G. T. L. L. E. T. B. Q. plus
individuals.
People with disabilities and
people with lower incomes.
According to a recent poll
published by the ACLU in New
Mexico nearly half of all voters
polled said they or someone they
know has been harassed or harmed
the police.
In that same poll nearly one in
five voters polled say they
would not feel safe if pulled
over by the police.
Talks displays of aggression and
sexual violence by police
officers that go unchecked
become lethal for community
members.
In a former IPRA request it was
found that four out of the
thirty five reports made against
a former local police officer
aware of sexual misconduct.
Former Louisville metro police
department detective Brett
Hankinson who was one of the two
officers who fired ten rounds of
shots into Brianna Taylor's
apartment murdering trick has
been accused of sexual
misconduct and assault by nine
women.
House bill one fifty six will
address this abuse of power by
law enforcement and hold
accountable those actors.
Of the state that use their
badge to sexually harm the
people they are entrusted to
protect and serve.
Madam chair I would like to
introduce of my expert witnesses
Alexandria Taylor.
The need to DO and Maria Jose
Rodriguez of these thank you.
Go ahead whichever of you in
whatever order you see fit.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I also want to
thank representative but at us
for the courage in sharing their
stories today.
My name's Alexandria Taylor and
I'm the deputy director at the
New Mexico coalition a sexual
assault programs NMC staff
believes the state's efforts to
reduce sexual abuse and violence
by providing training and
technical assistance to service
providers law enforcement
officers prosecutors medical
practitioners and mental health
professionals H. B. one fifty
six is necessary for our state
because the intersection of the
use of force and sexualized
violence continues to exist in a
power structure of our society
that harms the most vulnerable
we need to call it what it is
police sexual violence is a form
of police brutality there is a
clear power imbalance between
police officers and the members
of the public they are charged
with serving this power
imbalance is recognized exist in
our current statute but
explicitly explicitly naming
that a person who is
incarcerated are confined in a
correctional facility or jail
cannot consent to sex when the
perpetrator is in a position of
authority HB one fifty six makes
clear that police officers hold
that same position of authority
and as we talk about police
brutality and excessive use of
force addressing the sexualized
and gendered violence that
occurs by police is of critical
importance the victimology of
police sexual violence is deeply
intersectional as police
officers typically target the
most vulnerable women of color
transgender and gender non
conforming people victims of
domestic and sexual abuse people
engaged in sex work people with
disabilities and those suspected
of engaging in any criminalized
activity these groups are often
perceived as less credible H. B.
one fifty six makes clear that
consent is not a defense because
police officers hold up is.
Isshin Authority I will never
forget watching the verdict of
Daniel Holtzclaw an Oklahoma
City police officer who was
convicted of raping eight women
of color and I additional women
reported also reported being
assaulted by him most of them
black most low income one of
them is seventeen years old I
watched the jury deliver it's
bird verdict sitting at my
dinner table on my iPad on a
live YouTube stream the rate of
thirteen women of color by an
office officer who had a
position of authority a gun and
the full power of the state
behind him didn't warrant prime
time coverage if we do not hear
these abuses of power in their
brutal form it is not because
they are not a curry a former
police officer turned professor
Phil Stinson conducted a
national analysis which found
that half of the officers
involved in on duty misconduct
for sexual violence cases and
noted that off duty misconduct
is often facilitated by the
power of the batch or the
presence of an official service
weapon in a second study funded
by the National Institute of
justice and analyzing more than
sixty seven hundred officers
arrests nationwide Stinson found
that half of arrests for sexual
misconduct were for incidents
involving minors according to a
twenty ten Cato Institute review
sexual misconduct is the second
most frequently reported form of
police agency misconduct after
excessive force we know from our
work through the prison right
eleven right elimination act
that sounds loss are one
important step in ending the
cultural culture of violence and
abuse of authority but it won't
be the end of it we have had
local cases were corrections
officers have use the defense of
consent that abusive state
actors because.
Tion of a forty in our state is
documented a Santa Fe New
Mexican article from January
twenty ten twenty twenty one
highlighted the systematic
sexual abuse within the state
run women's prison and a lot
alleged lack of supervisory
oversight allowing the abuse to
continue to occur it is even
more challenging to hold police
officers accountable without
this specific law there are
times when we need to be
explicit in law like we did when
we added strangulation to the
criminal statute this is one of
those times healing must be
preceded by accountability thank
you and I'll pass it to make.
Can everyone hear me okay.
Yes we can hear you know madam
chair members of the committee
on the thank you for allowing me
to be here and speak with you
all today so I'm next to DO I'm
independently licensed mental
health provider the clinical
director here at the right
prices etcetera etcetera Mexico
I'm also a therapist with our
organization and I provide
services to survivors of sexual
violence in the family many of
the clients that I work with at
their best are seniors people
with disabilities LGBTQ
community and mail survivors my
role as a clinical director I
review all of the clinical
assessments that come in for
every person who seeks
accounting services and the last
two years I've reviewed over
three hundred survivor
experiences shared at the
clinical intake and it's
shocking the number of people
who have disclosed experiences
in their lifetime of being
sexually assaulted harassed or
coerced into sexual acts while
they're being questioned
detained are transported by law
enforcement officers the common
theme that I've observed is the
promise of not being arrested in
exchange for those sexual acts
and then when the act is
completed individuals taken to
jail for booking
Fortunately many human
trafficking victims are put in
these situations and what the
trauma that they've already
entered don't see any other
options other than to comply far
too many people have been
impacted by these acts and
what's that results in a long
term damage to the mental health
and I can also tell you that
none of the survivors have
chosen to report these assaults
knowing that our voices are
going to be heard I'm really
grateful that this has the
potential to change here today I
add these protections this shows
New Mexicans that there's a zero
tolerance for sexual acts by
perpetrators in positions of
power when the roll is supposed
to be to protect and serve this
protection will also empower our
survivors to report and
hopefully not only these
assaults but other assaults and
then that's going to help in
their aid in their healing
process madam chair members of
the committee I want to thank
you for your time and
recognition of this issue and
the impact that this change will
have on survivors and our
community.
And I will go and passed to my.
Good evening madam chair members
of the community I first wanna
also echo my appreciation Mike
my immense appreciation for
Representative but it us in
sharing what he did what they
share today with us I the
executive director with the
solace crisis treatment center
which is the rape crisis center
in Santa Fe any service at the
first initial district I want
you to hear echoing a lot of the
sentiment in the information
that both Alexandria I need
share we want you to hear from
one of us directors of the rape
crisis centers in I want to
start with my appreciation for
your time on these very
important detail.
I'm I have seen the devastating
effects of sexual violence
during nineteen years I'm doing
great crisis work I also want to
tell you that I have seen that
particularly devastating long
lasting effects of the sexual
bite and when east repatriated
by people in positions of
authority like law enforcement
we we trust them to service.
We trust them to protect us so
when the violence is perpetrated
by them they can really tear
apart something very very.
Much as you can you know course
sense of safety not just in the
life of every one survivor at a
time but all of us community
something is broken in all of us
when this happens you have heard
that evidence of sexual violence
perpetrated by law enforcement a
chronically under reported it
in you know no more about it
because of we wish Year two
night the report increases by
far the sense of safety of a
survivor that has already been
diminished is unthinkable they
can do something like that since
they will have to interact with
the institutions and the people
that are employed by them who
are the ones costing the higher
so no wonder this is a on the
reported crying because the
reported is also and the rest.
Is this because there's nobody
there's no sense there is a
problem and much less that there
is the need for policies or laws
to prevent it from happening or
to hold perpetrators accountable
at best as you know already but
information that has been chair
there's only in reference as a
defense that these violence
happens because they relate to
act of sexual consent.
No one can consent what
undergoing any type of law
enforcement care or the tension.
You have heard that there are
studies that have found that
police sexual violence is the
type of violence that happens
most.
Second place.
To excessive force.
We have engage in in the nation
in our state and local to
address police misconduct.
Police excessive force we have
to include sexual violence by
police last part of that
conversation so I respectfully
request your support to HB one
fifty six is to be able to
create a clear stand there to
address police sexual violence
by make it against the law which
will require police departments
to regulate through policy you
spiel also provides a clear
definition that person police
care or custody is incapable of
consenting to sexual activity
with a police officer.
Thank you so much for all your
time and consideration for
hearing the state permission we
who do these work understand how
hard it is to hear what we have
to share so we have a lot of
respect for you to allow us to
do that too.
Thank you Representative but I
do you have anything you want to
art should that we go to the
polling audience.
Thank you madam chair
comfortable going to the the the
pull in the audience thank you
okay so here we here we are
again with the call and
Allison is so so good she's
always act me so I'm gonna let
the dog in and you all do a vote
I'll be back in.
Okay so we have a eighty nine
percent in favor and eleven
percent in opposition so we will
close that and I we will start
with the propose and if you
would like to speak please raise
your hand.
Not give me a second those of
you who haven't been here all
day and it's under participants
so I'm.
So is there anyone who wants to
speak in opposition.
What okay.
I'm seeing none so I won't ask
for people who want to speak
Representative madam chair there
was one of course.
Madam chair I see more see me
all OK I'm sorry okay Marci may
thank you for catching that I
was on the wrong window what
else is new.
Garcia I don't know can you hear
me yes okay so I am a victim of
child abuse I I don't I don't
negate victimization at all my
concern is is that we are you
guys use one standard one and
this dealing with
The
people of authority which I get
it you know nobody should ever
ever ever ever ever be subjected
to that even if so someone
that's not and authority but it
just seems like there's a very
huge blanket track
a that you were guys were
talking about and at H. B. one
forty that people
you know you're gonna be looking
at the the.
Hello files the child predators
well what kind of data they
have.
You know.
And and that's that's a weak
argument I think you'd be a weak
argument here
if if the if the police officer
or someone in authority is is
doing that
you want I just want to be able
to say that we should do we guys
are saying well that's already
first degree felony and and this
is how it should be I would just
like to say.
It goes into proven innocent
and and and absolutely if these
guys are guilty like you said
regular calls let's do that
let's let's get some action and
get the guilty parties done but
I I had heartburn hearing that
over fifty percent of our police
officers are doing this I don't
believe that's true I think it's
a false statement
are you and I can say that
coming from.
And being an actual victim also.
Being a victim at work from that
kind of stuff so I'm not I'm not
of glossing over any any
Criminal anything but let's
let's get some real stats in
their I don't I think there's
some things that are skewed I
think there may be some of
the online support of blue or
black or blue but I think the
blue that support and protect
and defend people I don't
support blue that is abuse of.
In any in any way shape or form
they need to be accountable so I
guess that system want to I want
to have that put out there it
should be guilty until proven
innocent
and the lapel cameras help.
Madam chair you muted.
Thank you thank you more state
so we will go on to people who
are in support of this bill.
Okay so we will start with
I believe it's Eric but I
believe it maybe Erica Davis
Crump I'm not sure.
Madam chair yes Erica Davis
Kramp thank you so much.
Going.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Erica Davis
camp and I am the co chair for
coalition for choice and I
absolutely agree with this bill
and I'm very honored as co chair
of the coalition for choice and
to be able to say that all
fifteen plus organizations that
are part of that that I we have
to respect well New Mexico
families stand in support of
this bill is so crucial it is so
necessary and for the individual
in opposition I do pray your
healing as we should never
invalidate any victims
experience as a survivor of
assault and abuse in various
forms it is so difficult to
speak truth to power and request
accountability and I echo what
Alexandria Taylor said in
stating that healing must we
must be preceded by
accountability this is difficult
yes but it is also an ugly and
harsh truth that we have to come
to terms with and policy is an
absolute love language that we
should be ready to write in
favor of those survivors and to
protect anybody else that would
be subject to this really
horrific and courageous act by
those that we should trust most
as they are here and sign up for
serving and protecting our
community and as I wrap up this
include I want to say thank you
so much to Representative bring
but as and
Alexandria Taylor and everybody
else that testified because
you're doing a hard beautiful
and necessary thing and I'm so
grateful that you we have that
New Mexicans have you are side
thank you.
Thank you Andrew Echols.
How can everyone hear me okay
yes and we love your Kitty thank
you so much I'm not thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Andrew
Ackles and I'm a community
organizer for a quality New
Mexico an LGBTQ civil rights
organization organization I'm
also a survivor I'm here today
to show support for H. B. one
fifty six as we know queer and
trans gender individuals are
more likely to experience
incarceration and sexual
violence transmitter in
particular face these issues at
alarming rates HB one fifty six
it takes the power dynamics
between an officer and a
detainee into consideration a
person who was detained or in
custody is expected to follow
the orders of a peace officer
and it is appalling to consider
that any sexual act could be
included in such orders a person
being detained or incarcerated
has no power in that situation
and they could never fully
consent to sexual activity with
an officer not only would this
bill creates avenues for
transparency between peace
officers and the communities
they are serving but it would
give space for accountability
and provide concrete support to
those with marginalized
identities thank you again for
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you Charlene been caramel.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Charlene
New Mexico low and I am the
executive director of both
teachers.
During twenty twenty many of us
witnessed an increased focus by
the general public on rampant
excessive force at the hands of
we thought that there is a
reality that black brown trans
gender and people of color have
known for far too long.
As a woman who is a survivor of
sexual assault the idea that a
peace officer would be allowed
to use consent as a legal
defense after abusing their
position of power is rebel P.
frankly it certainly that PC one
fifty six even have to be under
your consideration today there
is no consensual sex between an
officer and someone in their
custody that is right and it
should be treated as such.
Past this legislation is a
failure to hold the system
already under intense scrutiny
accountable for crimes against
the very communities and people
they swore to protect are you
today to vote yes to help the
one fifty six and I want to send
out a giant thank you to
Representative but after share
your personal story and for
caring this important bill thank
you all for your time.
Thank you Sir let's go to Nicole
Martin.
Really well being.
Point.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you to call.
Hello everyone my name is Nicole
more in and I am one of the co
founders for indigenous women
rising I just wanted to up lift
and support
what everyone has mentioned
before me.
In terms of supporting H. B. I'm
yes H. B. one fifty six.
Sexual violence is an under
reported crime victims of police
sexual violence are even less
likely to report because of the
police officers position of
authority and their abuse of
power victims of police sexual
violence are more likely to be
vulnerable women in communities
of color I'll G. T. L. G. B. T.
Q. plus individuals peoples with
disabilities and people with
lower incomes I.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee and urge everyone to
please vote in favor of H. B.
one fifty six thank you.
Thank you all and I'm our final
Madam is from Barron Jones.
I'm on okay and that's not which
I want to so what is excuse me
hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barron
Jones I'm with ACLU of New
Mexico the ACLU strongly
supports is less legislation
because we believe on this
supports our mission of
increasing police accountability
and reducing negative harmful
interactions between the public
and members of our law
enforcement community it is
impossible the first time I sat
down on top with them is
Alexander Taylor about this bill
that we need a law like this on
our books in the first place in
is for these reasons we
encourage you to support this
piece of comments as legislation
and I'm in thank you
Representative Barreras for
bringing it and all of you
experts for speaking on the some
very painful subject thank you
all.
Thank you very okay so that's it
for public comment now I will go
to the committee.
Okay okay let's see I'm
Representative Lord go ahead.
Your you're still muted
Representative Lord thank you
there we go out.
This technology Intel is killing
me okay thank you Madam chair so
I do have a question for the
representative if that's okay I
would like to know if she in and
let me just explain to you I do
understand we're trying to get
to in this bill but I just had a
question did you speak to any of
the shares or any of the law
enforcement before presenting
this bill.
But talk to them you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair I will
refer this to
one of my experts if Alexandria
can can take this one I would
appreciate it.
Madam chair representative lord
so as I mentioned in our
introduction the coalition our
our mission is centered around
providing technical assistance
and training to multi
disciplinary partners including
law enforcement and so we are in
regular conversation with law
enforcement about the work that
we do systematic responses to
sexual violence all across our
state and so I have had
conversations with law
enforcement officers about this
bill and those who I spoke with
who are not harming members of
the public did not have an issue
with this bill because they are
not raping members that they
members of the community that
they are charged with protecting
thank you.
Okay thank you madam chair I'm
gonna take extreme
wow to say that they're only
officers who are not harming
people is is what you're saying
I'm gonna ask you specifically
are using the only officer not
raping people are for this bill.
Madam chair representative lord
that is not what I said I just
explain to I had conversations
within the partners that we are
partnered with that I had
conversations with and it was
not a concern for them because
it's not an act that that many
of the officers they work with
are engaged our our it's not an
activity that many of the
officers or themselves are
engaged in I think if there are
officers concerned about this
bill there are we should explore
the reasons why.
Wow okay all right madam chairs
I I'm I'm really feeling like
this is some very harsh comments
towards police officers because
I know some very amazing Leo's
in the state who do not go
around raping people and what
they told me and this is why I'm
asking as he told me this is
already on the books already
asked them I said what would
happen if they had sex with
somebody even if it was
consensual when they had some
cussing you know what that's
already a felony it's already on
the books so I'm very sorry that
the
these law enforcement officers
did not give you the correct
information I went through this
with multiple share some
multiple law enforcement
officers this is ready legal
it's already illegal it's
already on the books they could
not use that is called coercion
and it is a felony and I I think
it's incredibly disrespectful to
say that the shares were not
harming others are not worried
about this because I have a
bunch of shares who I know are
not raping people and not
harming people and they already
understand this is a felony
that's going to send this thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward in your and the courage
it takes to tell stories that
you did and and how challenging
it is to.
Be part of that I we often
discuss as a family especially
in New twenty twenty you know
who felt safe and who did and
and in the face of of law
enforcement and I don't think
this is that all a red herring
in the sense of trying to call
out cops in one way or another I
think we live in among these
folks are their brothers their
sisters aunts uncles cousins
there are neighbors we want to
feel safe with the law
enforcement that surrounds us
and I think this actually helps
us identify and and assure that
the folks that are there to
serve and protect us actually do
and I think that's a really hard
and in communities of color and
we talk about this and where I
grew up both in Espanola and
Santa Fe
we're sometimes we didn't feel
safer with law enforcement
around because of I think it
precisely what representative
but it us described in but so
many experience we're it is a it
is a problem
so that said at Madam chair
representative I did just want
to just lift up the what the
problem was and for all of the
bad cops out there they make all
of the good cops look bad and do
and and essentially this is to
prevent those backups from
continuing that that activity
and ensuring that our law
enforcement is in Representative
rest assured that the folks that
are being hired for these
positions are being that it's
through that lens and ensuring
that this is prevented so I do
support your bill and I just
commend all of the folks who did
speak up and for the advocates
here who I have heard from and
and have been able to understand
this issue more directly and I
just appreciate you all for
protecting those as well and to
ensure that we have the best as
in blue that are are working in
our communities to help.
Prevent this from happening
thank you madam chair and thank
you again representative for
courage and for this bill thank
you.
Thank you Representative Romero
now we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair sorry I
was going back to my notes
my my first comment goes
directly to Representative
bearers.
This
Personal testimonies are one of
the most difficult things out
there thank you does for
handling that with with the
grace that you did.
And so this stuff again we have
a bill earlier where personal.
Emotional things ultimately in
the become legal things and and
so
I too did my homework and I
talked to over ten.
Sheriff's departments police
departments I talked to the DA's
I talked to public defenders I
think.
I didn't.
Hey at least from eighties
insure said that thirty percent
of the state.
With respect to that.
To and the way I read the agency
reports and the information that
I get from the DA.
The the act we ask that we're
talking about our.
Already criminal and there's
already laws that the cover
that.
And so while I'm I don't
disagree that this for portent
that this is important I do have
concerns.
That we're writing what the the
party has in some cases more
stringent.
Situation but the other side is
is this bill specifically
relates to sections.
NMSA the.
Three bills earlier.
We're trying to dissolve.
Get rid of.
I guess
from just be interesting to see
how this progresses at this
current point with the with the
way this is done
I would I would like to make a
comment that I would love to see
the data on the departments that
were contacted.
So I compare that to the data I
have.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you representative Greg
Harris for your your grace with
respect to your story and to be
able to do that.
With grace.
Speaks highly of your character.
Thank you madam chair turned
back up okay thank you
and and I also want to thank you
Representative about us that
must be hard I mean I'm I was
crying what two hours ago and on
and on the bill we are that I
think this is a good point place
to point out that we are humans
just like the rest of your you
may not believe we are and and
we have our our delights in our
pains and our struggles and and
I have to say I love being a
legislator New Mexico because we
are completely acceptable I mean
people call and say I'd like to
leave a message is like you
don't need to leave a message
it's me and I can't believe that
we answer our own phones and
that they can you know find us
anywhere so I think that's a
that's a great part of this and
and thank you representative but
ask for your and your grace and
your bravery at so I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair good to pass.
And I will say that.
And so Allison will you please
take the role.
Representative Ferreira's.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
With an explanation.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew I if
you said something you are
muted.
No with an explanation thank you
madam chair.
I share more of.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
So by at three to two you have a
do passed and we will go back to
our Representative Lord do you
want me to go to Representative
Pettigrew first.
Okay thank you Representative
this is some former some law
enforcement to explain to them
how upset I am about the fact
that there was an implication
that only law enforcement is
raping people are are I'm not
worried about this bill I just
want to clarify this is already
on the books this is ready bill
I'm horribly offended and I'm
gonna start to see really angry
that you would make any
implication that you madam chair
but from the speaker who'd made
implication that only shares are
not run around raping people
would be offended this is
already on the books that you
just made a phone call and found
that out we wouldn't even need
this bill thank you that's all.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair again I I
am in agreement and
With with respect to I've I've
done the homework out personally
made the phone calls I
personally talked to these
people this bill does exist and
and I do have a huge concern
that we're referencing one
booking page of the of the code
that.
In in a in two days to a week
we're gonna hear again that's
going to dissolve that code.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so I'm that that's it for
today I want to thank everybody
for sticking with us this is
something you can tell your
grandchildren about some day if
you're young about how and a
bomb threat and everything else
that happened today for those of
you who get it was that was that
at that at Alfa I believe that
the City of Albuquerque building
so just that keep writing in
your diary and some day we will
tell our young people and they
won't believe that things were
as crazy as they are but they
definitely are so with that we
have concluded today's business
so what what what so we will be
in recess until one thirty on
Thursday and thank you all for
sticking it out and have a great
evening thank you madam chair
thank you members.
