Representative Eli.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
President.
Madam chair.
Care.
Madam chair with that we've
reached a quorum with a
president.
Okay great let's go ahead and
start with Representative
Oaklawn I see is in the audience
Representative with you could
raise your hand again.
And we will we were going to
first care house bill one oh
three
but we need our representatives
online so let's start with House
Bill excuse me house joint
resolution right Representative
Okam.
Welcome.
Please began when you're ready.
No need to and mute yourself.
In talking nobody can hear me.
In two members of the committee
house joint resolution.
This is Norris vice in the
military and Veterans Affairs
Committee decide because joint
resolution to house resolution
three is also endorsed by the
Veterans Affairs committee this
was.
The resolution proposed an
amendment to article eight
section five.
Constitution in New Mexico to
increase in property tax
exemptions for honorably
discharged members of the armed
forces and their widows and
widowers from four thousand
dollars ten thousand dollars and
the before I go to questions I
just want to know the last time.
Of this was released because two
thousand six.
You and two thousand six so.
Funny when you look at the
history of this bill.
In two thousand four hundred and
three thousand in two thousand
five into thirty five hundred
and two thousand six I went to
four thousand and then
quit.
This many years later.
Of the Veterans Affairs
committee said it does.
Is.
Madam chair I will stand for
questions.
Thank you representative let's
take a poll of the audience
I think we have that yes house
joint resolution three and is
now open for the attendees to
vote if you are in favor or
against house joint resolution
three.
We will keep that up for another
ten seconds.
Okay great to hear closing that
with six in favor and two
against.
So let's go ahead and hear from
folks that are in favor Rudy
Martinez you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair
Members of the committee.
Madam good to see you again.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Morning madam chair
Again Rudy Martinez I'm with the
New Mexico Democratic Party
veterans caucus and chair of
the.
The committee for a veterans
advocacy we are in favor of this
bill not gonna repeat what the
German of going mentioned.
But this.
This legislation.
will benefit many veterans
especially now that the
The.
Home prices has increased over
fifteen years.
And it's
House resolution three.
Was written with the careful
consideration to remedy that so
with that madam chair I do
Senator support this bill.
Thank you.
Next we have a R. P. state
president Roger career you're
right now and it.
So did I just read result no you
are you're good to go madam
chair and members of the
committee and it's good to see
you again madam chair my name is
Roger career and I'm here is the
volunteer state president with
New York to New Mexico and A. R.
P. New Mexico was in full
support of house joint
resolution three and thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have.
A. R. P. New Mexico Gary
Williams you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee just stated my
name is Gary Williams I'm one of
the staff members with a or P.
New Mexico I'm also a veteran
who proudly serve the U. S. Air
Force madam chair I am here this
morning as a veteran to urged
passage of this house joint
resolution and I thank you very
much madam chair and members of
the committee for the
opportunity to speak this
morning thank you very much.
Thank you.
During the C. and you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee good
morning Representative all clone
it's good to see you again thank
you for bringing this bill I
speak in support of it because
I'm a veteran of twenty one
years service and I live in New
Mexico and own a home and and
honor to the discharged I like
Rudy serve on the committee for
veterans advocacy
I'd like to point out that this
bill may get some opposition
because it shifts property tax.
from.
Veterans to non veteran
homeowners but I'll point out
that the I've reviewed DFI ours
for H. J. R. three and also H.
J. R. to.
And
does tell me that about a
hundred thousand veterans would
qualify for this however only
about sixty thousand veterans
actually claim the existing four
thousand property deduction so
that tells me that in the FIR
for this one.
the property tax shift
predicted to be about thirty
four dollars for the general
population would not be that
high.
And when you think about
Apps.
Twenty dollars per person if the
same number qualify that's about
two trips to Starbucks and it
would do more than pay lip
service to the veterans that
have served and particularly in
the last fifteen years who have
served in the Iraq wars in
Afghanistan and that suffered so
greatly thank you madam chairman
support.
Thank you.
Okay let's hear if anyone would
like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
We have currently you are now
and made it.
You'll have to meet yourself
Carla.
Madam chair it's actually Leri
Sonntag here representing the
New Mexico business coalition I
speak in support of house joint
resolution three so I wasn't
able to get in sooner but we are
definitely in support New Mexico
business coalition represents
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans our
focus is to make New Mexico a
better place to do business so
the Mexicans to have jobs to
provide for their families very
proud every year for the past
twelve years to have a few rules
banquet and recent years we have
the fact included a veteran of
the year award and not twenty
twenty last year because of the
pandemic we were not able to get
together with hundreds of people
but we were the only
organization that I'm aware of
we that was able to still award
a veteran of the year award and
we did so in a remote ceremony
we appreciate Representative off
on bringing this bill forward
it's a matter of economic
development as we know our
veterans are great workers they
actually have a lot of veteran
employers that take on other
workers.
Giving this type of incentive to
have other veterans come to our
state and stay in our state we
fully support so we urge you to
vote yes on house joint
resolution three thank.
Thank you learn right L. you are
now unmuted.
Can you hear me all right yes we
can.
My name is lower rate DL Good
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee every New
Mexico resident has a
responsibility to support our
schools and local government
property taxes designed to do
just that but H. J. R. three
increases the property tax
exemption for all honorably
discharged members of the armed
forces their widows and widowers
to ten thousand dollars this is
a significant sum it will result
in a significant loss of revenue
for schools in county government
where we doing this no purpose
for the exemption has been
stated in no criteria for
evaluating its effectiveness has
been mentioned in the resolution
H. J. R. three appears just to
be another giveaway well I
appreciate the service of our
veterans New Mexico needs all of
that sources of revenue right
now and to single out veterans
for special treatment is unfair
to the rest of our hardworking
taxpayers I urge you to vote do
not pass on this resolution
thank you.
Thank you.
That includes our public comment
we will now go to the committee.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and Representative
Dow con
while I really think that it is
Honored to it you know I want to
honor our our veterans I think
the problem is is as we do.
Many more and more exemption we
just displace that amount of
money on to the rest of the
taxpayers that I kind of I'm I'm
against that
I've got taxpayers and property
taxpayers in my district that
are already complaining about
their property taxes are too
high.
I mean if we do if we pass this
amendment next year we're going
to see some other group coming
up and saying we need to be
example we need a bigger
exemption
And.
It's just a round robin the only
one I'm going to support this
session is the.
Right yes more of a statement
and then a question but thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm
Representative Chasey.
That number.
I wanted to ask Representative
Akan this is actually I'm a
constitutional amendment not a
bill right.
Madam chair and
Here you Mr chairman Stacey.
Yes this will go to the voters
three thousand through the house
and the Senate voters will
decide if this can happen or
not.
madam chair and representative
all clones I think you said
there has been no change in the
impacts or that was not the
index but they the exemptions
since two thousand and four.
Actually madam chair the last
statement change goes to
thousand six two thousand six so
every time.
It changes we have to go to the
voters.
Madam chair and madam chair yes
every time.
So madam chair and
Representative of all clone.
I.
I just I have a question and I
have no idea of the answer.
I don't like putting hard
figures into statute because we
do need to change that as the
cost of living increases it
never decreases so I guess I
could say or decreases but
do we have any were also in the
constitution aware of figures in
taxed.
I I.
I don't know how we can.
Okay madam chairman
Representative Michael does this
is going to tax.
Madam chair and representation
this is going to the floor.
Okay.
I guess I would just recommend
madam chair and Representative
all call.
Thank you madam curry.
the maybe taxed Rabb and
Because we.
I have to go to the voters
every.
Four five six and in this case
fifteen years I'm not so a long
time but
You might make more sense to do
that because that you know in
there you're fiscal impact
report you all at the cost of.
Question on the ballot in
addition to that property.
Tax decreases.
Revenue so that's all I'm sure
Representative will come.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
neighbors.
All right I am unable to on mute
when I get messages pop up
covers my commute but sorry
madam chair.
Madam chair.
Things and I think
Representative Rehm Matt pointed
out but but there were several
statements made that that are
really
in the public comment that we're
not accurate in the first one is
there's not a result it does not
result in a loss of tax revenue
It shifts the tax burden.
Because the county and the
assessors job is to assess how
much taxes needed by virtue of
the formula and then it has to
allocate that among the various
properties in the county so if
you give one group an exemption
everybody else's tax goes up
slightly to cover the amount of
money that that is exempted.
And so I wanted to by that point
the clear.
And and I think Representative
Rehm pointed that out the the
question I have and I think
needs further clarification as.
Madam chair representative is
this a reduction in the value of
the.
Taxable property or is this a
reduction in their tax bill.
Representative neighbor this is
a a reduction in the tax
valuation.
So and so somebody sees the word
four thousand dollars for ten
thousand dollars that means that
their tax bill is reduced by
that amount is that correct
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative in
Iraq that is correct.
So so what what this does is
basically allow a veteran to
under current law you get a four
thousand dollar so traction off
of the valuation of their
residents which then goes into
the formula of calculating the
the taxable value and then the
the taxes assessed on that
battery is is my understanding
correct Madam chair
representative.
I.
That's what I thought
Madam chair representative
I'm wondering census is going to
the voters and the argument that
that you have made our it is
that it's been a long time since
we've corrected those values but
if you look up above in the
paragraph before that ten of
household at two thousand
dollars is not being adjusted
and I was wondering if we're
going to the trouble of going to
the voters why are we not
adjusting the out a head of
household
exemption at this time as well.
I would be a good deal for you
to carry.
Well how about an amendment.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative.
New one amended bill I don't
have a problem with two of them
and twenty one intended to.
Well I mean you're you're
basically.
Providing for a eight you should
to and value and and you're
going up so probably a a similar
type percentage increase maybe
maybe take for two thousand to
five thousand or something for
had a household
because frankly madam chair and
representative I'm shocked that
they are our Pete came out so
strongly in favor of this when
it simply shifts the tax burden
over to.
A lot of their members who will
not be able to take advantage of
this exemption and yet they are
on of of fixed income and they
get no benefit from this is
going to shift the tax burden to
them at least if you would
increase the head of household
exemption they to what would be
able to have some of their they
would have a reduction in value
on which our taxes assessed and
essentially the burden gets
shifted to
Business properties and our
properties that are not
going to be given either the
head of household for the
veterans exemption.
The fiscal impact report to look
into that was county where you
live.
I'm here four hundred thousand
dollar house this you have to
probably bring your costs to
about one thirty eight dollars
roughly.
If I read the report I don't
have it in front of me but I
read it earlier I thought it was
more than that but but in any
event.
Of.
That that that.
Cost shifting it is going to
occur and money just simply
suggesting that if you also
increase the have household
exemption which individuals
should be able to take credit to
of the that's going to
ameliorate some of that the cost
shifting to to those folks that
wasting my money
All right.
I'm concerned one way and the we
we carve out exemptions I'm I'm
someone who.
Lee said taxes ought to be
wholly blind
that that you impose a tax if it
applies across the board and and
we should worry about the.
You any status when we're doing
tax policy but obviously this is
in the constitution now and I
understand your desire to
maybe keep up with with employee
Shem but the M. concern that the
we're doing it for one group but
we're not doing it for the the
head of household
exemptions that exist in the
constitution as well as and I
would just simply suggested
maybe maybe you Amanda either
here or maybe we amended on the
floor I have your folks look at
it I would suggest to you know
five thousand seven thousand
dollars or something
at the end of the day it's it's
all gonna level out we we pay
the property taxes that we have
to pay to keep of the local
government is running and and
the
there will be some shift in in
the who pays it but the at the
end of the day of the the
counties and the schools and the
other institutions that rely on
property tax
will will receive the same
amount of money right whether
this bill and constitutional
amendment passes.
So.
Madam chair representative you
you might consider the had a
household thing I'd be happy to
Introduced an amendment on the
floor of your for a you would
accept it is friendly
I think some people probably
ought to look at that before we
we do it which is why I'm
hesitant to to make up an oral
motion here but it's something
that.
I think may may deserve some
some merit some discussion so
Madam chair representative but
thanks to look at that the
you know as it's worded right
now I I won't be voting for your
bill to be happy to happy to
Maybe see if there's some some
ability to come around and and
work on it with you thank you
madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank you madam chair I just the
normally I don't respond to a
comment but I just like to just
add to the fact that the job
here is to attract veterans to
the state of New Mexico.
There
out of the military and then to
the work force are already
trading.
And they're job ready and what
we're trying to do by doing this
little baby steps and into this
is that because we're keeping up
with the rate of inflation you
should be doing about twenty
five thousand dollars on
evaluation not.
But this is a way of attracting
them when they're leaving the
military to come to New Mexico
hello were no were you madam
chair I still remember last year
we had a veterans bill which is
the only veterans know that back
from the Senate everybody stood
up and we're so proud of our
veterans would do anything for
our veterans and we stood on the
floor both parties
under microphones on the I was
just I mean I was just shocked.
But so it's going to cost to
twelve fifteen thirty Bucks a
meal.
We can support something like
this so we can attract veterans
I find it hard to believe that
chair I just got
this from the acting is number
one this is not my ideal.
This is part of the military
affairs committee.
And we're
really shocked at the reaction
what I'm getting on well.
Resolutions that are presented.
I don't know anything else that
madam chair thank you.
Thank you madam chair coming
from a community that's trying
to attract all retirees not just
veteran retirees but but all
retirees
you know.
They they look at the.
At the property taxes and the
gross receipts taxes and all the
other taxes that that the one
has to pay when determining
whether to to move to New Mexico
and and so you know for for a
community that that's wanting
all retirees providing an
exemption for just one group of
of retirees does affect the
ability to market that says the
same thing to the the other
groups of of retirees and so you
know again tax policy of my mind
should be blind but the your
it's not and what does that I I
I think I could come around on
this if we could deal with the
head of household because that
would capture the other
retirees that we're trying to
recruit as well as the younger
families and what have you that
the.
Representative pay these taxes
but.
Now we get into a philosophical
argument Representative wants to
it has nothing to do with the
fact that we don't support
veterans we do it's just that we
need to come up with transposes
you Representative the bat you
know.
It is fair across the board and
and so anyway we can agree to
disagree or we can agree to work
together to try to come up with
some
some solution so that's what I
offer madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you pass.
We have a motion from
Representative vice chair
Johnson and and a second by
Representative or has and and
before we act on that motion I
just want to thank you
Representative akong for
carrying the bell and I do
understand about the burden of
the shaft but I think this is
something that our voters can
take into consideration knowing
the service that veterans have
made to our country and
if this gets to the voters I
will go out and happily support
that so thank you
Representative.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Chasey yeah.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative guy eagles.
Yes.
Representative my bridge about.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora.
No noted like to explain Google.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes please.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative.
Right before we officially call
that build Representative Zamora
to explain your vote.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative all on
for bringing this bill forward
but we should in my heart we
should look at the whole picture
and divert Representative Biber
offered an amendment which I
think you were open to at one
point.
And then that kind of change
your mind or may be needed
further thought on it but we
should look at the whole picture
of the whole state and how we
could.
I tracked all other retirees not
but just a Veterans and and I'm
I'm all in order to help in the
veterans but we need to look at
the whole picture because a lot
of times when make decisions
even in in our district it
affects the whole state.
And I think we ought to be open
minded to that and thank you
Representative dot com and madam
chair.
By a vote of six in the
affirmative and three and the
negative you have a do pass on
house joint resolution three
thank you representative thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee hello
you have breakfast now.
Committee members that we are
going to go back to House Bill
one zero three this is what we
heard on I believe it was Friday
and we have Representative
Anderson and Rebecca Roose to
provide an amendment if you
recall we took comments and I
think there were some
clarification language that
Representative night requested
and Representative Anderson and
Representative Madrid were in
agreement I don't see
Representative Madrid.
Representative Anderson but you
can go ahead and began.
And if you would make yourself
and explained the the amendment
before us.
You'll just have to admit
yourself Representative.
Representative.
Rebecca is
Representative Madrid going to
join us to you know.
Good morning madam chair I'm not
aware that Representative Madrid
has been able to get to a
computer access this morning
because of the weather and
that's the last I heard I did
think that Representative
Anderson was on
he's on he's just muted.
And communicating with them in
real time madam chair the
attacks as well
I apologize for the delay.
It's not your fault but thank
you.
He Representative Anderson just
texted me madam chair that he's
trying to on mute I'm not sure
what the difficulty as but he is
on in trying to connect with us
yeah we see him on and his
microphone is muted.
Madam chair appeared on his
phone I think star six maybe
getting are muted.
Representative I understand if
you're on your phone if you
would try stars.
Star six I believe so madam
chair let's try that.
Madam chair I'd be happy to try
to stand in for representative
edges to okay thank you
Representative so that his
because it seems to me that Miss
risk can explain what's been
done.
Let's go ahead and do that.
I'm if you would what will have
Representative Chasey stand in
or Representative Anderssen and
if you would just explain the
amendment miss rose.
Thank you sure happy to do that
madam chair members of the
committee I on Friday we heard
comment from Representative
night Burt Representative Nibert
picked up on this I need to
better clarify the definition of
late penalty in the bill as well
as a reference to the late
penalty I'm later in the bill
and that amendment changes both
of those things at to better
clarify our terms and then
effectively use the terms in in
the bill as specifically with
respect to the late penalty so
I'm it's now clear in the
language of the amendment that
the renewal application are late
penalty is only assessed when
the application is that
ultimately filed with the
department the environment
department so that's the trigger
point for the late penalty to
get assessed as when an
application is filed and are
we've also clarified at in
section three A. on page seven
that where it says rate to the
Department all applicable fees
at the time the application is
submitted including any
applicable late penalty
previously it said including a
late penalty that are improperly
conveyed that there would always
be a late penalty which is not
true according to the definition
of that term so we've corrected
that as well.
Great and just for the record
where you just confirm that the
number is point two one nine
eight five two excuse me five
seven point one so that's point
two one nine eight five seven
point one.
Madam chair that is correct
right thank you.
Thank you the agency released
this is Representative Anderson
who finally got a needed it
thank you madam chair and thank
you we're glad you can join us.
Madam chair.
Representative Anderson do you
want to add anything to the
amendment no I believe miss
first did an excellent job madam
chair we stand for questions
great thank you Representative
Nibert.
Madam chair I would move the
amendment for for discussions.
Right I'll second that the
committee for discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any.
Okay so you moved to adopt the
amendment yes ma'am I'll second
that okay and we have a second
by Representative Chasey is
there a discussion
Is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Okay seeing none we have adopted
that amendment.
She.
Committee members.
All of move for us that we.
House House Bill so one of three
yes.
As Amanda
okay great we have a question
for on a deep pass for house
bill one oh three as amended and
as
you madam chair I just want to
say Representative night for
doesn't get an opportunity to do
that very often and all second
that.
We have a motion and a second is
there further discussion.
Madam chair I would like to
point out I have the opportunity
to do that I just don't take
advantage of the offer.
Thank you representative.
Is there any objection to the do
pass on house bill one zero
three as amended.
Okay seeing you have a do pass
Representative Anderson showing
all members present voting in
the affirmative.
Thank you madam chair have a
good day thank you thanks thank
you.
We are moving on to house bill
one zero eight.
Representative Chandler you
would raise your hand and any of
your expert witnesses.
Great.
Representative Chandler.
Please begin when you're ready.
Great here we are.
Videos on on mute button is on
very nice to see the committee
and the chair woman I've been
listening to your meeting and
everyone seems in a really
chipper mood which is great.
I'm here to present was
Stephanie stringer so is
Stephanie on yes okay Stephanie
is the resource protection
division director at NMED and
house bill one oh eight
is a bill that relates to solid
waste management and under
current law solid waste
operators in New Mexico pay a
permit apple pay permit
application fees once every
twenty years and it's not enough
to fund the operations of this
particular program the fees have
not been a Justin's Justin's
since two thousand and seven.
The solid waste solvency bill
creates the non reverting solid
waste permit fund it removes the
permit fee cap currently in
place expands eligible
activities to include program
administration and permit
oversight costs and allows for
an annual adjustment to fees to
allow for inflation the bill
does not in and of itself
increase fees instead once the
bill is passed the New Mexico
environment department will
petition the environment
improvement board to adopt a new
fee schedule that addresses that
the need for funding and and
that will be done through a
public process madam chair with
the appropriate stakeholders and
public participation and with
that if I may madam chair turn
the turn the presentation over
to mystery.
Yes welcome.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee managing it
properly managing solid waste is
a bedrock environmental
protection activity that
prevents contamination from
entering our land air and water
I don't think there's a single
person that I've spoken to about
this bill that hasn't mentioned
the need to increase the fees so
we must pass house bill one oh
eight so that we can ensure our
environment is protected are you
know.
It's important that we fund this
program the department has seen
a huge losses of general fund
over time and we've been
instructed to seek out of ways
to fund the program and so this
is one of those strategies were
starting with our permit program
so that we can make sure that
important services that we
provide throughout the life of a
twenty year permit are available
to our customers and we can make
sure those businesses the
landfills and transfer stations
stay in operation
and we have the resources to
support that with that I stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative
Chandler we also have Joan
Snyder issue do you want to have
her speak or she available for
technical support madam chair I
think she's available for
technical support thank you so
much for pointing.
Great thank you we can now call
the audience or house bill one
zero eight.
Curious.
Okay in the poll is now open if
you would like to vote for or
against house bill one zero
eight please raise your hand.
We're going to close the pull in
three seconds.
Okay great we have ten in favor
and three against let's hear
from the folks at opposition
first.
If you would like to speak you
don't have to speak but you're
welcome to speak in opposition.
AJ you are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it is not that
we're totally against the bill
we just learned about the bill
when it was dropped this bill
removes the cap in so we have
the potential to go from.
Five hundred dollars a year to
twelve thousand dollars a year
right as a twenty year permit
right now has a ten thousand
dollar cap.
We agree there needs to be an
increase but this just maybe too
much for rural communities we
don't want to perpetuate the
problem that we're trying to fix
we have to a lot of education to
make sure people don't stop in
the arroyos and on the side of
the highway and we worry that if
this he goes up too much it the
people are or communities won't
pay that increased feet even
though it sounds nominal it's a
big deal if you're down in our
our rural communities there's a
similar bill it the leap worked
on with the environment alright.
The clean water testing act we
spent a year developing what
worked and where we could
partner with this one we just
learned about it so we're just
asking that we take the time to
develop a bill that our
communities can afford it also
properly funds the department as
we just ask for partnership and
time to develop what works thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Marco Gonzales your
now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and I am the
registered lobbyist for McKinley
County and it is with great
regret that we have to oppose
this bill I've spoken to the
sponsor many of the comments
that were just iterated are some
of our own making the county is
one of the of course counties in
the state and we fear that as
these costs are passed on to the
new permit fees increased to
consumers that is going to cause
a problem that was mentioned by
the previous speaker we
certainly support the full
funding of the environment
department and all of its
efforts to make sure that the
environment is clean we we to
want it to be that way but with
this the impact to the
environment may also occur
because of the inability for
folks to actually survive that
passed on cost so I appreciate
that I think the sponsor for
time talking with your a
respectful we have to close this
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you now we will hear from
those in favor if you would like
to speak again you don't have to
but you are welcome to.
Sarah your point.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Sarah Pierpont and executive
director of the New Mexico
recycling coalition we are
statewide member supported
nonprofit organization and our
mission is to inspire New
Mexicans to reduce reuse and
recycle and we support H. B. one
oh eight a lot of our members
did bring up the issue of
placing some sort of cap or
limit on the amount of fees that
can be collected we understand
this will be part of a lengthy
stakeholder input process during
the rulemaking at section of
this this legislation and so we
are prepared to take our I need
to put a cap on the amount of
permit fees to the rulemaking
procedures thank you.
Thank you Marla showed C. R. now
and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for south central
solid waste authority south
central solid waste authority
manages solid waste Dona ana
county and parts of Sierra and
Otero counties after several
discussions with secretary Kenny
and NMED staff we support house
bill one oh wait we understand
the demands of the solid waste
bureau and support their need
for funding we had concerns as
well about no cap on permit fees
and the legislation but after
several attempts to crack the
language we agreed that the
permit fee process you for me
I'd be will result in our
ability to increase the permit
fees accordingly without putting
undue increases to our rate
payers we strongly request
however that the secretary in
the solid waste bureau please
include the stakeholders as
early as possible as we move
into the rulemaking process
thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment process so we
will now go to the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I have a couple questions
probably more directed at after
the expert
Our first question is.
What.
Because the current permitting
process is a one time the.
And now it looks like you're
wanting to go to an annual fee
what is the department really
looking at in terms of dollars.
Madam chair I'm happy to defer
to either mystery Ernest Snyder.
Thank you for the question Madam
chair representative Nighbor so
currently there's and one time
application fee and it varies
depending on the size and type
of facility and so for our
largest facilities something
like a Camino Riel landfill the
currently plate pay ten thousand
dollars for the twenty year
permit which equates to five
hundred dollars per year so we
are looking to increase revenues
through the environmental
improvement board rulemaking
process.
Probably to something around a
maximum of five thousand dollars
per year but that's something
that is likely to need to be
phased in to allow communities
to work towards that so it it
really depends on the rulemaking
process what's that final amount
will be but we're really only
seeking to cover our annual
program costs and to run that
particular program just that
program within the solid waste
bureau it costs approximately
three hundred and fifty to five
hundred thousand dollars per
year to run that program so
those are the the revenues that
we're seeking to gain from this
increase in fees through the
rule making process thank you.
Madam chairman stringer you said
for large facilities five
thousand per year what about
small rural facilities.
Thank you madam chair
representative Albert that is
something that will work with
our stakeholders to figure out
what is the best fee for
creating equity ability making
sure that we're not increasing
fees unnecessarily on certain
communities so I think we need
to look at a new structure than
what's already in existence in
the rule making so that we can
get appropriate categories to
create that equity bility and
fairness within the fee
structure that we create but
that's something that you know I
think has been mentioned here
will have to really engage with
stakeholders before we petition
the A. B. to figure that out and
make it a data driven process
and so that's our goal is to
just remove the cap so that we
can go to the environmental
improvement board and before we
do that we would work with
stakeholders to come up with the
an appropriate fee structure.
Madam chair representative this
may sound like you're the last
discussion we have with
Representative about home if the
department has a figure in mind
as to the amount of money it
needs to raise.
Then the it sounds like they'll
be undergoing some sort of.
Shifting of the burden to to
deal with with various things
such as size maybe our the
ability of certain communities
to pay what have you but it
ultimately wants to reach a
certain stated dollar madam I I
heard the testimony correct
Madam chair and and
Representative Representative at
the current time.
Is the barman Department
performing the the oversight
with the general fund revenues
is because if if the programs up
pay for itself obviously the
programs ongoing is that because
we're were committing general
fund revenues to the Department.
Madam chair I will just defer to
Mister in on that point and
representative.
Madam chair representative and I
Burt currently the program is
funded through primarily general
fund with some corrective action
fund contributing to the program
because of the cuts that we've
seen in general fund so we're
we're really scraping our
pennies together to fund this
program but yes general fund is
the primary source of funding
for this program.
M. madam chair and mystery are
yes you get your way and get
this implemented.
Is the department budget then
going to be reduced to because
you don't need the two plus
million dollars because you'll
be generating that if these.
Madam chair Representative the
expectation is that the the
budget will not be reduced they
they barely have an S. as
ministering Arment madam chair
and representative pointed out
they're barely scraping by to
make this program work with the
funds that they have it's a very
important program madam chair I
think we would agree managing
the solid waste facilities is an
empire and critical
environmental issue and so the
expectation is that there were
general fund allocation would
not be reduced.
So Madam chair representative
that's my concern we're gonna
raise two point six million
dollars to to fund this program
but yet the overall budget of
the department's not going to go
down
we're just I mean this is that
since the tax increase because
ultimately the people that are
paying for this will be the
people that that utilize the
solid waste facilities which in
my estimation is probably ninety
eight percent of the people in
the state of so if you have
weather comes from the general
fund or whether comes from fees
it get passed on
at the end of the day it's still
people pay and
an increase in this case two
point six million dollars.
for this
Is there any one meditations
madam chair in this.
of Bill Representative would cap
the ability of the department
and the R. B. two of.
Limit.
The.
Fees would be imposed.
Madam chair representative not
within the bill itself there
will be a public process in
which stakeholders and others
can participate and that is a
possibility once it's it's it
proceeds through the I'd be.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative that
process doesn't limit it just
simply say you have to do it is
in the public view it and take
public comment the the the the
fees themselves could be raised.
As high as what the yeah I'd be
were approved for and and and be
able withstand whatever public
scrutiny results from from that
action but there's no limit by
statute if this if this is
passed there's no limit by
statute what that increase to be
is that correct.
Madam chair there's nothing
within the statute that limit to
it's it's a it's a public
process through the I. B. madam
chair and it's I'm quite certain
that is a limiting factor in and
how this will move forward madam
chair and representative.
Madam chair and representative
yeah.
Coming from a fairly unpopulated
area of the state so.
Where.
These types of facilities are
are far view between and the
quantity of material going into
them is is probably much less of
their will all be seated in the
more populated areas I'm really
concerned about the impact that
this is going to have on our
small smaller communities and
the communities that the.
Not only.
Our small but have to transport
their solid waste great
distances to to properly dispose
of it and if we are looking at
increasing fees
What is it a hundred times
What it's real impacts going to
be on the landscape because in
in my community are we see a lot
of the legal dumping
that results from people not
wanting to pay the the tonnage
three at the landfill and so
they just go dump their crap all
over the county roads and what
have you and and occasionally
the county has to go out.
And you know try to try to clean
that stuff up yeah so it's
really.
Balance Representative the if we
if we move the stuff up from
from five hundred a year to five
thousand dollars a year
That may that may have a
counterproductive effect on the
landscape yeah in some of our
particularly smaller communities
and so I'm I'm concerned about
that I'll be interested to hear
over the rest of the debate the
I am very concerned about that
impact thank you madam chair
thank you representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chandler for
bringing this bill forward I too
want to echo.
What's been heard time and time
again this morning.
from.
Representative night but some of
the witnesses the.
But wanted to testify is as a
farmer and rancher we see a lot
illegal dumping.
Out in the rural areas and
that's a great concern to me
because it's going to create
problems.
for other.
Agencies we we.
As.
Farmers and driving out the
rural roads when when we see a
pilot trash like that the only
way we can fight that.
Is is a very restrictive I mean
with very limited we can't there
there's there's hardly any way
to find that person and get them
to pick up their trash or do
whatever so then the we have to
call the county to come pick it
up or pick it up ourselves
because it it borders our arms
or whatever we wind up saying a
lot of that another thing I see
is a.
It's here in our area and I
don't know how it's done across
the state maybe you can shed
some light on this
Representative Chandler madam
chair right Representative
Chandler is a.
Here in our area if if you live
out the county.
When you go up to the booth to
to weigh in and everything if
you're county resident they
charge you a fee to that
individual yes if you live in
the city you can you pay a trash
for you so then.
You would pay.
at your residence for the for
the trash feeds so then they
don't charge of that to.
Dispose of your trash at the
dumpsite.
So.
Is is that the way it's done
through for the rest of the
state can you tell me.
Madam chair representative madam
chair and representative I don't
know the answer to that but
perhaps then stringer does madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative I think each
individual facility has a
different way of managing how
they charge you know we our fees
focus on the permitted
facilities and that's landfills
and transfer stations those
types of facilities but I I
can't speak to how each of those
individual facilities you know
raises their own revenue to run
their business.
Okay thank you for that answered
and madam chair Representative
Chandler I I guess at the at the
end of the day it goes to the
individual one way or another.
And my concerns are are of
illegal dumping and and that
we've seen.
Real bad problems with that in
the past and and they're not
that way today
I think they've gotten better
over the years.
But now with this increase I'm
afraid we'll see more of that
And and then maybe people start
dumping trash illegally on on
their private residences and
Barron and stuff
I just see a lot of issues.
With that I'm I'd rather see.
caps put on this on this bill
and.
And the and I know it's it's
this this is a hard bill because
because I can see about the
environment I can see about the
trash in New.
And the state being put in a in
the pry position on on cash
flows and and then it passes on
down to the individuals are.
But but I just hate to see.
People going back to their old
ways of of throwing the trash in
the ditches and and everybody
else having to clean up it's a
big concern for me I look
forward to see how the bill
moves forward and thank you for
bringing the Billboard thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Madam chair thank you and
Madam chair and Representative
Chandler I want to understand
how this works for the City of
Albuquerque dumpsite so are you
going to increase the fee for
the City of Albuquerque.
Madam chair representative.
I would say that's and not
directly but I will pass on the
the question if I may madam
chair to administrative.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rehm so the the
fees would apply to all of the
permitted facilities that the
City of Albuquerque manages and
again you know we would want to
create a structure that is good
for all stakeholders but brings
in the revenue that we need to
run the program and keep those
facilities permitted and in
compliance it's something the
illegal dumping issue is
something we're very aware of we
have to do absolutely do not
want to do anything that is
going to encourage illegal
dumping as a matter of fact we
got an illegal dumping complaint
over the weekends this weekend
that will be responding to but
those that's what we need the
resources for and the general
fund that is preserved by
increasing the fees of the
permit program will help you
address those illegal dumping
issues but that being said we
don't want to create a fee
structure that encourages
illegal dumping we just want to
be able to provide the services
to permit those facilities and
maintain and service the permit
through the twenty year life of
the permit.
One of.
Representative this is probably
for the over the your act but.
Currently you're funding.
Is from the from the budget are
our legislative budget is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
that's that's correct.
Madam chair and in
Representative
Even in my district.
Is that part of rules
Albuquerque up here and on the
vacant lots there's dumping the
reality is that.
You can go to the transfer site
which isn't far away and for a
pickup load a level pick up
load it's five twenty five.
And if we're going to increase
the fees at all that that's
going to have to go up.
And I think that's given me
encourage it if if I could what
I would do is would make it
redeployed stop at the site.
A huge I mean if you're caught
being somewhere else.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative bagels.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chandler for
bringing this legislation
I understand the need to to
update and modernize
some of these fees because for
so long that they haven't been
updated so that lease these
agencies in that in a
predicament of having to provide
services and not getting out
having the ability to to do that
that being said Representative
and and madam chair I I just
wanted to kind of explore why
there wasn't more communication
done with the minutes fully
Eagan Minnesota polities just
because when I I've been on
since we started I've I've
gotten several taxes from my own
minister khadi down home back at
home and so I just want them to
have it here in the process of
that you all are going through
because I do I have to answer to
them of course at the end.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for that question I
will deferred administering or
who has been working this issue
obviously thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative today it goes I
think that's surely reflection
of how thinly spread we are
you know I lost the solid waste
bureau chief who had been in
that position for for twenty is
the very long time or early
actually marks and Joan Snyder
is I lost her she retired to I
should clarify see in this so
Joan Snyder I I did a
recruitment and sought a new
bureau chief and Joan came on
board literally the day before
COVID telework hits and so we've
really been focused on making
that transition into telework
and focusing our inspections
that we do in the solid waste
bureau on our infectious waste
facilities so it's a matter of
we we are really spread thin
because of the limited budget at
the Environment Department and I
think in our minds well
certainly in my mind you know
the E. I. B. has such a robust
public participation process
that removing that cap was the
first step to see if we can even
go through that process is
process before we devoted
resources to at figuring out the
exact numbers we knew we needed
to remove this cap in order to
set the stage to petition the
environmental improvement board
with a good proposal that was
thoroughly vetted by the
stakeholders so you know I think
certainly we would have
preferred to do more outreach
with all of our stakeholders and
regret that this is kind of how
it came out because of the
circumstances we were in but I
definitely commit to engaging
very again very robustly very
thoroughly with all the
stakeholders before we develop
our final petition that we take
to the I. B. if we're fortunate
enough to do so if this bill
doesn't pass then we can even.
Start that process and devote
the resources to doing that
thank you.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you for Representative and
thank you for that answer
I think that that's a problem
because of you know of course
you know how do you get the
resources are we need the
resources to do the work but
then there hasn't been the the
work done to get to this place
so I'm I find myself kind of in
a in a place where
and concerned about the bill
because I think there does need
to be you know meeting of the
minds where does this go
Billboard is this bill go after
here Representative
Madam chair representative goes
to the floor this is this this
is the second committee.
Okay.
Well if you that leaves a little
bit in a quandary because that
makes it really difficult to
vote for would you be willing to
commit to talk to the municipal
league and some of the the
The stakeholders before getting
into the floor the has I would
need that before voting for it
on the floor yes Madam chair
representative absolutely I know
there has been a fair amount of
research outreach in the last
couple of weeks but of course
we're committed to continuing to
talk with the municipal league
and and other appropriate
stakeholders for sure madam
chair okay well if you can
assure me that I do think that
the I understand the reason for
the but I think it is it is high
of four
some of our smaller rural areas
and of course that's a majority
of what I represent and so that
makes me it hard for me to vote
for this where I do want to be
supportive and I hear
What was said and that you know
so important to get adequate
funding and so I I want to
support you and so I hope that
you'll follow up and and be able
to get that information before
it does that the force of thank
you thank you.
Thank you representative.
Committee members.
Madam chair I move in the past.
Second that.
Thank you we have a deep has
motion by Representative Eli and
a second by Representative
Chasey is there further
discussion.
Seeing none the clerk to color
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative guy a ghosts.
Yes announcement about.
Representative my part.
No.
Representative or test yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora.
No I'd like to explain Google.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
No reason I'd like to explain
about.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair we with that we have
I in the affirmative and for and
the negative.
Thank you and before we
officially call that both let's
first go to Representative
bagels to explain her about.
Thank you madam chair and once
again I just want to reiterate
we do want this to to keep
moving because I think that
funding is so important but I
think we need to find balance
and make sure that it's workable
was with the stakeholders so I I
really want to vote for on the
floor so I encourage the the
changes in the discussions to
happen thank you.
Thank you Representative Zamora
to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair.
I find a lot of difficulty with
this bill because it has no cap
at the top in to me it's it's a
bill that could skyrocket the
cost of dumping and we would see
legal dump in New I just can't
support this bill for that
matter.
By Karen Johnson to explain your
vote.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward I want you to
know that I support the work
regarding environmental we as
safe care regarding our solid
waste facilities however I also
hear and understand the concerns
with and my County McKinley
County and I know they're
concerned as a result of we're
still trying to recover from the
pandemic and then we also have
complicated land based areas we
have the checkerboard area so
based on that we have and a
complicated situation with the
illegal dumping as well so and
then I think Representative guy
a goes for her comments and her
thoughts about moving this bill
forward because I think it's
really important work with that
madam chair thank you.
Thank you so Representative by a
vote of five in the affirmative
and for in the negative you have
a do pass thank you very much
madam chair and thank you
committee have a good day care
thank you.
Committee members just a
housekeeping matter that I
forgot to mention at the
beginning of the meeting per the
request Representative Matthews
house bill two thirty four will
be rolled until Wednesday
probably and they're working on
some amendments so they're
hoping to get those done today
but I wanted to mention that
before we move on to the other
bills related to education
we have next house bill one zero
eight Senator Padilla.
We will move you to a panelists
if there are our experience
please raise your hand and
Representative Garrett if you're
on please raise your hand as
well.
Madam chair you said house bill
one right I think you mean house
bill twenty two.
Thank you representative I did
main house bill twenty two thank
you.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me we can hear you welcome
thank you and I know that
Representative Garrett is on
this is primarily her bill I'm
jumping back and forth madam
chair between Senate education
in New York Committee I think
she's going to introduce the
bill and I'm here to help her
but I may have to run back to
the real quick and come right
back thank you okay great okay
Representative Derrick.
Thank you so much Madam
chairwoman house bill twenty two
grow your own teachers X. Goller
ships a man of the statutes that
we put into place previously
and I have a expert witness for
any technical questions with a
Chelsea Canada familiar state
house twenty two expands the
eligibility for those who
qualify for grow your own
teachers that scholarships the
legislatively supported
scholarship program was created
in two thousand nineteen and it
supports the educational
assistance with scholarships for
costs associated with gaining
their teaching licenses
certification under current law
they can only qualify if they
are as serious as a resident of
New Mexico these amendments may
get it authorizes that for
anybody who is authorized to
legally work in New Mexico this
was a request of the school
districts they need to have
worked in a public school for at
least two years and be in good
standing and then there enrolled
or accepted by public
undergraduate teacher
preparation program and then
they have to demonstrate
financial need to institution
that they're pursuing course
work at so this bill expands
eligibility to people authorized
to work in New Mexico also
expands the definition of who
qualifies for the scholarship
some people who work as
educational assistance are
called instructional aides so
this bill addresses that reality
on the other thing that the
amendment does is sometimes
scholarship but then our
finances improved and they're
not eligible for the scholarship
but they still want to pursue
their certification.
So this allows educational
system for people in that role
who have worked two years to
still get the benefit of leave
to pursue their education even
though they're no longer with
the scholarship program so the
other thing is there is some
cleanup changes in the language
that was outdated that we also
addressed
I don't know if my co sponsor
wants to add anything Senator
thank thank you madam chair and
thank you representative and and
and to the committee I'm wearing
this mask because
My business is doing so well I
would really have employees
working inside of my office with
me so I'm trying to protect them
from from my whatever but thank
you all very much for allowing
us to present I have to say that
this may be if not the most one
of if not the most successful
scholarship programs we've had
to help our teachers to help
improve improve our our up
teaching ranks here in New
Mexico what a better way to
grow your career increase the
number of teachers which we all
know is a significant we have a
significant teacher shortage in
the state but what about what
better way to do that then folks
that already have significant
classroom experience and so
that's really what you're what
we're dealing with here the
representative and I were able
to just partner in a really big
way in two thousand nineteen and
get this done the higher
education department did their
part to implement and now we're
over here trying to make it even
better what you heard from the
representative is that we did
need to do some cleanup with any
major piece of legislation we do
need to come back as we all know
one two and sometimes seventeen
years later make it even better
and that's what we're trying to
do here there was an amendment
in the house Education Committee
which I believe the
representative touched on this
briefly but essentially it is
clearly outlined the duties of
an educational assistant and a
licensure system for educational
assistance and that was added
there I thought that was very
smart and timely for this
particular piece of legislation
to make sure that we're able to
hit all the objectives that
we're trying to I don't know
that there's anything else I can
can really add but I will say
that when the monies were made
available to do this we
immediately saw.
Job satisfaction improvements
with this type this particular
employee type and also
aged just a a horse race to get
a hold of the scholarships as
quickly as possible because we
found that there was a true need
madam chair members of the
committee so I'm very excited to
support the Representative again
this year we've done a great job
whenever we sponsored something
together and we're open to your
comments and questions.
Great thank you before we take
comments from the audience let's
go ahead and pull of those in
attendance.
So again we are on house bill
twenty two.
And the call is now open we'll
keep it open for another ten
seconds to vote in favor or
against house bill twenty two as
amended.
Okay we will close the poll now
we have eighteen in favor and
one against.
So let's go ahead and hear from
those in favor if you would
please raise your hand.
Stephanie Rodriguez you're now
and get it.
Thank you madam chair I am
Stephanie with Vegas name the
acting cabinet secretary of the
New Mexico higher education
department I would like to
express my support on behalf of
both of our agency in governor
Michelle lu Han Grisham for
house bill twenty two the grow
your own teachers act you have
already made the imported
decision to support the
scholarship program in the past
and now Representative Garrett
Senator but the at education
leaders and advocates have
collaborated to expand
eligibility so more New Mexicans
qualify and we can continue to
increase the number of
educational systems construction
all eight pursuing passed to
teacher licensure to date your
investment has supported nearly
one hundred fifty scholarship
recipients and we expect that
number to ask your fifty after
the last.
The teachers create great
students and expanding the
scholarship program with the
latest work for both our
educators and our children thank
you.
Thank you
you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
testify today my name is Missy
career and I'm a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixty on behalf of our client
western governors university we
stand in support of house bill
twenty two western governors
university is a nonprofit online
university founded by the
western governors in nineteen
ninety seven New Mexico is one
of the states that founded the
university western governors
university has entered into an
interview with western New
Mexico university to expand
online education opportunities
for New Mexico students
therefore we support this
legislation to expand continued
access to quality educational
opportunities for all New Mexico
students and increased training
and professional development for
excellent teachers and
assistants at all levels of
education thank you very much.
Thank you John locations you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipshutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor AFL-CIO the speaking on
behalf of the tens of thousands
of working New Mexicans across
the state and their families are
we stand in strong support of
this measure and also stand in
solidarity with their teachers
that will most certainly benefit
from our from this bill so we
thank the sponsors and hope that
you will support thank you.
Thank you germinal yanking your
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee German thank you
director of the to learning
sulfur Senator public speaking
on behalf of governor Jeffrey a
we do support this bill and the
expanded to eligibility will
have greater benefits one
consideration we do one ****
Sanchez is to consider expanding
the eligibility to tribal
control schools which will
greatly affect the.
The educational poll for people
that have been born grace and
will stand in New Mexico we know
that our students are transient
what's the system's moving
between tribal control schools
of public education systems but
sort educators you know we would
like to offer this full support
but would also like to ask the
sponsors for this consideration
we've seen this model being used
in early childhood in in order
published by the Landel
foundation and now it should be
and we've greatly is been
impacted by these of these
services thank you madam chair.
Thank you John H. you are now
and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's John durch I'm with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico we're also here in
support of house bill twenty two
as amended we do want to thank
both of the Sanchez who
presented the bill today in in
picking a revisit to clean up
some of the language on the bell
we we support the expansion our
of who is eligible for this
scholarship it was a server
unintended outcome that some job
titles would be excluded that
was not the intent from twenty
nineteen so we appreciate that
fix in this version of the bill
the other item that we wanted to
particularly underlying is that
some of the knowledge as a
pointed out that this particular
type of legislation has really
shown success with recruiting
and retaining diverse teaching
candidates so when we're
thinking about educational
equity and having a classroom
where our students are seeing
educators that look like that
might come from their
communities this goes a long way
to not only achieve that but
also bill are historic in sort
of chronic levels of vacancies
throughout our teaching
positions in New Mexico so we do
stand in strong for and want to
urge a yes vote from the
committee thank you very much.
Thank you marks a major your now
and it.
Thank you madam chair and and
members of the committee marks
better with the New Mexico State
University president's I
represent the seven four year
universities in New Mexico we
also work with the group that
called deans and directors of
the colleges of education and
throughout the state and this
addresses a number of concerns
or least suggestions that they
brought forward to a towards the
towards the higher department
and the public education
department as well so I think
the sponsors for the amendments
and for bringing this
legislation forward also
recognize the governor and the
and madam secretary higher
department their support for
this legislation as well and
with that the New Mexicos
University president stands for
this legislation thank you madam
chair and members the committee.
Thank you.
Really may Ortiz you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can good morning I am
willing they are to do some of
the Legislative lays off of the
New Mexico school board
association The New Mexico
school board association
maintains a membership of eating
and I school districts
throughout the state of New
Mexico with four hundred fifty
strong school board member
voices madam chair members of
the committee we know all and
research indicates that grow
your own programs have shown
success with recruiting and
retaining candidates this bill
expands the scholarship program
scope from only including
educational assistance to
include all school employees who
have worked directly with
students for two years so madam
chair members of the committee
this bill expands the pool of
teachers New Mexico school board
association supports legislative
action that will assist in
recruiting and preparing
teachers for our classrooms we
thank the sponsors madam chair
and we asked for favorable
consideration of this
legislation and we thank you for
allowing us to use voice our
position thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
You are now and it.
Okay thank you madam chair Ellen
burns Steen president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
we thank both Sanchez for this
great bill it has been an
excellent resource for the
educational assistants that work
in the Albuquerque public
schools to pursue a career as a
licensed teacher our educational
systems in ATS come from the
community
around the school that they work
and so that it's a wonderful
place to have representation
from the
the surrounding area of the
school to become a teacher and
then work again in the community
in which they live this is a
wonderful bill with great
amendments and we urge your
support thank you.
Thank you lily Irvin but you are
now and it.
Madam chair committee members
good morning my name is lily
Irvin Vitela and and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first we're in
strong support of house bill
twenty two it's very much
aligned with our forty second
town hall that was focused on
higher education and economic
development the ability to
attract retain and grow our own
teachers was seen as critically
important to both the
educational and economic well
being of New Mexico particularly
we appreciate the amendments
that also look at ways to create
opportunities and pathways
towards professional development
and growth and higher
compensation for educational
assistance and appreciate that
it's done in a way that's
collaborative with schools and
collaborative with districts and
really looks at ways to have win
wins
especially that there's
thoughtful approaches to how to
reduce barriers.
I'm in transportation by
increasing distance learning
opportunities thank you so much.
Thank you Lisa dial you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is a lease deal I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty stand
in support of this bill for the
reasons given here today on and
I will repeat those of course
but I would just add that in the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit the
judge recognized the
constitutionally sufficient
education includes a fully
staffed quality and diversity to
your workforce as we all know of
course our state continues to
experience a dire shortage of
teachers especially for
indigenous teachers bilingual
education special education and
early childhood.
For these reasons and I'll see
P. supports expanding the
scholarship HB twenty two thank
you.
Thank you.
That's all for those who support
is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition if so
please raise your hand.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee.
Representative neighbor.
Thank you madam chair just two
quick questions.
Our first Madam chair
representative would.
Hey.
Cafeteria worker qualify under
this act and.
With a fall within the
definition of directly working
with children.
Madam chairwoman.
Representative that's a great
question cafeteria workers do
work directly with children and
it is conceivable that they
would qualify I'd like to ask my
expert witness
miss Canada if you could add to
that.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative
neighbor
that's a good question and came
up in discussions when we were
drafting the amendment
I think you know it would really
it would really depend on
if if the school district
supported to that individual to
go upon this pathway but you
bring up a good point
technically under this bill
right now if the school district
see is that you know that this
the cafeteria worker is working
directly with students that they
could qualify.
And madam chair if I can add the
response there.
Thank you madam chair and and
and Representative neighbor yeah
I mean I I have to tell you that
I still know my cafeteria
workers two of them very well at
a still life and they say they
they and always talked about
going in and furthering their
educations along the way and I
think that you know if if again
as miss Canada mention if the
school district decides that you
know this person's you know work
their way up in a in a couple of
different areas maybe they've
done some of their own education
along the way and self funded
this would be eligible to them I
don't think to be an issue with
that.
Madam chair representative
senator
You know I certainly think that
we ought to.
Encourage that I was worried
that your words directly working
with children would mean that
this only qualifies for the aids
that are in the classroom.
And I certainly would like to
see.
US encourage.
Basically.
All the employees who are into
educational setting maybe set
their sights on on becoming a
teacher and sensor already
familiar with the with what goes
on in schools I I think that
ought to be an encouragement by
my second question was whether
custodial workers would would
also
All I.
Madam chair.
Representative.
I will tell you that the
custodian at the elementary
school where I worked for five
years probably knew more about
the children and some of the
teachers and so there are cases
where that custodian
Might be excellent person to
receive the scholarship.
And and and madam chair I'll
just add also can can you just
picture the the now suddenly
career path for every school
employee that works with the the
children suddenly there is a
real way for you to get this
done we don't pay the custodians
in the cafeteria workers in the
and even the EA's anywhere near
what they're worth their value
is and now they see a way to
advance their own careers and
have a way to do that through
the scholarship which does not
would necessarily be a detriment
to their families and their
ability to put food on the table
which is already tough if you do
this kind of work.
Madam chair representative
Senator our I would encourage
you to look at the.
Page two.
The wind and
the word works directly.
And just make sure.
That you're confident and
comfortable that the those words
are not limiting.
The potential pool of people
that you have now expressed a
desire to cover so I would I'm
not I'm not going to go down
that road I just suggest you
look at it make sure you're
comfortable that it captures
what you testified to thank you
madam chair thank you very good.
Thank you representative.
Committee members.
Madam chair and then we do pass.
Seconds.
Thank you we have a due pass
motion by vice chair Johnson and
a second by Representative Eli
is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass.
Seeing and hearing
Representative and senator you
have a do pass on health bill
twenty two as amended showing
all of those in attendance
voting in the affirmative.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you committee thank you madam
chairwoman members of the
committee thank you thank you.
Next we have the house bill
eighty three.
Representative Romero.
We raise your hand and if you
have any experts along please
have them raise their hands to.
Welcome Representative.
You have to admit yourself.
Representative Romero.
I think you might have stepped
away.
I know we have Representative
Trujillo on.
Representative you if you would
raise your hand we can hear or
house bill one zero three.
Okay.
Welcome representative to help.
How are you all.
Doing well thank you how are you
thank you I think Representative
Representative about this just
got off of education we're all
and Education Committee and it
sounds like do you want to come
back to me so he can finish.
Yes let's try a couple more
times I just text them as well
so Representative Romero are you
are you with this now.
Okay great.
Welcome Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair has this
coming from.
Education Committee so I
appreciate it chair for the
delay everybody no problem
health bill eighty three do you
have any experts so I do doctor
Ellen Bernstein and she comes
all go ahead and get started in
that can we she's promoted her
as a panelists so whenever
you're ready.
Thank you madam chair I do have
an amendment just so you know
madam chair so when appropriate
we can discuss that but will
kind of go over the whole bill
I'm.
If that's okay so house bill
eighty three is changing the
graduation requirements for
students so the first thing I
would like to know to the
committee is that we're really
looking at doing in
philosophically in the kind of
the philosophical framework
behind this entire bill is
really giving more choice
flexibility and individuality to
students education in the state
of New Mexico so I'm really
broadening what would count in
particular
Fields of students education but
we're also trying to be we are
being inclusive of career
technical education for students
and and various ways throughout
their high school education
So those are the main
underpinnings behind this
legislation so to get into some
of the particulars of the actual
bill
We are looking at maintaining
four units of English we will be
maintaining and we'll get to
this the original bill currently
has the three units of
mathematics will go into the
amendment and the minute that
pertains to that three for
science three and a half for
social studies and.
We'll have our career technical
field as well as well as being
inclusive of capstone courses
Senate capstone serve as
independent study in the bill
they will be guided by a well
qualified teacher in that field
so you know students are are
able to pursue something that
they are definitely interested
in but they will also be guided
by a teacher in that field that
is certified in that field and
so this capstone could be used
as a replacement credit for any
of their required credits
If you also look at the
requirements throughout the bill
for what would a mass of course
be what could some of those
options be what could some of
the options for sciences speak
in the bill we have them listed
there asked possibilities on but
it's not exhaustive in any sort
of way because through the
process of the public education
department to certify classes
they could go beyond that so
things that I'll I'll just pick
one out that's been the subject
of some discussion is is
culinary arts under
As a science credit right
currently if if a culinary arts
teacher were able to demonstrate
that their curriculum aligns
with the particulars of
content area and standards for
the sciences he could qualify
what we're trying to do is is
really expand the possibilities
and give these districts options
and ultimately students the
options that they would like to
see in their education moving
forward but that is broadly the
bill madam chair and I'd be
happy to go into to the.
Thank you representative Ellen
do you want to add more are you
available for technical
assistance.
Thank you very much I would like
to make a couple points about
house bill eighty three
For those of you that are not
deeply entrenched in the
educational policy making arena
it was in two thousand and seven
in the middle of the federal law
no child left behind when we
last revisited high school
requirements for graduation at
that point everything going on
in public education had to do
with high stakes testing and we
made a very narrow and rigorous
path forward for all students in
high school and unintended
consequence of that work back in
oh seven was that we basically
disallowed a lot of electives
including career and technical
education all of us and public
education around the nation have
been working on correcting the
idea that the only future for a
high school graduate is to go
into college we know there are
many rich careers that will
provide a great future for high
school graduates by allowing
high schools to create choices
actually districts to create
choices for are very
sophisticated high school use
they're able to pick their path
and they're able to work with
their teachers their parents
their guidance counselors on the
courses that fit their future.
In that way if you choose to go
to college you have your good
choices and if you choose to go
into a career you have great
choices also I believe that one
of the things that is essential
to making sure that high
schoolers graduate is having
that kind of engagement in the
choices that day per for and as
we increasing gauge meant we
will increase our graduation
rates
and then in terms of the
capstone class many high schools
across the nation including
those of us in APS have been
working on capstone classes
which combine the idea of
critical thinking skills problem
solving time management
integrity identifying their
passions and creating a cross
curricular project that they
then exist that to their
families their teachers there
peers and yes the teacher who is
providing the capstone class is
highly qualified in an area it
could be a core class
replacement again providing more
choice and more engagement for
our students and if you have any
questions I'll be glad to answer
them thank you very much.
Great thank you are you ready
for questions Representative
Romero.
you madam chair we do have the
amendment that'll be it
important
I don't know how you would like
to handle that is it going to
change public comment.
It may yes because it's in
direct response to some
criticisms that we had heard in
the previous committee okay if
you want to briefly touch on it
and then we can after we heard
public comment we can move it
for discussion.
Great thank thank you madam
chair so so basically the
amendment is in the current bill
we had
three units of mass we have
moved that to four units of mass
we heard some some criticism
about giving flexibility but
then lowering the mass amount of
requirements so we did bump that
up to four we also included
within the math credits a a
basic requirement of algebra one
to be completed by students in
the English portion in the
English credits portion we have
a minimum requirement of English
line in English ten and then in
the subsequent years so junior
senior year students would be
able to to choose the English
classes that would best suit
their education and then the
final substantive portion of the
amendment is that we would
include financial literacy or
economics so currently as the
bill stands economics is a half
credit requirement but we
colluded or financial literacy
as a core requirement so the
important thing to note in that
madam chair will get into this
later is that in the standard
for economics there's already a
heavy section on financial
literacy so whether students
church choose economics or
whether they choose straight up
financial literacy they will be
receiving financial literacy as
part of their high school
curriculum
So so that's and that's an
overview of the amendment thank
you madam chair.
Great thank you Representative
Romero before we take public
comment let's open the full.
So now folks that are attending
the meeting can vote.
For or against house bill eighty
three the pool is open.
We'll keep the pool open for ten
more seconds.
Okay we will close the poll we
have fifteen for and seven
against.
So let's hear from those in
opposition first if you would
like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay and polls nail you are now
and muted.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee I
appreciate you taking time to
consider these spots today I
have executive director of the
society of health and physical
educators New Mexico and well
written with the best intent we
oppose house bill eighty three
as written there has never been
a time when quality health and
physical education has been more
important for all of our
students so giving districts the
option to put health as a
required elective or move down
to the eighth grade level really
hurts are high school students
at this point health and
physical education are two of
the subjects specifically listed
in SSA and they are continually
marginalized and built like this
well they are integral to our
students well rounded education.
Nationwide there is less and
less
teachers coming out of
universities going into programs
if this is to create more
pathways to careers let's let's
not limit students they need to
access quality health and
physical education throughout
their high school career as well
we have submitted are requests
to look at some amendments I
think they'll come up in public
comment as well but I'd love to
see those come up before this
bill moves forward again thank
you so much for your time this
morning madam chair and
committee.
Thank you next we have Christine
more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today my
name is Dr Christine year I am a
parent licensed health educator
and a concerned citizen although
I am not opposed to changing
graduation requirements I have
two major concerns with the bill
first H. B. eighty three does
water down health education and
second the bills allowing too
many alternatives for physical
education as a bill is currently
written it is proposing health
education as required elective
this is not sound educationally
nor best practice for the health
of our high school students now
more than ever we need stronger
requirements for health
education health education
should not be an elective at
should be a standalone point
five credit door should be
pitted against an elective if
taken in to help in eighth grade
I respectfully oppose H. B.
eighty three with the current
language making health education
as an elective I'm also
respectfully opposing language
in H. B. eighty three which
allows multiple substitutes for
physical education for example
the current language would let
districts how electronic sports
for Pete this is not even
physical activity for E. sports
so the proposed language around
health and physical education
should be amended in the bill
and I respectfully hope that the
committee will consider those
amendments thank you for
listening.
Thank you next we will go to
Patty Nelson.
Excuse me passing out from.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
and Representative Romero again
I'm not totally against the bill
I appreciate the flexibility
however I'm a former school
nurse and school based health
center director at both middle
and high schools and the parents
and grandparents of students in
APS I respectfully request that
the health education graduation
credit is required in high
school instead of allowing it to
be offered in the eighth grade
health education as a graduation
requirement and should not be
compared to high school
electives it appears that no
other high school graduation
requirement they need maybe math
in middle school which begs the
question about why health
education is singled out to be
allowed in middle school house
bill eighty three offers the
opportunity to require the half
point five health education
graduation credit appropriately
in high school since it's part
of the high school performance
standards we know that students
who are not healthy have
difficulty learning and students
who are not educated tend to be
less healthy health problems
whether due to physical or
behavioral illness or injury R.
and main reason for poor school
attendance and a key lesson
learned from the pandemic is the
need for health literacy our
students are facing more social
emotional and physical health
issues than ever before and need
accurate and age appropriate
information provided through
health check health education to
help them be healthy and
educationally successful health
education with its prevention
messages should be taught at all
levels elementary middle and
high school but the graduation
requirements should be taught in
high school I respectfully
request that the bill be amended
to eliminate the options for
health education credit to be
given that the eights great to
ensure that health education is
given at the high school for the
graduation requirement and
therefore to.
Reduce the number of elected to
seven in high school.
I also request you reconsider
the options to meet physical
education credit physical
education should focus on
lifelong physical activity the
benefits the body in mind rather
than simply on moving the body
each day while engaging in
optional activities in high
school thank you for allowing my
comment.
Thank you now we will hear from
Elizabeth Dixon.
Okay.
She is no longer raising her
hand so let's move on to it was
a bit.
Are you on
it was Dixon.
Elisabeth.
Let's go next to Sarah.
You hear me.
There was a bill that you it is
me sorry about that yes we can
hear you now thank you so much
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Elizabeth
Dixon and I am just speaking for
myself I will supportive of
expanding the flexibility for
graduation requirements as a
public health nurse who has
worked in school settings in
school based health centers in
providing health education I ask
you to oppose any language in
this legislation that might
decrease to reduce the
requirement for health education
for graduation more specifically
I propose any language in that
in any bill that suggests health
education should be an elective
credit determined by school
districts or incentivize the
school districts or schools to
offer health education credit in
middle school as a high school
student health is incorrectly
linked not only to student
emotional for for educational
performance and successful
completion of high school but
also to their social and
emotional success the youth risk
and resiliency Services Survey
data that's gathered by the New
Mexico public education
department has shown us year
after year that New Mexico youth
experience increase port are
increased poor health outcomes
when compared to their peers
nationally health education in
the school setting mandates time
and space when trained teachers
and staff can teach students how
to care for themselves reduce
their risk for illness or injury
and has also shown to have a
healthy impact on their families
and communities a student share
what they learned back at home
and in their community this is
even more true during this
pandemic H. B. eighty three
provides an opportunity to
strengthen language in our
current law and I respectfully
encourage you to consider this
opportunity to reinforce the
current health education
requirement for graduation and
require health education in
middle school this demonstrates
for children and family that we
believe student health is a
priority thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you next we have Serra
it's Gerald.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
Mr fitzgerald I'm senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we haven't seen the amendment
but the chamber does have to
stand in opposition to this bill
as it's currently written over
behind the bills intend to make
our students education relevant
to their interests and the path
they want to pursue we're
concerned that this bill is also
lowering the standards that are
there to prepare students for
the future we're specially
worried about the removal of the
algebra two requirement which is
a prerequisite for higher
education institutions in New
Mexico it's unclear this
requirement has been restored
the amendment students can
sometimes take a while to decide
if their college bound or not
they should never be confused
about whether their high school
education has prepared them to
even apply to college and in the
state that's growing in stem and
cutting edge technologies like
space flight and renewable
energy we should be encouraging
our students to pursue those
fields not discouraging them we
want the stable and often high
wage jobs to go to New Mexicans
and out of state workers
recruited here.
So we are the committee not to
approve a bill that would leave
our high school students
underprepared for college or the
growing stem workforce thank
you.
Thank you next we have Ashley
Wagner.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
respectfully oppose this bill
although what the bill aims to
do seems reasonable by providing
a greater number of students for
the pathway to high school
graduation even with the
amendments the bill removes
alignment between graduation
requirements and college
admissions requirements which
may have a negative impact on
workforce development according
to the fiscal impact report over
one third of New Mexico high
school graduates who enrolled in
college required remedial help
in core academic subjects this
bill could exacerbate the
problem and put this state and
an increased risk of further
lawsuits and allegations an
example being the Martinez
Yazzie K. thank you.
Thank you now we will hear.
Comments in support of the bill
please raise your hand and I
will call on you.
Okay we have Representative
Rauch.
Well good morning madam chair
your good morning madam chair
and thank you for the
opportunity to speak I'm not
here this morning as a
representative although I
appreciate the ones that have
the title you never lose the
title I'm actually
superintendent of schools in
login New Mexico and I'm also
the president this year of the
New Mexico school
superintendents association how
we as an association stand in
support of the bill this aligns
very well with our one of our
platform elements which is to
provide local flexibility in
helping students determine which
courses they will take to meet
their graduation requirements
specifically in that but this
one also add some science and
language arts flexibility which
I think will very much help our
students individualize their
education plan moving forward I
do want to thank the sponsor he
and I have visited several times
about the bill he's been very
collaborative about restoring
for example the fourth match
requirement we certainly don't
want to jeopardize our state's
ability to print to continue to
excel in such areas as stem and
robotics and those sorts of
things but this does grant CTE
flexibility for those students
who choose a different path I
will say as to those who maybe
have it rates concern about the
health requirement in middle
school that requirement is
already in state law that health
education may either be required
in middle or high school
determined by the school
district and so that is this
bill does not change that but
does allow the flexibility to be
individualized education for
students that's why the
superintendents stand in strong
support this morning
particularly with the amendment
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have Danny.
Danny are you I'm muting
yourself are you on.
Okay let's.
Welcome back to Danny let's go
to we may Ortiz.
Morning madam chair can you hear
me.
Yes thank you morning madam
chair the lemaire Tissot
provided eight of the New Mexico
school board association Madam
chair of the New Mexico scored
Association appreciates the
option provided and house bill
eighty three it Cory broadens
the career pathways for our high
school students and it also
provides flexibility for
alternative job demonstration of
competencies in meeting the
graduation requirements and a
must be a supports is eight
legislation and appreciates a
sponsor for presenting that we
specifically thank and
appreciate the sponsor for
listening and responding to our
comments and the previous
education hearing so that was
where we asked to maintain the
current for math read it
requirements we we thank the
sponsor for that we support the
bill and the amendment and madam
chair we asked the committee to
give favorable consideration to
this bill and pass it forward
thank you.
Thank you next we have John Dyer
darts.
Thank you madam chair as members
of the committee my name's John
direction with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we are also here in
support of house bill eighty
three including the amendment to
be considered this morning
certainly Dr Berns dean and
Representative Romero will cover
all of the salient points of the
legislation however as a state
entity we are in strong support
of the legislation thank you and
we hope that you can supported
as well.
Thank you next we have had their
best that.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
heather Bassett and with
Albuquerque public schools and
we want to stand in support of
this graduation bill and I'm
with Representative Eli
Representative Romero.
Thank you did you get cut off
their.
If not we have now really
Irving's patella.
Good morning madam chair
committee members again my name
is lily Irvin Vitela president
and executive director of New
Mexico first we're in strong
support of house bill eighty
three in addition to the other
comments in favor we also I'm
appreciative of the fact that
the emphasis on vocational and
career
as well as college readiness
opportunities are embedded as
well as the thoughtful crosswalk
at the drafters did with IT a
requirements and the capacity to
meet the needs of students
who are special ed so thank you
so much courage to pass.
Thank you now we will go to
committee members.
Thank you let's go ahead and
move I can move the amendments
for discussion purposes
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair so on the
amendment and as I had mentioned
bumps the the mass requirement
to for on so you heard in public
testimony it went from three to
four with the amendment and it
also creates the the requirement
for algebra one as kind of a
floor or a basic requirement for
students
the English portion so it's
still four credits however in
the amendment it would require
English line item and English
ten and that students could pick
in grades eleven twelve
a different requirements for
different
from a list of different options
available to them in order to
fill the remaining requirements
such as journalism and then
finally madam chair of the the
next amendment deals with
financial literacy so in the
requirement for economics it
would add or financial literacy
so students would be given that
option and and like I had
mentioned to madam chair is that
with
despite the option that students
do choose whether it's economics
or financial literacy that they
would be getting financial
literacy as financial literacy
is a is a major component of the
economics requirement currently
in statute so in dealing with
that we did strike the portion
of current law that states that
school districts have to offer
financial literacy because we
think we are certainly elevating
it to a requirement within the
schools with that madam chair
will stand for questions on the
amendment.
Thank you Representative and for
the purposes of our records we
just confirm the point to
number.
Madam chair I do not have the
amendment in front of me as I
was kind of juggling things I
believe it's a point three
version okay then great we have
to one nine six eight three
point three.
Seems about right give me a
moment during discussion I can
pull it up and then verify that
okay great.
So we are in discussion of the
amendment.
Representative Nibert are you.
On the amendment no.
Committee members.
We adopt the amendment madam
chair.
Thank you representative we have
a motion to adopt.
And I'll second that is there
any discussion on the.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Did you find that number for
confirmation Representative gate
it is point three okay great
So we are looking for any
opposition.
Seeing and hearing none that we
have adopted those amendments.
Now on to the bill
Representative my part.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative of.
All right read with interest we
the ones that which were we're
getting into the weeds on what
what the.
Qualifies and doesn't qualify M.
might my question is really one
of of
The legislative role here in the
process and yeah I'm.
I'm concerned when I see
legislation like this that gets.
So specific
And I was wondering Madam chair
representative is it is it vital
that we place in statute are the
exact parameters that for a.
You know we're going to some
depth on page eleven as to what
the what.
Qualifies maybe what doesn't
qualify and or should we as a
policy matter should we leave
that up to PED at the local
school boards to determine
how to strip those categories I
I I can see us saying you need
for units of mathematics.
But to go into the detail that
we've gone into I'm just
wondering why we need to do that
it statute or whether we should
are we've got up to the public
education department for local
school boards.
Madam chair representative
neighborhood I I think that I
think that's a that's a good
point and I think that's what we
heard from certainly
superintendents and from school
boards is that it is providing
that flexibility so we're clued
we're.
In the statute including
including language so these are
suggestions and we do that in
other places you are most
notably I carry that on the
house side House Bill five a
couple years ago which is the
the expansion of education
services and what the at risk
factor could include and we
included very much of those
language that's parameters kind
of guidelines for districts but
they're certainly able to choose
and work on the classes that
they would want the important
thing to know from my opening
madam chair is that
School districts say if they
have something like a financial
literacy program if somebody had
a school site has a financial
literacy program that meets math
requirements for example and
they're able to present that to
their school district and then
to the public education
department a credit could be
awarded for math for a financial
literacy program so so school
districts will have this
flexibility whether we have
these guidelines are non I think
having these guidelines though
sits in gives districts kind of
the no idea of what they could
include within that curriculum
but it's not restrictive.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative.
The the next question I have.
Really concerns some of the
comments that were made
The business community
certainly our our colleges and
universities
We we place some value on a high
school diploma and.
We ought to have the be able to
make the assumption that the
person that holds that diploma.
Has mastered some competent
stadiums in some poor areas and.
All right all right I heard some
of the comments that reflected
that the baby not requiring I
think it was algebra to that
person would no longer be of.
But maybe have to pick up that
worst before applying director
college I don't know whether
that's true or false on I'm just
trying to remember what what
they said but if we are.
If we are the.
Created a situation where our
students now have to pass to
Terry one that would lead to
college and maybe another path
that they choose other academic
criteria of weeds to a
vocational or or technical type
of a program which which I
support
but.
Do we make it clear to the
students that if you do not do
this.
You will not be able to
At ten University without the
baby picking up courses outside
of high school a high school
setting.
In order to get admitted to a
university do we do we make that
clear either in this statute or
in this bill or elsewhere that
that's.
That's the.
A result of the student.
Allow us to do this versus that.
Madam chair and and
Representative night part we do
so the beginning of the bill
that we're leaving in place in
the statute our next step plans
that are to be completed from
eighth grade all one word and
the students career and it's
really setting goals and setting
a pathway for students whatever
that may be I think the the
beauty and in this proposed
legislation is that it is
flexible so we heard some of the
comments about students may want
to shift gears from higher
education course to CTE course
or vice versa is that I think
this bill certainly allows that
and it has multiple eyes on the
next step plans educators
administrators school counselors
in order to help guide students
toward particular pathways if
higher education is yes that
students chosen pathway than
certainly encouraging
different sorts of math credits
depending on the the college or
university that they wish to
attend but I think that's really
the the the point of having
these next step plans is for
students to really flesh out
under the guidance of of
multiple people at the school
site to to waive those options.
And so when the student.
Comes up for graduation after
completing their twelve year
They are not surprised.
When they are.
maybe try to apply to a
university of that are rejected
because of their failure to
receive certain credit for
certain classes that may be
required of the university of.
Sir I'm sorry.
You feel there's adequate
protection there that that
student would not be surprised
if that were the result.
I guess madam madam madam chair
and and Representative yes
because the sun is the next step
plans begin in eighth grade and
going through the students
career so if there is this sort
of change it's a way to try to
keep students on track so to
speak and and be able to help
them within their particular
pathway that they so choose.
Okay.
Madam chair representative I
hope I hope that the we don't
get calls in the future from
from students who are outraged
that they can't get of the
callers because they chose and
in high school or maybe middle
school not to take certain
classes that would better equip
them at all I have to apply to
college on the other hand do we
do we make a distinction in the
diploma
and that's really goes to to the
business community doing make a
distinction of the diploma as to
which are.
Course right they ultimately
pursued.
Madam chair and representative I
mentor expanding the crest
question correctly it's that if
you know we're we're kind of
talking these ways of pathway is
right like C. T. E. R. higher
education no there would be no
no distinction other than what
they're qualified for what they
may have had the opportunity to
apprentice with for the classes
stage taken but it would still
be a high school diploma.
Okay.
I I guess with that diploma some
graduates would be able to.
Use that as a stepping stone to
college others would use it as a
stepping stone to a profession
or vocation
and and they are well aware that
that as I understand the
testimony of.
Madam chair representative
Our.
I know we saw the other bill
with talks about the study you
know expanding the studies.
That the we engage in as a
legislative body
And I made the point we discuss
out that the doctor all the
studies are fine but really the
proofs the president of putting
sort of state of the approved as
to whether or not these
measures.
Our.
Ultimately successful your is
going to be a few years down the
road where we either continue
and forty eight forty nine fifty
of place or we start moving up
the ladder.
And we actually see that our
students are able to compete
our.
For.
These these jobs that are are
now worldwide and I made the
statement that our our students
are are not competing with one
another for for the local local
jobs but they're competing with
an international market place
for jobs around the world and we
truly have
an international competitive
environment for
Highly skilled individuals to to
go into that market place and
and so but I hope that that.
Yes.
The next five years.
That we start seeing the fruits
of this labor so to speak that
that we have I think in the last
four five years we've we've made
an effort to make sure that that
we're training our students to
go into
Applications white plumbing or
what well elector goal our
construction auto mechanics and
and you know our produce
electricity in the what have you
there's a great need for that at
the same time we we need to work
with the students who want to be
on.
At the university payout.
We we need them to be able to
compete with the broadest in all
the states and have
opportunities for for them to
make sure that we're equipping
them to enter the university
setting and and be competitive.
And so
I.
I don't know enough about.
The education profession to to
to Y. on Y. as whether it be and
so specific is good bad or
indifferent but but I I can't
tell you that that that as an
employer in the state.
I need to make sure that when
somebody walks into my law firm.
But they can spell that they can
write.
Thank you communicate
effectively.
And.
We need to make sure that that
are graduates from high school
out have mastered those skills
and so
also port your your your
legislation but I really hope
that the.
You is chair of the Education
Committee at
at those on education really
start looking not only at what
other studies we need to do
really.
Analyzing whether or not the
efforts for making this
legislation and then prior
legislation is actually a factor
in producing better results and
that we as a state can start
seeing some our.
Some advancement in the ability
of our students to compete not
just locally but but the.
Nationwide and even globally
here and so I I I hope that to
you and and others will will
keep a keen eye on that and and
hopefully we will all start
seeing the results of bottle you
the legislative efforts but the
efforts that are teachers.
Our administrators are of Public
Education Department the school
board that secretary put in to
to those efforts so thank you
for R. for bringing this
Again I I I hope that being so
specific is is not a detriment
but the.
I guess we'll we'll find out of
future years thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
All thank you madam chair and
this may be more purpose
statement the index of needing
the Representative respond but
I'm glad that we're going in
into career paths I've advocated
that we need to do that I've got
friends that are in vocational
fields making six figures so
they're doing well of the
summarized spoke with Scott
elder from APS and I was just
getting why don't you do you
know to career paths one
rotational and we have C. N. M.
who already has all the training
facility and you're sending kids
over there for AP classes so.
Where is this moving along the
the financial literacy
you know not that you need to
change the name but I can look
at as you know
the soft skills for you knows
what I've skills to how do you
prepare for a job how do you
raise a family and those issues
so anyway thank you I'm glad to
support this.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative role metal I
wanted to give you an
opportunity perhaps to address
the concerns of.
People I've worked with for
years doctor Christie are and
Patsy Nelson about the health
issues I did hear Representative
rushed former representative now
superintendent Rasch
Exploit that the law actually
already permits the so the
health credit being taken in
middle school.
It's just that we have so many
health issues we have.
You know in the pandemic is
perhaps brought some of those to
the fore with.
Real mental health issues that
concerns about student isolation
and and
I don't know if we have
experienced an increase in our.
In potential for suicide for
that for the high school age
population in New Mexico I know
my stepdaughter to Justin about
at and while they're
superintendent.
Said they had increased in fact
the increase was.
I think one more than the year
previous and so just concerned
as we all are about it it wasn't
a statistically significant
increase I.
Just the whole idea of being
physically healthy and also to
understand what.
How do.
Trying to live a life where you
minimize your health risks and
maximize your strength and well
being
What what what do you say to
those who voice those concerns.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chasey for
for bringing this issue up this
is something we we when that in
Lancs in the house Education
Committee about you know not
changing the standards for high
school and I think a lot of
districts including APS have it
to where it is mandated class as
an elective so it is a
requirement already through
through many districts and I
would defer to to my experts who
gave a really eloquent answer to
this during during our debate in
house at.
Thank you representative madam
chair members of the committee
we understand the concerns about
health education but I think
it's important to understand
that this bill wallet
highlighted the current
regulations that exist has not
changed any of those regulations
and I have personally sat
through many debates in house
education about what should and
are both Education Committee
sorry what should and should not
be counted in terms of health
education when we were working
on this bill
we ask APS leadership whether or
not they felt health was a very
important requirement they
responded to me that they do
believe it's important and that
is why in APS they have decided
to make it a mandatory elective
which is an oxymoron but that is
how they choose in their
district to work with the health
requirement
what this allows is the on going
local economy for every school
district to make sure that help
is offered and that if they
prefer to have it as an elective
in high school and for that
matter also met school they're
still allowed to do both and it
is permissive in this bill thank
you very much.
Thank you madam chair and
representative madam and Dr burn
sting
I I I appreciate that I and I I.
I do want our graduation
Requirements to mean something
of course and one of the things
that at listening to
Representative Nibert occurred
to me that.
I think what I would high school
everything was just you had to
do whatever they set
and you could get into whatever
for college if you if your
grades were good enough in your
standardized test scores were
good enough because you you did
what what was that but I don't
recall a lot of guidance from
the counseling and and I do I do
think that when
It's very possible that among
our needs in education is to
have more actual.
Contact with counselors who are
guiding the students so they
really don't inadvertently
placed themselves in a position
where they're not going to be
competitive if that's their
path.
So
I just and I and I also don't
think it's for the legislature
to meddle too much.
What the districts I think it is
necessary so I'm it seems to me
that you've struck a balance and
I appreciate it
And I just hope for the best
thank you very much.
You.
Thank you representative.
Committee members.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I I'll move it to
passed as amended thank you we
have a motion for do pass on
house bill eighty three as
amended and I'll second that
motion
the clerk to call the roll
place.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes your
caucus representative guy it
goes yes.
Representative night perch yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative likely had to go
to another committee to
president of bills so let's more
commence excuse place thank you
madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
eight in the affirmative and one
excuse.
Thank you thank you
Representative Romero you have a
do pass on health bill eighty
three as amended.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you committee have a nice
rest your day thanks M. D. L..
Moving on to house bill one
thirty.
Now Representative Trujillo.
We had on earlier was the state
to.
Move her back madam chair I
think I'm on you are welcome.
Thank you it's good to see all
of you this morning I'm also
doing what everybody else is
doing of I am on I am in house
Education Committee and I'm
presenting my bill here so if I
seem a little distracted please
forgive me I apologize the bill
that I'm presenting today madam
chair by the way you look
beautiful I'm not sucking up or
anything.
Okay thank you Representative.
Bill I'm presented today is
house bill one thirty which is
the US of school gifted
education requirements and what
my bill does before I E. R. I'm
sorry before I move forward I
have several experts
and that just million this.
my goodness I wrote them down
not going to have though I was
busy of and this man and this a
job for employers yes John gray
and then J. I think had given
them to show respect I wasn't
sure so they're also they're
really truly expert witnesses
but the the bill really does
simply it amends the public
school code to impose new
requirements madam chair for
school districts offering gifted
it education they include child
find procedures universal
screening which.
Schools are supposed to do but I
think the sometimes get
overwhelmed and don't do it they
have benchmarks that are
provided by the national
association for gifted children.
They were trying to create an
evaluation system for each
districts gifted requirements.
each district I'm sorry tricks
Gifted education program and
what I'm going to do is do for
first two dot Dr Jonathan
Parker.
So that he can add more
information if you don't mind
great thank you Mr plus.
You may have a spotty.
connection.
S. thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jonathan Parker I'm a
professor at Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore and I
also served as the president of
the national association for
gifted children I study talent
development and education policy
especially as applies as applied
to advanced education in New
Mexico has a reputation as a
state with many under served or
un served gifted students
especially low income students
and those from tribal nations
the activities in this bill
would move New Mexico from
behind the curve in advanced
education to a role as a
national leader for example I I
some school districts around the
country use universal screening
but New Mexico would be among
the first to implemented
statewide such a change would
greatly enhance the ability of
low income students within the
state to access gifted
education.
In addition the bills are
requirements for monitoring
auditing and evaluation would
place a level of fiscal
accountability over advanced
education that would make New
Mexico a national leader I'd
like to call special attention
to the requirement for the
proposed changes to state
accountability reporting which
would focus on both
participation and performance
the strategy is a very low cost
high impact policy change that
would far outstrip what any
other state has done or is
proposing to do I'm in the
previous committee hearing the
some honorable members question
the unfunded costs of the bill I
have to admit this surprised me
as many of the strategies
required or encouraged within
the bill are no cost or actually
have the potential to save money
over the long term for example I
New Mexico districts already
collect universal testing data
in excel iterations strategies
proposed I tend to move students
through their education more
quickly I'm moving them into the
workforce and higher education
sooner than they normally would
presumably saving money.
So in summary of my analysis is
that this bill will create
substantially greater academic
and economic opportunity for New
Mexico students all at a low
cost over the short term and
possibly to a a positive
financial benefit over the long
term
thank you for having me here
today thank you great thank you
and Representative do you want
your other experts to speak are
they available for technical
support us us simply Mrs gray Dr
gray right well doctor gray very
quickly.
We can't hear you doctor gray oh
no can you hear me now yes yeah
you might want to
increase your volume sometimes
that works okay can you hear me
OK a put it by fine face.
I'm thank you madam chair and
committee members first I want
to say I'm a mother of the New
Mexico student and former New
Mexico students
I work in New Mexico tech as an
education assessment specialist
and and I am a tribal liaison
for New Mexico tech
and I'm also the co author of
the report
Well it's got a huge title but
it's system failure access
denied gifted education in the
United States laws access equity
and missing this across the
country
and our my research focuses on
under represented students
with gifts and talents in gifted
education
And I wanted to.
You know the wonderful part
about this bill is that when
when we wrote that report we
addressed each state
individually and
with my personal ties to New
Mexico New Mexico state was one
of the first states we analyzed
and everything within this bill
is addressing every issue that
we found that was leading to
over twenty three thousand
students not being identified
for their gifts and talents
so I'm I'm really in support of
this bill and I hope that you
will pass.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Madam chair we stand for
questions.
Great thank you representative
before we go to public comments
we will poll these folks that
are in attendance and we are on
health bill one thirty if you
would like to vote for or
against house bill one thirty.
The pro is now open.
And we'll keep it open for
another ten seconds.
Okay we'll close the pool and we
have eighteen attendees and
favor and zero against you it
like to speak.
In favor of the bill you don't
have to but we are now letting
you raise your hand if you would
like to speak in favor so first
is Laurie.
Com Malley you are now and it.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Laurie Emily Kaplan I'm a
past president I am the past
president of the New Mexico
association for the gifted I
also serve on the board for
south central New Mexico
Association of the gifted we had
and then I whole heartedly
support house bill one thirty
and we think Christine Trujillo
for sponsoring this bill the PED
in conjunction with and Meghan
is affiliates recently conducted
three next steps meetings across
the state to get parent teacher
administrator and student input
on identification representation
program design and service
delivery and the curriculum
instruction are given to
students what we found is
although our state currently has
a rule for equitable assessment
and the provision of
individually designed services
for the gifted it's not
happening in every district
there's no mechanism for
accountability to ensure that
equity and identification on the
provision of services this is
happening for all students in
all locations especially our
indigenous students house bill
one thirty requires triannual
evaluation of the effectiveness
of the school districts get to
educational programming annual
evaluation of the IDA equity
identification statewide any
school district and charter
school as well as creating
funding so distractions spent on
gifted education.
We stand in support of house
bill one thirty.
Thank you.
Christopher Ryan you are now and
it.
Good afternoon my name is
Christopher Ryan I'm the current
president of the New Mexico
association for gifted a teach
plus New Mexico follow and most
importantly a teacher and Gallup
McKinley county school district.
As a classroom teacher this bill
revolutionizes my job.
Essentially allows me to ensure
that all the students in my
school are identified as gifted
this is my third year teaching
in New Mexico when I first moved
here to teach gifted I was told
by people in Gallup but now the
who students were not gifted and
could not be given to.
It is my opinion that this bill
is the number one way to help us
fight against that sort of
discriminatory outlook since we
are you doing personal screening
and ensuring that all of our
students have the opportunity to
show their giftedness to show
their talent.
We're going to give students
access to advanced education
Furthermore this bill expands
the areas where we can just
considered students as gifted.
Now we can look at artistic
creativity we can look at
leadership
by doing this we ensure that our
students are receiving the
services that they need and as
my colleague works only captain
said as Dr Parker said the
budgetary total revolutionizes
how gifted is funded in New
Mexico right now we do not know
how gifted monies are spent with
this budgetary code allows us to
track those funds and spend the
more efficiently and effectively
for these reasons I support.
Thank you Sandri hi achi you are
now and muted.
Good morning Karen committee
members my name is on to pay
you'll need a telescope local on
the coat American Navajo I am a
former member of the pandemic
cabinet and secretaries from the
advisory committee current
Indian Education Committee
member associate justice for As
You amendment and now speaking
as a mother of a gifted Fund
Cash peyote I would like to
stand in support of H. B. one
thirty gifted programs are
inherently elitist and I would
not wish my sons and I Germany
on anybody as you may know
gifted in gifted education in
New Mexico is considered under
the special needs umbrella of
services this bill would ensure
equity transparency and
accountability by implementing
that funding tracking code as a
parent that has advocated for
gifted advisory committees and
this to school districts of
Bloomfield and Aztec I can tell
you that the resources I learned
from and mag PD sped bureau and
an ATC has helped me identify my
own adult giftedness I am better
able to articulate an advocate
for my son and a knowledgeable
and respectful way efforts that
GAC's can promote like gifted
awareness state can provide
resources for parents and
substitute teachers who are not
spent license to become more
aware of a network that will
stand beside you and serving our
gifted children.
because at the time I just
wholeheartedly support this bill
and ask for it to pass thank you
search.
Thank you John very much you are
now and it.
Thank you chair members of the
committee John to the American
federation of teachers we are
also here urging a do pass on
this critical legislation for
many of the reasons already
expressed by public comment and
doctor Ellen burns dean of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
also asked me to note their
support for this legislation is
she had to step to house
education we do urge a do pass
on house bill one thirty thank
you.
Thank you Clark gaps in gads
then excuse me you're now and
it.
Thank you madam chair I'm Merion
Clark on the coordinator for
special education disincentive
and I just do I've got over
forty years will get that
education I am the current
president of south central New
Mexico association for gifted
I've also served on many boards
including the Texas association
of get the point I'm here today
to speak about my experiences on
the ground in the district I'm
very concerned for students who
are from disadvantaged homes
from poverty and their access
and their ability to not only
take advantage of services but
to even advocate for themselves
or have their families advocate
for them currently I am working
with five students all of whom
are gifted or a highly at risk
there is one student in
particular who sent six grade
has already used his deep
intellect to decide he can make
more money if he works with drug
cartels running on the border
many economic school and is
having severe difficulties in
school our students really need
support and attention they need
counseling they need guidance
and I would like to advocate and
urge for the past of this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Steve you you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and
representatives my name's Steve
Heil I'm a gifted educator with
Santa Fe public schools and a
member of the New Mexico
association of the gifted
Representative alright educators
here as the president of the New
Mexico art education association
we support house bill one thirty
and we hope you will too it
expands New Mexico's narrow
legal definition of gifted
students to include specific
talents and aptitudes in various
subjects including the arts
requires school districts to
monitor and account for state
gifted funding and to progress
toward more equitable
identification racially
ethnically socio economically
and linguistically.
It requires best practices of
identification resulting
inclusion of many high ability
students currently missing from
get that education across the
state and American black and
Hispanic students low income
students English learners and
those who also have disabilities
The New Mexico art education
association supports house bill
one thirty because it will help
develop the artistic potential
of diverse high ability New
Mexico students many of them not
yet identified as gifted in our
public schools we hope that you
will support this bill with a do
pass recommendation from the
committee thank you.
Thank you can Harris you are now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak this morning my name is
Kim Harris and I'm speaking as
myself in support of house bill
one thirty.
My experience with gifted
education in New Mexico is
diverse I am a board member for
the New Mexico association of
the gifted teacher of the gifted
of Rio Rancho a mother of a
gifted student and a gifted
learner born raised and educated
in New Mexico in two thousand
sixteen I was also named a
Travis Frazier scholar with the
national association for gifted
children working with other
educators and leaders in gifted
education to increase our
identification and supported
gifted learners with diverse
backgrounds.
I support this bill is called to
not only identify a diverse
group of gifted learners but to
address their diverse needs
after identification.
Through supports including
academic acceleration as well as
the additional supports needed
for the whole child including
occupational therapy and social
work additional supports which
have been difficult for me as a
parent to advocate for for my
own child throughout his
education.
I would appreciate the committee
support of our diverse gifted
students in the state three do
pass thank you.
Thank you.
Eight so PS Santos you are now
and it.
Hello my name is eva sorry hello
madam chair man's child are and
members of the committee my name
is it a severe Santos and I am a
sophomore I capital high school
and I am a gifted student myself
in my eyes house bill one thirty
will be a and and an incredible
benefit to a lot of students who
are of special needs students
from tribal discerned and also a
gifted students myself and I
really believe that this will be
incredibly good for the equality
of students and great push for
more funding on
For disabled students who would
be struggling in a seemingly
normal environment thank you.
Thank you John friends any you
are now and it.
Good morning thank you madam
chairman and committee in my
comments won't take a moment to
to kind of reiterate some of the
things that the total benefit of
this bill for all students
especially students who are
under representative can't be
over emphasized
bill one of the things I do want
to.
To address those the potential
people bring up roadblocks
around funding and I just want
to remind people to not funding
a bill like this has some really
dramatic unintended consequences
of.
Possibly increased crime
homelessness in need of a people
in need of health our mental
health services those kind of
things one of the things this
bill would help us do as a
status provide guidelines for
excellence for Martinez Yazzie
and also prevent these kind of
things by providing good paying
jobs and and being producers of
technology and excellence rather
than consumers of technology and
excellence
like I say I would highly
recommend do passed and let's
let's go for.
Thank you.
Now we will move to anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Trujillo I
have I spent many years of
special education and I actually
help start if you programs in
just in APS in the area and we
did it kind of universal
screening at the second grade
level and just to screening tool
one million
those of us who were doing the
program had to become licensed
as diagnostician because we had
to do the actual battery of
tests and
in the course of that what I
realized is that.
I think the traditional testing
can be quite discriminatory with
children who speak English as a
second language or who are
raised in a very different
culture and.
What.
We were able to.
Quite often if we gave the
Wechsler intelligence scale to
these kids.
The the children who were from.
The majority culture.
Would score much higher on the
performance I DO and then on the
verbal items and
I know that I did a special
project and I did it one of the
schools this legislative
district now courses of this
this before I had my children so
we're talking a long time ago
because I have grandchildren.
And
I was trying to find tools that
would get at.
The creative.
Process sees and the
Incredible ability to notice
what's going on and surroundings
and being so
Environmentally conscious and I
don't mean just the environment
like if something's growing
properly but everything that's
happening in the environment
and.
There there is actually no.
Limit to who could be
categorized as a gifted child or
individual because there's so
many.
Talons out there in so many are
easily
overlooked when we're just using
English language tools so I know
we were always searching for
ways to.
Try to cultivate the talents of
children and it just that was I
enjoyed so much hearing this
testimony today because I
I know I have been doing this
for many many years I have one
that is special at nine
practicing law but I love
hearing the
The wealth of of
With this being cultivated here
and
It reminds me of that
I'll think of it later there is
there is a great call by plate
that we used to use for
I'll have to check it out I do
it in this book Plato here even
though it's you know I've
battled my coffee but I really
congratulate you on this after
and I I was really.
Just heartened by the testimony
from the folks out in
delicately school really
appreciate it thank you very
much madam chair and
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you bye sure Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I'm a to
pass.
A second.
Thank you we have a motion for
the past by by Terry Johnson the
second by Representative K. goes
is there further discussion.
Okay seeing then is there any
opposition to the deposit
motion.
Okay seeing that you have a do
you pass Representative Trujillo
on house bill thirty showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
members of the committee I think
you're all gifted for doing
this.
Your you got the bill passed you
don't need to turn this.
Thank you all very much thank
you.
Next we have Representative
Ferrary and house bill one
seventy one.
Good morning madam chair and
committee
Thank you we are introducing
house bill one seventy one which
amends the public school code to
allow the license school
employees certified by the
national board for professional
teaching standards or the N. B.
PTS and not employee in and
administrative position on so
that they can generate a program
units in the public school
funding formula beginning in FY
twenty two and this bill has
been presented by
share Christine Trujillo in
twenty nineteen but we had
changes made to that bill
because of the opposition to
including administrative
positions so this bill does not
have includes that section and
with that I'd like to have my
experts
Ellen burns Steen issue still is
showing as a panelist to go
ahead and say more about the
bill.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair members of the
committee this is an effort that
has passed through the
legislature in both houses and
gone to the previous governor at
least once if not twice it was
sponsored I think just the
Sanchez sent by Representative
Christine Trujillo a long time
ago our legislature decided that
they'd value credential
that is hard earned from the
national board of professional
teaching standards at that time
they only credential teachers as
highly accomplished since then
they have added school
counselors and I assume in the
future They Might at school
social workers and possibly
other people like school nurses
the current legislation that
allows for recognition monetary
recognition for being credential
by the national board
is limited to the work teacher
and so this bill is an effort to
expand it to educator it does
not allow supervisory personnel
as in principals who were
licensed or credentialed when
they were teachers to also get
it when they move into the
principalship but it does allow
counselors this was brought to
my attention by school counselor
who was credential by the
national board asked me why she
wasn't recognized slicker peers
who were teachers that's when we
started working on this very
simple change currently she's no
longer working in New Mexico
schools but we do want to
attract and retain highly
accomplished school counselors
we know how important all of the
support and related services are
to the social emotional and
physical well being of our.
Students and so on this would go
up.
Some of the way towards
recognizing that counselors are
essential in our schools as are
teachers are and should be
recognized as equals thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
are you ready for questions yes
madam chair thank you great
thank you we will all the
audience so for those that would
like to vote for or against
house bill one seventy one.
The poll is now open and will
keep it open for another ten
seconds.
Okay we are closing the call now
we have three that provided for
the bill and zero against if you
would like to speak in favor of
the bill please raise your hand.
John excuse me John Curtis you
are now and it.
Thank you chair members of the
committee to undertake and with
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico we support
this bill it has been one of our
goals as doctor brings you had
mentioned to expand.
Who is considered eligible for
the state and we recognize that
many in our school systems have
the skills and should be
recognized as such and this bill
just seeks to expand the
eligibility as the certification
has expanded itself we also
think that our state should
recognize that so we do our to
do past thank you for the time.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition if so
please raise your hand.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee.
Committee members.
Is.
I heard someone but I can't
almost a do pass.
Great thank you representative
Ely I will second that motion.
So we have a motion printed has
by Representative Eli and a
second by myself is there any
opposition to the past motion.
Okay seeing inerrant hearing
then you have a do passed on
house bill one seventy one
Representative thank you madam
chair and thank you committee.
Thank you.
We now have House Bill.
One fifty seven.
And.
Representative small is
currently driving.
But we do have has expired and
I'm looking up his expert now.
Gerald Jerry.
Should we raise your hand.
Okay great.
And.
Do we have someone to present
the bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee I I I can do that
okay and we can defer to Mr.
She opener.
Colleges and I saying that
correctly but will have
Representative Ortez stepping in
and Mr chair if you could
explained bill please sure thank
you good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Gerry Shatner and I'm the
director of the money equipment
division with the energy
minerals and natural resource
are meant thank you for taking
the time this morning to hear a
bill
House Bill five seventeen a
man's been Mexico mining access
to authorized creation of the
mining act or Richard fund the
purpose of the fund is to
provide a mechanism for the
states to receive and manage
financial assurance in the case
of the money default you may be
aware that financial assurance
is required by statute and by
role on for all that permitted
money facilities in New Mexico
in the idea there is to have
adequate funding available once
mining ceases in the rare case
that a mine operator defaults
however the financial strength
would be transferred the state
in order to oversee a
reclamation and it should be
noted that eighty percent of our
financial assurance is in the
form of net present value which
represents eight hundred eighty
five million dollars or one
point four billion dollars that
was not in net present value and
when that present value does is
it allows the operator to put in
place financial assurance that
will be put in interest bearing
account that will gain interest
over time as the money operates
in the idea there is once my
name is he says there is enough
money in the financial assurance
on to pay for all reclamation
and reclamation is spelled out
prior to any permit being issued
there is a close out plan that
has a schedule and costs
associated with that so the
creation of the of the mining
act forfeiture fund would allow
the state to put these funds in
an interest bearing account and
only spend that money for.
Or reclamation for the facility
that for fits on any type of
financial insurance.
One important thing we're
mentioning is the creation of
the fund does not cost you the
state or industry any money it's
merely a fiscal management
school necessary for the state
to manage financial assurance
the clean up of money in the
rare case where money does the
fault that is madam chair I will
stand for any questions.
Thank you thank you
Representative and Mr Schaffner.
Will pull the audience.
So we now have an opportunity to
vote for house bill one fifty
seven the poll is open.
And we will keep it open for
another five seconds.
Okay we will now closed the poll
that we have I in favor and zero
against so if you would like to
make public comment in favor of
the bill please raise your hand.
Mike bow in your now and made
it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you very
much for the opportunity to
testify on this bill we'd like
to thank the sponsor and the
agency Mr Shatner specially they
came and brought this bill to us
and met with this we had long
discussions and hatch some
things we need to work out what
we're both sides cooperating
very well he got it worked out
proud to stand and support the
bill thank you.
Thank you Tony Trujillo you are
now unmuted.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity also to say a few
words about this bill is
previous speaker Mister by bone
stated this is a compromise bill
it was a lot of the work and
effort by both sides to come to
an agreement on this bill we
stand in full support of this
bill I'm a registered lobbyist
for Freeport mining company a
and so we stand in full support
thank you.
Thank you.
Amigos bravos you are now in
meeting.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee of Migos
problems as a watershed
restoration nonprofit
organization we stand in support
of this bill we think it will
help to facilitate responsible
mine reclamation activities and
not leave the taxpayers of New
Mexico to hold the bag in the
event of some kind of default
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Regarding your now and muted.
You'll just have to get
yourself.
Okay let's go back to Rita first
let's hear from Alice in the
wake you are now if they need
it.
Members of the committee I'm
Allison civic executive director
of the human resources
information project based in
Silver City and I'm here to
speak in support of house bill
one fifty seven that sets up the
mining act forfeiture fund that
would ensure that EMNRD can
complete reclamation and mine
sites in the case of portraiture
of financial assurance and in
addition to allowing for
forfeited funds to be invested
this bill gives EMNRD access to
the reclamation funds and
protects them.
From getting used for purposes
other than cleaning up and re
claiming the mine site for which
they were intended and hearing
Grant County we've experienced
funds getting drugs for other
purposes in twenty ten Freeport
McMoRan settled in natural
resource damage claim for ground
water damages at the Chino
Cobray and Tyrone lines and one
point five million dollars of
the twelve point eight million
settlement of million dollar
settlement were directed to the
Texas V. New Mexico lawsuit
rather than being spent on
groundwater projects here in
Grant County so we really need
to make sure that reclamation
funds coming from forfeiture
of financial assurance are used
for reclamation that will
protect public health and the
environment in mining impacted
communities we recommend passage
of house bill one fifty seven
and thank you so much for your
time this morning.
Thank you and we still have
Brady Garrity I know your hand
is not raised but if you can
speak and you like to your O. R.
now and it.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I do not need to
speak on health the one fifty
seven thank you for your time
and address.
Thank you.
Bruce you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
I the New Mexico environment
department stands in support of
HB fifty seven because it fills
an administrative gap to ensure
that I'm nerd and the
environment department are able
to access and invest forfeited
financial assurance associated
with mining permits thereby
protecting natural resources for
future generations of New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition of the bill.
Okay seeing line going to the
committee.
Committee members is there any
discussion otherwise what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Two passed I second.
We have a motion by
Representative Chasey for do
pass and a second by
Representative Johnson.
Is there any discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass motion.
Okay seeing none you have a do
pass on house bill one fifty
seven showing all members
present voting in the
affirmative thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
committee.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Ortez
So now that concludes our agenda
for today will have at least one
roll over item from a notes on
to Wednesday but I think all
committee members and members of
the public for joining us today
and with that we are adjourned
happy Monday.
