Start with Representative
Harper.
I would like to start madam
chair by reading my
dissertation.
No thank you madam chair when is
Jason Harper I represent
Sandoval County northern Rio
Rancho house district fifty
seven.
Representative Gail Armstrong
for mentally New Mexico I
represent captions to coral
Valencia and Sierra County now
is my new district largest
district in the nation.
Thank you madam chair good
morning ladies and Linda
represent house district three
which is the lovely aspect info
part of San Juan County and
representative Thompson.
Good morning and Representative
Liz Thomson house district
twenty four mid northeast types
of Albuquerque.
Yes Andrea Romero from it out
house district forty six
northern Santa Fe County from C.
Santa Fe through the Pojoaque
valley into the city of
Espanola.
Good morning everyone right out
of house district thirty four so
Dona Ana County Representative
the communities of principles on
him love missile Committee alone
the on set that that isn't
someone part will.
Good morning I'm Joshua
Representative Joshua Hernandez
I Representative district sixty
which is Rancho.
Morning thank you madam chair my
name is Nathan small I'm proud
represent house district thirty
six and Dona Ana County thank
you.
Good morning madam chair I'm
Gail Chasey in my district is
house district eighteen it
includes the Albuquerque campus
of the university of New Mexico
knob hill and thank you very
much for having us here today.
I am the co chair of this
committee which only meets one
time I have to I Garrett from
northwest Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county I'm going to
have our late comer introduce
himself and then I'll have our
staff member introduce herself.
Hi have you admit the Missouri
Senate district eleven happy to
be here thank you thank you and
good good morning my name is
Linda the era and I'm here
committee assistant.
Thank you everybody if we worked
on a tight schedule I would have
a number of people particularly
our family with our two young
New Mexicans thank you for being
here thank you everybody for
being here today and with that
who will turn it over to the
presentation of the house
request for the twenty twenty
three legislative session budget
we need this to proceed today
and our presenter will be
Representative Gail Chasey
assisted by chief house clerk
Lisa question.
Thank you so much madam chair
we're happy to be here today and
actually they're young health
for Indians who are here.
To be with us today the house
chief clerk and I are here to
present the proposed budget for
the house of representatives
this is this budget is strictly
for operational expenses for the
conduct of the twenty twenty
three session and also included
just for historical information
are the probation and actual
expenses for the last two sixty
day sessions plus the last
thirty days session and just a
reminder that twenty twenty one
sixty day was the COVID session
which was conducted largely
virtually so with that the
We're going to I'm going to let
the house chief clerk explain
the line items as that and you
can go through them all but the
the main thing to point out is
and I think we have agreement
from all sides here that we want
to increase the rate of pay for
session staff who support us and
in order to make sure that we
have
competent people who are well
compensated for the work that
they do to make all of this
happen and
and we all know they work well
beyond a traditional eight hour
day so we want to be sure that
they are adequately compensated
and also on our printing
services during the last sixty
day session the number printed
bills has decreased since remote
participation was allowed but we
have to make it available for
those members and for the public
who need it so there also is an
increased cost of products and
services because we have
experience in our day to day
lives the cost of many products
have increased to the pandemic
and we have this we have to do
the make that to caught that
adjustment as well the major
areas of cost savings for the
whole session budget is the the
chief clerks office continues to
be mindful of unnecessary
session expenses by removing or
reducing wherever possible so
because the money's here doesn't
mean it will be spent.
So with that I'm gonna turn this
over to the.
Hello everybody check more for
questions.
Madam.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today before you you'll
have for individuals sheets of
First of one of them is at the
top left corner will say request
twenty twenty yes.
I don't have this year.
Teens want to.
Okay good to.
The twenty three.
Thank you you are okay okay
wonderful so one of them and
left hand corner would will say
request twenty twenty three and
that on the right hand side is
actually the total request that
we're I'm asking for for this
upcoming session but it also
reflects twenty nineteen twenty
twenty one and the last
legislative session of what the
request for on the second page
are it breaks down what I
believe are going to be the
expenses for the upcoming
session the other three handouts
will be actual requests from
twenty nineteen twenty twenty
one to twenty twenty two and
also breaks down what we
actually spent and what was
actually went into cast out cash
balances post the session so
I don't know if you had an
opportunity to I just anything
if anybody has any questions I
also have available because some
of these things reflect on some
federal dollars and council
service I have an assistant
Espinoza here who is the
director of equipment
administrative finances of the
council service to help out with
some of those there are a little
bit beyond my scope of answering
Popp appropriately for you thank
you very much if you have
questions before we take
questions Representative
suspensi Communities yourself.
Morning everyone incoming thank
you.
Incoming State Representative
renewed to Penske I'll be
Ford in today from the house
district forty seven in Santa
Fe.
Thank you.
Do we have questions knowing the
people here I know we will have
a question okay Representative
Thomson thank you madam chair so
the first part I'm the
unemployment compensation is
down to zero what is that about.
unless the my I'll start in as
many to trail off on me during
the pandemic when all the
businesses were shut down and
employees were allowed to obtain
unemployment services I'm sorry
Madam chair representative
Thompson.
my full cost
and when employees were no
longer able to work businesses
were shut down and they weren't
making any money
I believe the work department
works look for solutions
eliminated the costs that
employers have to pay towards
unemployment benefits to help
them get through the pandemic
and I believe that's the reason
why that reflects a zero.
And.
Connect with.
Please feel free to come up to
the Mike to if it's helpful and
she also the to that a lot of
that was covered by the federal
funds okay thank you and then my
second question it's not really
a question but I see that
liability insurance has then
almost a third cheaper so I just
want to say good job I will tell
you Lisa is a master at pinching
the pennies and now so thank you
for doing that thank you madam
chair.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
metaphor leader and the clerk
thank you for for being here
presenting.
This
document doesn't include
everything that's in house bill
one correct.
Madam chair no this is just for
the house chief clerks portion
of house bill one.
So so so madam chair and and
that for the thank you that's
that's helpful to looking at.
A doctor who was all the line
items to house bill one and some
of them are still missing but
this only feels in one of those
items that I'm looking at is
that correct that's correct.
Okay of thank you madam chair
and
Madam floor leader I I really
don't have any questions and
what's presented here I just
want to thank you for for the
time to review and look these
over and I understand that you
know with the increases that
we've agreed to in salary and
and even additional positions
which are gonna help us be more
effective
yeah I I very much support that
those increases so thank you
Madam.
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
for your presentation one of my
questions is on the boards and
commission in state travel are
they receiving per diem whether
they are zoom or in person do
you know.
Thank you madam chair I'm going
to have our chief clerk answer
that question so madam chair
Representative Armstrong by
constitution each member is
entitled to mileage one round
trip mileage per diem and
mileage back and forth to the
capital and per diem for every
day that they're here in the
session so
If somebody I have to budget and
that is something that
everybody's going to be here
there's been times during the
pandemic or on special sessions
we have one here is I will ask
members or members of let me
know that I don't want per diem
and so that money will go into
cash balances but I have to make
sure that money is available to
all of you.
But madam chair are you talking
about boards and commissions not
not not provided pretty that
boards and commissions that
lasted for yes on the top so the
one that says of the top one is
mileage.
Who is mileage and and for you
guys in the second line is per
diem so that's thank you for
asking that question because I
yes that's provided produce okay
thank you so much thank you
madam chair that that clarifies
a lot I thought it I didn't know
what was for the legislative.
Legislature so thank you so much
thank you madam chair.
Does anybody else have a
question.
Would somebody like to make a
motion.
Okay we have.
A motion to pass by
Representative Thompson and a
second by Representative Romero.
This is where I freeze do we
need to take a roll call.
S. is is is is there any
opposition to passing this
budget.
Thirteen.
I see none we have a budget for
the session the chief clerk
thank you and we will adjourn I
move.
Thank you everyone.
