Here thank you.
Covert here thank you
Representative Romero.
Your.
Thank you vice chair Garcia.
Your.
Chair Rubio here.
We have a quorum we can begin.
Great thanks R. L. and thanks
everyone for being here welcome
to those who are watching from
our participants there's quite a
few attendees really are at for
to have you all on right now
I will
we'll go ahead and get started
on the agenda today we do have
two more presentations from
district five and district six
and then we'll move on to
to the house bills that will be
hearing this this morning out
again we do have four sessions
starting at eleven so I'll
certainly be what doing some
time check and and all of that
but for now if we want to get
started if Paul if you're in
well when we when and more if
you can make vehicles please.
What.
You've been promoted to
panelist.
Thank you
hello Sir and let me a screen
share your presentation.
there you are will you will you
be scrolling through it for me
just give me next slide in next
page please thank you to please.
Thank you.
Whenever you're ready.
Madam chair to go.
When you're.
Good morning madam chair
representative so secretary
Santa my name is Paul pressure
and the New Mexico department
transportation district I
engineer you have in front of
you a graphic showing the map of
our district right here you'll
know that a district encompasses
the counties of San Juan Rio
Arriba house Santa Fe Torrance
and Los Alamos with our district
five headquarters located in
Santa Fe District I is
responsible for maintaining
approximately fifty three
hundred seventy five lane miles
of roadway we work closely with
the ten tribal governments and
seventeen local governments of
tribal governments are very
important to us let me let me
name them there they pueblos of
to so okay walkie some of the
funds so Santa Clara okay we get
a house number a decrease in the
nation's of he Correa Apache and
Navajo our could DOT
commissioner is Mister Tom
Taylor pictured on the sheet
here that map that you see
compasses about nineteen
thousand square miles within
that the district has a
population of about three
hundred and eighty nine thousand
we've got about fifteen and a
half percent of the state's land
area in about nineteen percent
of the state's population here
we do that.
We take care of our
responsibilities through twenty
five maintenance patrols those
are located geographically
throughout the district we
manage construction from I
project offices strategically
located throughout the district
we also maintain three eight
rest areas our priorities are
always safety Kanemi multi modal
mobility and environmental
stewardship and if you look at
the lower right hand corner that
she bears a synopsis of our
budget which has remained flat
for the past few years at the
just under twenty four million
dollars and a one time we have
construction on the order of a
hundred and thirty two hundred
fifty million dollars right
there we have a in it serving
this district and the people the
state of New Mexico we have
exceptional people and they're
doing extraordinary things of
with limited resources under a
particular to difficult and
trying times these days and
they're deployed if you look on
the chart right there
is in the support maintenance
construction of three hundred
twenty one positions we are
vacancies are about forty three
right now for a of combined
vacancy rate of about thirteen
point four percent as a point of
interest I will mention that are
I. T. expenditures are about
four hundred forty thousand
dollars of that in that four
hundred forty thousand
For there's a hundred eight
thousand five hundred dollars so
spent on licenses and the quick
then if you go to the next
slide.
the next sheet I will be I will
show you some of the projects
top the list ongoing
construction projects I should
mention these are projects that
are in various stages of
construction right now some just
starting some midway through in
some near completion
note that they're very degrees
of complexity their urban semi
urban and their rural and we've
got something for everybody then
they are distribute your graphic
throughout the district the next
list from the.
From chapter two seventy one
section nine of a house bill two
and three
we we had the good fortune of
getting you know some thirty
million dollars to so we're
spending on I. twenty five which
is always a priority for us New
Mexico sixty eight the following
table shows
from
A section line item to have bill
two and three general fund
appropriations sixty point three
million dollars again today so
we have a we have a study in
there we have excellence
construction and these projects
are district wide just
distributed geographically
district wide to go the next
table of following that our
district elocution of funding of
the hundred thirty five million
dollars our districts share was
twenty million dollars this is
how we you're spending it
and you to top of the list there
are projects that we have
completed the water have a list
of projects that we will have
completed by summer at the very
bottom I mention that we have
three rest areas arresters our
bicentennial also call level
heart of this is on the
northbound approach to Santa Fe
I twenty five.
Adult snake is on either side of
I. forty between Moriarty
clients I quarters that is and
of course northwest house at the
gorge bridge we recognize that
the rest areas are the first is
sometimes the only impression
that travelers have a New Mexico
and so we do try to make the
rest areas attractive functional
and memorable in a good way and
the money we got we spent on
some restroom remodeling
landscaping lighting and some of
parking lot maintenance to keep
them going if you go to the next
page.
There's a listing of projects
that we have the development
stage we expect we let by
October here again these
projects are distributed
geographically throughout the
district is variety there's off
highway and bridge and their
urban.
and urban always sis can can be
very complicated a semi urban
and their rural in nature and
those are projects that are in
the development stage coming
soon the the next list shows our
our equipment priority needs you
know that we we are sometimes
find ourselves being called on
to plow as much as five hundred
to six hundred thousand past
miles a year which is five to
six hundred thousand miles that
you put on this equipment and
eventually that equipment is
going to need to be replaced in
addition to that we have other.
Equipment and catchments and so
forth and so we're looking at
and a need right now but close
to nine million dollars for
those items the next list shows
are under funded projects these
projects that we do have some
funding for but we don't have
all the funding we need and here
again we've got interstate
project in that list interstates
always being a priority for us
and those are distributed
geographically throughout the
state are throughout the
district rather are totaling
about a hundred thirty four
million dollars to go to the
next listing the finalist in
which is our unfunded projects
these are these are major
investment projects that would
be a good to have but they take
a substantial sums of money here
and largely aimed at the safety.
And they are of of this these
priorities to us here again
urban semi urban and rural in
nature and to go to the next
stage the final sheet there's
some photographs that will
remind you why we all live in
New Mexico and why we work for
district five and then let it be
here so with that manager I'd be
pleased to answer any questions
you might have thank you.
Thank you so much Mr brochure
other questions from the
committee.
yes Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Okay you're you're on the
Representative.
Sorry about that.
Not so much a question just a
comment for Paul what a great
job.
They are are doing I had the
opportunity last summer I have
about sixty people we had a
death in the family and some had
never been to New Mexico and
that was the common comment that
everybody made that we're from
all over the country quite
honestly about how beautifully
the highways were and we went up
to the boards and they would
just not by the courts but even
more so about how clean and neat
everything was and so that's
just you know let you know we
really appreciate the job you
guys are doing thank you madam
chair.
Your Madam chair representative
thank you very much I as I did
say we have exceptional people
doing extraordinary things thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone else
with any questions.
Great thank you so much Mr
pressure we appreciate your your
presentation and thank you for
being so patient with with all
of us as we navigate this whole
process of thank you your for
you thank you thank you so much
next we have Larry Maynard from
district six.
Mr chair you have been promoted.
Good night is promotion.
Movies actually she's actually
wondering have a raise comes
with the.
I just popped up on the screen
can you hear me yeah would you
very.
Can you see me okay.
we don't.
But
Presentation there that's fine
yeah we have a presentation.
Thank you.
Madam chair of Rubio vice chair
Garcia my name is Larry Maynard
in the district six engineer for
the New Mexico department of
transportation celebrating my
twentieth year in that position
this year and honor to be before
you today.
District six is located in the
western central part of the
state.
If you notice the map got about
twenty thousand six hundred
forty square miles of thirty
three hundred and fifty one lane
miles.
Copulation counties here almost
a bola we can only large portion
of captured in Santa Fe County
in small portions of coral
Valencia real results and what
counties well hundred eleven
thousand people in there that
includes our seven of our tribes
and twenty two entities and all
the drives are Navajo Nation
Zuni pueblo hickory Apache
nation it was Pueblo zero Pueblo
is included Pueblo an act.
If you'll notice on this page
one are are Representative
commissioner for district six is
Charles Lundstrom.
He's doing a fine job with this
and very active and involved in
everything that we do appreciate
that the picture below that is a
twenty year old picture of me.
And
Below that we have a chart of
our budget for districts six we
operate our our office supplies
utilities and salaries on about
seventeen and a half million
dollars we have about two
hundred and two hundred million
dollars of contracts act right
now that equates to about a
hundred twenty seven million of
active construction projects are
on going the rest of them are in
the process of being close we
contract maintenance of that we
use for special contracts for
war consultants is about seven
million dollars a year still
supplies that we use with our
maybe hundred forty maintenance
employees six million dollars a
year.
Then we have the strapping
budget about one point one
million dollars per year good
signage rest areas we maintain
the view improvements for about
a hundred eight thousand dollars
per year right the budget is of
two hundred and fifty one
thousand dollars per year I like
to pause there just to say what
it outstanding job where I. T.
sections done over this past
year of the pandemic we were
given notice that we needed to
tell work when we could get as
many people as we could.
We reach other to self
distancing and to do something
like that in a twenty four hour
period would have been thought
of without the great support
where I. T. professionals here
at the department of
transportation.
Jordy of our office personnel
are all working from home all
the time and we're still able to
do all the work that we used to
do.
In the luxury of our homes and
the safety of our schools.
Point break down what we have is
two hundred forty two positions
of those thirty one of the
number they can for about twelve
point eight percent vacancy we
have a support staff of thirty
nine positions made redundant
forty one construction forty
seven.
Your engineers court is about
fifteen positions.
If you.
Page two.
This page shows those hundred
twenty seven million dollars of
active construction project
we'll go through the mall but if
you'll notice there's a great
majority of I. forty in US for
ninety one projects on their
this this is the the part of our
district that has the the huge
volume of traffic in the
particularly truck traffic we
have about thirty thousand
vehicles per day on the
interstate half of those are are
heavy semi loads and.
In that requires a good portion
of our budget.
As you can see from the ongoing
construction projects that we
have here.
Going down to the page the next
three four charts there are many
for two thousand nineteen we
received and if you'll notice
the majority of all of that
funding is either spent during
the process of being at the very
first the chart their house bill
two section nine two hundred
fifty million we received forty
eight million dollars of that
and as of yesterday all of that
is on going construction or
design work we were very
thankful for this these are
large dollar projects that we
could not squeeze into our
current budget with the help of
the Legislature we've been able
to get these projects off the
ground.
Moving on down the chart all of
these like I said fully expended
and we're very thankful for the
receiving these funds in the the
last chart loss of twenty twenty
that that total of twenty
million there we have a large
portion of that is spent twelve
million of the twenty million is
already spent in the on going
construction is going for the
other eight million dollars.
Without this these five charts
to projects we would not be able
to.
Maintain our entire district the
way that we currently are which
isn't very good state of repair
if you go to the very next page.
In the notice that the projects
that we have in our engineering
stage now.
A good portion of those projects
aren't I forty projects the
project we're designing over the
next three years to let out did.
We're able to get off of the I.
forty projects a little bit
because of the great support and
help we received from the
legislature this past two years.
We're able to do this work on
New Mexico one eighteen on US
sixty highway fifty three New
Mexico one twenty six the older
building historical bridge this
twenty bridges group sorry.
Mexico five sixty six one US one
eighty down catching County
we're able to do our work on one
seventeen in New Mexico five
forty seven Mexico six twelve
school fifty three always a
rural roads.
Normally we just maintain with
the very little maintenance
dollars that we see now in
designed ages for future years
because of this we'll see thank
you for that looking down
on the.
The project needs we always have
a list of these.
And will always continue to work
on these we receive funding for
these will immediately go to
design and construction
remembers well if you'll notice
that the.
The the the top seven projects
there are.
The projects of great public
concern we get calls on these
sections of road all the time
and we currently year trying to
get funding is seeking funding
funds we're creating these
corridors.
The lotus the bottom of the list
you can never forget I forty
there's always a need there as
well.
School is going to be included
projects if you will and then
moving on to a.
Our district to quickly needs we
have.
What equipment is majority of
our fleet is about.
Fifty percent.
Fifty percent of our fleet is is
ready for replacement based on
yours the H. B. and maintenance
costs to maintain and we're
we're constantly seeking funds
to kind of a greater equity
little bit give our employees
the what they need to do their
jobs.
Speaking of our employees the
search will deploy as we now
have you the forty some
construction workers in the
hundred and forty maintenance
workers they have stepped up
beyond what anyone could have
possibly imagined to do all of
the work that's required of them
on a daily basis and.
Work of the twenty two entities
within our district with you and
in
the they don't question the just
do it they're the real heroes in
the mind of the department mind
this district in most so we're
very thankful for all the work
they do.
The department would be what it
is without them with that the
madam chair.
I'm.
Mr Garcia we stand for
questions.
Thank you so much Leri all open
it up to questions from the
committee are there any
questions.
I'm sure I share.
Madam chair I don't have a
question on just my comments so
I've been working with the chair
Maynard for the past five years
welcome longer now because I've
been known visit requests for
forty years nine years you came
on board and he's done a
phenomenal job along with the
are
Commissioner of sure some strong
the people are thank you said
they do go up and beyond the
call of duty all the time that's
an everyday occasion special
with this comment upon all you
know I really appreciate your
very Charles what you guys are
doing our rules if you go out
there you're in decent weather
in good shape you know there
are.
There's always room for
improvement but they are in good
shape while my district and
probably to a whole state just
about you know that like I said
there's a few problems here and
there but nothing to worry about
and once again Leri and child
and we appreciate you guys and
if I can be of any help or
assistance please reach out to
me thank you thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr
we're very thankful for those
comments and you reach out to us
any time as well you this
committee please thank you.
Thanks so much Larry.
I'm before we move on to the
agenda I know that there's going
to be quite a few folks who will
be joining for to help with
testimony so in terms of experts
so just give us
some patients around that
transition we have three bills
that will be hearing today
so we'll go from there on the
first bill is house bill sixty
eight spaceflight informed
consent act changes
Representative Hochman became.
Now not.
Representative Madrid.
Representative you're on mute.
Sorry.
No you and so it wasn't really
helping.
Thank you to.
I apologize I have a question
for for the department right now
what what I wanted to know if we
could if they could somebody
could answer I believe
secretaries here what do the
what when do you expect the
unfunded projects to be funded
with the present level funding
from the for the department.
Somebody could answer them from.
From.
Secretary Santa is is on right
now okay thank you.
Madam chair and Representative
Madrid can you guys hear me yes
we can hear.
you know it just depends the
right now with our current
funding we are are only able to
put about two hundred to three
hundred million dollars worth of
construction each year and so
when you divide that up by close
by six districts kind of evenly
this is not a lot of money and
you can see some of those
projects or forty fifteen eighty
million dollars and so we really
rely on you know these the type
of funding the that you provided
us last couple years in twenty
nineteen we got four hundred
million last year we received a
hundred thirty five million so
if you want to get to these
larger projects we need that
type of influx of money this
year we do have a a bonding bill
that will be coming through this
committee that will be asking
for your support on its to bond
the remaining two hundred and
thirty four million of create
bonds depriving us around three
hundred million of proceeds so
there's definitely some funded
projects on the list that we
provide you to show just how
much of a need we have we have
about three billion dollars with
the B. in needs and so any extra
money that we can receive try
and make a dent in that we
surely appreciate.
Thank you very well thank you
Secretary thank you for rural
appreciate it thank you mark.
Thanks thanks for Representative
we have had a grill and then
Representative advice for
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair
this question is.
To the Department well madam
chair
What we are our committee
meeting
I would question the the.
The department go back and look
and and our.
With respect to the the.
Some of the bills are pushing
for with oil and gas what with
their production being with
respect to their losses or
funding for employees and for
road funds.
Sure the oil and gas
tracking on the BLM and and and
State Land stop.
And I know it's it's it's a shot
in the dark but I am curious how
many what that does to how many
different employees across the
state and so
I would like to see some kind of
analysis on that at some point
preferably before we get to
approving budgets so are I have
an understanding of.
What worst case scenario for
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
three might be from the
department.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Okay great so I'm I think that's
it with questions vice chair did
you have any questions.
Madam chair well who you know we
respect to the time if you want
to proceed on with the
presentations that'll be fine
thank you okay sounds great so
next then we have Representative
Hochman the Huey welcome
Representative and go ahead and
start whenever you're ready.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here in front of
you today and what I think might
be the first bill that you're
hearing in your committee so I'm
excited to present today madam
chair I just want to make sure
before we begin that my experts
adjacently Fitch and secretary
Lisa Q. seven move over moved
over to participants in the Sam.
Yeah they're they're honest
panelists now.
Okay fantastic thank you so much
madam chair madam chair members
of the committee house bill
fifty eight out give me one
second here.
Fifty eight amends a space
flight informed consent act to
revise that and will launch co
construction the act alone on
the sunset provisions located in
section four
at it's pretty simple
straightforward madam chair at
this point I think I would like
to introduce my first expertise
in laser of virgin galactic to
give his perspective and
presents the committee J.
Senator.
Yes I am good morning
Representative Hochman Vigil in
the rest of the chair.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Right thank.
I think I had.
Sorry first of all act madam
chair and members of the
legislative group thank you very
much for the opportunity to
provide some brief comments
today virgin galactic is
supportive of this legislation
as a provides liability
certainty for human spaceflight
companies in New Mexico.
what it gives us is a
transparent liability
environment for space flight
operations provide certainty for
businesses customers and the
government helps position New
Mexico to become a hub for
future growth for space
transportation and all of the
advances in science technology
and education that it'll bring.
Of course I'm here today as a
representative of virgin
galactic but also as a taxpayer
whose recently relocated his
family to the state of New
Mexico and was basically falling
in love
it's very for to it as today
that I have the opportunity to
speak to this distinguished
group as it was almost three
years ago to today that I made
the decision to move to New
Mexico and had this wonderful
opportunity so part of that was
I see the inherent of the work
that the bill would provide to
other companies and industries
and pursuing the envelope in
human space flight.
We recently announced our next
flight window opening on
February thirteenth with this
New Mexico will just be the
third state to send humans to
space.
Just a wonderful wonderful
accomplishment
we are also expanding New
Mexico's already distinguished
history as a leader in aerospace
and helping to solidify New
Mexico status status as a leader
in transportation and space and
our policies and laws should
represent that grow.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil for your leadership on
this issue and we look forward
to many more successes in the
state to call thank you.
Thank you Mr lays madam chair at
this time I'd like to introduce
secretary Alicia keys to the
Economic Development Department.
Thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair members of
the committee this legislation
is about protecting our
investments in the growing space
industry and bringing more of
these jobs to New Mexico there
is an aerospace ecosystem in New
Mexico a space Valley corridor
of related businesses stretching
from Los Alamos through
Albuquerque to truth or
consequences in Los crucis the
governor has targeted the
secretary for growths diversify
the economy and bring higher
paying jobs to the state the
global aerospace economy exceeds
three hundred and fifty billion
dollars and New Mexico has over
sixty companies working in the
space industry we have students
at New Mexico tech in NMAA you
who want to work in the
aerospace industry and stay in
New Mexico as of the sponsor
mention this bill extends
liability protections now in
place through informed consent
the seven other states where
there are lunch activities have
similar legislation without a
sense that.
The amount of worldwide
attention New Mexico has
received from being home to
virgin galactic to spin launch
and Happ's AV has been enormous
this bill will ensure that New
Mexico can continue to compete
for these companies and the jobs
that come with them thank you
very much.
And without madam chair we stand
for questions.
Great before we move to the
committee I'd like to open it up
for public comment we do have
folks in the audience for those
who are in who support this
legislation if you will so I'm
gonna do it this way I'm gonna
have folks raise their hand if
they're in support or in
opposition and then and then for
those who are willing to speak
on behalf of your your stance if
you can keep your your hands
raised for that so right now for
attendees for those of you who
are in support of this bill if
you could raise your hands
please.
Will be.
Great and then if you are going
to speak in public comment if
you could leave your hands up
and then we'll we'll give you
some will allow you to to to
talk on on the platform so first
we have bill leave from
From the Gallup chamber.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
bringing this important bill.
Thanks.
Is an important step forward
again keeping the space economy
moving in our state and we fully
stand in support of of this bill
and the legislation it brings in
again thank Representative for
bringing at and asked that the
committee unanimously passed
this to keep this economy moving
which is important as a
diversification that we're all
talking about in our state thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Sir next we have
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and I
represent businesses all over
New Mexico and in every industry
we support this bill because it
minimizes uncertainty around the
businesses space transportation
and makes our liability
environment comparable and more
competitive with other states
making in Mexico more attractive
to spaceflight companies looking
for operating locations this is
in line with our economic
strategic action plan we
released in December where we
recommend numerous ways to speed
up our economic recovery and
diversify our economy thank you
so much.
Thank you actually I'm next we
have Casey on lot of their
derived.
Thank.
Hello I'm Casey and granted to
ride and I just want to think
Representative pop up day
Hochman Vigil and madam chair
and members of this house
transportation committee I leave
new space New Mexico which is a
nonprofit established to grow
the space industry from New
Mexico for the nation I just
want to comment that this
legislation is absolutely key
first commercial space travel
and for supporting the spaceport
America spaceport America has
had great success in attracting
industry and this industry is
supporting more and more of
their to help research assisting
their revenue and this
legislation is key and crucial
to keep of to keep being able to
attract industry in to be able
to do great things such as
virgin galactic that's all I
have thank you thank you so much
and next we have JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me now yes we can hear you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce and this legislation
provides the endemic Kate
medication that is needed to
foster more activity at our
commercial spaceport in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you JD on next we have
Markle Gonzalez.
Good morning madam.
Sorry about that.
I'm sorry did I get cut off for
United indeed if you can just go
ahead and start over okay I'm
sorry madam chair so madam chair
members of the committee good
morning my name is part of the
dollars and the rest of this for
virgin galactic and the only
thing I would say is that for
all the reasons already
previously mentioned by every
single person who stood in
support we think of the
sponsoring the bill and we
support thank you very much.
Thanks next we have the demi
Moore.
Good morning madam chair Debbie
Moore I am president and CEO of
the greater Las Cruces chamber
of commerce as well as I service
the president for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce executives
Association and to alcohol the
comments prior to me both
locally and statewide we see
this as a tool for continued
growth and expansion of the
economic development in the
aerospace industry we would
encourage you to support this
bill thank you very much thank
you Debbie next we have and walk
ins.
I'm from the C..
And go ahead.
Okay I'm so next we have folks
in opposition do we if you can
raise your hand if you are in
opposition of this legislation.
Okay.
There doesn't appear to be any
opposition I will go ahead and
open it up to committee
committee members are there any
questions.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Madam chair I'm overdue pass.
Okay will keep your motion for
now and is there any other
questions for committee.
Madam chair go ahead vice chair.
No question just a comment as we
all know all members of this
committee
The virgin I mean does spaceport
has struggled really years you
know this is a great opportunity
to make a go of it so you don't
pooled or event.
And the committee goes along
with that thank you madam chair.
Thank you are there any other
questions for the committee.
Okay so before we move on that
motion I I do have some
questions Representative one of
the questions that I have was
related to the repeal if you can
explain it maybe in detail as to
why other people and not just an
extension.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee other
reason for the re repeal is when
this law was first passed in
twenty thirteen the sunset was
added as a compromise measure to
allow all of the stakeholders to
feel confident moving forward
because of the maturity level of
the technology at the time we
feel confident with what virgin
galactic has been able to
achieve at this point that this
technology is right it's here to
stay the state of New Mexico has
made a great investments and the
presence of virgin galactic and
spaceport and so to to add an
extension I think at this point
would be an unnecessary
utilization of provided
resources madam chair because
we're at a point now where
virgin galactic is very close to
taking off on their first
mission and to space and so the
stakeholders a medic in when
discussing this bill and
everybody feels comfortable
moving forward with repeal the
sunset clause that says thank
you madam chair.
Can't hear you madam chair yeah
thanks Representative
and I think that's probably one
of the the issues that I have
with the legislation
specifically is the absolute
repeal I know that constituents
here in Dona ana county I've had
quite a few who reached out the
the issue around spaceport has
has always been somewhat of has
created somewhat of a heartburn
for for folks in my district
especially because of the amount
of money that's been invested in
this project and
and then there's just the
questions around private and
public
issues and so I think I just
wanted to raise those concerns
because they are some concerns
that are super valid especially
when we're trying to
Launch into something much
greater where
I think people are really
wondering whether or not this
investment is sustainable and so
I just I wanted to be sure that
I I made that very clear that as
as this legislation moves
through the the through the
legislature because I I don't
imagine any opposition from this
committee that some of those
questions might be raised
especially as folks especially
from Dona ana county and others
and other surrounding areas are
our hardest wondering about the
investment and is it worth
putting continue to put money in
it especially when it's what
we're we're
communities that are trying to
really build our economic wealth
and and then just kind of seeing
it as as a both and so I just
wanted to put that out there I
know that there's a motion from
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is their second.
Representative there is a second
is there any opposition to the
bill.
I don't have a gap so I I will
do it will not pull it down but
since there is no opposition we
health transportation public
works and capital improvements
it does do a do pass with no
opposition for house bill sixty
eight.
Thank you very much madam chair
and just to you know response
your Committee absolutely valid
points which I think do you
require further discussion
downline happy to have those
discussions I think it's an
important for all of us to
understand that the resources
and investment the state is made
and commercialize space
technology and looking forward
to having that conversation in
the future thank you.
Representative and thank you
Secretary keys for joining us
and Mr elastic for the thank you
for joining us as well
Next we have house bill seventy
one Representative Papen beaded
the municipal airport car and
peer to peer rentals
I don't know who your employee
you have experts for this one.
I thank you madam chair yes my
expertise good Peter karate from
the City of Albuquerque New
Mexico Allen from City of
Albuquerque and also I believe
is going to be a representative
from enterprise rent a car let
me find his name.
Well we can meet those two for
now.
Right.
To set me now when you're ready
I I can't see when people been
moved over.
Yeah we're working on it right
now.
I think there is.
Zoom and
And appears on he's transferring
now.
Great thank you madam chair let
me know when you want me to
proceed go ahead.
Okay thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
house bill seventy one replaces
section three of the municipal
airport lots to add definitions
including but not limited to
airport facility peer to peer
vehicle here to care vehicle
owner and peer to peer vehicle
sharing section two A. of HB
seventy one also requires a peer
to peer vehicle sharing owner to
provide I am provider to enter
into an enabling agreement with
the governing body operating at
the implacable airport which is
agreement will be made
establishing among other things
requirements on listing
publishing information about our
advertising if you're if your
vehicle or rental car and at
work parked on airport property
Filipina transportation airport
because.
Alright.
Thank you.
Promoting marketing care to care
vehicle sharing our rental car
chance for airport customer our
rental car transport airport
customers to an airport facility
and establishes penalties for
failure to enter into such
enabling agreements as required
in section two A. of the bill it
also requires agreements to
include provisions stating a
peer to peer vehicle provider
honor agrees to pay all
applicable taxes pursuant to the
least vehicle surcharge and the
internet provisions of the gross
receipts and compensation acts
and with that I'd like to
introduce my expert madam chair
Mister Peter karate.
Madam chair representative talk
but it it might be more
beneficial to have it would be a
better flow to have Nick Allen
president first of she's she is
she's my boss at the uptick
international support in the end
following her presentation I
will give you additional
comments.
Sounds good to me madam chair
the allow mystic Nick Allen to
present.
Go ahead.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil madam chair members of the
house transportation public
works and capital improvement
committee as an airport director
I can tell you I'm delighted to
work with new companies and
operators that provide safe
efficient and unique
transportation options for our
passengers in twenty fifteen the
airport crafted its first
operating agreement with the
ride share company at the time
these companies are highly new
and innovative and today we can
say they have dramatically
changed the personal
transportation industry for
consumers when ride share
companies began operating at the
centre court we had initial
concerns for airport revenues
and the safety of airport
passengers but were ultimately
able to establish proper rates
and charges that bring in more
revenue for the airport in the
taxi industry average did your
contracts we also included
insurance requirements to make
sure that these commercial
enterprises we're financially
responsible our hope is to do
the same by working with members
of the fifty fifth legislature
of the state of New Mexico to
help us bring your car Sir
platforms into compliance with
locally municipally run airports
across the state.
Airports regulate commercial
activity on airport property for
many reasons to provide for safe
orderly and efficient use of
airport facilities to compensate
the airport owner in this case
the City of Albuquerque for its
cost to develop and operate the
airport and to create a level
playing field on which
businesses can operate without
any segment secretary individual
participant gaining an unfair
competitive advantage creating a
level playing field protect the
airport honor from claims that
it impermissibly discriminates
against businesses that abide by
the rules it likewise protect
the investment in airport
facilities vehicles equipment
and staff made by those who
submit to regulation and to
protect the public interest by
ensuring that passengers have
clear high quality and suitable
options to serve their needs.
Carshare platforms are multi
million dollar commercial
operations that while using a
different business model than
traditional rental car companies
never the last rent vehicles to
airport passengers across the
country peer to peer pressure
platforms have resisted and
avoided paying fees associated
with conducting business at
airports which is allow them to
exploit an unfair competitive
advantage over legacy rental car
companies and other commercial
ground transportation providers
that comply with airport
regulations which include not
only concession fees but proper
insurance and record reporting
requirements.
This exploitation further has
the effect of reducing revenues
to the city and forcing other
entities doing business at the
airport to absorb the city's
fixed cost the competing in
legacy rental car market
provides significant revenues of
the City of Albuquerque's
aviation department which
oversees the operations of our
state's largest airport the
Albuquerque international
Sunport in fiscal year twenty
nineteen rental car revenues
made up twenty one percent of
the overall department of
aviation budget this revenue
makes up a significant portion
of the department's capital fund
about fifty percent and
reductions would significantly
reduce the funds available to
maintain the airport.
The airport rental car market is
a multi billion dollar industry
in twenty nineteen gross
revenues generated from rental
car operations at the Sunport
exceeded one hundred and six
million dollars and generated
fees and charges for the some
port totaling almost fifteen
million this legislation is
designed to create a level
playing field among all rental
vehicle providers and preserve
the revenue stream derived from
rental car transactions this on
port has been working to try and
bring peer to peer carsharing
companies into compliance by
creating a proper structure for
fees and charges that helps
level the playing field for its
legacy competition allows new
and innovative ways of serving
the public while also protecting
our state's single largest
transportation infrastructure
hub so it may continue to serve
our beautiful state for years to
come we are doing support for
house bill seventy one thank
you.
Thank you director Alan madam
chair and at this time now I
will introduce Mr Prodi to give
his presentation my apologies
director Alan.
Madam chair representative talk
with members of the committee my
name is Peter Prodi I'm the
chief legal counsel for the it
for the aviation department at
the City of Albuquerque and I've
I've a addressed
bills involving P. two P.
companies I I research those
throughout the country and and
and have addressed of many
airport lawyers in other states
with regard to the situation
involving peer to peer companies
and programs that are cropping
up around the country.
Let's talk about the little to
talk about our situation here to
support we've attempted to.
Of fortune agreement with one of
the peer to peer companies and
we have not been able to do that
because we haven't been able to
get to a place where the the
playing sealed with the
company's is a level playing
field P. two P. companies that's
peer to peer companies they have
resisted a level playing field
throughout the country when it
comes to
you know leveling the playing
field between rental car
companies and and the peer to
peer companies when enforcement
has been attempted in major
markets lawsuits have been
required to try and bring
compliance lawsuits have been
filed San Francisco Los Angeles
Boston and Tampa to name a few
lawsuits have become very
expensive we believe this
legislation would move us
forward without having to just
go through these expensive legal
challenges.
Insurance is an issue with
regard to these companies our
contracts will require insurance
as to our rental car company
contracts and we believe that if
additional insurance needs to be
added that could be added a
separate bill of insurance
issues can become very
complicated and there's no need
to over complicate this bill in
order to move the situation
forward they're also tax station
issues of peer to peer companies
are not just companies involved
transaction with
with people like all of us who
have one car that we might want
to put out there for rental.
There they're also eight
involved with car fleets used
car dealerships and even rental
car companies themselves have
the ability to use that map and
have a peer to peer type of
situation.
What is done on a fleet level
though that should be taxed just
like regular
the city type rental car
Concerns are taxed.
And
we to it just to leave you with
you know the sentiment we have a
very nice airport if you can in
Albuquerque the Albuquerque
international support.
I think it is has been a a price
for the City of Albuquerque and
to keep it nice we need to
carefully manage the commercial
activity at the airport
we can listed we list your
health in order to do just that
to this bill thank you very
much.
And with that madam chair we
will stand for questions for the
committee great thank you
representative before we go to
the committee I will go to
attendees for attendees if you
can do the same thing we did if
you are around for the previous
piece legislation if you can
raise your hand if you are in
support of this legislation.
And if the and there's let's
see.
There's one person in support of
will there is a couple people in
support are there people who
would like to speak on in
support of this legislation.
John Parrott for.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
I am.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you.
Yes I'm I'm John very Tory vice
president and general manager of
enterprise holdings here in New
Mexico I appreciate the
opportunity to support house
bill seventy one I thank the
committee for hearing this bill
today and thank Representative
Hochman Vigil in for introducing
this legislation house bill
seventy one issue several goals
this bill protects the state's
revenue streams and ensures that
companies providing similar
services at the state's airports
compete on a level playing field
Peter peer platform companies
want to do business in the state
of New Mexico we welcome them
and appreciate the competition
delivering to the marketplace
however that competition must be
fair for all house bill seventy
one goes a long way to ensuring
the car rental market remains
competitive in the state and
airports receive the revenue
streams they so desperately need
in these challenging economic
times.
I thank the committee for its
time and once again in support
of house bill seventy one thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Mr parador do we have
anyone else in attendees who
would be who would want to speak
and support of this legislation.
then can we move to opposition
are there any is there anyone
who is in opposition to this
legislation.
Okay we have a couple people
I'm.
In if please keep your hand up
if you want to speak.
First we have a brand more
Brandt go ahead.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes we can hear you
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Brent work
registered lobbyists for all
state and all state stands in
opposition to house bill seventy
one with all due respect to the
sponsor and what they're trying
to accomplish the reason why all
state is opposed to this bill is
that all state has a company
called the veil in unveiled
provides peer to peer.
Are sharing services and the
difficulty for us in evaluating
house bill seventy one is that
we believe that it's a piecemeal
approach to peer to peer car
sharing doesn't address all the
elements that we think are
appropriate in order for the
state to pass a piece of
legislation in this area all
state is a property and casualty
insurer and first and foremost
for all state we believe that
insurance provisions should be
included in this bill with this
subject matter is come up in
other states the the subject of
insurance has been addressed in
into that point the national con
the National Council of
insurance legislators has
developed an appropriate model
law for states to look at when
the address peer to peer car
sharing we think that's a good
way to go because it addresses
all of the needed elements that
are there for states to venture
into this without insurance
provisions their their leaves a
question as to who's coverages
is going to be first if there's
an accident related to peer to
peer carsharing.
We need certainty in the law so
that we don't have adverse
consequences for our consumers
the other point I would make is
that I'm not all things are
created equal rental car
companies have certain needs
peer to peer car sharing
companies have different needs
in the veils case they work with
offsite parking facilities to
conduct their operations in they
may not be the it may not be an
apples to apples comparison so
as it relates to peer to peer
car sharing we think the best
way for the state to approach
this is to include insurance
provisions and to follow the in
coil model act as it relates to
to peer carsharing thank you
very much Madam.
Thank you Mr Moore next we have
the jurors Center.
Thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
my name is Gerry setter
registered lobbyists for Toro
appear to peer carsharing
company reluctantly I rise in
opposition to HB seventy one my
client care letter with the
committee last evening so I
won't rehash what it said but
I'd like to make a few points
about the bill first of all to
realize been in discussions with
the airport over the last two
years and a concession human
well the negotiation has been
lengthy tour has found the
airport engage participants
unfortunately due to the COVID
in trying to up to find the best
fit to the unique nature pure
pure carsharing this sessions
have taken some time indeed
Terrel continues in earnest and
good faith negotiation with the
airport currently is awaiting
your point response where last
proposal.
Given these discussions we did
not see the need for this bill
in its current form the airport
is already ability to enter into
contracts and agreements the
bill seeks to put constraints on
all parties including airport
contract discussions this bill
does not include a definition
that is truly definitive peer to
peer carsharing and provide the
piecemeal approach the overall
issue of peer to peer carsharing
like my colleague Brent said
Terrel supports the adoption of
insurance regulatory framework
that has been enacted by at
least eight states and supported
together by stakeholders
including peer to peer
carsharing companies insurance
and the rental car industry.
This compromises crafted an
adopted by the National Council
insurance legislation
legislators and often referred
to as and while I also like to
make the point that Turo has is
in full compliance with the
state's laws on internet
facilitator companies that were
provided an H. B. six a couple
of years ago and is fully ready
to to come in to compliance and
agree on the
concession fee that has been
discussed with the airport are
pending or other negotiations
there are thank you for your
time and appreciate any
questions thank.
Thank you Mr Senator next we
have Kevin Cameron Dimitri.
Good morning chairman members my
name is Kim animation the
executive director of California
southwest at technet technet is
a national bipartisan network of
Texier house and senior
executives that promotes the
growth of the innovation
economy.
Technics diverse membership
includes dynamic American
businesses ranging from start
ups the most iconic companies on
the planet.
And it represents more than
three million employees in the
fields of I. T. E. commerce
clean energy gig and sharing
economy venture capital finance
techniques committed to
advancing the public policies
and private sector initiatives
that make the US the most
innovative country in the world
for those reasons technet
respectfully opposes this bill
for.
For the following reasons first
the need for alleged legislative
fixes not necessary is airport
already has the ability to
contract with and duties on its
own without such legislative
action in addition the piecemeal
approach as mentioned by few
before me.
To the issue of peer to peer
carsharing does not take into
account how it differs from car
rentals it does not address the
larger critical issue of
establish insurance regulatory
framework based on New Mexico
model which was mutually agreed
upon by all interested
stakeholders for these reasons
we are opposed to this measure
as we believe the bill is
unnecessary and fails to capture
the nuances between peer to peer
carsharing thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr Dimitri and with
that that is all we have from
folks in opposition
so open it up to the committee
are there any questions from the
committee.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Representative
yeah my first question is if
there is a small of the peer to
peer car sharing model act do
you consider using that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garrett I'm I'm
sorry Representative I didn't
quite understand your question
can you risk restate it for me.
Yes Madam chairwoman and and
Representative so
in the last twenty four hours
I've become quite the expert on
peer to peer car sharing which I
was very ignorant.
I'm but as the parent of a
former over driver I learned
that insurance is the Biggie and
so my question is if the model
of the peer to peer car sharing
model act has been implemented
successfully and covers not only
safety and background checks and
everything else but also covers
the intricacies of Insurance are
did you look into that and why
are why not.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garrett I'll give
a brief response and I will
defer to my experts but Madam
chair representative get we have
indeed looked at the model for
the New Mexico oil bill and I
will say that it's it's
intriguing and it is not one
hundred percent out of the
question at this point the
problem we've run into is is two
fold really one and that
regardless of peer to peer
network attachments that they
are different from rental car
companies that issue remains the
same that they continue to use
and airport infrastructure
without adequately at paying for
the ability to do so the
negotiations are going on
between the parties have been
going on for quite some time I
know that there has been some
concern that those there's
nothing really pressing those
negotiations to come to fruition
in the meantime our airports
continue to bleed and the it be
is our you know taxes that the
state of New Mexico and our
municipalities are entitled to
this law we've tried to
adequately at Taylor and keep
narrow to the issue of peer to
peer carsharing utilizing
infrastructure at an airport the
the insurance issue is quite a
good one madam chair
representative Garrett and it's
so good in fact it actually
requires I believe its own bill
they're going to require several
changes I think to the insurance
code to adequately deal with the
issue of peer to peer carsharing
and
ridesharing and to kind of
included within the purview of
house bill seventy one my fear
would kinda distract from the
issue at hand here which is
requiring these are networks
that are utilizing airport
infrastructure to continue to do
so in a fair and manageable and
equitable way I've actually
committed to working with the
various stake.
Holders on the insurance issue
on a separate bill to address
those issues I do think it's
incredibly important I just I I
my fear is if we included within
the purview of seventy one we're
going to get lost in the weeds
and the airport will be a
casualty this is actually
happened before when this bill
has been brought previously and
so we would ask the committee to
keep that in mind as we address
this specific issue here today I
hope that
Answers your question somewhat
madam chair representative
Garrett and I want to defer to
Mr Prodi if he has anything else
to add.
Shares Representative Hochman
you said it better than I could
have set it.
So I I don't have really
anything more to add excepted of
course we we would welcome a
review of a separate bill
in order to provide.
Appropriate over.
You Mr Prodi.
Yeah Mr Prodi if you can just
speak up just a little bit.
Your your your it's working we
just need you to speak up a
little bit.
All right I'm I have a I've two
microphones going so I guess one
of them has a has gone down on
me
if you can hear me now what what
I said was
Representative Hochman I I
couldn't have said it better
than them the way that you have
articulated so I appreciate your
understanding of this issue in
your understanding of how
insurance.
Legislature are important but a
very complicated so thank you
very much.
Madam chair I I have of.
One more question so so
Representative Hochman Vigil
housing this bill would be part
one with the second bill
addressing insurance so my
understanding that correctly.
Madam chair representative
Garrett that is correct however
I will disclose to you that the
insurance component of this
discussion is burgeoning it's
we've just broached it and so
the negotiations are we are in
their infancy it will take quite
some time to through to make
sure all the stakeholders are at
the table but the intention my
intention is to bring a bill
that will adequately address
this in the insurance code which
is where it belongs.
Thank you and I have one final
question madam chair
representative has.
In any way in from our smaller
airports around the state.
The some part is the largest but
here to peer carsharing is
something that I would think
would be a service around the
state where they can't maintain
necessarily you know traditional
car rental places have they have
any of the local airports the
rural airports weighed in on
this bill.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Garrett I I can't
I was hoping that we're gonna
see some testimony from one of
the municipal league
representatives about their
feelings on the spell I know
that several smaller airport
managers have sent emails to me
they are interested in the issue
and for the most part they have
expressed their their support of
the bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative those are all my
questions.
Thank you representative Garrett
next we have Representative
Crowder and then vice chair
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative the L. for bring
this for.
My problem.
U. S. Representative twenty four
hours ago so my my questions
are is the this if you're gonna
be impacted by this piece of
legislation as I.
Front page of the bill.
I want to talk about municipal
law.
A line fourteen it talks about a
municipal airport facility in
alliance twenty twenty one is
as used in municipal airport law
so what we're doing.
What do we have regional airport
do we have International Airport
all who are in this all the
workers in the state of New
Mexico where they all under this
law.
Can you speak to register.
This is not apply to.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Crowder I could
give you a general opinion based
upon my professional experience
but really the expert on on this
particular bill on your question
would be better answered by Mr
Prodi.
Madam chair representative
Crowder Representative Hochman
there there are.
Two classes of airports under
New Mexico law of municipalities
can sponsor point and counties
can sponsor point and and I said
and and the state can sponsor an
airport to so you might say
there's there's three Sanchez
this.
The vast majority of airports in
New Mexico our municipal
airports.
And this bill would probably
have its greatest effect in in
the metropolitan centres of the
State Los crucis Santa Fe
Albuquerque of possibly in
farming to and the at at six to
at Silvercity at at Hobbs and
Carlsbad
otherwise the the bill may not
have much of an impact
whatsoever and in fact of the
the bill has it out for airports
that do not regulate dissected
idiot all the bill allows
airports to waive any of this
regulation and writing.
And that was a concession based
on the fact that that some of
the smaller airports just.
Would probably encourage this
activity without because they
don't have any type of
regulation
for either rental cars or for
thirty two years sharing of so I
think the bill has tried to
address the situation
evenhandedly and of the.
And it's it's affect.
Where the effect is desired is
is a.
is captured in the bill.
Thank you for that response and
and I'll tell you what is this
to to the server on this.
Four or.
On their agenda is to change to
regional airport.
Its own municipality your point
out it is not in the city.
The county this just became
complicated and I.
I wonder is how will this.
Hello.
The state you just mentioned
that all of the smaller.
Your point total of the the.
Work in place the Albuquerque
or Los crucis.
It is that probably a lot of the
insurance.
It's kind of a sticking point
for me I think so have you
already the state through all of
our reporters there should be
some kind of shin our work with
in this bill.
Was.
The state so thank you for.
All.
Thank you for your responses
thank you.
Representative would be all
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have vice chair Garcia
thank you madam chair all.
Representative hoping he'd you
know most of the just committee
or kind of knew what was
happening here.
We don't have you know I have
never heard of peer to peer but
we're aggression and now
as in the Representative Hochman
madam chair adorable working.
With all your point on on
contracts and insurance.
Policies are ready for the last
two years.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I do is the question I
have been working with our
reported thank you for the last
two these are just general
you're just for their porch.
Madam chair representative
Garcia date that you introduce
have been engaged in discussions
for quite some time yes there
has been some concern as too
expensive litigation that has
been initiated and other states
related to similar arrangements
and as negotiations have
continued at I do add in good
faith that the necessity for
bill such as this is kind of
become more more parent but I'm
I can't speak directly to those
negotiations I think at this
point I'll defer to director
Alan to add anything else.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative we have
been in negotiations with a
repair company called Turo we
are working with them and you
know it's been two years we've
been working diligently to try
to resolve this there's a lot
going on across the country
other airports trying to make
this work I hasn't quite worked
out here yet but we are still
you know working diligently we
would like to get something
negotiated but you know at this
time we do feel that we need the
support of the legislature to
help us move this forward and as
Representative Hochman Vigil
mentioned this really was
specific and we didn't want to
kind of money it with some of
the other questions that we have
we wanted to keep this very
focused on how at peer to peer
car shared networks are able to
interact with airports and also
still allow freedom for small
airports to to be a little bit
more flexible but we have a lot
of regulatory structure at the
airports and we need to maintain
not across so we also do you
manage insurance through our
contracts and we do make sure
that all of our every contact
that we has had has proper
insurance so that something that
we do already which is another
reason we didn't feel the need
to put that into this bill.
Madam chair would do lasting
Alan madam Ellen sell it seems
to me let go of them what you
just finished saying on madam
chair is a she's like it's
taking a long time for the
session the we're panels have
you taken into consideration how
much of COVID is backed
everything up on you know this
personalization and provide.
But it's not very well needed if
we don't go back to Europe goal
would comment came in and
disrupted our system will be
talking about this legislation
now.
Madam madam chair representative
Garcia I'll defer to director
Alan again.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative Garcia
wild COVID certainly has put a
bit of a damper on our
operations at this time port
we've been moving all of our
projects through just as we
always would we have a lot going
on at the airport now everything
ranging from economic
development projects to our
normal contracting procedures
in may have put up a bit of the
you know slowed us down a little
but we still been actively in
conversations all this year and
so I wouldn't say that this that
COVID has been the main
destructor and us having this
conversation I believe it's the
a lack of desire to be treated
as an equal company across all
playing fields and to actually
step up to the rates that we
need to see coming from an or at
a company like this and
additionally and making sure
that they have proper
protections in place for our
passengers.
Thank you madam chair the total
question the next question is
zoom
The vehicle surcharge
G. R. tease you I mentioned
earlier
Representative Hochman that
distro building is making
millions of dollars we're a
little we can collect taxes on
it so what are we doing there
what what's going to happen
wells but he refused to say.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I will defer to either
one of my experts I think you
can answer better answer that
question for you because they're
more familiar with revenue
streams.
However once answered.
Madam chair vice chair Garcia
can you can you hear me alright.
You want to run your voice but
that will probably go and we'll
let you know if I can you read
okay thank you.
Madam all right then I'll speak
up as much as I can
Well it was so vice chair Garcia
your your question again
specifically involved the least
vehicle.
Tax.
The vehicle gross receipts tax
yes all right the the tax
situation.
It may also need to be addressed
in this in a separate bill but
not necessarily in this bill.
The primary concern that the
airport has is that.
Peer to peer car sharing can be
done by individuals involving
individuals like you and me.
It can also be done and is being
done throughout the country by
rental car companies you heard
Mr territory testify already
they have a peer to peer type of
app that they use this.
But is a rental car company they
have to pay all of these taxes
because their fleet is larger
than five vehicles.
So.
We don't see any in the with the
way that the bill is written it
would require the companies that
have fleets of more than five
vehicles to pay the same taxes
that rental car companies pay
when they when they rent cars.
That's a very important concept
in other markets used car lots
of.
Rental car companies other other
organizations with fleets have
have used the Toro vehicle
specifically in order to have a
burgeoning rental car
company presence at airports so
we feel this bill would
adequately level the playing
field by requiring any fleet
type operation to pay the same
taxes across the board as is
already required under the tax
law.
This Allen did you want to add
to that.
Madam chair yes thank you I also
do want to add that we also yep
of course in our contracts to
require that any company doing
business at the airport does pay
its property taxes and while we
don't collect tax ourselves we
do make sure to require it
within our contracts.
Madam chair
you know that I was reading the
the F. I. R. on it and it's it
is a the gentleman just finished
saying that
A couple you five B. for more
taxes but how many are I
vehicles are listed are not
being taxes the issue because
I'm concerned of what the state
might wind up losing on people
not paying taxes due to the fact
was happening around those right
now with COVID because the
moratorium on gas no we're gonna
be cut into a crunch of law have
to raise taxes eventually if
this does straight now and I was
just reading here
you know if you have one vehicle
you don't pay tax because you're
you're excise tax was paid on
the vehicle you for bought it
now you're exempt from paying
taxes the rest of the year and
and
Representative Hochman he'll
said that this the peer to peer
companies are making millions
and millions of dollars before
the tax is going to that's my
concern.
Where can enter that room.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garcia I mean
precisely that's why this issue
needed to be broached I think at
the legislative level because we
have to address the elephant in
the room which is you know at
the end of the day these your
card it works art utilizing
public infrastructure if people
are picking up these vehicles
from the airport and if they
intend to do so they have to pay
for the same infrastructure the
same way that everybody else
does regardless of how different
how their model differs from
anybody else's so that's why the
tax issue has been included in
the purview of this bill I know
that the analysis did raise some
issues as to how the tax tax
issue is treated we are aware of
those we are doing a deep
examination of it and if there
needs to be any amendments
brought to rectify the issue we
are dedicated to working on that
and making sure that that is
dealt with properly before you
know the bill the bills her
again.
Madam chair representative the
kids the that would be.
Yes oversight you know what Dr
you're saying that our staff.
But we need to cover the taxes
on on this particular bill if
you don't if you get the way on
us we're gonna have to be
discussing this issue next year
you're back after but you know
there's a lot of money that we
that the state's going to be
losing a taxes and I hate to
have to raise taxes and other
people and these people are
getting away with not paying
taxes on what they're doing.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garcia a thank
you review happen it was shared
next we have Representative
Pettigrew and then
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I.
Thank you madam chair
I don't remember who stated this
earlier but all the sudden I
learn more about that and the
last seven days and
Well I thought I would so with
that being said I right.
I'm.
I've been.
I am with phone calls from both
sides of this.
This bill.
unfortunately right now or
fortunately depending on how you
look at it the majority of the
people that I have received
calls from our opposition to
this.
What's interesting is each and
everyone of those people started
out what to call with with
saying this is a good beginning
we're just not there yet.
And I originally made notes from
different things that were said
today the you know we need one
bill not to but after the last
set of conversations with with
vice chair Garcia I now see we
have.
One bill one piece of
legislation potentially needing
three different bills and
The bill Sanchez last the last
word you know they're aware of
the tax bill they want to do a
deep examination and before the
bills heard again and and the
reality is is in my opinion.
Two things.
We should never use legislation
when negotiations are still
ongoing.
And you know to to bring
legislation and when when both
sides are openly stating they're
trying to negotiate through this
I have a concern with the fact
that we're gonna trying to
legislate one way or the other
let me go she Asians happen if
we can't do that then we can
figure that out the the Attorney
General says are still ways that
this can be done proofed through
the support
With out this bill this can
still be dealt with and I think
one piece of legislation that
deals with.
The topic the insurance in the
tax all together is is the only
way to continue this and allow
immigration agents to continue
will that be in the just based
off of.
What I've heard today the the
comments are received from from
both sides
I would prefer to see this bill
Rowe.
And have those conversations and
come back to us but if it does
if there is a motion to pass on
to the No thank you madam chair.
If you Representative Pettigrew
on next we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative for
bringing this for.
We're revisiting the beginning
of over.
And so we're hearing a lot of
the same questions that I are
way back at the beginning of of
over but my biggest concern one
of I have a lot of concern but
my major concern is the
insurance.
Portion or the lack thereof.
And I know the directors of the
airport mentioned all the
different.
requirements.
That they have of companies
doing business at the airport
but in this one in particular.
My question is.
If there was an accident.
And it resulted in the death.
With the airport covered
everything around that.
Question you know because I'm
thinking it's as if if I'm in
this program it's my
responsibility to carry.
Some type of full coverage on
everything.
And I'm having issues with that
not being in this bill.
But would the sun for.
Or any airport.
Be accountable and responsible
for the death of an individual.
Who had utilize one of these
vehicles.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I think I'm in a defer to Mister
variety on the issue at with
regards to the airports
liability and I'd like to make a
couple comments are falling not
by me.
Mr Prodi Madam chair
representative call their.
Representative Hochman no the
the airport would not be
responsible we what what
therefore does do is we
take reasonable steps to make
sure that our contractors have
financial responsibility so that
it protects the city.
It protects our passengers
and protects the overall
integrity of the of the
enterprise but now the some port
itself unless it had acted
negligent of some act negligence
of some sort.
would not be responsible for an
accident that a contra.
Okay and madam chair and and
Representative even if it had
happened.
On airport property I know so
often the going and coming you
know around the the the airport.
You know it's so congested.
At times.
And so the airport has no
accountability and
responsibility for example if I
I've got one of these cards and
I pull out and.
I'm being careless and I run
into somebody or someone runs
into me it's still on me is the
owner of this vehicle in my
correct R. O. does the airport
have some accountability in
that.
If it's on airport property.
Madam chair representative had
recovered I'll defer to Mister
Friday again to continue the
conversation.
Madam chair thank you
representative Bob.
Papen.
Representative Robert.
The the airport would have no
responsibility unless it was
negligent in some way of the
again what we would require
would be as we require of anyone
who uses the airport is to have
the financial responsibility at
least to the limit of the
airports tort liability that way
that
you there's there's there's
coverage in that respect but
the airport the airport itself
would be treated like any other
negligent actor the we would
have to be actively negligent.
In most cases if it's a traffic
accident the negligence would be
on the driver's
or in this particular case we
would require the.
Your company to have financial
responsibility in order to take
care of any mishap that occurs
on airport property.
Okay Representative and madam
chair thank you and and that is
my concern you know it's been
voice a couple of times that
this I feel like it's being
piecemeal.
And I am as well concern that we
have negotiations going on.
And it sounds like.
Even though you have the
different negotiations and
concerns that no one has really
come together to make this a
solid piece.
I will legislation.
And so I just I have some some
major concerns around that
because.
Liability.
Insurance liability.
Is always the biggest issue in
any type of an accident and so I
think going in and coming out of
the airport you know everybody
has some accountability and
responsibility.
And
that's some of those pieces just
are not.
Address in this piece of
legislation so with with that
madam chair relations for.
If you representative are there
any questions from the
committee.
Okay Representative I just had
just a couple questions and I
mean I think most of them have
already been answered by the
questions that were made by
other legislators
I just one thing that hasn't
been addressed and I kind of
wanted to provide this because
I've had a few calls around just
how this works because I know
that we've as as Representative
Powdrell Culbert mentioned
earlier this is been there's
been versions of this
legislation presented before and
so for folks who are watching
like what what process and what
progress has been made since
those initial pieces of
legislation were first
introduced and now and then
logistically how does this
process work in the first place
like when someone I think that's
the one thing that we that folks
I haven't heard being addressed
is is from the moment that a
person
Funds to attain some of this it
wants to attain the service like
what's what's the process from
start to finish.
Thank you madam chair so I.
We don't have that we we had
representatives of Toro speak
earlier but I think at this
point the process and what I can
land to the conversation as my
experience first I want to make
it very clear that we are not
talking about an uber type model
we are talking about their eight
that the prescribed here to care
vehicle sharing model which is
that you know something like the
Torah model and again we're not
talking just about Toro we're
talking about all applicable
peer to peer vehicle sharing
which is why it's so important
to create a level playing field
which is the not the necessity
for legislation to begin with
not just the creation of one
single contract with one actor
because then it would beg the
question you know again what
about subsequent contracts a
subsequent actors up for for
instance I use the term law
alliance and I did it because I
wanted to give my step son a
birthday present the ability to
learn to drive a very specific
cards these big into cars and
that's kind of the connection we
have you have an app you
installed on your phone you
wrapped you browse through the
various vehicles that are
available you pick what you
signed up to the apt you are
given information as your credit
card you sign that you agree to
a couple of I waivers and then
the vehicle owner will reach out
to you and let you know where
and when and when to pick up the
car in this instance you know if
it to be if it's rejected but an
airport it's pry there's
designated people that are
leaving their vehicles at the
airport and then your range of
time to pick up the vehicle and
and and go on your way so that's
kind of sort of how the peer to
peer vehicle sharing works I get
my perspective and it is you
know generally different from
that please someone speak up but
that's that's the basic model
and and how it works and
to answer the question with
regards to you know that the
peace beyond nature of the
legislation and how we've ended
up at this point where where we
are now yes this bill has been
brought before the bill is
actually brought before.
negotiations began because
because again we are we wanted
to set a precedent that was
applicable to all of your car
sharing
providers of this nature so we
had the bill and to speak
candidly madam chair it actually
got hijacked by the insurance
issue because I want to again
really emphasize the fact that
the insurance issue if we have
the cure to pure carsharing
issue at picking up at an
airport and utilization of
airport infrastructure that
issues the spec B. ensure your
vehicle sharing insurance issue
is the spec and so what is ends
up happening is this bill gets
hijacked by the insurance issue
because there are so many
different stakeholders because
there are so many people the
pinions and then it it begs the
question of you know whether or
not be limits for specific
car insurance policies in New
Mexico are high enough for peer
to peer vehicle sharing right
now twenty five thousand twenty
five thousand dollars for an
individual act fifty thousand
dollars for combined accident
you know should that be limit be
hired different for peer to peer
carsharing because there could
be potentially more liability
these issues just keep keep
rolling and in the meantime our
airport gets gets lost in the
process and so that's why we
really try to keep the
circumspect and and and the fact
that you know we need to set a
precedent for these types of if
your if your vehicle ensuring
providers so that they know what
to expect when they're
contracting with the forty four
is a liberty to require
additional insurance provisions
if they want to that's the power
to contract that they have
individually but it you know to
it to say that the tax issue
needs to be fixed within the
purview of this bill and the
insurance issues need to be
fixed with the within the
purview of the spell it's it's
you know trying to to put an
elephant on the back of a mouse
it's just not the way it should
work just because of the various
you know provision.
It's a lot it will need to be
amended and changed and again
we're trying to get relief to
our airport providers who have
been dealing with this issue for
quite some time and if we
continue to just kick the can
down the road so that we can fix
all the issues all at once I I
worry that they will continue to
be you know left lost in the
process of thank you for the
question madam chair.
Thank you representative and
thank you everyone for this
conversation I know that it's a
big one and I appreciate the
folks who have
participated today's
conversation and and and seeing
how we move forward what I'll
entertain a motion from folks in
the committee do we have one.
Madam chair I moved to table.
Ninety six what what do in.
Representative.
Madam chair secondhand knowledge
bring my second move.
Thank you for that motion I know
Representative here did you want
to say something.
Second.
Okay all right then what we'll
go ahead and do Raul for
at the motion on the table on
the motion on the table is the
table and so are you if you can
do a roll call please.
Representative Crowder.
Yes the table.
Representative Garrett.
Yes cable.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Okay however.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes to table.
Representative Romero.
Noted table.
Mr Garcia.
Well you should be able.
You know to table.
I agree to the table is a more
Mario.
It madam chair I'm not sorry on
the roll call you've missed
represented at a group.
I'm
sorry.
Thank you madam chair.
yes to table.
So we have a total of six to yes
the table into and stable.
I'm thank you Representative
when we hit your your
legislation has been tabled
and I don't know if you have any
closing comments that you'd like
to make.
Thank you madam chair I believe
a couple members of the
committee wanted to explain
about.
Yes I have Representative
Powdrell Culbert but did you
want to make any statement
before we move forward.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to present this bill
obviously it's an ongoing
conversation we thank you for
the really good input the
receipt that can from the
committee and.
We look forward to taking
mission issue up later.
Great thank you representative
first we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert and
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair I think
this is a interesting idea and
and like a lot of others is that
I'm just really I've heard of it
but had never you know had real
conversation on it and and I
just think that the
Need is comprehensive.
To bring everything in together
so that we can see a full
picture because this is going to
you know like uber is going to
impact lot of individuals who
decide that this is there no
small company so would be great
for the state to have is act
together so that those
individuals would know exactly
what rules and regulations are
required.
To step into this venture.
And I just don't think it's it's
in this piece of legislation.
It's quite a bit of work on it
from a team approach thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative next
vice chair Garcia thank you
madam chair Representative
Hochman thanks for visiting the
bill and.
What is explain my will this you
know I have concerns about the
taxes on it and I have concerns
about introducing legislation
still under negotiation with
other people you know on if that
have been done in would be a
good bill need to work on and
and in all I hope it does come
through whether the dish for my
knowledge could not supported
just basically the fact taxation
on a negative negotiations are
and in place and that's kind of
hard to say but people right now
thank you madam chair.
Thank you vice chair so thank
you all again for your
presentation of the of the
legislation
next we have on the agenda
Representative black and that
access for the house bill one
seventy two motor vehicle
emergency contact database are
you you can start letting them
in.
Promoted representative the lack
to a panel last when she get on
Representative black let me know
if you have anyone else you
would like to be promoted from
the attendee list.
Good morning I don't have anyone
with me.
When you're ready
Representative.
I'm good morning madam chair
thank you for having the
committee this morning I'm here
to introduced house bill one
seventy two act relating to the
motor vehicle
More vehicles requiring the
taxation and revenue department
to create and maintain an
emergency contact database I'm
so madam chair of I give you a
little background on this bill I
actually have been working on
this for about three years
visited with the.
The secretary of the department
of public safety briefly again
this morning I'm because I have
been working on it for three
years
and in the in the drafting
process of this my intention was
to have it drafted and brought
sense so that we were going to
hamstring the department motor
vehicle Department and having
how they would have to implement
it I'm I've spoken with several
clerks for the department motor
vehicle here in Santa Fe and
also in and work on my own
district that indicated that in
the tapestry system there
actually is a blank Clemente
field
that exist currently in the
tapestry system so in the
drafting I I wanted to leave it
so that perhaps my hope wise
that they could just use that
existing field and it was not
going to be an unfunded mandate
on the department's I'm.
I'll give you a little
background on just my own
personal view on this I'm twenty
two years ago as most of you
members remember on the house
floor I discuss as trying to
prevent that happen in my family
well in the same event chain of
events that happen my phone was
flown from the hospital in out
of order to UNM.
I'm.
Another my myself and my sister
were we were not notified of his
demise I'm and how we actually
heard about it was that
information was released to the
press and my sit my sister
actually heard on the radio
station driving home.
So that's what brought this at
this idea to me the other thing
is now my sister are the only
ones left in the family she
lives in Albuquerque and I live
in Alamogordo and my fear is is
largest New Mexico is we have we
all have grandparents children
in college and so for that live
across the state and would it be
a wonderful thing if we could
give law enforcement another
tool to be able to contact a
family member in an emergency so
madam chair I.
I guess that's what I've got now
stand for questions.
It is.
I was talking to myself this
whole time
so we do have some folks who are
in support of this legislation
and I want to open it up to
folks who are all I'm in
opposition as well if you are in
support if you can raise your
hand and then keep it raised if
you want to speak first we have
Dominic Silva I'm gonna go
ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Dominic
Silva and the I'm a lobbyist
with the air methods and we're
largest air transport company in
the state and yeah stand in
support of this bill I mean.
Being able to to provide
adequate information to family
members as a representative said
is is very important to us and
we keep that at heart so we
support this major thank you.
Thank you.
I'm do we have any opposition to
the legislation.
And there seems to be no
opposition all open it up to the
committee committee members are
there any questions for
Representative Black.
Okay Representative I I
Representative or did you have a
question.
Okay.
I'm I do have just a couple
questions I know Representative
thank you for sharing again I I
did hear your story last year on
the house floor and I really
appreciated your your courage
really to be able to share that
so publicly so thank you and to
be able to do that again today
I do I wanted to ask in terms of
what we're seeing now especially
within law enforcement and and
as you mentioned this being
another tool have there been
other circumstances that you
know of that have that we could
if we could that this toll would
have been able to assist law
enforcement over the course of
the last year so I I I'm just
kind of wondering what the what
other stories you might have
also been hearing from folks on
the ground.
Thank you madam chair I have not
heard anything I haven't heard
anything from anyone in New
Mexico I'm I did I have actually
been contacted by a by a lady
from another state I'm that she
has been fighting to get they
actually passed legislation in
her state I'm and her story was
that her son was a year and a
high school senior I believe it
was in was in involved in an
accident I'm in in front of the
high school he was transported
to the hospital I'm and.
And it eventually ended up dying
about three hours later and she
was never contacted.
Knowing that he would be told
that he was in the hospital I'm
so those are really the only
stories that I've heard and like
I said she was she was from
another state and she has been
act you know actively trying to
get legislation heard say
similar to this.
Yeah thank you Representative
and the only other question I
had was related to the analysis
I know that there
was some suggestions I believe
from taxed revenue around a
standalone web system being in
place verses what you might be
suggesting what what's the
process there in terms of of
your thoughts on whether or not
that would be acceptable well
madam chair thank you for that
question and actually when when
I was working with the drafter
originally we had talked about
that that yes it would I I would
love if I go ahead and renew my
driver's license online that I
could just click that and do it
myself and so when I when I
spoke with the drafter I was
told that the way that this was
drafted that that would give
motor vehicle department the
freedom to implement however
they see fit.
Whether it be a web based and
there's that there's a thing on
their website that says if you
want to do this do this.
So that's the instruction I was
given by the by the drafter so
I'm but I by all means I'm sure
if you guys have a way that if
you have some thoughts on how to
make this better I am I am
willing you know to take
suggestions on that madam chair
great thanks Representative I
know that there's a couple more
committee members with some
questions first Representative
Crowder and then Representative
Gary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative what's the
story like what you think I
have.
Maybe to concerns of that I'm
not sure about as I read through
the reports that we got from our
analyst everything on this
repeated it says where users can
log.
To secure online emergency
contact system in.
As your bill is written how much
security is there to protect
people's information what's
built into your bill that
protects the individual's.
Thank you madam chair
representative
that.
Is a very good question
Representative and
I guess my at my.
S. some shin would be that the
department have.
The motor vehicle department
currently has tapestry system
with.
Several different security
protocols.
In effect now so there's nothing
in the legislation that would
require them to add any new
security features
and I don't know Representative
madam chair if that's something
that.
That needs to be addressed in
the legislation like I said I
was trying to make it is is.
Harmful.
to them I guess is the best
word.
So yes I guess that would be my
answer thank you madam chair and
Representative like I'm not
familiar with the tapestries
system yeah and you know it is
the system.
I'm I'm assuming he's with tax
information tax records it is
well protected is incorrect is
all.
Thank you madam chair
representative I do not know
that is encrypted I know from my
personal experience in my job as
a as a chief deputy treasurer
we had to approach the treasures
actually had to approach the
motor vehicle department and
Division and go through a
rigorous security protocol in
order for the county treasurer
Steven access that system in
order to add wings on mobile web
mobile homes I'm so it is a it's
a very.
They're very tight with that I I
guess would be my.
They just don't let anybody have
access to that system so I would
assume that it would be
encrypted but that I don't know.
Okay in thank you Representative
Black madam chair the only other
question I noticed in all of the
reports received the F. I. R.
there there is no response from.
The public safety and I you said
you talked to him this morning
again.
Would it be possible to get a
letter of support from them or
or union from them
to.
Sure the confidence of the
voting members arrested.
At.
Your conversation you had with
this morning I see.
Thank you representative madam
chair so I spoke briefly with
Tim Johnson the
Secretary of the department
public safety and he had not had
a chance to actually analyze the
bill I'm originally of two years
ago three years ago I had
reached out at that point and.
There.
Their conversation was they
would they would appreciated
they use multiple multiple
different databases and this
would just be an additional tool
I'm not that it would be you
know a stand alone or anything
like that so I would be
definitely willing to to reach
out to them to see if I could
get something in writing I think
that would be appropriate.
Of.
Well I know there's other
questions of what.
I I I may requests we roll this
over just to get a report from
them to find out about the
tapestry system is it encrypted
help out protected or
individuals informations within
that system so are thank you
madam chair thank you and
Crowder Representative Gary.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative black of course I
do support this bill I signed on
to it but I like the.
I like the idea that
Representative Crowder said just
to roll it over to do a couple
checks including the date
because
clearly they suggested using
January first twenty twenty two
instead of the standard ninety
days would give them time to
solve these so
Representative black if you
support rolling it over just to
get these little fix this that's
what I
that's what I would actually I
move that can I just move it.
What can I just ask that I don't
think we have to do a motion for
to role metal you know that
Representative Pettigrew did you
have a question.
Chair I support really.
Okay.
The questions madam chair would
that be appropriate that we can
gather that information and
bring it back are you yeah we
can certainly do that
Representative and and just to
clarify the folks on the
committee I think just to
reiterate that Representative
black sheep she is right that
the bill does not require any
type of take tapestry but
this could in fact be a separate
system but I think that's where
we need to provide clarity in
terms within the language so
that it's more clear and so yeah
Representative like if you don't
mind we can certainly relate
over try to get as much
clarification from folks as you
can and then and then we can
certainly bring it back and and
put it a promoter again okay
great thank you so much madam
chair right.
Well thank you all in the
committee I don't know if
there's any questions we are
done with the agenda I know
Thursday you might have already
received an agenda for Thursday
we will be getting up and
getting a presentation from
the Tom all regarding the budget
and so I know that there's a lot
of questions around it that of
about the upcoming budget so if
there are questions that we can
be addressing offline between
now and then please feel free to
reach out and then we'll go from
there time do you have any
anything that you want to add to
that.
Thank you madam chair that the
committee not committee that the
technical group has met multiple
times and so what we will
present for you on Thursday and
I and I'll try to get that out
to you either late today or or
tomorrow so that the committee
can review it are the then
there's quite a bit of New
revenue
and when I say revenue I mean a
combination of revenue that was
on forecasted
COVID did not have quite the
impact that was originally
thought as well as some fund
balances
generally and in years past this
was a fairly small number
somewhere between roughly around
ten fifteen million this year
it's it's much higher closer to
fifty million and so what we
will present to you on Thursday
yes how the department of
transportation is is requesting
that this money be used and so I
will get those notes out to you
so you have time to consider
that other issues that will need
to be addressed by the committee
are the intent if you will for
the special appropriations there
there is a recommendation in
volume one of the LFC reports
that a hundred and fifty million
of special appropriations goes
to the DOT and fifty million I I
put I'm sorry a hundred and
fifty million to the DOT and a
hundred million to local
governments video T. as provided
and we haven't met on the issue
at but they've provided is
basically two different
scenarios one would.
The short term projects that
they could get out very quickly
and these are much smaller
projects another would be a
group of projects that would
take a longer to go through the
design that the development and
construction phases but would
also help with the whole major
project in R. L. in the state
and so those are two options
what once with the technical
group has a chance to review
that then we'll we'll present
those to you as well so that
that is a committee you can
provide some guidance Thursday
will not be a vote Thursday will
just be an overview of what the
technical group has has
discovered in balancing the DFA
the LFC and the department of
recommendations adding in new
revenue and fund balances as
well as a special projects so
with that on Thursday will be
really and just an overview of
findings which hopefully you all
will be able to give us some
some direction on so that that
and by the following week on
Tuesday we can present you with
a final if you will House Bill
three amended that then can be
pushed forward to H. A. F. C.
and so that's kind of the
schedule for this week and and
early next week depending on
what we discover Thursday then
is days House Bill three vote
may be need to be moved to our
stay preferably we can get it
done by Tuesday to provide the
drafters and various people
online to get it scheduled at at
AGFC it goes to HM HFC the
following week.
I believe on the sixteenth and
that's their their schedule
which were hoping to help keep
so that they can move house bill
two along.
And with that madam chair thank
you I stand for questions if
any.
Thank you Tom Representative
Crowder did you have any
questions.
Madam chair.
Question or perhaps Mr church I
guess question
You're in the house
appropriation finance committee
meetings there was also mention
of about forty million dollars
of excise tax that would come
into play and I believe that was
in the LFC framework are coming
out of the interim session can
you speak to that are you.
aware of that.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder what I do know about
that that I believe is is is
that.
House Bill I'm sorry Senate bill
one twenty one has been
introduced by
senator Bobby Gonzales and in
that bill is that it asked for
an additional authority to bonds
two hundred and thirty four
million dollars that excise tax
money going to the department
would go to that that at this
point in the budget that money
is is incorporated into the
budget that whether it goes to
dat at at at the passage of that
that legislation or not it will
still be in the budget generally
to be used for construction and
maintenance type needs.
Thank god I just recall one of
the conversation saying that the
hundred million it was going to
go to the local roads the new
local road Fund.
Would also receive the
additional forty million and I
think that's different from what
I'm hearing you say so I would
ask maybe we have cleared.
Representative Crowder there are
there are actually two status of
roughly forty million one does
go to the local road funding
that's a separate bill let me
let me check real staff are
Secretary sound of all of you
have any of these numbers are
want to jump in please do my
understanding is is that motor
vehicle tax excise tax is
roughly eighty million and I'm
saying roughly because it's you
know it's somewhere in that
ballpark and forty million would
go to this new local
transportation fund it goes to
the locals which the department
will establish rules on you know
on its distribution and then the
other part of that would go into
the D. O. T. budget and so you
are correct and what your
understanding I believe there's
two different issues at play
okay so tell me if you need any
any answers here as well Tom so
thank you but there there really
is several pots of money one is
a hundred fifty million that
goes to DOT the committee will
need to decide how to move
forward there's a hundred
million that goes to the local
government wrote fund there's
forty million this year from the
border vehicle excise tax that
goes directly to D. O. T..
I don't know if that's
necessarily in the budget
because we don't start
collecting that till July first
so would probably go into next
year's budget and that's a
potential funding source that
Tom mentioned for bonding.
although we would use a small
portion of that and then there's
forty million that's set to go
into the local government wrote
fund so all of those different
pots of money I think we can
talk about Thursday and what the
plans are but there's definitely
some things decisions that need
to be made and there are some
bills out there that need to be
considered as well and how all
this gets put together so thank
you Tom and thank you madam
chair of some of COVID.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative are
there any questions any other
questions before we adjourn.
I guess that's it everyone we
will see you all on Thursday.
You madam chair thank you well
have a good day thank thank you
madam chair.
Thanks committee.
