Proofed or denied on is not
published so we are asking in
this bill for the office of the
state engineer to publish that
decision when an application is
approved or denied the second
component about this bill is
putting into statute what all of
us know and understand about our
scarce resource here in our
state is that when a decision is
made on the use of water in our
state in the public welfare
interest
Which is been in statute for
over eight over eighty five
years of right moving on to a
hundred years that we understand
what that evaluations and then
also that climate change is
taken into account when these
decisions are made whether
approved or denied so what we're
trying to do Mr chair all
members of the committee is
ensure that the way that we
manage our water in the state
which is the public's water The
New Mexican citizens of our
state own our water it's in our
state constitution that we can
prove how we're managing that
understanding the changes that
have happened in our find it and
to ensuring that the public has
the information regarding how
these decisions are made in the
public interest so that said Mr
chair with me I have to experts
who will help me with as a as a
water and office at you know to
be able to help understand both
climate change and water why
we're asking state government to
manage this and the public
interest Dr David got slurred
was with us
is out is at the he's professor
of earth and planetary sciences
at UNM on his research interests
include climatology meteorology
interactions between earth's
atmosphere and hydrosphere
biosphere cryosphere and with
the spear of that language
and looking at whether
employment predictability and
variability she has done
research internationally
including in the southwest about
monsoon seasons long term I'm
itching productions looking at
our precipitation and wildfires
and how everything works
together.
Also with me is professor read
Bentsen who's been at the UNM
law schools since two thousand
and eight and his work spans
environmental studies including
where he was the executive
director at water watch in order
again and he's been teaching
water law natural resources and
administrative law at UNM at the
UNM School of lawn chairs the
natural resources environmental
programs I'm so they'll be here
to answer some technical
questions you may have on
climate and climate change and
of course how this would work
administratively in the law.
and with that Mr chair I look
forward to your questions thank
you.
Thank you Representative Romero
appreciate you being here Dr
good Sulur and professor Bentsen
at this point in time we will go
then to the audience members of
the audience of all those in
favor of house bill ninety five
for the committee substitute
house bill ninety five please
raise your hand and we will call
you one by one all those in
favor of house bill ninety five
let's go to Stephanie first.
Stephanie good morning.
Good morning I'm sorry.
Good morning Mr chair and
representative on behalf of two
fifty New Mexico world advocacy
we are strong supporter of this
bill climate change is an
existential threat and it just
makes sense to included among of
Marian factors to consider when
allocating water in the state
because New Mexico is the most
vulnerable US state when it
comes to water in the nation
thank you so much.
Thank you very much have a great
day let's go that to Douglas
Mikel John Mr Michael John good
morning good morning Mr chairman
thank you very much committee
members I spoke about this bill
in an earlier hearing and for
the reasons that I've laid out
the hand and for the reasons
explained by the sponsor
vertically the need to take into
account climate change when
making decisions on water we
support this bill and we urge
you to vote just it thank you
very much.
Thank you Sir anyone else in
support of house bill ninety
five.
Okay seeing another let's then
move to all those in opposition
of house bill ninety five please
raise your hand at.
Okay
All right that's a let's get
this list going then the let's
first include a little Riley
Laura good morning.
Good morning chairman Lente
members of the committee
Representative Romero I'm Laura
Riley here today representing
gavel land solutions a
consulting and regulatory
company that serves both
agriculture and natural
resources sector.
I want to thank the sponsor for
bring it forth HB ninety five to
address the issues that are
current Water Rights
administrative law however
respectfully we oppose this and
suggest review in the interim
with the office of the state
engineer and much more
stakeholder input.
Our specific concerns are the
impact of the divisional
reporting and studies needed to
meet the expanded requirements
the procedures in place the
procedures places burden on the
applicant our company has worked
in the regulatory compliance
arena for several years and
we're well aware of the hidden
cost applicants will incur to
meet the burden of proof
required to demonstrate the
application is not detrimental
in consideration of climate
change and public welfare to
laudable but identifying goals I
would be quite the professional
study and reporting needs to
those requirements of that the
I. Assur EA which can run into
thousands of dollars.
As this will affect both
existing water rights holders
and new applicants most of which
are small farmers and ranchers
in New Mexico this is a severe
financial burden to their
businesses for these reasons and
many more that you will hear
stated here today we
respectfully oppose thank you
for your time the agency right
it is going to cement the barn
castle cement the good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Samantha bond counsel and
general counsel to the elephant
Butte irrigation district ET I
D. serves thousands of
constituent farmers within
ninety thousand six hundred and
forty acres of irrigated
agriculture in the lower Rio
Grande and onion and Sierra
counties ET ideas one of the
largest production agriculture
economies in the state of New
Mexico if not the largest EDD's
been monitoring the impacts of
climate change for two decades
with one of the B. and he's
actually one of our leading
expert witnesses and consultants
being a go to person so to speak
with the New Mexico on climate
change issues and Education
impacts it is not a climate
change denier and recognizes the
intent of the bill is
unnecessary reality going
forward however the effects of
climate change are more
disproportionately passed to the
downstream water users with any
B. A. D. I called operation of
hydrology and the law being at
the end of the river necessarily
means there will be less water
especially in times of drought
but also the Rio Grande contact
to set up in a way that drought
inevitably means less water
passes gauging stations in
Colorado and then in New Mexico
therefore requiring less water
to be delivered to elephant
Butte reservoir for use with any
BID EDD will undoubtedly be
directly affected by this
legislation in a big way and not
a good way EBT farmers routinely
file applications to change
their points of diversion to
drill new wells when old wealth
wells fail or to move water
around within the district to
facilitate efficient farming
operations any ideas also
routinely pro tested
applications for new
appropriations that would harm
EVA the members and harm Rio
Grande compact appropriations.
We have more than ten of those
such protests pending before the
state engineer it's important to
remember that our members are
the only and are the only people
who pay assessments to A. B. A.
D. to fund those efforts to
protect the BID operations so
the cost is passed on to the
members for any protests the BID
files to protect Rio Grande
project water.
This bill unfortunately fall
short of the markets trying to
hit and rather than providing a
clear path forward to guide
water users and the state
engineer regarding the will of
the legislature on this issue
this legislation will instead
inevitably lead to many many
years of litigation and
controversy there by extending
the already extensive process
necessary to get is the approval
of the change of an element of
an existing water right there's
no clarity on what it means to
have to consider drought and
climate change in this bill are
those the only considerations in
the conservation of water
determination or
ask you to complete your
comments.
Okay Mister chair no problem I I
apologize for taking up so much
time essentially the bottom line
here is and I will skip all the
way past how this would
potentially work but this
legislature should be on notice
that our actions in the lower
Rio Grande are being watched
closely by taxes the United
States and the U. S. Supreme
Court and the state engineer
already struggling to show that
he can properly exercised his
authority down here anything
like this new at this time that
is not well defined is not a
good idea for New Mexico.
Thank you Mr castle of no for
all those that are looking to
provide public comment.
please keep in mind that we had
a schedule to keep we have a
floor session eleven o'clock we
have lots of hands up at this
point so please please please do
not be repetitive and please
keep your comments brief so
let's go to value where that is
worth the good morning.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
about reworked the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau thank you
for the opportunity today to
stand in opposition of HB ninety
five New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau supports the
sanctity of private water rights
as defined by state law and that
individuals privilege to utilize
these rights without undue
interference from government.
The proposed legislation before
you today is a bill that
continues to be modified and
again has not been vetted or
properly works through the
interim process any legislation
that looks to address such a
critical topic like water must
be heavily analyzed and works to
ensure all those affected have
had that opportunity to voice
and discuss their issues and
concerns the bill is and majorly
unfunded mandate that will
continue to hamper the ability
of the state engineers office to
do the important work for which
they are responsible for the
legislation looks to require
that each application is
accompanied by a report of
findings which is unnecessary
and will be burdensome to the
office requiring additional time
and resources for each
application this will lead to
additional delays in processing
applications additionally we
have concerns with the language
in section six items need and
elsewhere which states and
making that that the
determination as to whether
approval would be detrimental to
the public welfare of the state
the state engineer shall
consider the impacts on health
safety recreational culture and
environmental it interests this
language is extremely vague and
could be widely interpreted vote
for litigation we respectfully
request that you in opposition
of HB ninety five.
Thank you ms word that's go to
Cathy Elliott Miceli good
morning.
You are muted.
Good morning the morning Mr
Chairman representative and
Representative Romero I'm Cathy
Elliott and I'm a paid lobbyist
with Clinton D. Hardin
associates for New Mexico rural
water association.
The New Mexico rural water
association is a grassroots
member owned nonprofit trade
association composed of over
four hundred community water
systems across the state and
it's supposed to this level
legislation we believe it
violates the provisions of
article sixteen of the state
constitution section three and
that is actually highlighted by
the FY are.
Most Water Rights transactions
for community water systems
across the state and our
transfers of existing rights and
this bill actually money's the
water in those kinds of
transactions and places
increased really unnecessary
burdens on rural communities.
So as a summary we have
concluded that this proposed
legislation conflicts with the
constitution conflicts with
established prior appropriation
violate property rights and
unnecessarily complicates the
LFC permitting process and
increases the cost for the
applicants and the OSC and so
for those reasons we request
requested the bill is actually
tabled thank you very much thank
you Mr Elliott have a great day
let's go to Amy Amy good morning
you're with us.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Amy
very and I'm the registered
lobbyists The New Mexico oil and
gas association I won't belabor
the point made by others and by
the office of the state engineer
in the FIR but our members share
their concerns about both the
practicality of implementation
as well as the cost to the state
the oil and gas industry shares
the Sanchez concerns about
climate change and our members
have dedicated resources to
address in our responsibility to
our environment unfortunately
the mandates in this bill are
not tenable nor an effective way
to address climate change
therefore no other respectfully
opposes house bill ninety five
thank you thank you very much
Amy let's go to Greg originally
Mr ready good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to the committee I know the
state engineer would like to
speak as well I wanted to make a
couple points that are concerns
regarding house bill ninety five
as we mentioned in our analysis
the.
Requirements that the in the
bill that all decisions of the
state engineer be published with
findings is fine with respect to
contested applications which are
already addressed through the
state engineers administrative
hearing process which results in
written decisions that include
findings but.
Currently there are many many
applications that are not pro
tested are not contested to in
do not go to the administrative
hearing process interacted upon
by our district offices.
The requirement that these
decisions as well.
It includes findings with
respect to both climate change
and the public welfare of the
state will be insignificant
additional burden.
Will require additional FTE ease
in the agency to address and
will contribute it will probably
slow down our ability without
additional funding to process
all of our pending applications
that will probably contribute to
an increase in that
backlog of pending applications
before the agency.
The other point I'd like to
raise a legal one.
The Bill modifies six different
statutes to require findings
both received with respect to.
Conservation of water within the
state and the public welfare of
the state.
it does not notably modify
insect and those are
in sections two through seven of
the bill but the bill curiously
does not modify in section eight
another statutes that's the
seventy two twelve B. one it is
in statute governing the export
of water from New Mexico and
that statute is amended in this
bill but not to require the of
find the criteria with respect
to public welfare be addressed
in findings so the bill would
leave the strains the outcome in
its current form at least that.
Six different statutes governing
state engineer permit
application processing will
require the agency to make
findings with respect to
specific criteria.
Regarding public welfare
including
Cultural and environmental
interests but those same
criteria will not be required to
be addressed in applications
under seventy two twelve B. one
fee export statute and that
matters because that statute was
declared unconstitutional in at
least two times in the early
nineteen eighties on the grounds
that it was a violation of the
Commerce Clause of the United
States constitution the basis of
those determinations by the
courts at that time was that
applications to export water
we're treated differently in
evaluated differently by the
under the statutory scheme
compared to applications to use
water within the state.
I'm gonna sleep concluded
comments yes Mr chairman I'll be
brief the result of that in
nineteen eighty five was that
all the statutes were made
uniform with respect to
requirement up the
determinations on conservation
of water and public welfare in
both the experts statute and all
the other statutes I am
concerned that this bill if it
were to become law would leave
it disparate a statutory scheme
between those the export statute
in our in state statutes and Lee
our exports statute vulnerable
to another constitutional
challenge thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr Risley let's go
then up to Liz Taylor misstated
morning.
Good morning chairman Lente and
members of the committee and
Representative Romero I am Liz
Taylor not been water lawyer in
Albuquerque for twenty nine
years of I'm here today
representing both the San Juan
water commission in northwest
New Mexico and select energy
services in southeast New Mexico
both entities propose house bill
ninety five because it would
create confusion in state
engineer proceedings and make
the process more expensive and
time consuming kind time
consuming for applicants because
they bear the burden of proof
they must prove with expert
testimony that the transfer will
not impair other water rights
and is others have noted the
bill as two significant topics
that applicants must address
climate change and public
welfare I believe that others
have commented on that and I I
will not it address and more
however I would like to point
out to meet the tragedy of house
bill ninety five is that it does
not address climate change in a
meaningful way.
When climate change or some
other force reduces the supply
of surface water the state
engineer manages that through
administration not through the
nine new permits the bill agency
understands the two distinct
separate functions of the state
engineers office the first
function is to decide permit
applications and the second
function is to administer the
water rights in permits once
they are determined.
The bill makes use up those two
functions by inserting a little
bit of administration into the
permitting process is very bad
policy in it should be rejected
also one other issue that has
not yet been addressed is the
standing issue the bill was
amended before to take out a
wide open standing.
Asian that would allow anybody
very directly to protest
applications I think there is
still a back door to standing by
stating that that public wealth
that climate change can be a
basis of a protest because if a
person argues that they are
substantially specifically
affected by climate change or by
one of the public welfare
subsets issues they can then
become become parties to the
application in protest even if
they do not have water rights
and that is a significant change
in the in the law in should be
rejected so on behalf of the
salmon Water commission and
select energy services please
table this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr we have the state
engineer himself was no make a
public comment but I would like
to come to him last so we'll
keep him in the queue let's get
to all the other folks first and
then we'll come back to you Mr
Antonio if you don't mind this
gonna Jim wishes well Winchester
good morning.
Okay good morning chairman Lenti
in the bill sponsor Romero and
members of the act committee
thanks for the time this
morning.
Arjun Winchester in the
executive director of the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
Representative three nine fifty
members who are mostly
independent producers here in
the state I PM this morning
stands respectfully oppose to HB
ninety five percent of reasons
as already mentioned but we'll
add just a few quick additional
points the bill in this latest
iteration offers suggestions and
ways to include climate change
provisions in water rates
we feel that existing state
water strategy already
incorporates climate change in
place of the state engineers
office and it's been very well
that it to include the voices of
many different parties at the
table
the bill as substituted now
unfortunately is a bureaucratic
layer that is unnecessary but
does make necessary yet another
layer of burden for the state
engineer and for those who wish
to excess water for necessary
operations
it will slow down water
appropriation specifically to
oil and gas to Ag into other
industries and we do fear that
these delays will have a
devastating effect on the many
walks of life in the state of
New Mexico so for these reasons
we do respectfully stand opposed
to HB ninety five thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much Jim Ralph
Schmidt Petersen good morning
all.
Warning Mr chairman and members
of the committee on Rolf Schmidt
Petersen the director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission and I will try not to
repeat what I've heard from a
number of the other opponents
here I will mention that the
exports statute that Mr rigidly
brought up in the issues
associated with it give me pause
because as you all know we have
responsibilities within the IOC
associated with all of New
Mexicos eight Interstate Stream
compacts and then also with
state and regional planning
I think I want to just mention
very briefly that from a the
climate change purse perspective
my office the office of the
state engineer has been taking
that seriously for well over a
decade and in fact we operate
under climate change related
type conditions on a number of
our rivers every year and I
think there's a communication
issue where people don't think
that's happening when it
actually is under active water
resource management it just kind
of calls out to me I think the
the importance of what the
Sanchez bringing forward but the
kind of the lack of information
out there for what's actually
happening and I think some
discussion needs to occur in
that area you know outside of
this venue because I think the
bill as as written creates other
problems and tries to take on
too much here that should be
taken on in other venues for
example the climate change piece
you know the Interstate Stream
Commission with the governor's
fifty year water plan is seeking
to do this leap they had of
fifty years in the future of
increasing temperatures and what
that means for water across the
state I think that's the
appropriate place as a first
step to take on these climate
change related elements and then
look at a Debbie admin and
priority administration through
those filters to see what that
means for.
Water uses within the state
I would just mention for that
that you know well I appreciate
the members of the House
bringing up climate change even
today with the house
appropriations and finance that
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars appropriation request
that we made was was not taken
forward so there's zero dollars
for that and so for really gonna
take on those issues we gotta
get funding to do that either
through that special
appropriation or other manner
means to go forward but most
importantly I want to bring up
interstate compacts you know
I've always looked at parts the
public welfare and conservation
of water elements of the state
engineers evaluations as
important for looking at our
different interstate compacts
and there is no one size fits
all with interstate compacts
every single one of them are
different and and they're kind
of completely ignored within the
way the bill is Frank now that
gives me significant pause and
is a our primary reasons for the
Interstate Stream commissions
opposition to this bill as
written today thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you all for appreciate you
being with us this morning let's
go to Carla Sonntag good morning
Carla.
Good morning Sir members of the
committee on Carlos ontact.
President of the New Mexico
business coalition we represent
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans and
our focus is to make New Mexico
a better place to do business so
people have jobs and can provide
for their families we
respectfully oppose house bill
ninety five.
Because it is an impediment to
business creating additional
opportunities in New Mexico New
Mexico is not always business
friendly but policies like this
only make it more difficult for
businesses to operate it's a
deterrent to new businesses
coming to our state.
And for existing businesses to
expand both of these issues
create hardship for New Mexicans
who desire paying jobs in order
to take care of and feed their
families.
For that reason and the others
already stated we oppose this
bill and we hope you will as
well thank you very much thank
you miss on tech let's go then
to Walter Bradley good morning
Mr Bradley.
Your water your media are we
here you're there all right
thank you Mr chairman you look
awfully spiffy this morning it's
good to see you again.
The
I represent the dairy farmers of
America and of for all the
reasons of more than states and
I know you're on a time schedule
so I won't belabor the point I
just simply want to.
Put in our request that the this
bill really needs good betting
and it would what we would like
to be at the table in an interim
to to re address the whole issue
and and see where we can go with
it so with that in mind we would
respectfully request a committee
to table the bill and I look let
us work with the sponsor in the
interim thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Bradley appreciate
you being here that's going to
Caitlyn Hart miss Hart good
morning good morning chairman
Lente and members of the
committee and Kaitlyn Hart an
attorney representing on over a
coalition.
A group of farmers and ranchers
who manage land and water New
Mexico totaling one point five
million acres of the in the
slant and we stand and
respectful opposition to HB
ninety five well we respect and
appreciate the work the sponsor
has put into amending the bill
the remaining language is far
too broad and ambiguous to be
enacted.
And acting language such as
drought and climate change with
no legal definition attach the
Act opens the HSD lawsuits
there's a danger that various
hearing examiners may issue
decisions with varying
definitions of terms for similar
these similarly situated parties
which had been ruled by the New
Mexico Supreme Court to be
unconstitutional in addition the
inclusion of the language
impacts on health safety
recreational cultural and
environmental interests is very
broad and will likely and invite
litigation over what exactly
these terms mean and include we
think Representative Romero for
bringing forth this legislation
but we believe it's better
suited for a longer discussion
in the interim thank you.
Thank you very much it's gonna
Matt Thompson good morning Mr
Thompson.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you members my name is Matt
Thompson and I'm a registered
lobbyist for Apache corporation
we respectfully oppose H. B.
ninety five due to the
substantial hurdles and delays
the bill creates for water
appropriation the vague open
ended in excessively broad
definitions that others have
already addressed and the fact
that the bill is in and around
regulatory ban due to untenable
permitting delays with that we
urge you to vote against HB
ninety five thank you thank you
Mr Thompson let's go to Lauren
Lauren Patterson good morning
or.
Lowering your muted.
Thank you chairman Lente members
of the committee Representative
Romero I learned Patterson for
New Mexico cattle growers
association we stand in
opposition HB ninety five we
understand that the water basins
in New Mexico or just as diverse
underneath the ground as they
are as the land is above the
ground the current system allows
for consideration of constant
variations and the supply of
water and a flexible approach to
permit approval.
At and your culture maybe the
ultimate at use in water
conservation and we believe that
hindering our ability to use
that water bye funded management
mandates in the state engineers
office would disrupt production
agriculture and that's the
reason we stand in opposition as
well as others previously
mentioned thank you all for your
time thank you Mr Paterson is
gonna Missy Missy good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is misty Currier a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixty on behalf of our client
Occidental petroleum we
respectfully ask you to oppose
H. B. ninety five we do
recognize and agree that water
is New Mexico's most precious
natural resource and climate
change is a paramount paramount
focus however we can Kerr with
the concerns that water experts
and fellow industry leaders have
expressed today this bill would
create potential unintended
inconsistencies and months
hearing examiners generate
additional and arbitrate work
for staff and hinder New Mexico
business during a time when our
economy is trying desperately to
regain its strength thank you
for the opportunity to testify.
Thank you Mr have a great day
let's go to Jim Blaylock good
morning here.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Erin
balik on the superintendent with
the pick is probably artesian
Conservancy district we stand in
opposition to this bill for the
reasons that have already been
mentioned but I wanted to point
out.
That so these water right
transfers and applications to
change pointed diversions and
similar applications are a
regular part of day to day life
here in the pagus valley.
We represent about a hundred
thousand constituents within the
boundaries of the district and
that also includes about a
hundred and ten thousand your
gated acres and I think it's
important that the committee
recognize how often water is
moved up points to diversions
are changed except for and this
as a substantial burden to to
those types of applications so
we respectfully oppose ninety
five thank you Sir thank you
here and that's going to Ashley
Wagner ms Wagner good morning.
In morning thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and I
represent businesses all over
New Mexico and in every industry
well we appreciate that this
bill attempts to address climate
change we propose because the
places unnecessary burdens on
rural communities and will
create regulatory uncertainty
that sends the message that New
Mexico is not business friendly
New Mexico needs to be able to
bring in industry and diverse by
our vestments but this bill will
set us back because this bill
affects so many different
stakeholders we respectfully
request that the bill's sponsor
continue to work with all
stakeholders in the interim
thank you so much.
Thank you very much there's than
go to jail Romero.
Your first name Romero.
Good morning.
J. Romero.
You're on mute.
Good morning Mr chairman my
name's John Romero I work for
the office the state engineer
I've been with the agency for
twenty seven years working with
water right applications I'm
actually a rapid director Water
resource allocation program
director Water Rights director
so I see how this bill what
would affect the agents the
first hand because my staff by
though why right districts a
wide and.
I want to make a few points that
haven't been made because the
the I have been a lot of good
points that have been made
already that why this bill
should be tabled
No no one's disputing climate
change and it's very important
and I sit on the governor's
climate change task force for
the agency and we look at this
and our agency and and
adaptation of how we how do we
had adapt to climate change so
when I hear comments about we're
not looking at climate change in
the agency that's totally false
we look at it every day we also
look at administratively when we
look at surface water supplies
and how they are being affected
what usually it's there's less
surface water and we look at
historical supply we evaluate
applications and that the
historical supplies less than a
hundred and it's transferred to
a well
will cut it down to whatever
that is so to say that we don't
look at climate changes.
Is wrong and the main point I
want to make here is the
resources the lack of funding
the agency that this will affect
this bill Haidle backed
our current backlog ideal I see
this back about every day we get
applications coming in every
district were up around five
hundred we were at fifteen
hundred at one time and now
we've got it down to five
hundred very hard work but the
the aspects of this bill will
require us to.
To do these findings of facts
Act that workload throughout the
patients it'll take more time
more time with will increase the
backlog and and this bill has no
funding to the agency.
If we're gonna have to do
something like this we need more
resources to be able to do what
this bill is asking and one more
thing I want to say
and I don't think this bill was
very thought out and it has
that's what in many accounts.
And I wish they would the
sponsor and they would have come
to the HSD beforehand so we
could have talked about it in
the intramolecular worked out we
kind of even our ideas you know
where the experts we've been
here.
I've been here twenty seven
years I heard while fees.
Of earlier I heard requests
speak and state engineer and
nobody consulted us to with this
bill and it came up to three
weeks ago that's very
That's not good government and I
heard John say that last time
this bill came up and I just
want to make those points
because sometimes nobody's
thinking about the agency and
the resources that have to be
that have to be undertaken to
get this bill to do what this
bill is asking so.
Also there is NO times in an
issue but I I will encourage the
committee to table this bill and
we can work with the sponsor and
in the interim thank you
chairman thank you take in that
score then to Jason Weaks Mr
weeks good morning morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee Jason Weaks a
registered lobbyist for XTO
Exxon Mobil we stand in
opposition to this bill we
understand what the Sanchez
trying to accomplish respect
that we also respect and want to
make sure that we do everything
we can to protect the
environment however this bill
creates a significantly
burdensome process not gonna
believe the points made by
others but it will significantly
narrow the ability for any
business to acquire permit has a
significant legal issues
associated with that amongst
them undermining the true
meaning of legal standing or
moving the need for an actual
connection to the harm this will
have a negative impact on all
business but specifically oil
and gas because it will really
make on getting those permits
they're necessary for operations
very difficult to obtain for
that for those reasons we stand
in opposition thank you.
Thank you Mr weeks let's and go
to Michael Miller Mister Miller
good morning good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I might well are
Representative I mean basically
trolling Association for the
second time I will not take that
and reiterate all the points
that have already been made with
regard opposition it is bill but
we do stand in opposition to
this bill and would certainly
encourage the committee to table
and referred to an oral.
Position thank you.
The service go to Walter Brett
is Mr reading do you committee
yes.
Give me a second opportunity Mr
chairman now we'll talk no we're
not but thanks for being with
us.
Let's go to Beverly Beverly good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee we also have to
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill because of the
reasons already stated by the
agricultural groups on this call
also business groups and water
experts especially at the office
of the state engineer who this
lap that would fall into so as
others that this probably needs
to be vetted a little bit more
with input from business and
industry anybody this affects
and especially the office of the
state engineer thank you.
Thank you very much then finally
this to our state to engineer Mr
Antonio John.
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee you've you've all
heard probably from all the
comments that I I was going to
make so I I won't reiterate too
much of this I I do want to just
make sure that Representative
Romero knows that this is this
is not anything against which is
trying to do I know she's
involve yourself in a in a very
complicated issue here and I
think current chance on this
bill was was very good the more
we read it though in the end and
the fact that we were able to
work on it during the interim I
think it is you know.
Gives a lot of a lot of concern
and I think.
I would look really look forward
to working with the
representative in the future on
anti any bills it's just state
in this particular case it's a
misapplication of climate change
concept we are all concerned
about climate change the threat
of water supply of the supplies
going down and I and I think
guys I've reiterated that and
I'll try to just touch on a few
points that that have been
touched on but you know I think
of of as Representative
indicated that so you know
waters owned by the public but
the the the unincorporated Water
that belongs
That that waters belongs to the
public and is subject to
appropriation for beneficial use
I think that's the the big point
here budget uses the the
majority the faces the majority
and the liberal Water Rights and
so one of the things that's
really concerning is it Mr it
really does mix up to functions
that that I'm responsible for it
it's deciding permit
applications number one and then
administering the water rights
in the permit so once they're
once they're determined and so
you know we've we've talked a
little bit about this before and
I I just kind of I just want to
reiterate that you know once so
once the water rate is either
educated or is established
budget use of the permits are
are filed within the state
engineers offices and then the
vast majority of these that are
going to come before me are
changes in place and purpose of
use of work this way of
actuators for impairments and
and we look at the both the move
from the move to a location but
we have to manage and administer
the water supply in any given
year we really need funding and
for the legislature to
understand how important the
IOC's work is on the fifty year
water plant and that's what's
going to generate really good
water policy for us because
we're concerned about the second
and third order effects of the
reduce surface water supply that
will that will affect to the
ground water supply in so many
critical areas within the state
of New Mexico and we have we
have though that ability to look
incorporates critical management
areas domestic well mentioned
areas to account for those
second and third order effects
that that happened do do do do
climate change impacts so again
I want to thank the sponsor for
for bringing the subjects to the
legislature I think if we work
together in the interim we can
actually come up some with some
very good policy that and.
Corporate so everybody's concern
as well as our concerns
obviously of with this bill but
I I think there's the more I
read this on no there was no
mention made about promulgating
rules and regulations also Mr
chairman and and that's another
another unfunded mandate that so
we concerned with that there's a
house bill nine it's out there
and I think there's was
particularly from the
administration that if that if
that's going to work it's going
to be funded of for the for the
state agencies to incorporate
climate change and and and and
I'm getting real sits so well
for various reasons we really
stand in opposition of this and
would like to work on these
issues during the era thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Antonio seeing no
further comments in opposition
we will now go to the committee
members we will begin with
Representative Zamora
Representative good morning Sir
you have a slow the morning
everybody but morning Mr chair
and representative for metal
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I think the testimony we
heard from the audience was was
just unreal
It goes to show what.
And how.
The COVID era has affected us
this bill has not been vetted
the this bill has not been
carried through interim
committees like we did in the
past especially when we were
meeting the person I think a lot
of the subjects were been
brought up the.
The interim.
And we wouldn't be sitting here
today with this bill looking
like this.
I'm very concerned the the the
bill states the the state water
engineer needs to be looking at
climate change climate changes
is being looked at.
That testimony was brought forth
by doctor metal with the state
engineers he sits on the state
department board with the
governor that's that's a big
statement there are.
Listening to the state engineer
speaking.
And listening to the testimony
of unfunded mandate and how the
state engineers already strapped
for money.
We ought to be funding the state
engineer better the Mr chair I
would.
Move that this bill house bill
ninety five be tabled.
And and we look at it a further
point in time when the the
committees and and everybody in
this legislature could look at
it.
Yes Representative Zamora that's
not a an allowable motion at
this point you have to make a
motion by itself as opposed to
going into conversation about
the subject so your points are
well taken Sir
you know what will other
committee members to continue to
comments and and should should
you feel and the need to come
back with the motion by itself
you're more than welcome to that
okay thank thank you Mr thank
you Representative let's go that
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil but
we can't hear you.
You're not needed either.
Let's give her a second at
situate yourself.
Be there Representative can can
you hear me now you know yes
ma'am thank you.
I I apologize it seems that my
Microphone my computer's not
working thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Romero for
bringing this interesting bill
up for discussion I'm I'm really
interested Representative to
know more just because we have a
lot of materials in a lot of
exchanges in terms of the
committee analyses if you could
explain to us explain to the
committee the differences
between the original bill and
what we're seeing in the
committee substitute to be very
helpful for me Mr chair and
representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative so through the
first committee that we got
through through energy water
natural resources we've learned
a lot through the process of
presenting the bill in the way
that we had in its first
iteration and what we did was
take out sort of the vagueness
of again that standing position
that you had heard about many of
folks and referred to that we've
removed that from this portion
of the bill so that when it
comes to protest it's we we've
not changed anything regarding
protests and how that will work
so so we're focused primarily in
this iteration and have have
fine tuned the definition of
what we're asking on the vetting
of specific permits for drought
and climate change and putting
into statute of the formations
of public welfare that have been
decided when it comes to health
safety recreational cultural and
environmental interests this is
been a consistent
finding within case law that
we're now putting into statute
that we're looking at we're back
in nineteen eighty five when we
were starting to wrestle with
the ravages of drought and
climate change and worrying
about how to manage our water
successfully our our state
legislature then started looking
at public welfare as what what
it what it meant and so now
we're better defining that since
at this point in time when we
look at how approvals or denials
of permits have gone on madam
chair Miss Mister chair
representative we don't really
understand what the vetting
process is as far as public
welfare so this puts into
statute but the two components
both looking at at the a
scarcity of water and to public
welfare into statue as part of
that process
Mr chair representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative that's very
helpful to me and so now I can
actually focus better focus my
line of questioning with regards
to applications Mr chair and
representative upon who was the
burden to to meet the
application standard is it upon
the applicant or upon the at the
application at reviewer.
Mr chair representative by
design as we discussed through
what folks have already talked
about with the challenges and of
length of time on application
the burden has always been on
the application to making sure
that they could potentially of
the first line of their
application show that whatever
beneficial use would be public
welfare and secretary would be
within their application in the
confines of that application the
second line of burden and is
evaluating that application
Madam chair representative and
the state is meant to decide on
certain criteria what it is that
application that presents so
madam chair representative
already you know making sure
that all the teas and eyes are
in the proper places chair
representative that's what the
the first line is is is
definitely on the applicant.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative for that
explanation so
I I definitely see the intent of
this bill and I definitely see
where you're going with it let
me explain to you a few the
concerns I have so if the burden
is on the applicants to meet the
standard and what this bill we
are expanding that standard and
putting into place specific
requirements that have to be met
with regards to you know bird
and and public welfare I'm
really concerned that we're
going to be putting additional
burdens on applicants who may
not have the requisite
understanding of the process or
that you know legal knowledge to
know exactly what it is they
have to prove in order to make a
successful application
especially if we have people
that are not represented by
attorneys are or have a
rudimentary understanding of the
process so can you explain to me
Mr chair representative how you
how you would avoid something
like that like that happening if
we were to pass this bill into
law.
Mr chair representative so again
with any application and what
we've seen as far as our
analysis goes on how they're
being currently evaluated is
that the vast majority of
applications that are are going
to are from exactly who you're
talking about the folks that
we're always trying to protect
our small farmers you know the
small uses of water for transfer
one of those are typically not
the applications that are
getting pro tested and or are
under any sort of scrutiny madam
chair arm sorry Mr chair
representative so what we
understand about the process
thus far Mr chair representative
is that those folks are doing
great.
R. this should not add any
additional burden upon them
Mr chair representative what
that what we are asking however
is for the LFC to evaluate on
the criteria of course of
climate change and public
welfare and what we hear about
the unfunded mandate Mr chair
representative what I'd like to
bring to your attention is that
we've worked with LESC to
understand the I see budget at a
greater level of of how this
would work in practice as far as
how those evaluations would go
Mr chair representative and
currently as of as of twenty
twenty there were eighty four
vacant positions within the OSCE
of the three hundred forty two
total positions
there were one point six million
dollars and unspent person funds
which equates to about seventeen
positions so of those seventeen
Mr chair representative we think
about three to five positions
would help with expediting the
process already Mr chair
representative and even for
twenty twenty one for their
budget they've deleted twenty
four of the eighty four
positions but those positions
were vacant for over two to five
years so we're talking about
some of the lag time some of the
unfunded mandate Mr chair
representative I think part of
that is just wondering you know
how to improve the process
overall but as far as what we
see Mr chair representative in
understanding how to that these
application successfully that it
is in the public welfare
interests and it is in the
interest of the ownership of the
water in New Mexico which is of
the people Mr chair
representative that this
additional vetting layer is
important to this subsistence of
our water statewide and so with
this is what we'd like to see we
believe based on what we've
discussed with the legislative
finance that there it's in the
budget to be able to hire for
these positions.
and I'll defer to
my experts read Benson on some
of and any of the administrative
layers on the burden of
application that you were that
you ask for forgive me I just
felt like it was important to
discuss some of how the
logistics would work on the
vetting of applications through
the process that we've looked at
so far and and with that my my
expert Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Hochman Vigil are
I think it's a couple of things
are are worth noting that for
the most part the kinds of
applications that are involved
here
new new permits and it changes
it they typically are going to
be in place for ever so this is
a permanent decision on a water
right and so you kinda have to
get it right the first time and
I think that is an important
point because well it's
important to consider as you are
Representative Hochman Vigil and
many others have said we got to
be concerned about the burdens
on applicants we also have to be
cognizant of the permanent
consequences of these decisions
about what happens to the
public's water resources so is
so I think that's the the idea
that the making these decisions
that are going to have permanent
consequences some up front
review and some considerations
of factors like climate change
and like the public welfare a
standard that's been in the law
for a long time but doesn't have
any meaning right now the two
it's for it's a appropriate for
the legislature to to to set
some some basic standards.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative and professor
Benson for that explanation I I
appreciate it but I think my
concern still remains and that
you know if you are going to be
evaluating these types of
applications with additional
standards and you have you know
lay men that are that are can be
submitting these applications
and then you're asking for an
additional layer consideration
and evaluation that means that
you're gonna have to have the
application evaluator going back
to applicants for additional
information you're asking them
to be like a scientific standard
committee which which brings me
you know great because and and
and also like if we're going to
further define public welfare
how are you going to how are you
going to convey that expectation
upon an applicant are you gonna
have to go back to the master
additional information are you
gonna have to revise the
application so as to get those
details I just I think that it's
a slippery slope there and I'm
I'm I'm I I really am very wary
of unintended consequences if we
were to to put that into lan and
I I realize there are many other
colleagues that when asked
questions on this bill Mr chair
so just wanted to one additional
question I have Mr chair
representative.
Why at I'm sorry to questions
back to the unfunded mandate
just I think it's important to
note I'm a new member of the
house appropriations and finance
committee at as are up I believe
Representative her head and that
is to but just because you have
funded Bacon yes doesn't mean
that you can just hire people
especially for a highly
positions require high level
expertise in education it's it's
hard for a state government in
New Mexico to the to identify
folks that want to come into
state governments and workings
positions especially since you
know we have a lower salaries
people usually get educated the
state they leave so just because
you know you stated there's
funded but vacancies available
doesn't mean we're going to be
able to fill those positions and
then at at and then we're going
to as a result come up the water
application process.
Industry is I I think we've
heard about so that just a
statement second question why is
it important to at codified in
statute evaluations that were
asking the state engineer state
engineers office to make I mean
isn't that better promulgated
through role Representative Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative thank
you for your comments
and and and what we what I would
just respond to grow quickly is
that climate change and public
welfare can already be protested
so as far as the way that it's
been defined in statute broadly
so far so that's an we're not
we're just putting into statute
a definite definitive way of
being able to manage how we want
current applications and future
applications to be.
Vetted Madam chair
representative but that said on
your second question on on your
question now Mr chair
representative why we need it in
statute is that currently as far
as how decisions are being made
on approvals and denials then
chair representative for Mr
chair representative excuse me
we are getting information some
of the applications are being
posted online Madam Mr chair
representative some are not and
so we are asking for transparent
process on that evaluation up to
a standard that we've seen many
many courts decide upon on these
protests on these decisions have
been made and making sure that
it is in statute so that we as
the people understands the
standard as well
Mr chair representative and and
I'll defer to my experts at to
add to that Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Hochman
Vigil just a quick point of
public welfare spending that and
the law a long time and it has
no clear meeting now and I think
the state engineer has been
reluctant to adopt rules on what
it needs so I and I think it
there are certain areas where it
is really crucial that the state
engineer the state engineers
technical expertise is.
Is important and.
As I see it public welfare is
something where the legislature
very appropriately should weigh
in if if if the if the question
is what is the public interest
in water in New Mexico to me the
elected representative bodies in
a better position to address
that then then the HSD is
because it's less about
expertise in more about values
Mr chair if I may add we give
two years for the rulemaking
process to take place so we're
not asking for this to happen
overnight we're asking for a
period of time where there is
the way for understanding how to
better define climate change how
to understand how we manage or
drought Mr chair representative
so we're not this isn't an
overnight all of a sudden you
know sort of change in in in
that process for us we're giving
two years to to be able to make
those changes necessary within
the department understanding
that this is an urgent need in
our state.
Thank you very much Mister chair
Mister chair representative and
and I understand and I
understand that I guess my
reservation is that you know the
standards for climate change are
are rapidly changing and
changing all the time and so I I
guess I would suggest that if we
were to you know and
corporations that is part of an
agency's date but we were to
pass this bill we have to be
able to grant the flexibility
they need to be able to write
rules that allow them to utilize
those changing standards but
then I guess also meet the
statutory language that would be
propped that we would be setting
is a standard codifying it lost
so I guess I would just you know
urge caution that that and
lastly I'm sorry Mr chair final
question it just reminded me Mr
chair representative is the the
presidential standard still in
this bill or did you remove it
at and the committee staff
committees of the two Mr chair
representative we've removed
that standard and just to of
respond to your your comment on
climate change what we of course
understand about where we are is
in a perpetual state of
instability Mr chair
representative and of course
water scarcity so two big
reasons why I'm in support of
this bill and why I'm
looking forward to this to this
discussion and absolutely
appreciate all of the comments
are two things Mr chair
representative number one when
we look at how we've been
managing water in our state
being that it is a as a finite
resource and it's something that
has not been replenishing itself
at the range that we would like
to see we are continuing to
issue permits and water rates
eight in the state without
understanding the finite nature
of that Mr chair representative
and so when we're talking about
you know I I like to think about
it as a banking system Mr chair
representative where if we
thought we had a hundred dollars
in the bank Mr chair
representative and we're making
loans for that I'll use it for
that amount of money Mr chair
representative.
Have and we don't even know that
the hundred dollars is still in
there when we go and and
everybody and wanted to have a
bank run on that hundred dollars
we wouldn't know if anyone could
even cash in on that this point
time Mr chair representative and
respectfully I know we had
speakers from the Pecos basin
that you know and and some of
our other basins and we know
that those maybe over drawn
already so Mister chair
representative number one is
being able to look at how that
finite resources managed into Mr
chair representative I look at
it as the fact that when we're
trying to hold the line on who's
responsible for the management
my community and many of our
communities have been fighting
it out amongst themselves Mr
chair representative over this
finite resource when the water
does not flow down and who's
held accountable that to that Mr
chair representative in right
now our state government is not
as far as how that resources
managed and so for me Mr chair
representative is being able to
create that accountability
structure in the transparency
we're at we're we're requesting
for that for the state
engineer's office to start
implementing on how these
decisions are made Mr chair
representative so that our
community members are not
fighting each other on where
this resources managed so I
that's probably to.
For what you're asking but
that's why I think it's
important to understand why I am
involved in this and why I think
it's important that we look at
the structure and look at the
public interest as far as how
we've been managing this to the
constitutional level of the
peoples Water Mr chair
representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative I appreciate your
answers I appreciate the
dialogue you know I I absolutely
see what you're trying to do
here I agree with you we have
had you know longstanding
inherent issues with how we
manage water in the state
someone's calling me for me to
kind of call
and and I I definitely you know
I I agree with you that this
issue has been long in coming it
needs to be addressed from a
legislative perspective
respectfully Mr chair
representative I don't feel that
this bill is it I think that
it's it gets you some of the way
there but I think you've got a
lot of work left to do I would
encourage you to kind of take to
heart some of the committee that
we've heard today work with as
many people as you can take up
take those criticisms start the
dialogue because I think it I
absolutely think and believe
that there is a way to do this I
think you can get there I think
it's just gonna take a little
more a lot more work and I
commend you for taking this
issue on it is so hard and I'm
sure it's been quite an
education.
As it's been for me just
listening to in and out and
trying to understand so thank
you.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil let's go Representative
Ezzell.
Mr chairman I made to do not
pass on House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
substitute for house bill ninety
five.
They will is been a motion made
by Representative Ezzell is
there a second also going to.
Second by Representative the
more up.
Madam secretary.
Call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes on a do not pass.
Representative.
Sorry Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Matthews.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I just got
a procedural question eight
eight do not pass.
That's different than a table a
table right.
Do not pass it is different than
the table yes ma'am.
And can you remind me what the
difference is I'm sorry.
I do not passed basically and
it's it's movement through the
process here today and now and
if we table that it would have
the availability to come back if
someone pulled it off the table
at a later date Representative
Matthews.
I'll pass for now.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative.
You come back to the method that
we go through through the entire
rules I'm I share Herrerra.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
I'm well known I'd like to
explain about.
Absolutely.
Check you that now what's what's
the county jail.
By a vote of seven to to before
I make the final announcement
Representative Matthews to
explainable yes I I I think this
bill is well intentioned I think
it has are a lot of interesting
ideas I just think it needs more
work and that's I would prefer
at this point it be tabled to
give them a chance to perhaps do
another committee substitute or
something
but
So that that's why I'm voting
no.
Very well then and it is no
Representative Matthews and the
you know I eight is difficult
when when we have to
Vote for for do not pass and
ends here but none the less I I
think that after hearing all of
the attendees.
Comments to this bill I would I
would the second all those
statements made by
Representative Hochman Vigil in
regards to perhaps this is a
work in progress Representative
Romero and and others that
joined us this afternoon or this
morning
I think you're on to something
but the same time you know the
when we talk about water New
Mexico it's gonna take a and
everybody an all hands on deck
approach to making sure that we
can make this right we can get
it right we're not gonna make
everybody happy all the time for
this point in time in this in
this part of the session we're
we're already halfway done you
know the the fact that you know
committee subcommittee
subcommittee so still seems yet
be a very rushed process that I
am not very comfortable with so
I think maybe perhaps taking the
interim to really look at this
building all stakeholders
together again would be perhaps
the best bet so with that being
said madam secretary what was
the final count.
It was seventy two okay so by a
vote of seventy two
house bill ninety five.
Does not pass on this committee
thank you Representative Romero
thank Mister chair thank you
Representative really appreciate
your feedback and look forward
to the interim thank you thank
you doctor jester thank you
president and a committee
members we have come to the end
of our agenda for this morning
we you know it at this point we
have to outstanding bills both
basically have been rolled at
the request of their sponsors so
if they want them to be bought
to be brought back up for
Thursday's meeting they'll have
to get with us today will will
will will get with them and see
if they want to have a heard on
on what on Thursday if not we
don't have any bills in the
committee so we'll wait and they
will put on an agenda as soon as
we hear back from the folks and
if not we'll have a madam
secretary we talked to everybody
and let them know of what if we
will we will not have an agenda
for Thursday at this point in
time we do have a floor session
at eleven o'clock thank you all
so much for the deep
conversation Representative this
question comes up you just
waving black okay well we've
divided as well and we'll see
you all later thank you all for
the discussion today have a
great day bye thanks.
