Committee I've had an
opportunity to also talk to
mostly all of the legislators
are one to one and so I'm having
a better understanding of where
folks are in in their own
purpose in this work and their
own intentions moving forward I
think are really very much
aligned with with where I'm I'm
I'm going as well and so I'm I'm
excited to be part of all of
this I wanted to go ahead and if
folks want to introduce
themselves and I can call on you
all so vice chair of Garcia if
you want to if you want to
introduce yourself thank you
madam chair my name is Jerry
Garcia Representative house
district sixty nine which covers
parts of San Juan McKinley
Cibola Bernalillo Valencia
itself as a coral colonies occur
the biggest district in the
state I think probably a rural
list of this is my fifth year
with transportation I know most
of the people on this panel
thanks for being here and thank
the general public for decision
net and that's about are working
with you madam chair the movie
up to vice chair so it's good so
we'll look forward to work with
everybody.
Thank you.
Give us chair representative
Garrett.
Good morning madam chairwoman
good morning everybody
I am joy Garrett and from the
west side of Albuquerque.
Bernalillo county to I touch
Herries District at the Rio
Puerco I go down to I. forty up
to Sandoval County line and then
ease of services my third year
on the committee I believe it's
the best committee.
Because it's just we really work
together as a team beyond
eighteen partisans such just a
real pleasure to see everybody
and work with the department of
transportation particularly
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Romero.
thank you madam chair and good
morning everybody my name is
representative on the rest
Romero and I represent house
district ten which is the far
south valley and Bernalillo
county in parts of southeast
Albuquerque it's great to be on
this committee and and
congratulations madam chair I
look forward to working with
everybody I think this is a
really tremendous team and I'm
honored to work with all of you
thank you.
Representative Representative
Lundstrom.
Good morning everyone my name is
Patty Lundstrom I represent
house district nine which is
the.
In Gallup McKinley county part
of San Juan County area and I've
served on this committee for
twenty one years so I'm looking
forward to continuing it's a fun
Committee we do lots of great
work here and I want to
congratulate the new chair and
new vice chair and I and let you
all know we've got some good
hands here with the the staff
are former cabinet secretary for
DOT and others I think we're in
good hands and I look forward to
lots of great things.
Great thank you so much chair
next Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair it's a
pleasure to be here I love your
background by the way so because
you're a flagon by king in up
that's that's really cool.
want to straighten Harper I
Representative house district
fifty seven and that's in Santa
Fe County basically that the
northern half of Rio Rancho.
and I've been on this committee
nearly as long as a chair once
drummer our our Representative
Powdrell Culbert but to
it's been a great I think this
will be my sixth seventh you're
on the committee and and I agree
this is this is a great
committee to be on
and I'm really excited to see a
secretary church I'm here
working with us that that was a
great move to bring him on.
so I'm I'm really looking for
for to some great collaborative
work together and and doing some
good for New Mexico and and and
it's gonna be great working with
you madam chair and and
congratulations to you and and
Representative Garcia.
Good great team.
Thank you representative
Representative Crowder.
You're on your own meet Sir.
One more time this
representative Randy crowding.
from the Clovis area
Representative district sixty
four this is my third year I
believe on this committee I to
very much enjoy the committee
and and look forward to many
good things coming out of the
committee.
Great thank Representative are.
Representative Egolf.
You madam chair and
congratulations to you and and
representative Garcia.
I too am excited that have
secretary church on the on the
committee.
Representative district sixty
one which is.
The biggest part of the county
Lovington opportunists out and
then Google small communities
monument mountain marks.
And our.
I will.
In in the engineering civil
civil engineering side of the
business for thirty five years
I'm just excited to be on this
committee thank you.
Thank you representative.
Representative Powdrell.
Good morning.
And congratulations to both you
and representative Garcia.
Like.
Representative Lundstrom this my
nineteen year and I think this
is a great committee and I think
it's one of the best
nonpartisan.
Committees we do great work and
I look forward to working with
everyone.
Right thank you so much
Representative Representative
Madrid.
Chair congradulations position
and and R. and Mr Garcia as well
as vice chair I think it's a
great deal of the system to our
south.
In the room so I look forward to
working with you and see what we
can do together.
Right thank you so much
Representative I'd love for the
staff to introduce themselves as
well if.
Tom if you wanna if you wanna go
ahead and start.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Tom charge I I have a twenty six
years career with the DOT
I started back when it was a
highway and transportation
department
and.
Gosh I worked for governors and
six cabinet secretaries and I
retired in two thousand eighteen
that have been thoroughly
enjoyed my retirement
and I I've been I've I've had a
lot of meetings with chair Rubio
and I think you've got really
some good leadership I know many
of you on the committee and
worked with you for many years
Representative Powdrell Culbert
Representative Lundstrom might I
think I've worked with the
committee as long as both of you
and so yes it is a great
committee I think I think you
you accomplish a lot of really
good things for the state of New
Mexico you have an excellent
Department to work with
and you know it's a it's a it's
a really good budget and this
committee has ensure that over
the years you know putting a lot
of focus on maintaining the road
fund both as an autonomous and a
growing frontier as well as
helping out with special
appropriations when there's
money available so you know you
have a you have a lot of good
things to accomplish this year
so good luck and if you need
anything at all please call me
on my cell number and if you if
he's get published or anything
but if you need by my phone
number is two three one seven
one five five so please feel
free to call me anytime and I'll
definitely work with the chair
and and trying get downstairs to
you on anything that you may you
may want.
Thank you.
Thanks Tom.
Mention would you want to
introduce yourself.
I apologize I'm sorry my my
computer has the black every now
and then and then I don't hear.
People anymore and say good
morning everyone.
Okay.
Okay not.
I don't know what happened and
budget good morning my name is
madam long government acting on
this committee for the this is
my third year and this committee
and and the maturity house
Majority analyst and I
thoroughly enjoy right all the
great representatives have
stated The Great committee to
work committee to work for and I
really enjoy my time.
And I look forward to working
with of you again and.
And I also am and I'm glad to
finally meet at that Mr chairman
had chairwoman and get into I
had to go through the L. thank
you so much.
Thank you more than.
Where everyone the.
Madam chair congratulations of
this device congratulations on
your position I have been with
state transportation committee
as a analysts both the majority
and minority since I think
twenty twelve then just to echo
what everybody else said this is
this is a great committee issued
a work for and looking forward
to support everybody and feel
free to call me or email me I am
obviously working from home and
do not intend to be in the
roundhouse so everything will be
up remote again congratulations
to both of these.
Thanks so much more than and
walk and good to meet you
finally.
and less than not least Mario.
Everyone I'm Mario some agree I
am the committee assistant here.
This petition Committee it's my
thirty year in the legislature
are working I was chair Rubio's
LA last time around on from
downtown Albuquerque and I'm
excited to get to work with you
folks and the the zoom gross so
if there's any issues tracker
stuff my cell is on all those
emails I've been sending so just
give me a holler but looks like
we've got a.
Success so far instrument.
Great thanks I appreciate and
thank everyone again and I I
recognize that with these are
unprecedented times and we're
stuff remotely but I appreciate
the the staff and and everyone
who lives who have done a really
great job and and preparing for
us to to have the session today
and again please if there's any
issues or any concerns as we do
this work remotely over the
course of the next fifty plus
days please feel free to reach
out and we'll try to make
this process testing less as
possible I did want to start off
by just setting out some some
some ground rules I think to
help get a centered in terms of
just how we move the committee
forward I know that
transportation is usually the
first committee that gets a lot
of the the first hearings for a
lot of the the legislation and
so I really want to operate by
having this committee yes there
is possible to to provide hello
another opportunity for folks to
ask questions and and to comment
on on not only the presentations
but but also on the legislation
that's going to come our way I
know that overtime there are
exceptions you I I would like to
hear legislation as it as it
comes in in terms of the border
but I recognizes things get
moving quickly and towards the
end of the session there is a
lot of of movement and and there
might be some exceptions but I
will certainly let you all know
I had a time of of some of the
changes to the agenda
I do want to also mentioned that
There's going to be I know some
issues that might arise with
zoom and things like that
especially when it comes to
public comment fortunately I
don't think that will have a ton
of controversial legislation
here in the way that other
committees do and so
I I certainly want to give the
public an opportunity to to to
to raise any concerns that they
may have related to any piece of
legislation that we're reviewing
I know that the technician the
technology folks are working on
a pulling so that week we can
have it set up and it's not set
up right now but it will be
eventually where we can ask
people who support or oppose a
piece of legislation that's in
Canadian folks can do this poll
raise their hands and then we
can leave their and for folks
who want to speak in support or
in opposition that opportunity
will be provided as well so I'm
just letting you all know about
All that and then
Finally I think that again we
won't necessarily I believe have
a ton of controversial bills
bills but if scheduling becomes
an issue where we may need to
I have similar expect for to
participate in in a number of
Of different pieces of
legislation that we're hearing
I'd like to be able to Google a
lot of those those bills
together so I will certainly let
folks know if and when that that
happens
Overall I mean I would hope that
if it as we start to move along
with the with the with the
committee and as things are
starting to to really take shape
and move quickly that folks are
are willing and open to to adopt
and and just make things work as
as well and as possible as as
well as positively as as we can
one of the things that I've
forgotten to do now as as
chairwoman of this committee is
role so can we Mario can you
help us do the roll call please.
Awesome okay Representative
Crowder.
You.
Senator Garrett's.
Representative Harper.
Here.
Representative Lundstrom.
See you Representative Madrid
your.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative how difficult.
Your.
Romero.
Your.
The.
Here.
We have a full house.
Right to get started.
Thank you all and thanks for
your patience on forgetting to
do roll call so I appreciate
I appreciate that with that you
all I would like to move on to
our presentation for those of
you will you all receive the
the agenda for today on the
docket we have the stated that
the state of the the department
transportation and will have
secretary Santa giving us an
overview as well as Mallory my
son it asked months on it is and
then
Franklin Garcia and David Harris
To talk about this is the the
model the model
work that's being done
and so is if if secretary Seneal
the what is here if we can go
ahead and get started if you can
be brought in as a panelist.
Thank you madam chair and yes
yes I am here and welcome to the
committee good to see everybody
again and for those of you that
are new like chair woman Rubio
who welcome and look forward to
meeting you and getting to know
you over the course of time a
little bit difficult now
virtually but looking forward to
working together with you in
this committee also wanted to
say was good to see my former
boss secretary Tom church
usually if I can answer a
question I defer to staff and I
might just defer to Thompson T.
pry knows the department better
than I do
Tom was my mentor for a lot of
years we worked together for
over twenty years so it's good
to see him back and as my mentor
whenever I do anything wrong I
just say that's all Tom church
taught me and and blame it on
him so.
it's good to to have somebody
there that's familiar so madam
chair I'll go ahead and get
started on this and to go over
our annual report and then I'll
be happy to answer any questions
that you have and then like you
said after me Mallory and louder
will be going over budget and
then there was to specific
presentations that were requests
which is Franklin Garcia are
mobile division director and
then Dave Harris oversees all of
our transit and rail program so
that'll be the line up for today
if you have any specific
questions about projects in your
area I'd certainly be happy to
try and answer those but I would
just remind you that you do have
all six district engineers and
our executive director for high
we appropriations up on Thursday
morning and so they comply if
you want to wait till then that
would be great the plan have
more detailed answers but if you
really want to know something
I'll do the best I can to try
and answer that for everybody.
so if you go to the next page
please.
So this is our annual report
that's produced every year isn't
over at briefly kind of give you
an idea of where we are as
Department and you can move on
to the first a statement says
yeah right there
As you probably are aware I am
the cabinet secretary Mike Santa
but I do report to the governor
obviously but we also have a
commission which is unusual this
is not something the other
departments have where they have
commission meetings every other
month where we have to report
and get approval for bars and
other things other policy things
such as that has to go through
our commission and get approval
you can see the appointees there
some of you may remember former
representative Taylor there and
you can see that all these
positions are full and we have
commissioned me we just had a
commission meeting last Friday
so if constituents have any
particular is is to you as a
representative but they can also
go to their commissioners and
the commissioners act as the
liaison to back to me to report
any issues or bring up any
concerns in their particular
area so I just wrote a message
there they do every year a lot
of it was focused on the
pandemic as
our department has been called
to do quite a few things are the
pandemic I think we've
interacted with almost every
single tribal government helping
them with signage and closures
and curfews we've been
delivering water to folks we've
been delivering and picking up
P. P. to folks even have and
unfortunately to drive
bodies around if you want to
believe that just because of the
the death toll that we've had
here in New Mexico so are staff
has been called to do all
different types of stuff
throughout this pandemic way
above and beyond our call of
duty and I thought it was
important to recognize them for
their good work during this time
when this been doing the
pandemic first started we we
have two thousand six hundred
and four employees.
Eight and we have right now
about a thousand over a thousand
people working from home so we
had to get them out fitted with
laptops and computers and home
networks and all those type of
things back in March now we
still have a about thirteen
hundred people working in that
field and those are maintenance
workers are projects staff
inspectors are buildings and
grounds folks in those type of
people so are essential workers
as we refer to them or continue
get up everyday and go to work
like they normally do and follow
strict protocols but we're happy
that it's it's I think it's
quite remarkable that we haven't
really seen a slip in service or
a slip in projects things in the
workers continue to get done and
so are proud of the folks that
we have on staff who have
maintained their work work ethic
and integrity throughout this
process and and kept the state
moving forward as far as
transportation goes next slide
please.
Here's just an idea of our work
chart this is kind of a
management or upper level
management obviously not
everybody is is on here as I
mentioned we have twenty six
hundred and four of employees we
appreciate the legislature last
year who gave us an additional
hundred positions those went to
projects staff and maintenance
workers and other things as well
as well as our ports of entry
and so last year this time we
had twenty five hundred for now
we have twenty six hundred and
four and we appreciate that this
is kind of the middle to upper
management levels of our
departments to just wanted you
to know who's in charge of what
but if you ever need anything at
all you can reach out to me or
anybody on this list and will be
sure to to help you next slide
you can go on past that one.
So I'll stop right there on on
state road fund.
I'm at hopefully this is been
provided to you if not I can
provide this to electronically
our annual report I won't go
through all the narrative but
just to let you know we receive
about four hundred and forty
million dollars a year and state
road fund also you kind of how
that breaks down in just a
minute
but that is about half of our
revenue source we're getting
close to a billion dollar
operating budget every year I
think we're just ten million
dollars shy of that last year
will be just shy of that again
this year depend on how
negotiations and revenue outlook
finally looks
but we rely heavily on revenues
were basically an enterprise
agencies so the more revenue we
receive the more the higher
operating budget and revenues
are down then our operating
budget is down we do not
generally receive general fund
money for operations we strictly
rely on our revenue sources
which I'll talk about in just a
minute also want to mention we
do have a good bond rating our
bond rating right now it's one
level above the state's bond
rating this is important to know
we just refinanced about seventy
million dollars worth of bonds
and to fixed rate bonds and so
we're able to save the state
this last year about seven point
seven million interest rates are
at an all time low they've never
been lower and we took advantage
of that through some bonds flops
earlier in the year to save some
money we also currently have
approval to do seventy five
million dollars worth of bonds
starting July first twenty
twenty and so we want to make
sure that we maintain a good
bond ratings so we can take
advantage of those good rates
will also see a bill come
through here shortly that'll ask
for additional bonding authority
to use the remaining money of
the bond of the great bonds so a
total of two hundred thirty four
million we really want to take
advantage of the all time low of
bonding bonding rates interest
rates and are good bond rating
it to to get some.
Some more money out into the
economy so I'll just mention
that next slide please.
I'll focus here on the upper
right hand corner I mentioned
state road fund where does that
come from if you look on there
about a hundred eighteen million
a year and diesel Tax hundred
twelve million a year and gas
tax ninety two and weight
distance or one of the few
states as way distance in about
eighty million in vehicle
registrations of those obviously
fluctuate every year that
somewhere that brings us to
about four hundred million and
then we have some other smaller
revenue sources that come in to
get us to that four hundred and
forty four million or so per
year you can see down there on
the bottom right corner kind of
the revenue we're happy to say
that our revenue projections
exceeded expectations just like
the general fund we were
impacted but by the pandemic
specifically in the gas tax
revenue but not as much is we
thought we were going to be and
so the revenue forecast seems to
be recovering and looking we
have a pretty good outlook going
forward for the next four years
we're happy to to see that
clearly gas tax and people are
buying less gas but we did have
some increases in some other
areas specifically on the
commercial vehicle parked which
help make maybe make up for that
so louder will be going over
specifically some of the numbers
but we're just happy to see that
our revenue is is recovering and
looks good for the next several
years next slide please.
This is our debt service and I
think this is important to note
just because we do have about a
hundred and sixty million two
hundred seventy million dollar
debt payments each year but that
significantly falls off in
twenty twenty five in the upper
right hand corner you'll see
that we're paying using federal
money about a hundred and twenty
million dollars a year in debt
payments in FY twenty four that
goes up to a hundred and twenty
eight million but we get to FY
twenty five or debt payments
significantly drops to sixty
four million so there's
definitely some capacity there
if we were to bomb these
remaining grip Authority but in
twenty twenty five we're gonna
be looking really good as far as
seven we want to call it new
money freed up from not having
to send that to debt service and
the debt service is really made
up on the federal side of
previous bonds going all the way
back to governor Gary Johnson so
we're trying to get all those
paid off if you go down to the
so if you can see on that page
if you go down to the bottom
left corner that's our road Fund
rate payments to debt service
We we finance some of the bonds
that were related to real runner
and so years if you remember for
those of you have been here for
a while we had couple cliff
payments coming up in twenty
four and twenty five in those
were leveled out thanks to a
secretary church and so now we
have a very consistent bond
payment moving forward of thirty
nine million until it falls off
in FY thirty I'm down to twenty
five million so that makes it a
lot easier for us to plan and
like I said they're very
consistent with fixed rate bonds
the last one is just our highway
infrastructure we use that to
help pay some bonds and that
kind of goes up and down a
little bit it's not a huge
funding source but that also
remake it's more consistent
after twenty twenty five so FY
twenty five isn't to be a
critical year for the department
is that and if we have quite a
bit of money to be used on other
things so next slide please.
You can keep going all the way
up so I think one of the most
common questions we get is how
do we select projects
and really it all starts with
our pavement conditions and we
have what's called a tap program
or transportation asset
management program we look at at
our pavement conditions every
year across the state and they
get a rating from interstate two
US routes to New Mexico routes
since you can see there on the
on the right side what that
looks like we always this you
want to not be in the poor
rating but usually there is that
pride ten percent or so
regardless of the type of route
it is Interstate US in New
Mexico usually at least ten
percent in poor and so we're
looking at how to do projects we
obviously want to look at those
poor conditions trying at least
move them into a fair move those
fair into good and keep as many
in good condition as possible
and we do that through our temp
program and so we try and the
database we we want to put the
money where it is most needed in
in respect to keeping our
pavement secure and safe and
keep.
Politics out of it be very
bipartisan but as I think you
all agree transportation is a
bipartisan issue and so we try
and do that using that and and
putting the money where we think
it'll be best use as far as
payment condition goes next
slide please.
This is just kind of a pro
program dashboards and the
things that we look at the upper
left hand corner you'll see
Laster in FY twenty we let three
hundred thirty million dollars
worth of highway projects out to
bid we would expect that to go
up now in FY twenty one with
some of the new money that was
provided by you as a legislature
over the last couple years I'm
going to the upper right hand
corner we have a performance
measure at the federal level are
we want to keep are inactive
project list under two percent
right now at one point five
percent and what that means is
that the project hasn't had any
activity for six months it'll go
on an active listing certainly
don't want to see that we want
all of our projects to be active
money to be spent amend that
money being put to good use so
the fed the fat FHWA Federal
Highway has a goal of two
percent or less and as you can
see the apartments on a pretty
good job over the last four
years and making sure that we
stay under that two percent.
In the upper left so I the lower
left hand corner is just the
average percent over bid use I
want to bring this up it was one
percent in FY twenty which is
really good but we are gonna see
that go up more first quarter in
FY twenty one was over five
percent in where we're seeing
that is some of the larger
projects in more urban projects
we're having a lot of issues
with utilities so we go in and
do trying get information from
our utility companies as to
where electric lines are were
gas lines are we're sewer lines
are we base a project cost off
of that and then we go in the
contractor goes in in the lines
aren't where they said they were
going to be we find new lines we
find Grogan lines in that it
results in a change orders and
increased cost of projects so a
lot of the increased costs that
you'll see in projects are due
to just.
Utilities that we didn't over
there and that were unexpected
so we're doing pretty well with
that in regards to everything
else but we are having some
issues with just as funding
utilities that people do and
we're not aware of and and no
one had been digging in that
area for quite some time the
last thing on the bottom right
is just to present a project
completed on budget
traditionally the the department
does pretty well and it's over
ninety percent and last year we
are ninety two percent next
slide please.
I'm I won't go too much into
this but just on the left hand
side you'll see a map of
projects that are active in
projects that were completed
within the last year as you can
see we do projects all around
the state would try and be
equitable with where money is
going in our state every part of
our state is important to us
from corner to corner we try and
like I mentioned you things
based on pavement condition but
we have projects going on
everywhere in our state if you
look at our four year step is
state transportation improvement
plan over the next four years we
have four hundred and fifty nine
projects planned with over two
point two billion dollars worth
of projects and if you're ever
wondering what project is coming
up we can provide you act access
to R. E. step which is online
and you can kind of look in your
district or your area as to
whether some of the upcoming
projects they're broken down by
several different categories
there's a few there from our
local projects to our federal
construction capital outlay
which is really our severance
tax bond projects and then going
down to our local government
transportation funds so that's
not all inclusive but that gives
you an idea of how many projects
are going where next slide
please.
I'm on the left side I won't
spend too much time on the
maintenance Rick Padilla will be
doing that presentation for you
on Thursday and going into
detail about maintenance but we
do have a pretty robust
maintenance program that Rick
will talk about if you want to
know specifically district
projects in your area these do
not include locals but there
isn't a good idea of how many
are active and how many got
completed on this last year with
District one really having the
most and that's down in the Los
crucis area with twenty eight
act and eleven completed and
then you can go around on to the
other districts and see what's
happening now but at least
everybody has a active projects
in these are kind of the larger
projects that are happening at
any one time throughout the year
next slide please.
You can stop right there some of
them spend too much time on
public transit is because again
Harris's we'll go into more
detail for you doctor park and
ride the real run I think you
all know the rail runner hasn't
been running due to the pandemic
but he can give you some
information about that parking
ride has been but at a limited
capacity and Dave Harris will be
giving you a lot more details
regarding that so I won't go
into that but there's a lot of
information in this document
that you could read through if
you're interested to find out
what's happening in our public
transit area next slide.
In our mobile division in
Franklin will be talking about
this also later today so once in
a lot of time but we do operate
all of the ports of entry in the
state and the as you can see
from that a right hand map more
these ports of entries are
located so we have staffing
there that sells permits that
monitors compliance we took this
over from department of public
safety about four years ago and
now this program is self
sufficient so we're getting
enough weight distance permit
fees and other things so that we
can pay for staffing we've also
seen the way distance Revenue
increase since we took over this
program on here there's a few
things that I just want you to
be aware of up and in the state
in the Farmington area or the
sea cedar hill and Shiprock
those are not that we do have
structures but those are not
active point when you go down to
a large Berg just south of that
are used to that Columbus and
handle up wells are not active
and then kind of in the middle
of the state in Bonn in on the
east side Tatum those are not
active point there used to be
active point there we think at
some point we need to activate
them or create a new port in
those areas we do get a lot of
this the trucks in that are not
permitted and so the more the
better situated in the better
staff reports are the more
likely people are to be in
compliance in the more revenue
that we're gonna generate and as
I mentioned before since we base
our budget on how much revenue
we generate that's always a good
thing we can increase our
revenue stream but I'm frankly
maybe talk a little bit more
about that but we have staff of
all of these ports duty staff
and and monitor our commercial
traffic that comes into the
state next slide please.
Hopefully a lot of you have seen
our we call I. T. S. boards
intelligent transportation
system we've been able to use
those for COVID messages that
you've seen but most of the time
we want to share the information
with on those boards on traffic
conditions or other emergencies
happening we usually invest
about two million dollars a year
you can see on their some of the
investments we made this last
year but we greatly want to
expand this into the rural areas
so you'll see the majority of
these along the interstates in
in the Albuquerque Santa Fe area
we really want to get these
types of boards down to the
southeast part of the state and
other areas a lot of that has to
do with the broadband capability
since these do take that we
control all of these from
Albuquerque we can change the
message and in two or three
minutes or less so we can be
very up to date with the
information that we provide and
and we just want to continue to
live in our network in our use
of things and we want to focus
on some of the more rural areas
where it's a little bit harder
sometimes to get timely
information so we try and make
that investment with the
expansion of broadband we think
that's to be something that
we're able to do.
frankly may touch on this also
but I just wanna let you know we
do have an AV eight aviation
Division we you utilize F. A. A.
funding and we work with are
over fifty minutes of pool and
local airports we don't really
do much business with the
Albuquerque some poor but every
other airport we try and provide
them with funding for any
usually construction or capital
projects such as repairing the
runway building hangars those
type of things we don't get into
their operations but we think
it's important to support them
with infrastructure projects and
you can see in FY twenty the
budget there was a little over
sixty million so we do spend
with the FAA's help with money a
significant amount and invest a
significant amount in our
airports and I think having good
a network of airports is
important not only for that
local economy Representative
airport is but at the economy as
a whole with in New Mexico so
we're always looking for ways to
help support and next slide
please.
Traffic safety Frank talk about
this I do want to say you'll see
in a big push this summer for
the zipper merge as construction
is in the really be heating up
again when it gets warmer one of
the biggest delays we have is we
have to go from a two lane to a
one lane and and how that people
interact with that it's not
always clear really starting to
promote zipper merge we think
it's the most efficient way to
to get through the intersection
when there is a lot of people
we've seen a lot of delays on I.
forty with crashes or
construction I don't know how
that gets better without
expansion in that area which we
can talk about but we want to
try and be as efficient as
possible when we do have a
construction going from two
lanes to one and and certainly I
forty
west of Albuquerque is is
probably where we have the
biggest delays in traffic but
you'll see a big push to try and
educate the public on how the
zipper word marriage works and
how hopefully people will be
encouraged to do that when they
do get in those situations next
slide please.
This is just are fatalities
Mexico's traditionally
unfortunately in the top ten and
overall fatalities and alcohol
related fatalities also even
worse than that number one or
number two and pedestrian
related fatalities and in many
cases the pedestrian is the one
who is impaired we track all
that there is a statutory
mandate that all crashes
throughout the state come to D.
O. T. about fifty thousand a
year so we track all of the
crashes fatalities and keep
track of all those and look for
trends we also provide money
that Frank talk about to locals
to help combat the traffic
fatalities but we're at upwards
of four hundred every single
year with about a hundred and
thirty alcohol of those about
alcohol related fatalities so
I'm Frank go into more detail
about that but we that is
something in our top priority
that we look at as a building
transportation system
maintaining them but also trying
to keep them safe for our users
and now we trying to that both
engineering wise and behavior
whites and to get people to
drive a little bit safer next
slide please.
You can go on.
So I won't spend too much time
here just to let you know back
in January first when I took
over the department we're you're
at about a twenty one percent
vacancy rate we had five hundred
and twenty eight vacancies in
March right when the pandemic
hit we were down fifteen percent
so it made significant progress
in getting our vacancy rate down
obviously there was a hiring
freeze and and process that got
put in place in March we went
back up to twenty percent and
then you add in the the hundred
new positions we got on July
first and we were we were right
at twenty percent again I'm
happy to say that right now
we're back closer to a little
over fifteen percent again that
includes with the additional
hundred positions that we got in
July so we've made it once again
significant process progress
it's a little bit different
process not a little more
difficult to get positions
advertised into the system we're
hoping with in improve general
fund
The outlook that those kind of
bands will be lifted but we'll
have to wait and see but we
think we need to be down around
ten percent twelve percent to be
running at the most efficiently
we're always gonna have that the
vacancy rate there well people
are leaving and retiring and
other things but if we can get
down to ten percent we think
that's when we're running really
at an efficient level there's
some other things you know
injuries on the job injuries we
had fifty four works on injuries
thirteen and then these are the
number of claims that were filed
against the department like if
one of our trucks kicks up a
rock and you know cracks the
windshield or something like
that seven hundred sixty nine
claims were filed against
apartment last year just so you
have that number.
On the right hand side we've
greatly
improved and expanded our social
media footprint we are on
Twitter and Facebook or posting
on a daily basis those kind of
went down during the pandemic if
I don't know if a lot of you are
aware but our communication
director resumes went to the O.
H. from October first to January
first to help
with the pandemic and some of
the messaging there we got her
back a couple weeks ago on
January first and she was the
one who is doing a lot of the
Facebook and Twitter post so
those went down a little bit
while she was out that we have
greatly expanded our social
footprint and we're we're pretty
proud of that and and hopefully
you're seeing if you're on
Facebook or Twitter I'm a lot
more activity from our end next
slide please.
This is really the last I just
wanted to once again thank our
staff for all of the hard work
they've done they've been asked
to do things their way outside
their job description but we've
never said no and if any
Level has asked us in the city
has asked us any entity and
asked as we have not said no
we've tried to support in any
way possible and and a lot of
cases using our own funding to
help support that so it's just a
great tribute to our staff that
we have especially those field
person around and we're all
doing their job every day and
and I just want to recognize
them and and say there really
the the heart rate in the
cornerstone of our department
and and how things ultimately
get done so madam chair with
that I think that's the last
slide I want to make sure that
everybody has my cell phone I
know most of you do because I in
contact with you on a regular
basis but for those new folks
my cell phone is five oh five.
Two three one.
One eight two six for the new
folks and so feel free to give
me a call text me whatever you
need and I very sponsor get back
to and look forward to getting
to know you and in working with
you and I'd be happy to answer
any questions madam chair if you
want to go on to the next
presentation whatever works for
you.
Thanks so much Secretary is
there any are there any
questions for the secretary at
this moment would folks prefer
to move on to the next one.
Representative Powdrell you're
on.
Can you hear me yeah we can
hearing okay I'm we were talking
about when you went through the
A party presentation on ports of
entry.
What about the port of entry at
Amarillo.
Open I couldn't tell if it open
or closed.
are you talking about on are you
talking about San Juan yes yes
so Sanzone is open it's a twenty
four seven point so the ones
that are on I. twenty five and I
forty are open so that's and
then the Senate to this rent to
own San Juan Gallup those are
the busier ports especially the
ones along I. forty the one in
Tatum is a one on the side
that's not a hello okay thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
The surgery center both great to
see you this morning thank you
for the.
Reason Tatian.
The the question I have for you
but will first I'll just
compliment you on the department
again I know that you are
usually always.
Like us on the type top five
departments nation that
accomplish the most with with
the least amount of dollars and
and that's that's a pretty
amazing we were very grateful
for the great work that you in
your apartment do.
the question I have for you if
you could just talk a little bit
more about your you're up
bonding and the debt I know
that.
Of the last few years we were
looking forward to that balloon
payment
coming up for for the rail
runner debt mostly and and I and
I believe that was refinanced
maybe a year or two ago.
but he was kind of sure that the
details on that again and and
you mentioned that the I guess
in about four years we'll see a
big decrease in our our debt
payments if you could just go
into a little bit more detail on
that I'd appreciate it.
Yes madam chair and
representative partner Harper
yes so our debt payments right
now our over the next four years
are when you add all the funding
sources federal and state
anywhere from a hundred and
sixty to a hundred and eighty
million so for the next four
years we're gonna be paying
somewhere in that range it
fluctuates a little bit and then
in twenty twenty five it drops
significantly so we would gain
anywhere from seventy five on to
I think eighty five million
dollars so our payments will
drop and then they continue to
drop all the way to twenty
thirty two and I can provide you
with a chart that shows exactly
how much we would be paying
right now and in twenty thirty
two were completely out of debt
really in twenty thirty most of
our significant that is gone I
think the twenty thirty one and
twenty thirty two payments like
five million each for something
and so yes they're pretty
consistent going forward we have
about thirty nine million
dollars of a real runner debt
that we're continuing to pay
when secretary church was there
he refinanced that to get rid of
the cliff payment which was very
helpful and so we have a very
steady a real runner payment
going all the way into twenty
twenty four and then it drops a
little bit so
In twenty twenty five the
department sees is it we're
really looking forward to that
because we're gonna have some
capacity there either to put
that money into construction or
somewhere else no I will say we
do on a bond some money they're
still two hundred and thirty
four million dollars left of
great bonding authority
even if we were to bond that
entire amount which for us to do
we would not push our dad passed
the twenty thirty two marks were
not in a do a thirty year
of payment schedule we would do
a ten year payment schedule but
we even with that bond the new
bond payment that we would see
with that two hundred thirty
four million eight we would
still see significant gains in
twenty twenty five moving
forward and so when we get to
that bill it's it's in the come
through this committee all have
charts and everything to show
you exactly what we would be
paying without the bond in with
the bonding and that way you can
make a decision on how you want
to move forward but it if we can
get through these next four
years it looks like we'll be in
pretty good shape.
Yes thank you for that
and and remind me the a lot of
the.
debt payment is is
We would pay that was federal
dollars.
If we don't have that payment
can those federal dollars be
allocated elsewhere or or do we
lose those dollars.
we get a are apportionment from
FHWA which is usually around
four hundred fifty we can use
that for whatever we like
there's certain categories but
we have chosen to use the
hundred and thirty million
whatever it is for debt payments
so once that that payment goes
down then that frees up money to
use whatever else we wanted we
don't lose that much.
Right that's that's awesome
Okay so yeah I'm looking for
seeing how you propose to to go
forward with that I would just.
encourage you on the department
you know whatever we we bond out
something.
When you finally pay it all off
we paid for it two or three
times over
and if we have just paid cash or
or pay for without bonding
so you know it's a little not
dollars you have no having two
or three times as much row done
if we're for patient versus
doing it all at once I think
that's just the long game is it
is better that way so I I would
encourage you to you know I
understand some bonding is isn't
that is necessary but I like
hearing you saying that you're
you're not going to go up to
levels that we were in the past
will try to keep that at a at a
good place.
As well as you know I I support
you in that and keeping our
bonding is as low as possible.
Thank you madam chair senator
Munoz I I will the reason that
we want to use this remaining
bonded or is simply because
interest rates are low and we
just did our the swap and
interest rates were less than
one percent
and it's just I mean it's almost
like the money basically in the
sense that you're not paying two
or three times more you normally
what and so that's the reason
for this I think if we were to
buy on the entire two hundred
thirty four million we get about
three hundred million dollars
with proceeds and with all the
needs we have right now I think
that would be really beneficial
to to get us some money to get
us to the next four years so
that we can have a good
construction program or the next
four years twenty twenty five
hundred and free up a lot of
money in a we should be good
going forward there I'm not
interested in putting the
department and get any further
out than we already are which is
the twenty thirty twenty to
twenty thirty two time frame
when you see the payments and
stuff it'll give you a better
idea even with this money what
in good shape will be so I look
forward to having that
conversation in the bill comes
to the committee.
Thank you Secretary thank you
madam chair.
Representative Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation Mr
secretary
yes my sound quality okay
trouble in this location
yesterday and my okay.
That's great secretary under the
LESC framework and some
Dissipation of.
Additional funding for the
transportation department a
hundred million state route.
For local roads and hundred
fifty million for the state
roads do you have a of a
framework or plan as to how that
would be.
To use or have you.
Even started to consider that
opportunity yet.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Crowder yes we do
we actually have a list of
projects my district and we can
go in whatever direction we need
to go and so when when the
department was awarded four
hundred million in back in
twenty nineteen some of that was
used for major investment
projects these are projects that
you know would take two or three
years to get moving some of the
larger projects hundred million
of that was given to maintenance
projects things that we can get
done right away and then fifty
went to locals and so we're in
that position now where the pain
on how that money wants to be
spent is we can spend it that
way so last year you gave us a
hundred and thirty five million
and US that we spend that right
away and so we had projects that
that money's RD mostly spending
all the spent by September
thirtieth of this year
so with that hundred fifty
million dollars that we get we
could go bigger projects we to
go smaller quicker projects
we're in a position now where we
have shelf ready projects and we
could move in either direction I
think I want to do is look at
the big picture loans
particularly hundred fifty
million
the LFC budget which is right
now if we're able to on that two
hundred and thirty four million
which are hoping to do you know
how do we make those work
together so that we can plan
that out and not
to do that independently some
hoping to have a good idea of
you know whether this bond their
support for this new bonding of
the two hundred thirty four
million couple that with the one
fifty you kind of put some
projects together based around
that amount so that we can do
this comprehensively so I will
say the hundred million right
now that's in LFC budget for the
locals we're hoping that gets
put in the transportation
project fund that's the new fund
where it's competitive or we're
focused on shelf ready projects
will be advocating for that
And I think we've let the locals
know ahead of time that
hopefully that money will will
be coming through and they'll be
in a position to have good
projects ready for us the good
news is the fifty million that
you gave us in twenty nineteen
there was a lot of local
projects that we're ready on the
majority of that has already
been spent so it's not in some
cases like capital outlay works
it's around we really focused on
getting that the locals on
project at the the we ate we
knew they could do right away
and so we want to do the same
thing with this hundred million
if we can get in that fund.
Thank you Mr secretary should.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Secretary I'm do we
have any more questions from the
committee.
Great so thank you Secretary for
your presentation and are you if
we can have the next presenter
on Mallory.
It is promoted to the panelists
see should be popping up
shortly.
My.
B. and she needs to be the one
to present next and then I'll be
myself.
Good morning.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee today I would
just briefly president of our
latest on fund for custom.
So you can use can we okay
perfect thank you.
So this focus was prepared of
these generally and the building
review by the consensus revenue
estimating grew if we can just
move to the table thank you so
as secretary Seneal rural
anticipated though before all of
that is stated that some good
news also because even if people
on that because been affecting
some of the state or fund
revenue source uses these part
guys these model of the meeting
and what we had the loss to rely
so in particular he flew out the
cat in fiscal year these update
three duties the study out about
twenty twenty one and yet I'm
looking to apply in the
seventeen not Kollam and the.
By a ball with the forty million
dollars compared to the falcons
prepare on January twenty two
and the when the legislative
budget that was presented less
the of course that so yeah I'm
I'm competing get line seven do
not we
calm and so the focus but but
let's see of course was prepared
before the pandemic has been a
so we have Steve for casting
doubt some revenue low sis but
as mentioned before in July we
expect the does losses to be
much more pronounced the and
those losses needed that been
the way we expecting them to to
to to be so all that was mainly
because of some how did it get
the building blocks of the plan
then make it as being partially
offset by the federal stimulus
bekerja so for instance by the
well on the road the dollars
check and the six under that the
sure knowledge that weekly
unemployment benefits what also
by the sheet that the consumer
spending shift from services the
goods that of course than to be
more fact the pendant the and so
consequently our water
commercial bay could revenues
have suffered less than what we
initially expected the.
Then if you focus or not if we
move on now of fiscal year
twenty twenty two avenues of
from me and you can see the
fiscal year twenty to a fund
according to revenues and yet
I'm I came looking up line seven
do not call them all on for
because the R. four hundred
ninety three.
Going to meet in the loss of
which is about the twenty
MediaOne dollars above what we
had the in July twenty two and
the soul yeah I'm cool fading to
align seventeen coral all we
line seventeen calm and
and if your real quickly for
folks who are having a hard time
reading
Mario is going to adjust the
screen but you also have the
option I'm at the top of your
screen to view the to view the
screen at a much larger
It is that you can see the the
the slide much larger if you you
can make those adjustments on
your side as well sorry about
that ought to go ahead thank you
we'll talk so the I believe this
is good news for fiscal year
twenty to
and anybody could have so
overall I want to speak station
is that the fund then make we've
continue to I need reading off
the low income housing those and
with some all continue to keep
unemployment high especially in
the service sector so and that
will put the nation on and at
the state level then if we just
focus on our four major revenue
sources we tried gossip enough
especially few a lot weight the
sense and they could
registration anything but look
at get gasoline gasoline Revenue
all of which is be the that I've
annual source that most of the
software that the the the
pandemic of course so is
expected to continue to software
deep and then Micah and that
these because of of course
business restrictions and
closures and and less commuting
so in fiscal year twenty one
that these revenue sources
expect to drop to about one and
a ten million dollars and then
to slide to the call that in
fiscal year twenty two of then
if you look at the odds of a
The passenger bacon Revenue
sauce with cheese bacon
registration not deserving of
sources expect the to be pretty
stable law on our own eighty two
eighty six million dollars
between fiscal year twenty two
MPs can you have twenty five and
then the if we look at the water
commercial bacon revenues that
this we mentioned before out
special few well at and we the
stand so
As mentioned before these two
what I'm into sources of
building some all positivity box
the the
by an increased demand for goods
any comments say so so the good
news is that the out of office
baked the the to show some
moderate growth in fiscal year
of twenty one and as well in
fiscal year twenty to and then
to grow off the higher rates of
in the following of these kind
yes Sir.
if we move to the next page of
these presentation now.
Communities Bajor we and the for
cross the for all the are in New
York the restricted funds so and
as you can see from he had a
pretty much all the funds would
see some decline in fiscal year
twenty one in fiscal year twenty
tool with the highway
Infrastruktur Fund in the
ideation fond among the ones
that would be lost affect the
the and it being the other way
the most affected by the fund
then you can the only exception
exception you have the the the I
want to point out to you is the
local governments Fonda which we
locked all the stop the
the CV anger in fiscal year
twenty two and yet you can look
at the line go to the pool so
these fun would start receiving
about forty one million dollars
so of additional revenue from
the motor vehicle excise tax
distribution.
So this is our one forecast for
today next page we jobs that
show you are one being given a
child which basically
presents for of all our main
fixed broadband a description of
the expect of beach tax program
in the rates docks rates in the
beneficiaries of so diss all I
have for today in the I was
simple places but perhaps when
not of modernity we let we
finish up at presentation.
Get out at yes Mallory can come
on and then we'll we'll do
questions after.
Madam chair representative
Mallory months not S. and the
administrative services director
and I oversee the budget I will
be focusing on column B. column
a right now is what was loaded
and FY twenty one budget as of
July first column B. is what was
submitted as our budget request
in September so column B. line
number two we've requested a
hundred and seventy one point
one million dollars in cable
four hundred and twenty one
point seven million dollars in
contractual services three
hundred and sixty five point
seven million dollars in other
costs which include debt
servicing requests for total
budget request of nine hundred
and fifty eight point seven nine
hundred fifty point five million
dollars this is a thirty one
point eight million dollar
difference compared to our
budget in FY twenty one.
We have decreased our F. T. E.'s
by thirty seven FTEs.
The way the revenue are the
budget works is that line number
eleven calling me out of the
nine hundred and fifty eight
point five million dollars four
hundred seventy eight point
seven million dollars is made up
of state road fund seventy five
point three million dollars is
made up of restricted funds six
point four million dollars which
is line numbers nineteen is a
coming from the TRD to fund the
ports of entry.
And then four hundred and four
point one million dollars is for
federal sources.
We do have for programs that the
Department support the first
program is the project design
and construction program this is
our construction program our
federal highway program in
existence service program at
this time on this program is
decreased by twenty one point
five million dollars our second
program is highly appropriations
program where the districts live
that budget has decreased by six
point six million dollars our
third program is our business
support program and that program
has decreased by one point one
million dollars and our last
program is a little programs
which has decreased by two point
five million dollars.
Keep in mind the department does
go through budget negotiations
with DFA and LFC we are
currently going through that
process as we speak so more than
likely that thirty one million
dollars will go up by the and by
the time we present to you our
final budget in February the
major differences between FY
twenty one in FY twenty two was
the elimination of twenty five
point nine million dollars and
you'll see that online number
twenty eight column C. we have
reduced our FY twenty one twenty
two budget by this amount so far
and then
there was a decrease of road
fund of thirty eight point six
million but as loud explained
that thirty eight point six
million has now changed and then
there was an increase of the
thirty four point seven million
for the local government road
Fund and that madam chair that
concludes the presentation on
budget and revenues the pages to
follow breaks down each program
more in detail but I stand for
questions.
Thank you Mallory I'm all open
it up to the committee are there
any questions
For louder Mallory.
Madam chair go ahead this is Tom
I'm I I just wanted to let the
committee know that there's a
generally Bennett technical
group that has been meeting for
gosh twenty years or so it's
it's been run by Charles tarpon
for Angie Mosier prior to that
for many many years
And what that consists of is it
consists of the agency their
revenue Laura Mallory plus
several of the other agency
people involved with budget as
well as usually the secretary
and some of the W. secretary
city at and then the DFA
department of finance to who
prepares the executive
recommendation and they're
they're madam are as well as the
legislative finance council
member Conner Jorgensen
and and and myself for on behalf
of this committee and so the
technical group needs they have
several meetings where they look
over the differences between the
executive recommendation the
legislative recommendation and
and the but agency request at
this point we've met once and
essentially the differences
between the LESC and the agency
and DFA are are are pretty
insignificant the bottom line
being the same in all programs
essentially the differences are
moving a little bit of salary
and benefits where where the
ball the LFC and DFA felt they
were over budget into other cost
allowing them to be used for
contracts
and so at this point the
everything is is we pretty well
aligned the question then
becomes is adding an additional
money for the new revenue
estimates which is roughly about
twenty million twenty million
point seven something like that
and so so what we'll do is we'll
have another technical group
meeting on this Thursday and and
from that we'll find out what
you know what exactly the
differences in the.
Money that needs to at it be
added into for the revenue
adjustment as well as looking at
any of the fund balances that
that are currently in the agency
and re budgeting or reallocating
those and then with that what
will happen is is will come
before the committee and go over
these these differences if you
will get your input on where
that money should go or how that
money should be divided up and
then from there are
House Bill three will be as
already been dropped as a down
the bill but then from there
then House Bill three will get
developed the goal is to have it
to the chair and into the
committee by I believe it's the
eighth of February the ninth of
February it's for a vote in
which at which point then it
becomes an amendment or
committee recommendation that
then goes into house bill two
and so that's where the whole
budget processes at this point
and I just wanted to share that
with the committee I've been
meeting with the chair
several times on on various
issues so that you know yet you
have a better understanding of
of where everything is that then
of course you know as a
committee you can accept the
tactical recommendation or or do
your own thing the process has
worked for many years in that it
really you know I it it works
with all sides in trying to keep
this you know a balanced budget
that lives within the revenue
and so with that madam chair I
just thank you for letting me
Madam.
Absolutely time thank you so
much and thank you allowed and
Mallory for your presentations
before we move on does anybody
have any other questions.
Okay so next Mario if you can
let Franklin and David in both
will be presenting on an
overview of public
transportation programs
and the real division so transit
rail.
Franklin would you like to
begin.
This is the current slide
frankly David to start on.
want to make sure that we're
we're on the right page thank
you so much you madam chair this
is Franklin Garcia I'm the
mobile director here with the
duty and I'll be going over some
of our program areas our little
bit includes our aviation
division our ports of entry our
transit and rail and air traffic
safety division as you see on
your agenda Dave Harris will be
going over the transit and rail
portion after I finished my
presentation so it'll jump in
after I'm done.
The next slide.
Starting out with our traffic
safety division it's created
statute in it's a main goals to
reduce crashes injuries and
deaths on roadways statewide
using multiple programs and
projects and the focus is on DWI
protection for people making
sure they're wearing their seat
belts and to make sure children
are buckled up in in the
appropriate car seats distracted
driving speeding and safety for
all road road users and also
ensuring that we have proper
data as a working on data
improvements as a secretary a
sample mentioned before all law
enforcement agencies submit
three to four press reports to
the DOT we take that information
and put it in a usable format so
that we can address and identify
areas where we need to target
and and do some initiatives the
majority of our funding is
federal and it comes from a
national highway trade traffic
safety administration we do have
some other state does the funds
to help us meet our goals next
slide.
So the traffic safety division
putting the the projects that we
have in in the usable area to
describe how we do our programs
we have our alcohol impaired
driving programs we have our own
protection programs police
traffic Services is our general
counsel which is it deals with
speeding aggressive driving
other driving behaviors that
we're trying to address we
oversee the motorcycle safety
program and the motorcycle
training program we have a
pedestrian bicycle safety
program we have a robust media
and marketing campaign program
that's in line with our high
visibility enforcement and we
have oversee the traffic rectors
programs as I mentioned all the
data that comes in from law
enforcement reports is put into
a usable format and then we
share that with our engineers
and other program areas to try
to address the prices and and
injuries we also are able to use
some of our funding for planning
administration so some of that
money is able to pay for some
positions next slide.
So we get asked a lot hello the
COVID pandemic affected our
enforcement program and so all
the funding that we utilize that
we put out to about eighty five
percent law enforcement agencies
statewide and comparing FY
nineteen FY twenty if you see on
the far left of the number of
checkpoints that was conducted
in FY nineteen was for twelve in
FY twenty there was two hundred
seventy two checkpoints all
there was a reduction in the
majority of that was due to
manpower issues law enforcement
officers were pulled in other
directions so they could all be
together and and set up
checkpoints as they had in
previous years however if you
look at the next column you see
that the number of patrol hours
actually
Maintains those those hours in
actually increased so
so we really get activity out
there next call so the number of
due to a guy rest was about
nineteen hundred in FY nineteen
were about it eighteen hundred
in FY twenty and moving on to
the slide you see other
citations.
Other cats all there's about
forty thousand of the citations
issued in FY nineteen and about
thirty six thousand FY twenty
speeding citations I know there
is a big issue statewide and
nationwide where people are
concerned that speeding crashes
went up us being involved
crashes because a lot of people
realize law enforcement wasn't
available as often as they
happened in the past well in New
Mexico we did see an increase in
number of speeding citations for
FY twenty FY two FY nineteen FY
twenty and the total number of
activities on the far right
column you can see that we
didn't stay pretty close our FY
nineteen numbers we did have law
enforcement to spend some of
their activities during the July
June or July area
because of the Covid duties that
they were pulled to other areas
but in comparing New Mexico to
what we're talking to other
states and our neighboring
states in our region they did
see a big drop off on
enforcement activity so we're
looking at our law enforcement
partners were able to maintain a
pretty robust activity using our
over time and using our federal
funding so next slide.
So combined with a high
visibility enforcement we also
have a high visibility Education
and media campaign so this was a
image from our summer campaign
it was done using
S.
animation obviously during the
COVID we could have a production
company get come in and have
people interacting so we went to
animation we came up with this
campaign we have a high
visibility enforcement of that
we put out through high
visibility awareness I would put
out through our normal
television radio and also robust
Social media so that is a
complete conjunction and that
high visibility enforcement in
high visibility
Where this is been shown to up
affect driver behavior it's a
been validated that the
scientific process to address
driving behavior so next slide.
So you may see some of the slide
before the bottom on the far
left on the gray in the red bars
we go only back to nineteen
eighty and look at our data as
far as overall crash fatalities
and alcohol ball fatalities and
if you look at the gray bar down
in nineteen eighty going up to
the top you see we see a
consistent downward trend in the
number of alcohol fatalities and
then the red bar you see we have
seen a consistent downward trend
prices two thousand three I'm
overall fatalities but we try to
address that and but I putting
our resources where they're
needed on the far right you can
see where we've identified some
hot spots where we want to
definitely address activities
whether they're D. W. I. with
their speeding whether they're
people not wearing seat belts
and we try to partner with our
law enforcement there to try to
address those issues so next
slide.
As the district wide school
safety program so we definitely
work on education and we also
train and import collaborate
with law enforcement agencies we
share all our data with our
different engineers and partners
community leaders pedestrian
advocates our staff works with
the mid regional council
governments they've been working
with the Albuquerque vision zero
program and working with other
NPOs and RPOs regarding
pedestrian bicycle safety action
plans we have coordinated with
the Los crucis safe routes to
school based on the pandemic
obviously the safe routes to
school we would private educate
we'd be educating the parents
the teachers the students on
walkable communities and how to
safely navigate to and from
school we work with the
adventure cycling staff the city
of Los crucis grow up there
transistors training the the the
drivers on pedestrian bicycle
safety information one of the
items that we do is we always
into the state statutes that
exist in New Mexico regarding
pedestrian bicycle safety that
is one of the requirements of
the federal funds that we have
to use our the district money to
describe the statutes that exist
and so we try to incorporate
that into our different
campaigns we also through our
bicycle pedestrian training and
all of our driver education
instructor certification courses
so all the driver instructors
when they take the initial
trading or re certification gets
bicycle pedestrian training
information so they can take
back to their team driving
students we have collaborated
with local communities schools
and media outlets throughout the
year on bicycle safety education
efforts the campaign that we use
is called look for me and we do
media had throughout the year
doing different outreach we do
put items in the daily local at
UNM and also New Mexico State
University newspaper we try to
target those areas where we know
there's a lot of pedestrian
bicycle activity we also do a
lot about reached near the
universe.
In New Mexico Hospital where
there's a lot of pedestrian and
bicycle activity going on.
And in March of this year we
coordinated with the Albuquerque
police departments and
distribute a lot of traffic
safety information to motorists
during routine traffic stops and
to pedestrians during the trolls
whether law enforcement so that
include information on the in
the past information in bike
information as well as the
statute and and travel safety
trip tips we also been working
with the planning division
collaboration within the
department working on pedestrian
safety action plan and that is
currently in draft but is being
out for public comment so we
we've been working on it a
department wide pedestrian
safety action plan so next
slide.
So here's some images on some of
the different activities that
Department into utilizes to
address bicycle pedestrian
safety initiatives next slide.
So you guys can see this the top
left gives you a breakdown of
the total crashes there's about
forty five thousand crashes per
year on New Mexico road that are
reported to law enforcement of
those about six hundred are
pedestrian Paul so that makes up
about one one point three
percent total crashes that are a
pedestrian mall but on the the
right top right it
Thank you see that the as far as
fatalities of the four hundred
twenty five fatalities in twenty
nineteen eighty the three were
pedestrian vault and that makes
up about twenty percent of our
total fatalities so obviously
the pedestrian fatalities are
over represented as far as
pedestrian fatalities in our
overall fatality crash numbers
on the bottom left our bicycle
involved crashes again the forty
five thousand prices were per
year and we can go back looking
for the past five six years we
see about three hundred seventy.
Bicycle crashes in New Mexico
roads and that makes up close to
one percent of our total crashes
and then on the right you see
that the the bicycle fatalities
on New Mexico roads and those
numbers fluctuate
And so you see last year there
was line up bicycle fatalities
and that makes about one point
two percent of our total
fatalities so the next slide.
Point of entry Division like
touch a little bit on this it
does generate revenue for the
department and our road fund
through our permits there's a
way this is permanent we have
weight distance program that
that describes how the permits
are distributed in the
requirements in the limitations
on the permits we have treated
deal tax permits oversized and
overweight permits and like you
said it generates about a
hundred million for the road
fund annually Exide.
So here's a list of where our
ports of entries are we do have
for twenty four hour point of
entry
we do have some up nine twenty
for our ports of entry that have
various hours based on traffic
counts and things like that so
they work different hours of the
week and different hours of the
day and as Mike mentioned we
have some opportunity to
identify other ports of entry
that we've bill that might help
us generate some revenue so bond
and the Cedarville port of entry
are some future options for the
department.
So talking about taking over the
point of entry permits sales
back in twenty sixteen you see
in twenty fifteen NDPS was in
charge of the program there was
about nine million dollars a
nine point six million revenue
collected and about four point
six revenue collected on Revenue
and also dealing with a weight
distance tax and then twenty
sixteen you see it all the way
through twenty nineteen the
numbers have consistently gone
up as duties taken over that
responsibility and DPS canal
focus on the the enforcement and
inspections we did have a drop
in twenty twenty due to the
COVID we were able having to
suspend the sales a permit to
keep the conversation industry
moving through the state and so
we did see those numbers drop
off but they did rebound and we
did get close to our twenty
twenty numbers so the drop off
in twenty twenty was due to the
pandemic.
Next slide.
Aviation division as a as
secretary Santa mentioned we
usually get about thirty million
thirty five million a year from
FAA that goes to our general
aviation airports throughout the
state and in FY twenty.
With the cares Act money it and
also the FAA money that money
and jumped up to about sixty one
million that went to airports
about nineteen million of that
went to the sun port which they
are operated by the Albuquerque
City of Albuquerque but the
other fifty plus airports mmhm
in our aviation Division words
with that at with those airports
to work on infrastructure
improvements next slide.
And there's a map of where the
locations of all the fifty plus
airports are throughout the
state.
Next slide.
So that was all I had will stand
for questions madam chair and
members of the committee I'll
let Dave president and if
there's questions now or if you
want to move forward we can
stand for questions.
Great we do have someone with
questions Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Frank and thank you for what you
sent me during the interim
committees to questions
in light of the potential for
the legalization of cannabis is
the traffic safety division
exploring impairment from
cannabis as opposed to just
alcohol impairment are you
laying any kind of ground work
or.
Exploration for that.
Thanks for the question madam
chair and Representative Gary.
We have been tracking
Fatalities in crashes that are
due to a drug or impaired
driving due to drugs we do have
programs that are out there that
exists we have a drug
recognition expert or drug DRT
program that law enforcement
training on how to identify
different areas for drug use as
far as if fatalities and also on
the blood drive we do track that
through our partners at
scientific lab division so we do
lots of law enforcement training
as far as how to identify drug
use and things like that we do
we would plan on working out
with law enforcement on any item
that they would need there have
been bills that have been
presented that would work on
some per se limits on how much
drugs can be in your system so
those are areas that have been
developed in other states and
been utilized in other states
well what's best for New Mexico
is difficult to determine but if
these bills do pass we would
have opportunities that we would
have funding that will go
towards enforcement of different
activities plus an awareness
campaign that will go talking
about the dangers of violations
and the penalties for those
different behaviors.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Franklin I one more question at
the point of entry
are there then D. O. T.
employees and then there are
some still of public safety
department employees.
Madam chair and rested here yes
so we have a symbiotic
relationship with the with our
partners at GPS law enforcement
they have the transportation
specters make sure the vehicles
brakes tires all windshield
things like that are in safe
operation they're not overweight
over the allowable permit use
and if they are they can be
cited so we do have the PS staff
that are in there we have
transportation staff so there is
enforcement arm they're
obviously due to we aren't that
enforcement arm but we do build
the permits so we keep Commerce
working keep industry moving and
Long person make sure that
they're.
Following the regulations and
more.
Thank you very much that's it
Madam chairwoman.
You representative are there any
other questions from the
committee.
Great thank you so much for your
presentation I really
appreciated David if you wanna
go ahead and and begin.
A good morning Jeremy all
members of the committee on
again Harris transit rail
division director of DOTA.
we can go to the next slide the
transit route Division
is basically the.
The conduit for which we support
and promote and fund multimodal
transportation and public
transit throughout the state
whether be technical assistance
direct funding
we support the development of
transit ride sharing is viable
choices in New Mexico we
administer federal transit
grants funding for planning
transplanting as well as a
direct services we oversee the
New Mexico DOT parking ride
inner city bus service which
runs throughout the state
operations real metro we managed
rel honor service
we can drive participate in
transit route planning
activities we assess local
governments to establish RTD's
region travel districts and
systems are TV's the plan to
coordinate implement a service
and we also in our real bureau
administering the DOT's rail
grade crossing safety
improvement program next slide.
This is just a map of the the
transit public transit services
throughout the state there is
some someone's of.
Transit service in every county.
In New Mexico except for four
counties of catcher and Sierra
the Baca Guadalupe so there's
some semblance in all of in
every county for and for such a
a rural state
we have a very robust transit
program especially considering
we're the fifth largest state by
land area with about you know
two point one million people
so all state all counties except
for have transit service next
slide please.
So obviously you've been reading
in the paper and hearing on the
news about how the pandemic has
affected us all but especially
public transit
so do so I wanted to just
highlight the things that were
happening in New Mexico despite.
They're building a thirty four
percent decrease overall between
FY nineteen and FY twenty and
public transit we went from in
FY nineteen there was about
fourteen million trips in the
state and in twenty we want them
to about nine point two million
when the pandemic hit March and.
So that was almost about fifty
percent of the year we look at a
lot of our federal transit
programs on of the federal
fiscal year so to start in
October and ends in September so
it's almost half of the year so
so with all that we accounted
for those nine point two million
trips and there are a lot of
benefits from that sixty one
point five million vehicle miles
reduced sixty one point million
vehicle miles traveled would
have otherwise been probably in
a.
Standalone vehicle eliminated
twenty nine point four tons of
CO two emissions reduce gasoline
consumption by three million
gallons next slide please.
Also.
During this year we met the FRA
deadline for positive train
control the implementation of
Rio metro did a great job of
implementing this method
deadlines the end of December we
work in concert with that
throughout over the past number
of years to get funding we
brought in.
The department of provided real
metro state infrastructure bank
loan to assist with meeting some
of the match requirements of the
federal funding that we work
hard to get from federal
railroad administration and
federal transit administration
so when services back up and
running we will have a fully
implemented positive train
control system on the New Mexico
rail runner line as for the
federal regulations
most transit agencies were
prepared to provide a full range
of services with COVID of going
on we provided them with safety
guidance videos training and
resource tools conflict
management de escalation for
transit drivers and supervisors
training as well we develop PSAs
and guidance on how to ride
public transit during the brand
pandemic and we did a surveys as
well
next slide please.
So as part of this many transit
agencies provided expansion of
eligible services which we
applied for under FTAs emergency
relief provisions so they didn't
just have to
Give a person a trap they could
go and pick up groceries
medications and so forth and
help out some of those those
TransCanada all who didn't even
want to go out so they were able
to do some of those
errands for people as part of a
an eligible expense during this
emergency relief.
And then also
Coordination with department of
health we provide emergency
transportation services for
COVID nineteen related
activities so we're coordinating
with G. O. H. and providing
trips for people who are just
recovered from COVID to work at
a care facility or taking people
from
their home to a COVID facility
after they've they found out
they they have of COVID a lot of
these trips are in the
Albuquerque area and a lot of
these trips are for from tribal.
Tribal lands to care facilities.
Throughout the state so we've
we've we've provided a lot of
help with that besides all the
other help that all our
that our staff that secretary
Santa talked about that we're
providing directly
through our staff this is that
we contracts for and pay for
with the funding we receive from
the federal government.
We also have contactless payment
ready for launch by the New
Mexico GOC parking ride once the
star faring charging affair with
we've been running a fair free
during the pandemic carrying in
order to ease to to ease some of
the efforts by those essential
workers who need to use the
service and then also with the
assistance of the care Sanchez
COVID a COVID a coronavirus Aid
release and Economic Security
Act which came out earlier in
the year in March
earlier last year transitions
he's already in staff for
normalization so they didn't
lose workers were able to pay
people we were able to pay for
maintenance all staff even
though revenues might have been
down on the fair side or or
locally to help sustain those
programs.
Next slide please.
So the care funds in general we
received I'll just deal with the
top line and the other
information is there for you as
well to take a look at received
over a hundred and thirty two
million dollars and Care Act
funds for transit purposes
obviously the.
The majority of those funds
S. eighty million went to the.
So the Albuquerque area for
eighty to ride it real metro
regional transit district
and of the four smaller urban
areas Los crucis Santa Fe in
Farmington.
As well as Los Lunas which is
part of Rio metro they received
fifteen point seven million and
there's the you can see the
break out of the house and rural
transit we received about thirty
six point four million of those
funds and the these are
equivalent to about.
Two point nine years of of
funding that by formula that
these agencies received from the
federal government FTA.
we've of.
All of these phones have been
encumbered by every other of
these agencies and
in the rural areas we spent
about it's about ten months of
costs and expenditures we've
tracked and we we spend about
thirty five percent of these
funds in the rural areas other
traveling that in the urban
areas about twenty percent
expended but it's it's tracking
as per normal and these funds
have an expansion of eligibility
to be spent on PPE and safety
equipment and other types of
services that are over comment
related next slide please.
recently a crystal funds came
out Corona virus responsible
we've supplemental appropriate
procreation sack of twenty
twenty one these were intended
for really the large transit
agencies throughout the country
there's about twenty of them
really large funds and was.
It was intended to help them
meet all the revenue a decrease
that they've had over the last
year
and the only agency in New
Mexico that actually receive
these because it was based on
some data from twenty eighteen
and we sort of local funds that
are put in your overall
operating expenditures the only
area that received any funding
under this act of was Santa Fe
at one point eight million so
Santa Fe is the recipient of
those with a little portion of
that going to the north central
regional transit district
which provide service in the
smaller urban areas.
Our next slide.
So I've also provided a number
slides with additional
information resources for
training videos.
information on rural transit
parking ride Roadrunner R. N. M.
gov ample program in the highway
rail grade crossing improvements
program
we don't we could stop here for
now and I can take questions.
chair Rubio and members of the
committee madam chair David I
have Representative Crowder and
then Representative Powdrell all
all you'll you'll be able.
Thank you madam chair it just
one question regarding.
Revenue that that might come
into directly to the department
of transportation from the
railroads or our airlines it I
just want to self ordering are
we receiving any franchise fees
or use of easement fees right
away seize.
Are the rails of the.
dissipating in the state with
the fence out were you fans of
cattle off the highways are
often is is is there any monies
that flow directly into
transportation in any of those
areas.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative
madam chair members of the
committee
many of the if they're on a
highway were away
or rail right of way you know
there are funds available and in
those part of the usual typical
eligible funds that you could
use for protecting of Rep Rod
Stewart high the right way
and those are those are part of
it typically on the real side
when we're fencing
our right of way off we're not
charging fees for that
but you know there is there are
fees at times charge for
licensing where
someone will you know put and
fiber or wireless to water
pipeline connections under our.
That answer question
Representative somewhat yes I
I'm working.
Interested in is there any
revenue being generated to the
department of transportation
from the railways.
Or from the airlines directly
into your budget.
That Representative there are
there are some fees aware of the
plate like right right L. BNSF
will pay gross ton miles on the
rail runner line.
the on that line but otherwise
is those lines are owned by the
the class one freight rail
companies
and you know they own so really
we we work with them where our
high with a our highway grade
crossings crossed their property
which is is the rail line so
there there isn't
significant amount of funding
coming from the but there is
some revenue generated okay
thank you for that one final
question madam chair you said
you work with them when our
roadways crossed their rail line
is is that would imply to me
that they have seniority or or
senior all rights there.
Do any of the state roads or
interstates have senior rights
for the railway.
Pays for the privilege of
crossing the state highway.
that's a great cross question
representative madam chair so as
many of you know you know
reliance in part to a large
respect the make may predated
many of the roads we have so.
I'm just going back centuries
Representative rail the rail
lobby has been very strong and
powerful so there is there is a
bit of a a skewing of your
perspective that you need to
look at when you see a rail line
so so for instance
Representative line that runs
through the Santa Fe rail yard
even though Santa Fe owns that
property there's a rail line and
it's it's pretty mas exclusive
entitlement that that rail line
Santa Fe needs to ask for
permission to cross their
property even though even though
it's their property and because
it's a rail so it's a really
it's a different perspective you
have to have when you look at
rail and roads because most of
us are familiar with roads and
understand how the that property
arrangement may work but when
our state highways crossing a
rail line it's not owned by us
yes that's that that's the the
pejorative of of that route
really.
Thank you I I will tell you
through the through the process
you've been very helpful thank
you for that thank you madam
chair.
Representative Representative
Powdrell Culbert thank you madam
chair I'm just curious going
back to the
hundred and thirty two million
plus that was received from
care.
Of those funds.
Yes I hope in what seems like
the highs.
Of the whole COVID pandemic any
of those dollars left over how
are you all going to be able.
To use them or is that
designated how you can use them
only for whatever whatever.
I'm just curious Madam chair
representative the excellent
question but I didn't get into
the detail on so you might have
heard of the news that oh my god
we got a spans of many of these
cares Fund Act funds before they
lapse the transit funds are
totally different all the
transit funds never lacks there
are a hundred percent of it they
don't require any match so there
are a hundred percent funding
they could be used for any
eligible activity so
There is no waxing funds and
they can be used for anything
and that their neck their not
being is going to be a call back
so to speak by the federal
government as per the statutory
language in the cares Act so
excellent question
Representative Madam okay so if
let's say Los crucis area Los
crucis the receive those funds
will they be
they can be read that what
you're saying is they can be.
We designated for anything that
Los crucis wants to do with
them.
And if so then how does that
affect.
The budget all of the entities
that received cares dollars.
Or does it is it a plus or minus
I guess the question I'm asking
to us.
Madam chair representative in
the example of Los crucis so
they could be spending
They're all their cares funds
and a hundred percent for as
long as they have them and the
funds that typically fund their
local funds which are typically
provided doesn't match at fifty
percent for operating can be
used for other things in Los
crucis and that's a local
decision so those those other
funds that match those cares
funds can be used to be re
budgeted within their local
budget
on the rural side we're funding
ministration and operating of
all the rural transit agencies
throughout the state at a
hundred percent
for two years so far and we're
going to see how the funding
lasts and how it's going so
those local agencies as well re
budget those funds or they can
utilize those funds to provide
additional services if you need.
Okay and utilize those funds for
different services with any of
the entities that receive cares
dollars.
Will that affect.
How much money they will get
from.
The state budget.
Hello from us that clearly you
the but I I understand your
question representative madam
chair
so there is no recurring
state funding for public
transit.
okay don't provide any of the
match the only the only
state funding that goes into
public transit primarily is for
New Mexico DOT parking.
I I knew that the.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Madam chair one more thing.
I'd like to thank joy for us
that that
recreational marijuana question
that's that's something that I'm
I'm really concerned about as to
If recreational marijuana it
gets through the legislature
And everything that I've looked
that is affected everything in
transportation so I'm really
pleased to hear that we're
looking ahead to see the impact
and try to understand some of
the impact that it has because.
All the states that have have
passed recreational.
have definitely had an impact on
law enforcement and traffic and
traffic accidents so
Representative thank you for
asking that question on my
behalf.
It thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative are
there any other questions.
The committee.
Now okay great well I'm thank
you all for your presentations I
really appreciate you all taking
the time and to the committee
thank you all for making this
home first day of Cherry of of a
seamless one so I think for for
now we we are done for today's
Committee meeting Thursday we
will be getting presentations
from all of the districts and so
we will any information that is
sent out to us prior to that
will certainly try to get that
out to you all as soon as
possible but with that I a would
like it's I will well and the
committee now unless there's any
other questions from from
committee members.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair secretary.
Did you.
Indication do you have those
booklets available.
Yes Madam chair representative
if you don't have it already we
will send Tom a Tom church the
electronic version of our annual
report and then he can provide
that to you or Franklin pry has
your information you can send
that to directly but all of this
is in the in the format and
we're happy to get that to test
okay actually Madam chairwoman
and secretary we have it in the
format I just happen to like
that but what thank you madam
chair representative we are in
the process of printing them out
so soon as I get a hard copy
will make sure you get one thank
you.
Thank you well thank you so much
Secretary for joining us this
morning and for presenting and
for everyone to join us who
joined us through the zoom
session we appreciate it and
we'll we'll see you all on
Thursday.
Thank you madam chair thank you
everyone thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair would feel
like we waivers.
