Senator Gallegos.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Nibert.
Your.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm here.
Representative Zamora here.
Representative Gallegos.
Madam vice chair.
Here.
And madam chair blue is excused
madam chair we have a quorum
with one excused and seven
present.
to excuse rather seven present.
We.
Madam chair yes when you're
ready.
I am ready let's begin our
meeting madam chair before we
start to gender as a first order
of business I'd like to move
house bill one sixty two that's
the PR a bill off the table and
make it the next order of
business I have a proposed
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty two.
Madam chair.
I've had to call all right need
to come work on my computer so
I'm not going to be able to
access that bill gets brought up
on on Monday get brought up if
we do it right now I'm not going
to have in front.
I think what I can do is because
to roll over I think I can
explain it pretty simply it only
makes a few changes and then
Representative Nibert can be be
up on the floor I missed
Representative dental I think
the committee substitute if
that's okay.
Sharp Representative please
proceed all right so the two oh
two number is point two one nine
seven seven one point eight
so it should wait will
eventually get it we all have
these technical problems I am
very sympathetic to
representative Nibert on the US
I've also alerted the original
co sponsor Representative
Anderson and I would ask madam
chair that he be bigger part is
right now if you.
Order yes.
Do we not need to vote on the
motion to break it off the table
first.
You know that's a good question
I don't think so but I don't
mind doing the vote if that's a
concern I think we can move to
bring it off the table I don't
have a problem that I thought.
I thought the motion I think the
motion was to to bring that to
the general now we could go to
not bring it off the table yeah
you know what I think you're
right in the motion yeah I think
that's right okay we do it okay
we can right.
Okay committee members let's go
ahead and take a vote sure sure
take role yes madam chair I want
to point of order here first of
all we have a committee sub none
of us have even seen at is there
analysis on that committee set
up.
Yes there is.
Okay are you I don't know let me
give the computer that we can
find this up and and look at it.
I'm sure if I could yes let me I
I want to be accurate about this
is what I understand so
Legislative Council are
circulated the committee sought
to the staff and the analyst on
Saturday whether there is a
written analysis that I don't
know but I know they have and
have had it for more than twenty
four hours so we've met the
purpose the rule to make sure
that they have.
But whether they've done an
analysis not don't know couldn't
it.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative the other
point that I think that we need
to discuss is to bring it off
the table you had to have voted
in the majority.
That is not true Mr I and the
reason I know that
Madam chair representative is
because I actually made that
mistake the very first year I
was there I voted against a bill
thinking I would vote against it
to bring it off the table that
rule applies on the floor it
does not apply to commit so you
don't find anybody can bring it
off the table and committee
that's correct.
Well the.
Thank you madam chair I think.
What's required if you have a
motion for reconsideration.
The motion for reconsideration
requires someone who voted in
the majority to change their
mind if you have a motion to
bring it off the table
I don't believe that the it
requires any particular vote on
that.
So I'm committee members can we
proceed and take have the court
take role.
On your motion to take off the
table so madam can we be clear
that on the table in motion now
we're lifting it off the table a
motion to guests will bring off
the table is that correct.
Yes okay.
Madam chair I I want the
committee to understand that I
have gone through and review
this again
you know after the committee and
I have a lot more questions and
I think that there will be
a lot of questions that will
come up on this is so we'll have
to discuss this bill and
particularly the committee set
up again I just want you to make
aware that you know you have a
pretty full agenda and this is
gonna take some time today.
Thank you Representative.
Did we move Representative
it's been moved and seconded
madam chair go to the okay all
right she recent would you
please take role on the motion
yes thank you madam chair as a
point of clarification can you
please tell me who seconded that
motion Representative Chasey yes
it was Representative Chasey
thank you Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm now ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair next to all yes
please.
And madam chair losses excuse
madam chair with that we have
one excuse I in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Thank you so we have the motion
And we have I am have formative
and three in the negative so we
have moved the house bill one
sixty two.
with the proposed committee
substitute off the table.
So now we will and go to.
Back to Representative Eli thank
you madam chair so
what I'd like to do first is to
invite the original sponsor to
this Representative Anderson as
a panelist you should be a
participant or panelists right
now.
And as you're doing that let me
see what I can explain what this
does this is this is actually
the same thing stop but with
it would change it restores the
track for as a voting member of
the board it restores both
retirees positions as elected by
the retired members it
grandfathers existing retirees
on the boards through twenty
twenty three and twenty twenty
five and requires the secretary
of state to promulgate rules to
administer elections and I think
madam chair and to
Representative range point it is
certainly his absolute rights to
be questioning and and talk
about it but my suggestion would
be that we get this out of this
committee if we can get you
Judiciary where we all have a
full vetting out with all the
analysis and if there are
changes to be made to we do it
with that madam chair I think I
I'm not sure about this but I if
I could madam chair
representative because it is
representative Anderson's bills
I don't want to authorize the
discussion and if Representative
Anderson could say a few words I
appreciated madam chair and I'll
turn the floor back over here.
Thank you Representative
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair Madam chair of.
I'll be shortened to the point
of this bill from the get go has
been a compromise now I call it
a compromise hybrid and today I
called it a claim committee
substitute incorporating all of
the good ideas suggestions
recommendations that have come
and I really believe the to
improve bill.
In in the form that you're going
to act on today and with that
madam chair thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative Rehm.
I'm I'm trying to find the bill
and I can't find it and last
night I was in our are you know
schedule for today and I didn't
see it and I'm in that schedule
now and I do not see it where do
we find the bill.
The staff is there a way to
ascend Representative Rehm.
And maybe representative Nibert.
Right now I okay right now thank
Representative Nibert if you
find the bill.
Sure I just got my computer up
and running and I have gone to
both the Canadian website and to
share file for today.
I do not see any bills that
reflect the amending the
amendments that the
Representative for more Santa
was talking about.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative.
I need a copy of it to you're
going to you know about okay we
have staff working on it right
now if you could just give us a
few minutes please thank you
madam chair one point of order.
We have a twenty four hour rule
for reason and and I'm wondering
if you were if we have a amended
bill was it stories to the
committee twenty four hours in
advance and if not I suggest
that we take this matter up at
our next meeting.
You madam chair what the problem
for me is on plan F. now is I
decided stupidly to do all this
from home and so I'm trying to
pull I had I had it last night
and my understanding was it was
sent the real purpose as I
understand it is to make sure
the twenty four hour rule is to
make sure all the analyst in the
debt they had as of Saturday now
when members have it that I
don't know but here would be my
suggestion rather than rolling
over to Wednesday let's see what
I can do I'm going to ask if I
can pull up my email home I can
email it to everybody so they
have it and we can bring this up
later in the meeting today and
I'm happy to wait on it and come
back but I do think this has
some urgency to it and I like to
get to it today if we could.
Madam chair the real issue is
not that we pool the bill off
the table the real issues we all
the.
We we pull the bill off the
table bit that has an amendment
that was in the in my mind
timely submitted so it seems to
me that.
If we're gonna follow that the.
Twenty four hour rule
Probably our but it just it's
off the table it can be set up
for Wednesday at and we can deal
with.
I I don't know why we also have
it I'm if I if I can collect my
email at home that's the
frustrating part.
I think hang on hang on
Representative yes we have this.
And we did meet the twenty four
hour rule it was submitted to
staff and the analysts on
Saturday Representative.
Representative Zamora.
I want to go Representative
night birds.
Sermons I have not read the the
amendment I don't think it'll
make a big difference in the way
even the.
You know that's why we're
bringing it back and I would
like more time to look at this
bill.
I'm.
yes I'm so I was gonna say this
is representative Anderson's
bill I mean if everybody's
complaining about and I'm not
able to pull off on I I'm not
gonna fight to keep it today I
mean I'm just trying because I
thought you know we got it done
there were some minor changes to
it but they were significant and
I thought we can get through but
if it's the will of the
committee to move it to
Wednesday I'm not going to stand
in the way that but I would sure
like to hear from Representative
in years.
Representative Anderson and
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair of I understand the
dilemma of the hour in the
session is getting late in if
you roll this issue to Wednesday
I would just
you'd be the first order of
business because it does have a
second referral we're many many
members of this committee you're
gonna have a chance to see it
again but not all and therefore
if committee members need more
time to see and read the
this committee substitute I
would be willing to do that
that's all I have thank you.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair
I'm I would like to do a little
bit later in the committee after
everybody has their copy to look
at but the twenty four hour will
folks is not that everyone of
you who has read the bill
proposed bill of the committee
sever the amendments twenty four
hours before hand it's a bit
committee receives that so that
the Alice can get to it and
we're getting to a point in the
session when most committees are
going to be with them well a
week from now so spending the
twenty four hour rule so because
we want to try to get as much
done as we possibly can so given
the judiciary schedule if it
does go if it survives this
committee and it's going to go
to Judiciary I would like to get
it out if we can.
But as I told you I'm going to
be gone for a little bit and so
court hearings and out but
there's no question that the
twenty four hour will was
snapped and its property bring
it up off the table so whatever
the committee decides on
discussing it there's no
technicality requiring that we
can't hear it until Wednesday.
Thank you Representative can
committee members because I yeah
because I.
Of the the point that I also
agree with is that the analysis
has not been done and we have
always done that now right now
we do have the twenty four hour
rule in effect you know and that
the analysis is completed so I
think this has to be put off
when state.
Even even our analysts haven't
looked at it I mean in the
minority analyst as well.
Sure we have we had any luck in
sending out the.
The bill or the analysis.
Staff madam chair members.
Yes yes madam chair.
You have received that.
I have now received the what I
would also ask our could they
send out the analysis that we
keep talking about madam chair
last thing let me see if I can
and the discussion let's roll
over to Wednesday
thank you again the question is
is that it is still the question
of do you have to and we I don't
know that we have now that's
what I want to make clear
representative Nibert and
representative reach point no we
don't always do an analysis
that's just not true the fact is
as we get later in the session
you're going to see lots of
stuff without an in house that's
not the require requirement is
if there's not a significant
change and can be described by
the sponsor there isn't
necessarily an analysis but I
don't discriminate when I want
to in the discussion that we
just moved it over when state so
well of the committee and
clearly just that we move it to
Wednesday we move it to
Wednesday but I would say
to Representative Anderson's
point and I'm sure that we move
it to the first order of
business on Wednesday to get
this thing out we spend far too
much time under already and it's
still got another committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members so move it is
so move that and we will move we
will roll the bill to the first
things first order of business
on Wednesday morning thank you
and we will now proceed with
house bill two six one as
amended.
Representative Madrid.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
Can you please let and Frank
Copeland.
Copper I'm sorry.
You madam chair you need when
you're ready thank you
Representative please introduce
and explain your bill and your
co sponsors and expert
witnesses.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
This is a House Bill to sixty
one amended
this is providing the petition
for metal for you misspoke
incorporation this should be
uses the population data
provided by the university of
New Mexico borough of Business
and Economic Research what this
is doing
Members of the committee and and
in those initiatives that I'll
turn it over to my experts
because well this is basically
our our our movement to.
Hold on to the data that was
just recently compiled from the
senses of our entire state and
what that allows me to do is be
able to use this in the coming
years to be what are.
Presuming corporation by using
this compiled data and I've not
done this this sort of Linda so
if the opportunity of the county
telling me to go back in and do
another census so in essence
this is opening the door for
other people of the state that
may have a incorporated
communities such as mine will be
able to use this recent data
compiled with that being said
madam chair like to turn it over
to my expert witness for copper
and let him go.
But more like to this thank you.
Thank you Mr cobbler.
Can you hear me now.
Yes thank you.
Thank.
Okay okay muted.
Okay now you can hear me okay
thank you madam chair.
Representative Madrid thank you
for Karen this bill.
Of the background of this bill
is that the I have
I thought.
Let me say I am a registered
lobbyist for the entity Water as
patient district.
The Anthony water and sanitation
district provides water and
wastewater services it's a
public entity a political
subdivision of the state.
Providing water and wastewater
services into shepherd of
specifically that more I think
will serve as into desert.
Eight years you incorporating
communities are underserved and
our.
In need of organized school
government so that their
municipal government can the
catalyst for.
I think local services that are
needed and cannot be put on the
list there is a local minister.
sitting in for government
involves petition process.
Involves the.
Select process involved
establishing base and to the
point of this bill involves a
stab in addition one person per
acre within the that you
establish as the boundaries
proposed meniscal government.
And the there is a of an
amendment to this bill that we
did in the state government
elections in Indiana Ficker any
which is the of reference to
the of Business and Economic
Research to the.
UNM's geospatial and population
studies group and the.
What this bill does is instead
of the current law we're the
volunteer citizens are
petitioning to the county
commission.
To allow a vote on.
incorporation under the current
law the county commission
decides what the census
requirements are in other words
they decide what the.
What the criteria for suitable
Census is.
The end of the well.
Commission could takes.
Census may.
Getting certified
takers.
The little certified.
Door to door.
Leave the information up and
come back and personal I do
think count every per with in
the area.
Mexico for temple there's
practical Representative.
People.
The.
Yes if the county should were to
require that.
Elaborate formal sit in cost one
thousand dollars.
Well simply put the simply.
Only allows the money.
This bill will allow.
State of up to twenty five
dollars by get the same in the
shin that is available.
The University of New Mexico.
The spatial and pop the studies
group simply put that's what it
does thank you madam chairman
and I stand for any questions.
Thank you Representative Madrid
are you ready for the pole are
we ready to conduct a poll.
Yes Representative I'm sure well
we're ready to conduct as this
is a really exciting for me for
me to see an opportunity for my
community that's.
Running close to thirty thousand
plus and and making as now the
second largest growing city in
the and don't have a the wells
what that'll so it's greatly
needed and understanding this
Angelus of having local
government is what I'm striving
striving to get us to to be able
to get monies to us down here so
I thank you madam chair and
we're ready for questions okay
thank you let's go ahead and
conduct a poll and those who are
in favor or opposition of the
bill can now vote.
And we have ten seconds left in
the poll.
A little over a.
And we have to in favor of the
bill and now we will go to
public comment and we will begin
with comments in support of the
bill please raise your hand and
we will call on you.
We have Robert.
Correct again please forgive me
from missing your name.
Robert.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes good morning madam
chair members of the committee
I'm Robert Ratigan I'm the
director of geospatial
population studies at the
university of New Mexico review
the amended bill on the HSD bill
analysis submitted by UNM's that
you're a bit business and
economic research I agree that
geospatial population studies is
the appropriate entity to
provide population data for the
purpose of municipal corporation
my department functions as the
office of the state demographer
which isn't funded which is
funded in part by a research and
public service project
appropriation from the New
Mexico state legislature in this
capacity we are happy to assist
in the effort to determine the
best most accurate timely
population count and population
density for any municipality
seeking to incorporate
identifying most accurate timely
population counts and population
densities is not always as
simple and straightforward as it
may seem we encourage public
entities to utilize our
expertise in New Mexico
demographics for purposes such
as this proposed bill thank you
madam chair.
I don't see any further hands
raised now we will hear any
comments in opposition if there
are any.
Do we want to text
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair I move it to pass
I'm sorry thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you we have a motion for I
do pass Representative Rehm and
a second by Representative Ortez
a clerk to take role please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night part yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Chasey.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair losses excused
madam chair with that we have to
excuse and seven in the
affirmative.
Thank you Representative Madrid
you have a do pass on house
bill.
Two sixty one as amended.
Are you ready for your next bill
thank you madam chair to
committee on this one yes I'm
ready how.
Yes
from progressive from DOT.
Mr Garcia.
Okay I believe is an.
Okay now we will hear house bill
one nine eight as amended
Representative Madrid please
begin.
Thank you madam chair this is a
simple what are called circles
been a it's been a little bit of
a working out and we still have
some things on this is the
transfer of certain affording a
administrative duties from
department of public safety to
the department of
transportation.
We're just changing the
ministrations DOT is been
handling this for years with GPS
overseeing it now it's just
being.
Changed over the DPSS turning
over their responsibilities
completely to the DOT DPS is
still involved stills plays the
same rules it's just the
ministration process that being
said overturn I will choose to
Franco to Franklin so you.
For COVID.
Thank you Representative good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Franklin Garcia the mobile
director with department
transportation and our ports of
entry falls under our mobile
division
the major changes that are in
front of you I just clarifies
the Representative Madrid
mentioned the duties to allow
for commercial vehicle permits
sales at the twelve point of
entry New Mexico currently all
the activities are allowed to an
existing memorandum of agreement
that's been in place since
twenty seventeen and and it's
between DPS in duty and tax and
Representative to make sure the
revenues collected in transfer
and this will just formalize
that process DPS will maintain
all the enforcement duties any
citations any commercial vehicle
inspections will still be under
the authority of department
public safety we did find a
summary of the changes to the
committee it's a thirty page
built with majority of the
changes are just a changing deep
DPS to D. O. T..
Authority I know in the at the
FY are the analysis is a GPS
could take a ninety four
thousand dollar impacted their
budget.
That money would be transferred
to do T. however we did budget
for it so that money will be
available to to DPS to utilize
at the point of entry for
eligible needs and an eligible
uses within that and as we move
on as we get to the amendment I
could explain some of the issues
that came up regarding the
amendment.
Will stand for questions.
Thank you now we will and
technical and allow those who
are in favor of the bill or in
opposition of the bill to vote.
We have one in favor now we will
go to
participants and we will hear
comments in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised do
we have any comments in
opposition of the bill.
Madam so now we'll go to
committee members.
Representative Ortez.
Madam chair would you pass on
the H. B. one ninety as amended.
Also the.
We have to pass a motion by
Representative Ortez and and
seconded by Representative
Zamora clerk to call the roll
please.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We've there's amended that we
were looking so I'm not sure for
voting on
the bill or if we have an option
to amend that bill.
Representative Madrid.
Yes madam chair the needs of
children number ready to do so
yes please.
Okay.
Going to two zero one one eight
point one.
Okay would you explain your
amendment.
All you know to my expertise.
Yes Representative thank you
madam chair members of the
committee the.
As I mentioned this is a thirty
page bill and as we are going
through and identifying areas
that we want to make sure that
we need to make any other
responsibilities of tax rebels
parts lessons or responsibility
DPS we identified a few areas
that needs fixes the first
amendment done in the previous
game really acquired lateral
duties are which leads in the in
recommended being.
What forward in that committee
the current amendment that
Representative Madrid as a.
Proposed fixes that issue from
the previous committee it's.
Amendments and it doesn't
address the technical Biggs
that's needed act act so this
will up there that we would
still and who will address those
needs.
Madam chair the primary.
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair we probably need to
get the Representative work
chance to withdraw her motion so
we can handle the amendment
first.
Okay.
Representative Ortez.
Madam chair I would withdraw my
motion and I move adoption of
the amendment.
Also.
Okay we have the motion to adopt
the amendment and the second.
Representative night Burt is
there any opposition our
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing and we show everyone
voting in the affirmative and
you have an adopted amendment to
house bill one ninety eight.
Twice amended.
So.
Now we're ready to vote on the
amended bill.
First thank you for state the
Representative work has to renew
her motions.
Representative Ortez.
You madam chair I move I do pass
as amended.
Also the okay so we have and new
motion by Representative Ortez
or do you pass and a second by
Representative Nibert.
And clerk to call roll.
Representative Chasey is yes
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair blue is excused
madam chair with that we have to
excused and seven in the
affirmative.
Thank you Representative Madrid
you have a do pass on house bill
one nine eight and twelve as
amended.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Next we have.
Representative Ortez.
Committee substitute house bill
two six five.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I have a witness
an expert witness that Andre
Miller who's in the participants
right now.
And madam chair I also I have an
amendment to the committee
substitute I don't know if you.
Like for me to explain that now
or after.
We we talk about the bill.
Why don't you go ahead and
Explain the bill first and then
the amendment.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee as I'm here to present
HB at two sixty five which
amends and modernizes the
natural lands protection act and
the natural heritage
conservation act
together the and I'll rate to
naturalize protection act and
the NACA natural heritage
conservation act gives our
state's gives our state the
necessary tools to protect our
natural resources are view
states are landscapes of course
are important for hunting
fishing rafting hiking those
attacks together also protect
are working plants which are
critical for food security and
our cultural traditions so this
bill would bring this to
programs together the NACA and
the an LPA to create the natural
lands and heritage conservation
fund which should be expanded to
allow that the state to do a
couple of new things one well we
will be able to acquire lands
unilaterally and without a
nonprofit organization as a
partner this was not the case
before we're also expanding the
purpose for acquisition to also
include recreational access this
is really important for
communities all over the state
for health but also for economic
development the bill expands
scope of factors that the state
considers for projects that seek
funding or acquisition to
include habitat connectivity
cultural significance recreation
and climate change among other
factors I'm the bill also
includes some changes to the
natural lands protection
committee which has now been
expanded to include the
department of Indian affairs
department of cultural affairs
director of outdoor recreation
or their designees this really
brings in a wider range of
experiences and perspectives
when managing the fund and the
projects all of these changes
together really open up the
state's ability to cover that
non.
Federal match for the land and
water conservation fund and
happen to other risk sources of
funding the LW CF land water
conservation fund was just fully
funded last year by Congress at
the great American outdoors Act.
I think it's important point out
here that Colorado and Texas
both have a dedicated funding
source for conservation we do
not hi and this New Mexico we we
know how important is to
diversify are we talked a lot
about that and this committee
and other committees we know how
important is to protect our land
and water and we know how
important is to bring in that
new generation of hunters and
fishermen other early and
stewards these amendments set
the stage for that I want to
also point out here that we're
not asking for an appropriation
with this bill but we do we do
know that if we were on the part
of these programs we could
street we could distribute
grants to local governments land
grants a sec yes to to match
those federal funds for
acquisition restoration
conservation and recreation
projects.
Madam chair chair right now
explain the amendment.
Yes and you probably need to
find that two oh two number.
But I don't believe there's a to
a to number on the amendment.
And but but will will one of the
more senior members of this
committee let me know if that's
fair madam chair I have the
children okay I do have it sorry
I see you know.
Madam chair is the first time
I've done an amendment in the
committee so please bear with me
and thank you madam chair for
for for that the two oh two
numbers two two zero two four OO
point three.
Thank you so I'm now you can
explain that amendment.
Okay so that this amendments
allows EMNRD to transfer
management responsibility with
consents to another agency or
political subdivision of this
addresses some of EMNRD's
concerns it also
provides for a third option for
acquisition of before was state
only now it was the joint
corporate pathway as the option
now we have a third option which
allows the state to give grants
to political subdivisions like
counties towns I said yes to
acquire land for open space and
natural areas and.
I I believe that I would like to
ask money expert witness to.
At anything here I miss
something.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Ortez members of
the committee my name is Andrea
Miller how are coming
conservation Potts point and
resource advocate with bank
representatives of sponsoring
this bill invoice support on
behalf of western resource
advocates and Representative
Ortez noted the next line
protection act answers
conservation effort to existing
programs in this administered by
the energy minerals natural
resources department House Bill
to sixty five monitors these at
these existing sister programs
and provide technical fixes to
make the program more functional
for the department and ready for
funding in the future of the of
the bill the two programs off of
the state W. concerning Act
because lance wildlife number
heritage by the strong working
lands rangelands watershed and
wildlife habitat purchasing
conservation area and
agricultural easements
acquiring the land to create new
parks and wildlife areas and
local open spaces with your
recreation and conservation
benefits finally protect land
the cultural significance.
Unlike many of its neighbors now
last Mexico lacks a dedicated
conservation grant program of
funding the store credit share
project fund across the two
programs this issue grant local
communities and private
landowners for conservation
projects also expands our
position representation the
committee oversees the fund and
importantly at flexibility to an
LPN NACA to meet requirements
across numerous federal programs
the leverage for conservation
the changes to that okay and
hopeful to sixty five all out of
state agencies and political
subdivisions the state to
acquire land finance for both
conservation and recreational
access this is an important
change because they allow the
program to meet the requirements
of federal funding under the
land water conservation fund
state and local assistance
program three twenty five
significant increase in funding
to the diligent work dedication
Mexico's compressional
delegation the bipartisan
passage of the great American
outdoors that question twenty
twenty.
There's an elderly CFR to
complete in every county in New
Mexico over this through the
program and starting this year
this is poised to see a
significant increase in federal
funding totaling three or four
million dollars annually all
which requires a one one
nonfederal match This bill will
tell us how to take full
advantage that increase in
federal funding.
Under house bill two fifty five
local commute so the opportunity
for apply for federal of the
severance and state matching
funds to acquire and develop new
open spaces expand public access
and provide more opportunities
for hunting and fishing.
Yes part of our culture and part
of the interior minister grant
administer numerous grant
programs which require non for
matching funds that the state
could bear leverage this
includes the proper endangered
species Fund the fourth legacy
program wetland conservation act
grants and various agriculture
restoration you programs.
I'd like to re create the
committee that the next one
protect as I heard with heritage
conservation after running lost
their voluntary program so to
provide financial assistance to
private landowners tribes and
political subdivisions the state
for conservation purpose the
goal is to create a associated
additional flexibility
opportunities for the state
except competitive friends in
local communities with within
the evaluated for signing by
committee with members
representing various state
agencies in the public but the
changes to the LPA and NEC and
helpful to the I think one of
the tools they need to take a
land fiscal approach to protect
and serve Mexico plants wildlife
and heritage thank you.
Committee members Is there
debate on the amendment.
This debate.
Madam chair did you want to go
to the committee I've been to
the public first or do you want
a motion now it's really up to
you.
I thought we could move that
amendment and then the the
public could.
Right we discussed the bill and
then as that including the
amendment.
Our church is no objection to
that I'll make a motion to a
document.
So we have a motion to amendment
and we have a second.
Is there any opposition or
objection to adopting the
amendment.
We sure everyone of voting in
the affirmative and you have an
adopted amendment to house bill
two sixty five.
Now go and take a poll.
Okay we have ten.
In favor and three against and
now we will go to public
comments and we will hear
comments in favor of the bill
please raise your hand we have
Oscar Simpson.
Mr Simpson please begin.
You are available.
Sorry I had on the.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I am Oscar Simpson
representing to organizations
New Mexico sportsman.
And Rio Grande indivisible we
support this bill for all the
reasons stated thank you.
Next we have the least Carrero.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee many
mysteries that on the
legislative and political
organizer with every last year
club real mandate chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand numbers are so
supportive strap New Mexico and
we support HB two sixty five
preserving our natural lands in
international care it's
extremely important to our New
Mexico.
our history of the outdoors and
our ancestors understood the
importance of preserving the
beautiful natural resources
actually live in Los crucis in
southern New Mexico near the
organ mountains desert peaks
national monuments which is an
area of full of great recreative
areas and boost for local
tourism this bill increases
representation within the
natural lands protection
committee allowing members to
also appointed designees and
specifies that the committee
oversees the funds to be used
for both programs it also
streamlines the word of the
committee by clear clarifying
shared projects fund across the
street program this is a really
great bill that really want to
thank our sponsors this bill at.
Thank you next we have New
Mexico wild.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is long last nap on staff
attorney with New Mexico wild we
for support HB two sixty five
for the reasons already stated
in encouraging a vote to pass to
ensure equitable access to our
our fantastic other resources
and to ensure that the state of
New Mexico and local
municipalities have the ability
to stave off the the more severe
threats of climate change and
mass species die off thank you.
Next we have windows.
Hi there I'm on music.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to comment in favor
of H. B. two sixty five I'm
Linda sorry from now the kirke
and represent the Rio Grande
Valley broadband great old
broads for wilderness we're in
favor of amending the natural
lands protection and natural
heritage conservation acts in
order to upgrade needs to
safeguarding programs that have
the capacity to certify expanded
public access to new parks and
open spaces.
These environments will help to
support rural outdoor markets
repair and refurbish our lands
water wildlife and our natural
world New Mexico needs all work
source of funding for
preservation strategies like
amending the soil in our gardens
now and then our New Mexico
landscapes require the staying
care planning an upgrade when
traveling anywhere near far from
home in New Mexico we gaze out
the window at amazing natural
resources.
That captivate or and tension
and big for protection equipment
start desire to explore new
territories.
Thank you next we have just
Jesse do bell.
You are now unmuted.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to comment
this morning my name is Jesse
development the executive
director of the New Mexico
wildlife federation of New
Mexico wildlife federation star
stands in strong support of HB
two sixty five madam chair
members of the committee I think
the expert witness did a
fantastic job explaining the
benefits of this bill
monumentally this bill would
ensure that New Mexico has the
ability to expand public access
create new parks and local open
spaces all rural outdoor
economies and restore our lands
water wildlife and working lands
for these reasons New Mexico
well and federation urged
committee members to please
provide HB to six I do pass
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have a great
Peters your now and muted.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
Greg Peters public lands
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
your stand in strong support of
H. B. two sixty five is a
straightforward build offers
technical fixes to existing fund
committing programs this bill
does not rewrite the purpose of
these acts nor does it ask for
appropriation simply by it's
existing programs to be ready
for the future will provide
critical leverage for other
sources of conservation funding
such as money for federal
assistance should wildlife
restoration the farm bill L.
WCSC assistance programs state
wildlife grants as well as local
conservation funding for cities
and counties this bill will
prepare our state by giving it
the ability when funded in the
future to distribute grants to
get projects funded.
Modernizing these programs will
ensure the New Mexico has the
ability to creating parks and
open spaces also rural outdoor
economies and restore lands
water wildlife and working lands
conservation is how we protect
species maintain our traditions
Madam resources keep working
lands and working here.
We need all the tools in the
toolbox to give landowners every
opportunity to manage and
steward plans for future are
generate.
Thank you next we will go to
opposing comments if we have any
please raise your hand if you'd
like to comment.
I see Michelle frost Maynard.
You're now I needed.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee
Michelle frost mater speaking on
behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers in New Mexico will
course we stand opposed to house
bill two sixty five the bill
would change the fundamental
purpose of the Act to include
recreational use of the land yet
does not clearly define what is
recreational appropriations are
given to acquire land in
projects but are not allocated
for the maintenance of acquired
land and appointed fund for
payment of the committee members
per diem and mileage is not
clear as is not clear the
schedule the committee meetings
times and location finally
nonprofits role in the lead up
keep is not stated therefore the
state I would be responsible for
all the management costs and
maintenance that keep for these
reasons we stand opposed to
house bill two sixty five thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you next we have Tiffany
Rivera your unmuted.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to
provide comment my name is
Tiffany Rivera and I'm the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in respectful
opposition to house bill two
sixty five we're opposed to the
state acquiring any new leads
and removing those lands from
the private ownership this
action could negatively impact
our local communities tax base
the bill before you includes no
funding for EMNRD to manage the
land that is acquired further at
the bill allows for land to be
purchased for recreational
purpose the recreational use of
the land lead to degradation was
short choir management and
maintenance the lack of
management funding seems to go
against the purpose of the
natural heritage conservation
act to better the land further
we have concerns about the
amount of discretion of the
legislation provides the
secretary of EMNRD the secretary
has the authority to determine
what land is purchased purchased
the land and designate the
management of that line to other
state agencies again with no
funding provided for the
increased management
requirements please no
opposition.
Thank you now we will go to
committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
What questions on the US and and
I think Miss Romero.
Pointed one of the mountain that
so.
Language on page four.
Winds thirteen through
seventeen.
We are if I read this correctly.
Madam chair representative we're
taking now the.
Former.
Legislative action to acquire
lands and now the secretary
would be able to.
of.
His or her own accord  our choir
lance is that an accurate
reading of what you're trying to
do.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I I'd like for Andrea to.
Is that question.
Madam chair representative I I
believe the the concern is that
this the.
For this
that.
Is set up so that
funds yesterday appropriate for
specific purposes and this bill
would create one fund across the
two programs that is a
nonrecurring fund and I think
and that is why
up.
In the beginning that others to
noted making appropriation but
this does not in fact include
appropriation but there again
the one one non returning fund
across the two programs.
Madam chair representative Mr
Miller great the current statute
requires the legislature to
appropriate funds for
acquisition of property right.
Madam chair this is
representative I can I just make
a point where Representative I
would just repeat where he's
referring to so I can track
what's going on.
It's so madam chair it's a H.
four winds thirteen and follow
really three seven but it could
go on down thank you.
Madam chair of representative
Ely
I I I believe so.
That was the old yet that was in
the the legislation before.
Madam chair representative
Richard to do away with the
legislative process and and
basically grant to secretary the
ability to acquire lands
without.
The legislature specifically
looking at a particular
acquisition.
Thank.
Madam chair representative
Representative Eli R. yes I
believe so and like for Mr
Miller to elaborate.
Madam chair representative I
believe that's the case I I'd
add that there the.
That e-mail's not resources
department secretary will work
in consultation with the
committee including members of
the public and other
representatives from public
agencies to make those types of
project determinations.
Madam chair and representative
Mr Miller
when you say committee you're
not talking to this committee
you're not talking to.
Of the natural resources
committee you're talking about
the committee this was done to
the terms of the act which is
somewhat back to lance
protection committee is that
correct.
Madam chair representative in
line for it that is correct in
that committee under the act
will be expanded to include
other agency department heads.
Or their designees.
Yeah.
This raises a concern I have
we're you know we continue to
In power agencies of state
government the to to perform
legislative acts and New this to
me is is just another one that
we are delegated to the
secretary
the ability to to to acquire
lands without the R.
legislature over saying those
particular
of acquisitions and and maybe
even well
Questioning the the need or the
desire to to gauge.
And so I just I'm concerned
about that.
Certainly
So you were my constituents that
are more concerned about the
some of those activities.
Moving on to page six.
There's a
place in in page six and then on
page seven I'm looking at page
six lines twenty two twenty two
or twenty four and then overall
page seven lines six through.
All right talks about a
corporation yeah we're inserting
words that owns land jointly
with the state.
This is state currently all
lands jointly with the
corporation.
Madam chair and representative.
That that is the case.
Can you cite me some examples
madam chair representative.
Yes I will Madam chair
representative you lie and and
please Mr Miller if you like to
jump in here you you can as well
but there is that the end all PA
and to lance protection act
has been used for some joint
acquisitions with state agencies
and nonprofit.
Land conservation entities and
corporations the nature
Conservancy has about ten
properties that it owns jointly
with the state the state ninety
percent TNC at ten percent of
those lands are in McKinley
County a couple of them that Rio
nutria
And in Grant County the mills
and million sand prairie reserve
in the Sheila and Grant County
at totaling all totaling forty
eight four thousand eight
hundred twenty acres.
That you mentioned the maleness
and the chicken.
Habitat area and at one point in
my life I was pretty familiar
with that
I did not realize that that that
was joined err jointly owned and
so I I suspect that if it was
jointly on the legislature our.
That the but our situation under
the terms of this act and
authorized at the joint
ownership
it so.
Seems to me that most most lands
of the state did not.
Do not involve private or
nonprofit you have to do so.
Maybe that's.
Maybe that's the the desire of
the R. do do you know how those
what what the process was for
the state to.
Jointly on those properties that
you detail Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is the beyond beyond
the scope of my historical
knowledge
Apps Mr Miller does
I'm sorry I regret to say that I
do not.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative
Right Representative noted there
are those that I think act used
within two thousand nine to
spend some time but I believe
that the
the committee with about that
transaction Committee would of
recommended those types of
acquisitions incinerated water
trust board recommends projects
to be funded through
legislation.
The madam chair and in
representatives are looking at
the rate SantaFe lines nine
chair and.
generally we we think of our
lands that are being acquired
for for recreation purposes as
being open to the public
yeah and I see here
the existing law R. although
were mandating adding state
agencies the existing laws of
the visits can be restricted.
And so could you explain.
if work wiring using public
monies to acquire lands for
recreation purposes why we would
then.
Allow a restriction of those of
us and and could only be done
under the supervision of the
employer doesn't
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'm I want to
refer to your previous question
if you if you let me I I want I
want to get some additional
information from the lawyers at
EMNRD around that the history
and I will get back to you on
that and but if if Mr Miller can
answer this this question here
great.
Thank you madam.
I I know that public access is
not mandated in this over for
preserving that as an option
many of these ten properties on
the part by the nature
Conservancy in the state are for
particular unique wildlife
habitat where access is is
restricted currently and we're
allowing that those restrictions
to continue but as I noted in my
opening statement public access
is an important mansion option
for the state to be able to have
to match federal funds that
require recreational access and
madam chair representative
Nibert you know it's it's not
always appropriate to have
visitors all the time on public
land sometimes you know they're
in it at there's nothing
happening or or in an endangered
species that need to be
protected at various times of
the year so I think the
allowance to restrict visits it
is it is important based on
based on the science.
Well I I noted that are one of
the purposes of the amendment
should bring it forward is to
allow recreation and to acquire
lands our reserves for
recreation not just the other
purposes for which the original
lacked was a stab.
But to.
Create opportunities for lands
for recreation so so I'm I'm
concerned this is.
The HSD is going to be acquiring
lands for recreation but then
not allow recreation
or please restrict recreation to
to
maybe a only a few and and you
know we have you covered already
manages state parks
access to state parks is is not
open to everybody it's it's open
to everybody that pays a three.
Your it's it's open to
are the
people who are willing to pay a
of the three to to enter those
plans and and to that engage in
that recreation and that's why
we see a number of bills last
two sessions that are creating
carve outs for for certain
people so that they can go those
places without incurring.
So I'm I'm just trying to to
figure out how how all the
scripts were requiring lands for
now for recreation.
Why are they not the going to be
like city parks where you can go
and recreation without having to
pay
Thank you speech or or B. under
the direct supervision of an
employer designated
representative of managing state
agency or corporation
Because a lot.
I often times.
You don't know this but I'm an
assistant scout master and and
taking my scouts out to enjoy
the outdoors and to.
Use a lands is becoming more
more difficult because of the
other fees for our regulations
and things that are pros
and and it is the
it's a concern when I see we're
going to do this but yet you
impose these are.
Either intentional or
unintentional barriers to to for
you to join.
The very purpose that were work
why and lance for I understand.
We understand the bill Sam
check.
That was purchased specifically
to protect the threatened
species are and to provide you
have a and you don't want.
You know what my boy scout
troop.
Walking through the past year
during the booming cities
I fully understand but
I see were expanding the breadth
and scope of the statute.
To do some things that it was
originally intended to but yet
we still have
the limitations on access and
and you know I I.
I just.
I'm conflicted over whether or
not the.
Whether or not that makes sense
since for many.
Madam chair representative I am
concerned for.
Many of the reasons that were
brought out by the the cattle
growers and farm bureau and
others that that spoke and I'm
and I'm concerned because of my
own personal
Her experience with
land management agencies over
the years and the continued.
Creeping out or
Access who's allowed to go and
was not allowed to go where some
some of the HB.
Necessary but some of its over
brought so thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative for
answer more questions.
Madam chair I don't see any
further debate I would do pass
out of the house committee
substitute house bill two sixty
five as amended.
Thank you Representative I see
Representative Zamora raised his
hand Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee and
representative or this.
Can under this bill.
Can eminent domain be used to
acquire land.
Madam chair
Representative Zamora at
I don't think that that's not
part of this bill.
Mr Miller would you like to.
I'm I'm I believe that the
service will.
Okay so madam chair and
representative of what this so
so then secretary say there's a
farmer that has apply lake.
Where the ducks are nesting.
The farmer would have to be in
agreement to sell his land then.
Madam chair representative
Zamora.
Absolutely we have to be an
agreement to sell his land on
under these two acts on brought
together that that's yeah that
would have to happen that there
would be.
They would have to be agreement.
Okay that's all the questions I
had madam chair.
Representative thank you.
Thank you we have that do pass
motion by Representative Eli.
Second that motion.
Critical role.
Representative Chasey is excused
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair blue.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excuse I in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Thank you.
Representative Ortez the motion
passes with five in the
affirmative three in the
negative you have to pass on
house bill.
Committee substitute two six
five.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Okay now we have Representative
Rubio with house bill three zero
one Representative there you
are.
Good morning everyone.
Good morning.
You may begin when you're ready
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative house bill
three oh one is pretty
straightforward it creates a
legislative review commission.
Of which would then require this
commission to review and develop
policy proposals relating to
improving our legislative
process and and of course they
would be required to do a report
before by the end of the year
twenty twenty two I just for
some context for folks I know I
talked to several of you all
over the course of the last year
about this issue in twenty
nineteen with the support of
then Representative Bobby
Gonzalez is now are Senator are
we introduced legislation for
to address legislative pay it
made it all the way through the
house and then most of the
Senate but then with the support
of Senate finance unfortunately
the day before the Senate the
session ended because of the
rules committee ended up
rewriting it pretty much it
didn't go anywhere and so we
were going to make another
attempt in twenty twenty
and that failed as well but
there was a lot of momentum in
terms of creating this
commission and then COVID hate
and so we are this is really are
tempted to really revive that of
the Thornburg foundation which
could report at the end of
December twenty nineteen and and
that's report I can send to you
all
really looked at all the work
that's been done in the past to
address the modernization of our
legislature and focus groups
were done from a good government
standpoint and a lot of former
president legislators were
involved as well as folks in the
community.
And so as a really diverse group
and many of the topics that were
reviewed was linked the
legislative sessions the
legislative compensation of
course staffing bill
introductions like we've seen
this year with our I limit here
in the house interim committees
which representative Ely has
worked on as well and other
issues like capital outlay
process
this isn't again the only time
that this has occurred but this
is a commission that my hope is
will actually begin to really be
the roadmap to actually getting
things done and not shelving
things back into the shelves
that exist in the roundhouse we
really believe in making sure
that there are
Things that we need to do in our
legislature to modernize to make
it more efficient specially when
it comes to issues related to
transparency
and and so I I this is certainly
that that that mechanism and
that be able to do that
I ask for your support but I
also ask for your ideas if if
this bill needs to improve I'm
I'm open to that Representative
Stansbury is a co sponsor for
this legislation and and I have
been working on this issue for
over a year and I don't know if
she's on but I certainly
wouldn't want to find her an
opportunity to speak if she is
and then without we would we
would open it up to questions.
Madam chair.
Thank you yes Representative.
Would it be okay if I offered a
couple of comments.
Yes please do.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee M. as Representative
Rubio said this morning and this
builds on work that's been
building momentum in the last
several years and one of the
things I wanted to just bring
into the conversation is that
under Representative previous
leadership we started to convene
upright partisan group of
legislators early last year that
included folks like
representative Armstrong and
Harper and myself and others
Figueroa and others who are
interested in this topic in
because of COVID obviously
things got kind of ported I'm
you know I feel so strongly that
it's really important that we
identified passed forward to
address all the structural
issues that we struggle with
every year as we're working to
bring legislation forward and
trying to for the past policies
that we can and I think that
this bill creates a sort of
framework for doing that so that
we can advance our legislative
process so with that I just want
to say thank you and and look
forward to the discussion this
morning.
Thank you.
Now we will go to the
participate poll.
And we will conduct a poll and
those who are in favor or in
opposition of the bill canal
boat.
And we have three in favor and
one against we'll go to the
participants and we will hear.
Those who are in support of the
bill.
Meredith Machen.
You are muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Meredith nation
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico and we strongly
support this legislation and
have of force the several years
that were mentioned by the one
of the sponsors.
This is so important we it back
in two thousand seven there was
a huge
Commission that did exactly what
this commission I believe will
do and we can see that there
were improvements that were made
and we've suggested many
improvements over the years
we also supported legislative
Hey we believe that the
legislature could be so much
more effective if we people
looked at it structurally not
about their bills and I
encourage this commission to
have outside members I believe
that that's the definition of
commission and we would love to
serve on this commission
because.
Thank you next we have heather
Ferguson.
Madam chair members of the
committee heather Ferguson here
with common cause New Mexico we
support this legislation we've
been working on this for a
number of years as well and we
saw that there was a legislative
task force that was very similar
to the us being years ago and
many of those recommendations
were not implemented and so it
seems that now the time would be
right to reconvene a task force
to study how we can streamline
the legislative processes take a
look at legislative Hey and
overall modernize and overhaul
some of that process is for the
legislature so we strongly
support this and thank the
sponsors for bringing it up.
Thank you I don't see any more
hands up so now we will hear
from attendees who are in would
like to speak in opposition of
the bill please raise your hand.
We will now go to committee
members.
Representative Ortez I thank you
thank you madam chair I think
this is a fantastic bill I'm new
to this process and I have
experienced and you know seen
lots of things that could be
changed improved including the
need for for some staff it's
been you know it's it's a
challenge as a as a first year
legislator of navigating the
process and especially you know
one over zoom so I really
welcome a committee taking a
hard look at and what we can do
to improve the government's in
in the state of New Mexico I'm
I'm very grateful for this and I
I do encourage us to pass.
Thank you Representative
scripture.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative when I look at
this almost look at it that it
should be a memorial but one of
the things that I'm wondering
why couldn't we have the LFC
study this over the intro.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I mean I
think it's a very good question
and it's certainly
conversations that we've had
with Legislative Council
services and
the legislative finance we
haven't had this conversation at
least I haven't directly
but I think that depending on on
where and how this legislation
makes its way over the course of
the next what would we have
nineteen eighteen days that
that'll certainly determine our
our roadmap moving forward
beyond the legislative session
so I appreciate your comment in
your question I I think that is
certainly
another Avenue that that we're
considering as well that we
should consider as well.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of overview of
how many times you are has the
question gone to the public to
pay legislators in the past of
what was the result.
Thank you madam chair and
representative would be total
number has been seven and the
last time it was done I believe
it was in nineteen ninety one it
was the closest vote that had
been had
It was I mean it was pretty it
was pretty tight but on.
I think.
There is a lot of momentum I
mean it's pulling right now
within New Mexicans not
necessarily just legislative pay
because I know that
that that this is an issue that
can certainly be I mean there's
there's two sides to to this
issue for sure but I think
what's really even more
important is all of the other
things that we really should be
talking about as I mentioned
there's a lot of questions
around capital outlay process
issues related to interim
committees do we have too many
of those issues around ledges
the.
Introduction of legislation do
is it absolutely necessary to
introduce an unlimited amount or
are there are there things that
we can be limiting there there's
there's questions around
transparency that we could be
improving public support I mean
public input I know that this
last session because of COVID we
it's been more virtual it's been
virtual so it's allowed for more
public participation so I think
those are all of the different
areas that even if you feel
super passionately about being a
citizen legislature and and not
supporting legislative pay which
I know some of you in this
committee believe very much on
there's other things that we
should be improving in the
meantime that we think that the
commission can addressed even
just outside of salary pay
outside of the salary
discussion.
R. thank you madam chair and
representative I really what
you've outlined I think is the
duty of the LFC thank you thank
you.
Representative Eli.
Yeah thank you madam chair it
gives me an opportunity to up
bring something up is that so I
do like this idea
and I do think the legislature
we should plan to a set Council
Service they can be truly
involved in the should be but
this is also something where I'm
as we're discussing it
legislature should be involved
but I will say to everybody what
we would really like to do is
get and I was looking for
Natalie and I got interrupted by
a call so we ask one question
Representative review where does
this go after we start
committee.
Sliq goes to let me just double
check to make sure I believe it
goes to
I'm hoping you state judiciary.
I think it is
I can't find it I I believe it
is Judiciary but
that's right I didn't mean to
kind of jump on you with a
question right here here's
here's what's what what I think
Representative Nighbor and I
have been working on together is
to kind of get all of these
things in one place one of the
things that we're trying to do
on our realized a discussion is
limited to the commission but so
you know to step back and
broader picture is to start
talking about what we're gonna
do in the future when we face
these pandemics and we have H.
E. R. six which we talk about
calling legislature back in
every ninety days and in talking
with church Chasey and in fact
in this committee she raised the
concern that that starting to
look like the legislature's
gonna be involved more more
often.
And as that happens there is a
legitimate concern that we are
not a rate legislature with
staff which we would almost have
to be if we're going to be in a
pandemic situation and being
called back so what we're hoping
to do is get everything in front
of Judiciary we still have I
think it's H. R. six is still in
this committee so when this gets
out it goes to Judiciary and I
do think this would be an
opportunity to but everything
all of the issues are that are
related both to the pandemic and
the powers of the legislature on
as well as how the legislature
should function in the future I
totally agree that we need to
have staff I mean the fact is is
that without it what happens is
is that we have to rely on those
people with institutional memory
that becomes a lobbyist and
that's not healthy
we we have to have paid staff so
I very much support yes and I'm
hoping that we can have this
discussion in Judiciary once
everything gets there will have
kind of Senator are built and
how strong memorials all at once
in front of us and maybe we can
have the full discussion I'm
hoping this week so I'm using
this opportunity to chat with
lobby those SharePoint to favor
chairs the chairs this committee
and the chair of the judiciary
to get this going so we can have
that conversation yes sorry
Representative.
Madam chair representative it
looks like we only got one
referral so
I don't know what that would
look like moving forward play I
mean Representative I always
speak for representative
Stansbury but I'm assuming she
would feel the same way is that
this is something that we really
care about it's really a top
priority for us it's something
that I ran on actually so my
district really believes in this
and so I mean we we we recognize
that it is a long road ahead but
we certainly don't want to be
part of that
process where we just do we just
study something and then we
don't do anything about it like
we really want to try to get
things moving along even if it
if it means it's it could take
awhile no I am and madam chair
representative and I see that
I you know it it is helpful to
me to know that it's going to
for control that be part of the
discussion in Judiciary just say
Hey this is going there and this
is something we need to address
the broader context out should
the legislature I believe the
legislature should have more
ability even a pandemic with no
criticism of the governor I
should've remembered and but if
we're going to go that direction
the legislature needs to be off
that list that singular last of
being the only plans for
legislation the country so I
really appreciate that and
appreciate you bringing thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I do have a concern with the.
What just legislating very
provided.
Admission but.
It does seem to me that that the
order of the board all that.
Charges either in on many or
Legislative Council to to take
up the issue.
Instead of creating a law that
those with the
That's not what we have before
us but my my only other question
is so Page three paragraph or
paragraph by which these lines
thirteen to sixteen is this is
the standard language that we
see or regarding.
The issue of.
Compensation or the prohibition
of compensation.
Is it looks a bit odd.
Madam chair representative I can
certainly double check and get
back to you but when we had the
drafters drafted
this seems to be the typical
language that is that was used
and so
This will be what we have.
Madam chair representative.
I recall usually saying wide
range of says members of the
commission are not entitled to
compensation but by receive a
reimbursement pursuant to the
provisions of the per diem Alex
Act because that's not really
deem to be compensation that's
compensation gets tax the
the vote language just seems to
be different than what I've seen
in other legislation the more
this point that out
madam chair that's all courses
are thank you.
Thank you madam with.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam vice chair and thank you
For bringing this legislation up
I guess what I would want to say
is that I hate to have some
concerns that it's not in a
moral form I like the concept
and I think that we need to have
those discussions I would sure
like to see
I would like to see Legislative
Council I would like to see
participants from
You know if we did it as a
interim committee or have those
discussions to be able to have
those discussions of what what
as legislators we feel that the
needs are because they as an
outside commission where I value
stakeholder feedback I also
think that we're living in and
just being able to to really
discuss
you know how capital capital
impacts our districts.
How not getting paid I mean you
know works many of us are having
to balance having Travis of
calling in doing you know
working at night and day to try
to fulfill our job
responsibilities at the end also
our legislative responsibilities
and you know the the people of
New Mexico said yes to do the
the work of the people and we
need to be able to be equipped
to do that so I I see so many of
your concepts really as as
something that we need but I
also want to make sure we don't
take the legislative voice out
of the the conversations and so
I would just kind of put that in
here in as part of the
discussion because I think that
we have several value to to have
to those discussions you know I
also think you know we talk
about
you know letting the lobbyist
are the ones that have that
institutional knowledge but it's
also the staff and you know once
again I think we should have
that institutional knowledge to
be able to navigate some of that
because I think that that's
important.
because I think that there's
been staff that has been around
for years and that's you know
you talk to somebody and they
say well that's just the way
it's always been and but you
know we we want to change that
and and so we need to be able to
have the knowledge as to why
it's always been like that and
and if it maybe it made sense
twenty years ago but it might
not make sense anymore so so we
can open up those discussions
and so I would just add that
I I like the concept of the bill
I a I would just like to see
some tweaks to it thank you
thank you.
Thank you what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Madam chair movie do pass of HB
through one.
Okay I have a motion for to pass
by Representative Ortez.
And I will second that motion.
But Rowe.
Representative Chasey is excused
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Yes.
Representative night Burt.
No ma'am.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
And.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused I in the affirmative
and three and the negative.
Thank you Representative Rubio
you have a do pass.
On your bill.
House Bill three zero one.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives.
Thank you.
Chair just a point of order.
Okay.
Madam chair I actually think we
have to excuse madam chair and
Representative Chasey thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair Lewis was
present for the vote.
Okay thank you I'm sorry thank
you.
All right now we will manage to
committee substitute for House
Bill to ten.
Yes Representative Ferrary with
us.
There she is.
Okay Representative you may
begin when you're ready.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee if we
can bring over our Dr Richard
cram and Dr Michael Kaplan from
the attendees they will serve as
my experts this morning.
All right I see them both thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
If you're sitting here today
hoping to hear bipartisan non
controversial bill look no
further I'm pleased introduced
house bill two ten and acting
that all audiology and speech
language pathology interstate
compacts the purpose of this
compact is to facilitate the
Interstate practice of audiology
and speech language pathology
with the goal of improving
public access to audiology and
speech language pathology
services the lack of access to
medical and educational services
in the state of New Mexico has
been well documented.
Many of our most vulnerable
vulnerable citizens in the state
of New Mexico including the
young are aging population rely
heavily on audiology and speech
language pathology services the
nurse licensure compact has
provided increased access to
medical care for the rest
residents in the state of New
Mexico similarly enacting the
audiology and speech language
pathology interstate compacts
will be a great benefit to the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico.
At this time madam chair if I
can help my my two experts
introduce themselves and talk a
little bit more about the bill
thank you.
Thank you please proceed.
Madam chair this is doctor
Michael Kaplan I'm a speech
language pathologist I work in
home health I'm a past president
of the New Mexico speech
language and hearing association
and I currently serve on the
speech language pathology
audiology and hearing aid
dispensing practices licensure
board we support this bill this
bill will definitely address the
shortage of services especially
to children in rural school
districts throughout the state I
DD population which is ever
growing and access to services
has been limited in the past
and in addition it also provides
a higher degree of consumer
protection by having us be part
of this interstate compact to
there are currently six other
states that have passed the
compact there are additional
states that are considering
passing the compact this
legislative during their
legislative session and twenty
twenty one and so when ten
states have adopted this
legislation for the Interstate
contacted and the Interstate
compact would begin in New
Mexico once it is this
legislation is passed thank you.
Okay my name is Dr Richard cram
I'm an audiologist and I am
currently serving as the chair
of the speech language pathology
audiology and hearing aid
dispensing practices board for
the state of New Mexico I also
served as the on the interstate
compact advisory committee when
this idea first came about and
went back to Washington DC and
met with other audiologist
speech and pathologists and that
Council state governments and
when we just talked about this
plan and how we could bring this
to about before bill was even
written nor the compact was even
right and so I've been involved
with this from the beginning I
think this is a great
opportunity for New Mexico to
lead out and do something great
for the residents of the state
and provide more
Impact and access to the
services that are needed it also
will help with telehealth in
audiology and speech language
pathology and also as the
address for
members of the armed services
being able to be licensed and
their spouses to come to the
state to to work I also like to
thank our the representative are
asked for sponsoring this bill
and getting it to this point
thank you.
Madam chair with that we stand
for questions.
Thank you so now we will conduct
a poll and allow those who are
in favor or in opposition of the
bill to the.
Okay we have to in favor of the
bill and now we will go to the
audience and here comments in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand and I will call on
your name.
Sherri dot sent.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am sure reduction of
all of your advocate for A. A.
R. P. which stands in support of
HB to chant
of we recognized that of.
The importance of our SLPs and
already audiologists are for the
staffing in our New Mexico
schools and this bill will help
to facilitate that it also will
facilitate the process of New
Mexico licensure for military
spouses who wish to work and our
beautiful state again A. A. R.
P. stand in support of HB to ten
thank you.
Thank you next we have Adrian.
Rapture.
Good morning madam chair
representative and those in
attendance thank you for hearing
this bill today Dr Adrian
Bratcher I serve as the vice
president for.
Governmental affairs medical for
the New Mexico speech language
hearing association I also
served as the American speech
language hearing association.
New Mexico Representative
efficient by council this
morning I would like to request
that the representative.
Point eight.
Or this bill as it will give our
ability to start the president's
state of New Mexico as well as
the other elements that drive.
Your.
In addition I would say that
coming from eight immunity that
is hi Military Clovis Alistair.
This lady thank you course our
ability to assist those spouses
and serving working stated.
Thank you now we will hear those
in opposition.
And I don't see any hands so we
will go to the our committee
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair at reading this
bill.
The thought came to mind that is
this going to be the first of
many similar bills that we're
going to say because I think
with the advent of.
The pandemic are you so
zoom and electronic.
Communication.
It is just something that we're
going to see a lot of other
areas somewhere tax legislation.
In your opinion.
Thank you madam chair and our
Representative I'm gonna let
doctor chaplain answer this one
I I appreciate the question
Representative.
thank you Representative Ferrary
is madam chair and
Representative nine very I'm.
The interstate compact you know
there are already an interstate
compact in place for nurses that
New Mexico participates in as an
interstate compacts in place for
physical therapists that New
Mexico does not currently
participating but would like to
copy participate in I'm there
are several other
organizations that have passed
into state compact New Mexico is
part of those interstate
compacts and this would just
allow us to make sure that the
services are available by the
few telehealth are actual on
site services through a for that
part of our.
A community that doesn't
currently have access to those
services because there aren't
sufficient numbers of speech
pathologist and audiologist in
New Mexico currently to provide
those services so this would
allow us to have access to those
speech pathologists and
audiologists who are members of
other states that belong to the
interstate compacts to be able
to provide those services that
are necessary here in New
Mexico.
Madam chair representative I I
appreciate you bringing this
bill I think particularly from
for those of us who are in rural
parts of the state there are
there's some and I could foresee
other
Profession particularly in the
medical related fields
some some real opportunities
there are for.
Assisting our citizens in
getting some of the are things
that they need R. and I I I see
this is a as maybe a move
forward that will allow our
citizens to do things.
You're in a different
Representative although one that
the.
Appears to be capable of
addressing their needs so thank
you very much for bringing.
Since.
Committee members.
Moviepass.
Second chair.
Thank you I have a due pass
motion by Representative
settlement with and the a second
by Representative Ely quick to
call role please.
Representative Chasey is excused
Representative you're not going
back.
My apologies Representative.
Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you with that madam chair
we have nine in the affirmative
zero and the negative.
Thank you Representative you
have to pass on house committee
substitute for House Bill to
ten.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you committee members
I'm at I mean this committee so
often I feel like an honorary or
member so I appreciate your
support and the see you guys
soon thank you.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda committee
members we have house bill two
to one Representative Garrett.
Madam chair representative
Garrett should be logging on any
second she was chairing another
committee.
Okay and then housekeeping I
believe we are rolling house
bill three hundred.
the request of the sponsor
representative Stansbury.
Okay right yes.
Right here.
Okay I'll second that sure okay.
Do you have when Representative
Lewis has thirteen pinions in
her hands.
And representative Nibert it has
fourteen canyons in his hands.
The usual state of affairs a
difference of opinion.
and.
I would.
Westford General.
You madam chair.
Rep Matt madam chair says that
she's not
She's only partially fact
popping in and out I said well
she's not a half back she's not
a full back or she may be a half
back or quarterback but she's
certainly not a full back.
We
apologize.
I just I just thought I'd like
nest that seem very serious this
morning.
I think we're gonna have to
impose an new role that when
someone isn't sharing that you
can't have the jokes revolve
around the chair.
Yeah
we're we're support the.
I need to talk to the
interminable rules committee.
I don't think chairman back yep.
Thanks guys thanks to a.
Madam bass you're preparing
today.
Your committee is a handful.
Madam chair may I tell a little
story yes please.
I am embarrassed to say that I
was flustered while I was giving
my presenting my bill because my
campaign promise kitten was
eating my hard boiled egg and I
couldn't tell him to stop
so if you notice some.
Yes some flustered behavior it
is it is because of that
sometimes you see him on the
screens I apologize to
representative Nibert for not
being as focused I didn't want
to scream and if that so I did
not.
Thank you madam chair.
You didn't have your breakfast.
Madam chair chair yes it does
mean that.
Madam chair I thought we had a
rule that if you brought food to
the committee meeting you have
to share it with all.
We do.
Okay Representative Garrett are
you ready to present your bill.
Yes
madam chair and thank you we
just had a very one of those
tricky votes in education I was
Cherry and a deciding vote so I
excuse me for being a little bit
late I'm and madam chair I do
have an amendment do you want me
to introduce the bill first and
then the amendment how would you
like me to proceed yes please
thank you.
Go ahead and introduce your then
your bill and then discussed
here.
Yes okay and I have an expert
witness of Dr Byrne steam.
I'm is she here.
Madam chair representative I do
not see doctor burns Steen
unless she logged in under her
phone number.
I'm I think she is in health
education and I've texter to
come so if you can watch for her
I appreciate it.
Absolutely.
I'm so with that I'll start
House Bill to twenty one relates
to public education it's
changing the assessment
requirements for students in
kindergarten through second
grade and adding some points
that over the last year we've
added to a structured reading so
it adds three point five reading
when I retired from teaching in
July which was just this last
July I had spent the last six
years as an instructional coach
at an elementary school in
Albuquerque that served about
eleven hundred pre K. to grade
five students very very diverse
students I tested hundreds of
students that I taught other
teachers how did yes and every
every year every other year to
be a different system we do
developmental reading we would
do observational testing we do
doubles I station I ready and
numerous other systems and
assess as you all know in life
and in school it's it's central
to knowing the students progress
and achievement but in the last
few years we've gotten away from
what's best for young children
and observational assessed that
assessments are currently used
in our pre K. programs and the
opening twenty days of
kindergarten and then we drop
them.
I.
In children's strengths their
weaknesses their areas of growth
in a developmentally appropriate
in a way that's culturally and
linguistically responsive to
them as individuals is tied to
their daily activities that's
why it's so important to do
observations currently there is
been a great stress on computer
testing the problem with the
computers is I will do a test
call I station with the
kindergarten you don't know if
they didn't know the right
answer or if they press the
wrong space on the iPad itself
there's a great story from a
friend of mine earnings you have
to and she tested in the red as
you know the lowest reader even
though she was reading at a
third grade level in first grade
and and her and said will you
know what happened she said you
just press all the buttons
really quick and then you can
get back to reading your book
another yes man observational
tests the tier one of the things
on observational tests let's
child's physical development the
child was not walking properly
and as a teacher reviewed it she
let the parent know your there's
something not going on here
that's correct.
You know take your child to the
doctor the child actually had a
tumor in her late so we should
all casting really recognizes
the diverse range of development
in young children so in this
bill I'm for us
that we start using this again
in kindergarten to second grade
and that's where my amendment
comes can I share that amendment
at this time.
Yes please.
Number is two two
oh oh seven two point one.
Committee members to you
Do you have that amendment.
Madam chair I do not.
It's not on the share file on
look at that right.
Are you able to send.
Amendment Representative Nibert.
Yes madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative.
Okay I can quickly very quickly
review it on in the House
education the superintendents
asked that we change the
implementation date so that it
would be this year
so we change that that it
wouldn't start until twenty
twenty two to twenty twenty
three.
We spread it out over four years
so in this coming year actually
PED already has it developed be
beyond the first trimester
kindergarten they're actually
actually developed all the way
to first grade but we would not
begin implementing that fully in
kindergarten until twenty two to
twenty three and then we would
phase in first grade and twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
four and we would implement for
second grade in twenty twenty
four to twenty five this allows
time for development or training
for PED to update their
dashboard reporting system
and so that's why we have the
amendment.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
To adopt the amendment.
you haven't you have a lot of
public comment yet have you we
can.
When we come back to the
committee.
Okay Representative Nibert are
you able to pull up the
amendment yet.
All right yep pulled up we're
sure you sent me a copy of it so
I'm looking at.
Okay so in the meantime we will
go to the poll.
And
will conduct a poll those who
are in favor or in opposition of
the bill canal boat.
We have ten seconds left in the
cold.
And we have to in favor and one
against and now we will go to
public comment and we will hear
comments in favor of the bill
please raise your hand and I
will call on you.
Actually long.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee actually long
with the American federation of
teachers New Mexico we thank the
sponsors for their work on this
and we stand in support of the
bill thank you.
I don't see more hands any
comments in opposition of the
bill.
Gardner.
Are you able to and mute.
Have you unmuted on my end thank
you go sorry sorry madam chair
not necessarily in opposition
this keep order Rachel this for
imagination station just want to
point out the one issue of
concern here is that if we and I
appreciate the Sanchez amendment
the the concern is that we have
years and years of of data that
that has been collected using
these the current testing
process in the concern would be
obviously that as we move
forward especially during this
pandemic where we had a
different version of learning.
To be able to make sure that
that data from before is
comparative data that we
currently collecting we collect
in the future so that we can
really see what's going on with
these young minds I have a
grandson and have done the
studies with him and done his
tested watching do the testing
and and agree that observational
obviously is important as well
but combining the two is going
to really be key as we move
forward watching these young men
and women develop thank you
madam chair.
Thank you hi being no further
comments from the public
committee members.
Nine for.
Thank you madam chair.
Couple questions
Is going to corporations next
stop.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chairman and and
Representative no I'm he
already has people working on it
who have worked on it and
Nothing is going to change in
the next year so it is not going
to appropriations.
The FIR correctly it's going to
have a two million or one point
seven million dollar impact
maybe maybe it's not next year
but it certainly will have an
impact
in the following years.
Yes they need to know what's
coming down I will stop.
Second question is.
Related to what Mr Gardner
brought up is is our.
Are we totally getting rid of
the the prior data or we going
to.
That day the.
Are we going to continue to use
of that data or or what what's
going to happen.
To the existing data that's been
compiled over.
Great question Madam chairwoman
and Representative first of all
we don't have years and years of
data during the five years that
I was the instructional coach at
painted sky we went through
three different data systems
So data school district the data
stays with the child so a
teacher can look up what ever
testing system was used with the
child through whatever years of
schooling they had it stays with
them it's captain their
cumulative file and it's cap on
the computer records of the
district and the school and some
of the current system will still
be used I.
So we'll still have the data
it's not going any place.
Madam chair representative you
set some of those systems.
You made all of the systems are
the main word backward average
for some children in some
districts and we're going to
have it for other children in
other districts.
I Madam chairwoman of
Representative the data stays
with the child and with the
school so as an instructional
coach looking at a third graders
data I could go in I could look
at their pre K. data their
kindergarten data their second
grade data their third grade
data it's all there even today a
teacher or a coach or an
administrator can go in and look
at an eighth graders records for
the entire time that they were
with that school district.
Madam chair representative and
insert your testimony that that
that data will be reserve that
will continue with that that
student.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative absolutely and
and that comes from my
perspective as a teacher at
multiple schools in grades and
as an instructional coach that
was responsible for putting
together school wide that at
four thousand kids and six in
six different grades.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for
explaining that to me thank you.
Members.
Representative Chasey would you
like to go back to entertaining.
Their motion.
Madam chair we adopt the
amendment.
Okay I will second that so we
have a motion by Representative
Chasey to adopt the amendment
and I second is there opposition
our objection to adopting the
amendment.
Then we show everyone voting in
the affirmative we have adopted
the amendment for house bill two
to one.
Now going back to the bill as
amended what is the pressure of
the committee.
I'm in the past.
Thank you I have to pass a
motion by Representative
Gallegos settlement with.
And a second by Representative
Representative by Representative
a second by Representative Ortez
is there objection to the to
passion passed motion.
We show everyone voting in the
affirmative and we have
Representative you have a do
pass on house bill two eleven
two to one as amended.
Thank you very much Madam
chairwoman committee.
Thank you.
Now we.
We will not hear house bill
three hundred but we will go to
House Bill two two seven as
amended Representative Harper.
There you are Representative
Harper you may present your
bill.
The other committee called use
Mr Representative Harper.
Would like to order they'll.
Okay give me just one moment
please my apologies one moment.
My apologies chair I was just
about to speak on another bill.
Can I can I maybe very quickly
introduced the bill and ask.
R. Representative Nibert tore
someone else to take over for me
I I believe I do have an expert.
In the attendee list yes Mr
director CEO perhaps you can
jump in.
But I'd be happy to okay thank
you thank you I appreciate that
so I'm just very briefly what
this bill does I have
constituent come to me and say
that he.
Very early in his career very
young was married and had his
wife as the doesn't mean.
For a as the para.
is is is paramount
does it mean if something
happened to him she would get
the funds.
The US cents got remarried.
And would like to participate as
new spouse is cold spells this
of a great relationship.
And she's very happy to side
over those those are benefits to
a new spouse.
And apparently that part
apartment it's request like this
all the time.
and so this bill does just that
it requires the the prior spouse
the prior doesn't need to write
write a notarized approval that
yes you can remove me but allows
them a one time ability to
designate someone else we
actually did amend this bill in
the last committee based on
comments from Mr Trujillo.
from para.
so I know it's very fast I I I
hope everyone I got to the
general.
Many of the bill there with that
I will
I stand for questions and thank
you Mr Trujillo for for being
here I really appreciate it.
Thank you Representative Harper.
Committee members we will now
conduct a poll.
Those in favor of the bill.
Or against the bill will number
of.
Okay seeing no coal results we
will now go to participants.
In here from those in favor of
the bill.
Please raise your hand and I
will call on your name.
I don't see any any comments in
opposition of the bill.
I don't see any hands raised so
we will go to our committee
members.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair when I was
I was wondering is here
This arrangement requires the
agreement of the first
beneficiary.
So I do there's a property
interest in domestic relations
for the.
The retirement benefits of the
styles and so I'm just wondering
how that works.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative all out Mr
trio are trying to address your
question.
Thank you madam chair
representation you are correct
so we did this bill the prior
spouse would have to consent to
having that change maybe if we
have a divorce decree or other
divorce docs that the state that
cannot be changed that would
from this bill that the former
spouse would have to consent to
that change Madam chair
representative.
So thank you very much for
clarifying that I appreciate it
madam chair Representative
diverted Mr Trujillo.
We.
So at the point of the divorce
though does the former spouse.
Right.
Right to how the earnings after
that you create with seeing now.
Madam chair.
Your go ahead Mr trio sorry
about that Madam chair
representative Chasey.
It's all dictated by the
decrease so so the former spouse
could continue receiving a
portion of the benefit if a
split was in in effect at the
time however the the member
could then leave his portion to
the new spouse his or her new
styles if this changes to go
into effect.
So madam chair and
representative Nibert Mr trio it
really everything's controlled
by that you create.
And what you're all you're
trying to do here is this find a
legal path.
For a new spouse to be
designated if all parties agree.
Yes.
Representative that is exactly
correct.
Those are my questions.
Representative Ortez.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I I don't I don't really
understand all of
the pair requirements but I'm
why is it a one time revocation
what happens if someone gets a
divorce remarries implements
this onetime revocation puts the
new spouse into the beneficiary
standing and what if they what
if they divorce again that
spouse dies are they allowed to
again designate and and a new
spell submit it does happen
people to remarry more than
once.
Madam chair of the the
representative our.
You must be reading my mind so I
will have extra Trujillo answer
both of our questions.
Madam chair in the
Representative Ortez.
I believe this would still be
limited to two one what we call
internally deselection of a
beneficiary
this legislation or this option
has been around I want to say
since two thousand and ten and
there has been a couple
iterations when it first came
out it was limited to of a
retired member who selected a
non spouse at the time
retirement and that's that
hasn't changed this would be the
first the first option to allow
this language to select a new
spouse
as far as a second divorce in a
second the selection I don't
believe the legislation
covers that Madam chair
representative.
But you are correct it does it
does happen.
Thank you madam chair
representative number.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Committee members.
What is the committee.
On chart.
Okay I have a motion for do best
by Representative Chasey and a
second by Representative Eli.
Representative also made a
motion.
Okay Representative okay goes
live to to pass seconded by
Representative Ely quick to call
role please.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy Ecosse yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm spent.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
nine in the affirmative.
Thank you Representative.
You have a do pass on house bill
two seven seven as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and thank you Mr Hale.
Thanks committee members
appreciate so much.
Thank you Representative Harper
okay I think that completes our
agenda and we will adjourn our
committee meeting.
Have a great day everyone.
