Here.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Sari√±ana.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler your.
Representative Townsend Here.
Thanks chair Stansbury.
And chair the queen.
Here.
We have a quorum.
Thanks everyone for being here
promptly a couple of
announcements before we begin
and actually show the the you if
Representative small is
available you could work on
promoting him to panelists.
first off we're not here house
bill ninety five the water
ministration bill.
Sanchez still working on that
bill know that we may hear that
on Thursday.
so for the attendees if you're
here for the water
administration bill that's
getting rolled forward.
we will likely meet on Saturday
so please keep your schedules
open I with I think nine o'clock
is probably a
A good start time and we're
missing the.
Representative small excuse me
Does anyone on the committee
have anything while we wait for
a person small.
Okay he's looking for the zoom
link I will send it to him.
Also Mr chair this is vice chair
stands brand president I was
just a competitive.
And I sent in my link so we'll
see if he shows up as matching
with bring.
We see that there is you
chairman Matthew McQueen.
service first this morning is
that house bill one of five.
Electric generation project
requirements this bill relates
to industrial revenue bonds and
the bill we passed your to ago
and Representative a small my
request to you would be as you
present a bill to not only
explain what it does but also
explained how it does it because
I do believe it's a complicated
bill whenever you're ready
Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you so much committee
members for allowing us to
participate I will be joined by
John Ryan with Cynthia and also
Robert pope with the chief
financial our financial officer
for Sandoval County Mr chair
committee members I will turn to
them for some of the detailed
explanation.
For the legislation the
legislature in a bipartisan way
you chose to extend the same
industrial revenue bond
opportunity for transmission
lines knowing the importance of
these transmission lines for
unlocking New Mexico's renewable
energy potential
And now we need to make sure
that these in a in a technical
way which I will turn
two Mr Burpo and Mr Ryan to walk
through how house bill one oh
five we do have a proposed
amendment Mr chairman
I know that's been sent to the
committee how those with some
with some like to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Okay I see more to see
representation raising or at.
I move the amendment for
discussion okay I think that's
part of the process I can
explain why but Representative
small thank you Mr chairman I
thank you for moving the
amendment with that I would turn
to Mister Ryan and especially Mr
Burpo to explain the financial
Intricacies of this legislation
and the ways in which especially
for local school districts we
work to ensure they receive fair
revenue from these projects and
we avoid Mr chair and committee
members the potential for the
pool we implemented if it
doesn't work right then
communities counties schools are
denied revenue and renewable
energy remains locked away and
unable to reach the grit so
thank you Mr chairman and I
would turn to Mr Burke perhaps
to begin to go into some of the
financial into.
Mr Perot we need him.
Or maybe he needs I need
themselves.
Yes.
You ready Mr chairman so we can
we can hear you your little soft
we cannot see you but whenever
you're ready I'll get a couple
of thank you Mr chairman and
Representative small
the energy development projects
I've always enjoyed provide
benefits from tax budget benefit
from the New Mexico legislature
going all the way back two
thousand two
and when for example gas fired
power plant to be developed in
San Juan County Luna County so
the Deming and done in Lee
County and the legislature
backed them
had a draft legislation more
than the legislature that
created the ability for the the
school districts to negotiate
with the county for the local
government a revenue sharing to
offset the new students that
we're going to be put into the
school most read project back in
two thousand and two you're
gonna have about two hundred
fifty new long term employees
being brought into those
communities about two hundred
students and so we want to make
sure that the pills Revenue
government we see from the fire
rate were distributed somewhat
to the school to offset these
new students coming into and as
a result you saw the legislation
from two thousand to I might
mention the the the the
floodlight provided I create
strange bedfellows ninety nine
percent of the time my work is
on the side of the counties.
kind of against the developers
will be in them the patterns the
assembly is but this particular
situation brought us together in
a unified voice
Mr chair do you know has
everybody received the new FIR
that came out yesterday.
But you know I've been looking
for new FIR and I've not been
able to obtain it.
I don't know where it is.
Okay it was it was on the
website the last night around
five o'clock so
I don't Mr yes Mr Burke at sorry
Mr chair if I might.
Representative thank you Mr
chair I will leave the able to
perhaps send that to to you to
make sure that you have it and
Shelby does in order to
distribute to the committee I
just added the new one and to
the Citrix drive for all of the
members.
It.
It's just a maybe put that in
the email to the committee as
well.
Absolutely thank you.
Representative small.
Thank you and please Mr Burpo
continue I'm sorry thank you Mr
chairman Representative small
if I was planning on taking you
through the through the new FIR
let me just review some of the
important salient points it's
affordable LFC is decide to
change the nature discussion of
the analysis and focus on the
ways in which the proposed
changes would assist the
development of renewable energy
projects in the in the state of
New Mexico in it go through a
number of issues but it says the
important consequences of the
hold harmless provision from
last year.
The following
Some of the required payments
that are required actually end
up being in excess of what the
pilot payments alright let me
give you two very brief of
examples of Torrance County last
year did a one point four
billion dollar industrial
revenue bond
with with pattern energy the to
school districts that benefit
from this.
Are located outside of the
county in Guadalupe county and
Lincoln County but with the way
their their their boundaries are
drawn there on in the their
boundaries are going up into the
into the cast but as a result.
On the porch transaction the
county for the first eleven
year.
Would have to take over eight
million dollars out of it
general fund.
The rate goes to school
districts to make up the
difference between what the
include payments are and what
the hold harmless to the it
would take them another eleven
years to recoup that eight
million dollar they spent.
Right now so in effect the
school district or to the the
the the county would only
realize revenue.
About seven and a half years of
a thirty year project and that
money will all go to school
districts outside together.
In the case of Santa Fe
community who did a small
transactions seventy million
dollar transaction with PNM in
two thousand and nineteen.
the Kelly in order make hope
would make copayments would
never break even they would
actually end up losing six
hundred fifty four thousand
dollars in the difference
between what the utility
payments they received would be
and what was due and the make
whole provision in both cases I
cannot imagine either County
ever proving that transaction.
That would cause them to take
money out of the General Fund
cut curtail services to their
other constituents.
you know your conventional I. R.
B. isn't just going to the F. I.
R. something following your fire
conventional higher we are just
we're designed like an Intel
transect we create a lot of jobs
in those jobs create students
and what have you like the cold
or the the gap are project
created new employees need to.
The renewable industry according
to the FIR the fact doesn't
really create many long term
jobs if any at all they're not
designed to do the the the solar
panels and wind turbines are
very durable in if you look at
the budgets of these projects
the the new of the maintenance
expenses are very very very
small component of the of the
overall but I.
So you end up in a situation
where as as the
the FIR said of the Indian
payments from renewable projects
are something of a windfall to
the school because they have no
new students.
But they're getting new revenues
and you know it's it there's
little math equation I like to
throw out there situation where
the school are getting all the
money in the counties are
getting not impact actually
losing money.
They're not going to do a math
equation basically is this
Representative nothing is still
nothing and what would happen is
the counties we just elect not
to do that so what we have done
in conjunction with
Representative Townsend we had
some conversations with them.
Is we look at a way to.
Distribute.
The term but how much to
distribute to the school
districts and then determine how
equitably to these distribute
that.
If we look at a number of
methods we look at for example
school populations but if you
use that as an example reviews
the property tax amounts with
the for the different school
districts what you end up
happening in for example in
Sandoval county is Rio Rancho
school district will get eighty
five percent of the money and if
you want to other school
districts like in curry county
eighty one percent of the money
would go to
of the clover school district or
Rio Arriba county eighty percent
of the money would go to the
middle school districts so
Representative Townsend had an
idea that the money should be
distributed equally to all the
schools that are beneficiary.
So that's one of the provisions
of this this amendment this this
bill is that whatever the the
revenues are they will be
distributed equally among four
five six seven whatever school
districts are in the school to.
The formula itself though is we
want to make it based on fact
and not be arbitrary and
capricious so what we did is we
went in and we said okay what
are what are known revenues and
and and we basically based on
the mill that the school
districts impose and I and I
apologize for this being a
little bit in the weeds but
that's what the legislation and
so we'll go through it.
We said we know that the schools
have all rural districts in the
state have three sets of mill
that they impose they impose
their operating mailed their
debt mill in our capital
improvement mills.
We added to that for the
calculation the state dept mill
which is one point three six
Domingo that way and that was in
the network to bump up the
revenue sharing components so
for example when you take this
formula imported into into
affect for example.
In towards County it means that
stand to the Moriarty mountain
air bonding role the.
Which here thirty five percent.
Of the of the of the the the
piping in the case of Sandoval
County thirty two percent would
be shared between Bernalillo
Amos you are for Allison Rio
Rancho.
In the case of curry county for
example forty one percent would
be shared between Clovis Texaco
Melrose and Grady the beach
area.
In Rio Arriba county for example
where the new project above
thirty five point six percent of
the revenue can be shared
equally between the Thomas
school district Amos math school
district in the no school to.
in Dona ana county for example
that actually works out to forty
point six percent of.
Representative small backyard
that would be shared equally
between the Los crucis hatch in
the gaps and school districts so
that's what the formula does but
we also provides all in that we
think is.
Probably will never happen but
we put in as a safeguard the
school district.
In case the a project is
developed in a in an urban
setting they in Albuquerque or
Los crucis proper where property
taxes are already very high as
opposed to the very low property
tax you see in from the wind
farm location.
We put in a provision that says
the school district will never
get left.
Then what they were receiving at
the project not even been done
so the school districts are
always protected in a worst case
scenario in that Mr chairman
Representative small committee
members is the gist of the
technical part will.
Representative small.
Mr chairman thank you at a huge
thank you to Mr Burpo.
From the thirty thousand foot
perspective this is something I
know that has broad support the
The detailed work that rob and
others in to to make it work
technically working with leader
Townsend and others is deeply
appreciated and I think knowing
that we're
there maybe there will be
questions from the committee I
don't know if Mr Ryan has
anything to add otherwise Mr
chairman I think we would stand
there and then look forward to
questions from the from you and
from the committee.
Mr idea of anything that I I
would just add a little bit Mr
chairman members of the
committee the state of a
the industry which would include
generation and transmission is
it is trying to gather enough of
the puzzle pieces to put
together to
you know make these projects
successful it's
a there's a lot of potential in
New Mexico and nobody knows more
than I how difficult it is to
build generation and
transmission and you know the
legislature put together a bill
last year to add transmission to
the IRB's that was extremely
important as we interacted with
the nine counties that that
Sunday at yeah impacts each of
the county said they're big
priority was to bring jobs and
revenue to the counties and in
looking at how to bring jobs and
revenue to the counties of the
counties also brought up higher
bees and how valuable I are bees
are to.
In that revenue to them and
we thank you for for passing the
bill last year then the issues
that were created
are real the counties now say
that they won't issue IRB's for
generation and transmission
unless we get this fixed and
Representative Burpo went
through a detailed explanation
as to what new formula we need
to put in place for the counties
to be interested again in
issuing are bees
And and that will will determine
how the industry progresses and
develops without it you know I I
see the county still being
hesitant to deal with with big
companies and big projects like
Sunday and Sunday a wind and the
wind farms Western Spirit
pattern energy there's a number
of new industry partners that
are trying to get their foot in
the New Mexico and with the
IRB's the counties
you know stand back and say well
you know we're we're we're not
gonna do our bees and that that
then hurts the counties that
that hurts the school districts
and
and that's what we don't want to
do thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr I and before we get
to the committee.
We'll go to the attendees
if anyone would like to speak on
this bill you may raise your
hand if you're on the phone as
opposed to resume link
I understand if you press star
line that has the effect of
raising your hand.
Then we'll just take the public
comments in order I ask you to
be brief and into the point of
course and our first.
Mr Mrs representative Montoya
I don't know are where they can
explain the the amendment as
well it was move for discussion
and I don't have a copy of it
so.
Used it how would I.
So that's.
Representative got your
recognize that's a fair point.
the the amendment was
considering the concerns
expressed in the first FIR I
thought that our commitment was
remarkably brief but either a.
Representative smaller either
experts if you could just
explain the amendment
cemetery at the amendment is in
Citrix it has been there for a
while so it has been available
Representative small who would
you like to have explained what
the amendment does.
I thank you very much Mr chair
if Mr Burke bubble could briefly
go through the amendment the
amendment is very brief
Mr chairman.
Mr chair if I and I am in Mr
Burpo in his opening testimony
Help explain that on page three
line three.
He the inserted the state debt
service males the same thing Mr
chair Representative Montoya on
page seven
after County inserted state debt
service mills and Mr chair if
you would like Mr Burke would be
in the best position to explain
the inclusion of the State
debtservice not the purpose for
the inclusion of the state that
service mills.
Mr but I believe that the first
FIR
essentially said that the mass
in the building or this is fixed
that issue and could you explain
how.
Mr chairman
Committee members the the first
FY are
Quite frankly was.
Looking more the transmission
component then the at energy
generation and so the new FIR
really takes the this he
mentions in here LFC decide to
change the nature discussion of
in our focus on the way the
proposed changes with the
development of renewable energy
so it it really took a hundred
eighty degree change and and and
study what we did though after
our meetings and conversations
with Representative Townsend
we were to find a way to
systematically and.
And in fact we increase the
revenues to the school districts
over above what they normally
would get in the and and from
their school operations school
that and capital mmhm of Bill
and so we added a constant which
is every every taxing
jurisdiction the state of New
Mexico was born Indian
reservation has the one point
three six debtservice mills we
added that as a way to boost.
The percentage of revenue
sharing that goes from the bill
to the school the.
Okay.
Thank you for that
Representative motto is that
says factor.
Yes probably have questions on
that later I just was wanting
that to be explained in advance
since we had such a move thank
you Mr thank you someone tell
you that that's helpful okay now
we're gonna try going back to
the attendees Shelby if you're
ready our first the public
speaker is you know and then.
In this lesson.
And when they nearer unmuted
well our well yes hi I'm and
Linden Weller I am the policy
adviser for the energy minerals
and natural resources department
and we we are in support of this
bill for all of the reasons that
Representative small Mr Burke
and Mr and said that this really
does is.
Thanks a problem that was an
unexpected results of last
year's very necessary build to
help counties benefit from the
renewable energy industry
development in the state we are
in support of the specs thank
you.
Thank you for that next we have
Louise Martinez.
House bill one of five
facilitates the development of
renewable energy transfer to
this.
We want you to do a little late
could you start from the
beginning please of course thank
you okay I'm Louise Martinez
also with the New Mexico energy
minerals and natural resources
department director of the
energy conservation and
management division and we also
stand in support of this bill as
it does help with development of
renewable energy and
transmission which will support
the energy transition act of
goals that have been set for the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr
we have Wayne Johnson.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for a moment Sandoval County
stands in support of H. B. one
oh five I've got a little bit of
history with this over in
Torrance County and for the
interests of Santa Fe County we
believe that this is a common
sense way to make sure school
districts are supported and
protected from the revenue
standpoint and that any of the
and revenue this generated
through health is equally
distributed fairly distributed
among the schools I think
everybody wins in this case
currently under the languages
has been mentioned by Mr
proponents to Ryan there's no
incentive for a county to
subsidize these projects through
its general fund by making
school districts whole in the
end we only to win and this this
particular amendment to or H. B.
one of five makes that possible
so thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Johnson so we go
from the former Torrance County
manager to the current towards
K. Madam Jezebel.
Good morning chair.
I can hear maintenance chance
for a I stand this house bill
one of five.
Torrance County has wind and
sunshine some days I wish we had
a little less but.
Remember how blessed we truly
are we have gone through this R.
B. process prodigy generation
several times with the goal of
using well revenue to provide
basic services are kept as
operational during this pandemic
if this bill passes our county
is scheduled to enter into
negotiations for that are
Torrance County does not have a
significant other businesses
sorry dear tees made revenue
source we operate mainly offer
property tax collections and
also including are coping.
In order to raise the quality of
life for residents such as the
hiring of career firefighters
EMTs improving road conditions.
Water sustainability and
delivery as well as other
infrastructures we ask that you
pass this legislation this bill
forward.
The past we have amazing school
districts and we hear Torrance
County want to make sure that
they're protected in this
process as well
Madam we Johnson is commented we
felt this is a fair and
equitable way the counties to
receive funding and also whose
schools as well thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you Mr a lot next we have
Marco Gonzales.
Good morning The.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and Richard
lobbyist for pattern energy that
is developing a close to four
thousand megawatts of wind and
transmission projects in New
Mexico and those projects
represent about a seven billion
dollar investment in million and
solar energy in New Mexico and
really for all the reasons
previously stated by each and
every one of the are those who
have risen in support we also
support the bill thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you to
the sponsor for Kerry thank you
for all the hard work done but
folks during the process thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez except we
have the Interwest Energy
Alliance.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee sorry for the name on
zero my name's Rikki Seguin and
I work as the executive director
of the Interwest Energy Alliance
we are the regional trade
association representing thirty
of the largest renewable energy
developers and manufacturers in
the nation headquartered right
here in New Mexico in a west is
here today in support of house
bill one of five as it will
restore critical functionality
to industrial revenue bonding in
the state as you've heard about
we stand with the comments that
were made earlier I wanted to
note that often when we talk
about renewable and transmission
projects coming here to our
state we're often thinking about
the energy transition act and
those requirements however as
states across the Midwest meet
with New Mexico in passing their
own clean energy policies all of
their utilities are looking to
buy renewable generation as well
and that means that our projects
in New Mexico are competing with
projects and Colorado Nevada
Oregon all across the west to
win these competitive
solicitations in the latest
study show that will need about
nine gigawatts of new renewables
per year for the next twenty odd
years to meet the laws on the
books today so we know there's a
lot of new renewable projects
that will be built the question
is can we in New Mexico bring
them here and receive those
benefits in our local
communities that's why we're
here today supporting house bill
one of five this will make sure
that the renewable projects
needed in the west can be
developed here and that our
local counties and school
districts will benefit from that
project development so thanks
for your time today happy to
take questions.
Thank you for that and I think
that is our public comment.
And just won't do anything that
before we get to the committee.
Now Mr chairman thank you thank
you Representative first up we
have Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman
representative for bring in the
support I wish we had gotten
the.
Dated F. I R. a little earlier
it probably would have.
Alleviated so.
Questions and times and maybe a
little concerned but.
I think it's important to back
up a little bit and
Mr chairman and.
This proposed amendment to this
bill.
Will in fact
Protect the county from having.
Brownie and out flow and and I
think that needed to be fixed
and I appreciate Mr Browde and
Mr Barbeau and Mister Johnson
from making the long arduous
trip cartouches talk about that.
But Mr chairman I think the
other thing that's important to
note.
Is.
In the IRB process the
proponent.
This construction.
Who M. radius.
has significant.
Financial.
Our budget can you go through
those please Sir.
Representative small it was
directed you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I and
I Mr chair I may turn to Jon
Ryan Mr chair leader Townsend in
order to
Equalize the tool of the
industrial revenue bond which
does provide
financial benefits for that
Whatever the the developer of of
formally industrial processes of
the electric generation whether
that's done with coal natural
gas or other forms of generation
now is transmission they there.
Up front tax burdens in our
alleviated in order to help
them.
Construct that project and I go
to Mr Ryan if you want to add
anything to that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Townsend
as you know these these projects
are very expensive.
Cynthia is a is a four billion
dollar project a lot of that is
is for equipment and and various
aspects to build transmission
line.
Of our late incapacity
two different lines and and that
you know is that spread out
through New Mexico and Arizona
when we visit with a counties
the county said how can you
bring some revenue to us and we
said well we can negotiate
community benefits agreements
with you and that's one way we
are working with each of the
counties that we and our staff
is providing some benefits
directly to them for the the
needs of the government like was
mentioned by Janice and
though those are important the
if the other aspect was that was
the ability for counties to
issue our bees and in that
negotiation of IRB's with the
developer the counties have the
opportunity to tell us how they
want
you know revenue to come to the
county and for what needs and
purposes and and so it it's a
lengthy negotiation with regard
to things that the county wants
things that the school districts
one and and to some extent what
the developers will and that's
the only Avenue for us to
directly provide funds to the
county if if there were other
ways to do that we we would do
that as well we want to be a
good partner we will continue to
update our counties and stand
tied to them they're they're
very interested in our progress
they want.
They want updates they want us
to work on roads with them and
so it gets a long process that
we we've been working on these
transmission lines for over
twelve years and we've got lots
of support from the county's
resolutions letters supporting
our.
Are permitting processes and so
forth so we will continue to do
that and is right that we as a
as a big company with with deep
pockets need to take care of our
our counties especially the
rural counties that early each
of the counties that we go
through
you know they're unemployment
their their revenue to that to
that.
You know to miss the county
government
needs a little help and and they
look to these kinds of projects
to really boost you know their
activities and their services to
their communities.
Thank you for that Mr Townson.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
master plan but the point I
wanted to make and I I think we
can get it pretty quick is and
the project that you just
described the four million
dollar project.
It is typical to a lot of other
big linear projects that I have
done about fifty percent of that
would be subject to G. R. T. and
about fifty percent of that
would be is that directionally
correct.
Mr chairman Representative
Townsend we we have not yet
gotten into that right now as we
have those estimates with regard
to what our construction costs
are going to occur and and what
and well G. R. T. apply or will
it not and those are questions
that taxed Rabb.
you know.
Grapples with every day and and
you know there is some precedent
now that we have some other
projects and then gone down that
path we can we can look at some
of their information but that's
still an open book
Representative Townsend and will
will apply whatever law is it is
apple at the time in the some of
it will be taxable some of it
will and
It in the in those taxes that
they go to the state you know
the the locals you don't feel
left out you know the county
governments feel left out and
and I think they have for for
many years before the the local
option allowed you know gross
receipts a compensating tax to
go down to the counties that you
guys passed last year before
that the counties we're getting
a lot of that the generated
income from these big projects
as you know Representative
Townsend and and that I think is
is something that we've tried to
try to fix without hurting the
state revenue.
You know I R. V. is hard state
revenue
but in our bill we've we now
have a five percent of the money
goes directly to the state which
is identified to alleviate that
that particular problem.
When I appreciate that but
Mr chairman and Mr Ryan I think
what
And I understand the county
issued a but my issue has been
and continues to be the school
children a rural New Mexico.
And and those rural counties
that and I under and the
financial implications seminar
be but just so the committee
understands that and I are to be
on a four billion dollar project
if it breaks down at fifty
percent available to G. R. T.
you're talking about a hundred
million dollars.
You're talking about lots of
money.
And what we're talking about
with the county out hello on
that particular one point four
billion dollar project that put
the counties in the negative our
position which they shouldn't be
I agree wholeheartedly they
should be it's about eight
million dollars.
So the difference between the
two.
I mean eight million dollars on
one point one point four billion
dollar project is hardly a
rounding error.
so although I I
I understand.
The garbage in the amendment and
I think it corrects.
The problem with the counties.
In the in the school children of
rural New Mexico.
Have less than they would under
this bill M. eight company.
Who is proposing a one point two
our our one point four four
billion dollar project I think
it would behoove them to hold
the county whole so they didn't
have that out hello they enjoyed
the benefits of the G. R. T.
state building.
And did not take away from the
children.
That is my point and has always
been my point.
So I.
Mr chair will run again I wished
we had gotten the FIR.
Earlier so that our analysts
could
Have alleviated some of these
concerns and and questions that
I want the committee to
understand.
The impact to the state.
The impact to the children and
the impact of the counties I
think it's all important with
that Mr chairman I'm I have more
questions because this is a
complicated bill as as you
mentioned early on them and I
appreciate the time and and
thank you Representative small
to bring this forward.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we have
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair
representative small I have some
questions around decision to go
with equal sharing verses next
net taxable for the school
districts you know there's more
than one school district in the
county
where you know where you
facilities to transmission lines
would be would be placed can you
explain that a little bit to me.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Ortez I'm gonna
ask Mr Burpo.
to help explain that these.
Chair representative the the the
analysis that we use for even
verses either of student
population or property tax
allocation those two numbers
property tax allocation for
population allocation well
almost identical to one another
and so what you would have for
example if you use the property
tax or the school population
that qualify a number of
scenarios of the study Torrance
County fifty three percent of
the money would go to Moriarty
school district
states you would get about
seventeen percent more get about
seventeen bond would get about
six percent who will move would
get about seven.
if you go to Sandoval County for
example eighty one point six to
go to Rio Rancho versus six
percent Brawley and Kerala's in
like three point four eight
percent you go to a.
The Cuba in the case of curry
county for example ninety three
point seven six percent of the
money would go to public school
districts New Mexico get about
five Melrose get about one a
great you get about a half
percent.
going down to billing and
County for example against would
get about the
about twenty percent had forget
about six percent in about
seventy four percent would go to
Los crucis school district and
so what we're trying to do Mr
chair and representative is
instead of having these
imbalances which.
Very dramatically hurt the rural
rural district we went to the
concept of even instead.
so that
Just to make sure that the small
school districts got a decent
bite at the apple in the big
school districts that typically
may not need as much.
Didn't get as much and that was
the that was the analysis and
and and center for the but the
the concept of the the.
Thank you Mr chair represents
sort of answered my question.
Thank you Representative Ortez
next we have Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman and
presenters.
Could one of the presenters
compare for me obviously the
industrial revenue bond.
Is an advantage for the
developer or else I would not be
pursuing these.
One of the presenters.
Compare for me the consequences.
On a county and school district.
Of developing the project.
With.
With a conventional tax payments
and property tax payments as
opposed to developing the
project with your the what would
be the consequences to the
county and school districts
Salazar R. B. versus.
a conventional attacks.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Scott I had a
couple of quick thoughts and
then go to perhaps Mr Burke or
Mr Ryan Mr chair Representative
Scott committee members
to reemphasize of course this is
a totally voluntary process
nothing this legislation
obligates in the county to enter
into an I. R. B. process second
Mr chair committee members these
I. R. B. tools exist for a wide
array of current industries this
is simply working to ensure that
for some of our wrote most rural
counties Mr chairman committee
members they have a tool that
allows them to get if they so
choose to speed up development
there for speed up funds for
those counties the jobs that
come with the construction of
these transmission lines
except and then finally Mr chair
committee members before I turn
to the expert financial
analysis.
The situation we have today what
we've heard is that this tool
which was put in place in a
bipartisan fashion in this
legislature.
It's not quite tuned right and
so the counties who would
voluntarily want to go this
route are unable to do so in
back to Mr Burke post comments
Mr chair and representative
Scott is that a hundred percent
of nothing is nothing we are not
seeing the development that we
need for many reasons and so
just to make sure that that we
very clearly communicate to the
committee that this in no way
obligates counties to enter into
the inner into any agreements
one way or the other Mr Burke I
don't know if you would want to
add or Mr Ryan.
Eight to summarize a quick
financial break down
specifically to Representative
Scott's question.
Mr chairman that's got the the
the the one of the facts of
doing any of the higher rate
whether it's with a a pattern or
PNM or Intel you they don't care
they don't show or share all
their cars nor should that's a
little business decisions with
the now is that for example your
rural counties take into into
account the fact that.
The projects are all developed
on on property that in some
cases the the the per acre value
is is with the the at a Buck and
a quarter acre and of without
some kind of development the
property taxes in many cases it
is negligible at best and so we
can look at the I. R. B. as a
tool to bring not necessarily a
job in the renewable sectors we
talked about but right tax
revenues the former pilot
payments for bill payments.
In in lieu of jobs in indicates
the renewable energy industry
into very rural parts of the of
their County you're not going to
see a a solar farm or wind farm
built anywhere near downtown
Albuquerque or downtown.
The Hobbit or or or or
illustrious isn't just the cost
of real estate is too high so
they end up going to places
where a there's wind right or be
their son but see that there's
ample land at a very low cost
and that's the thing that the
bring to the table if if you
look at the property taxes that
are being generated on the fly
Act
well as I said medications right
now it's negative because we
negligible in so these projects
are actually quadrupling or or
would probably are everywhere
you look at it I mean you know
we've done some studies that
show that on on on the case of
the four million dollar project
one point four billion dollar
budget better the property taxes
the county was received right
now
fifty eight thousand dollars.
All content is getting on the on
the property fifty eight
thousand dollars and fifty eight
thousand dollars in total
property taxes per year right
now up to about one point six
five million dollars and so if
you look at the numbers that's
how it looks looks at it the I'm
not going to get into the the
number of.
Of the the voters don't know and
I want to make any
misrepresentations
Representative that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Scott.
Mr chair and
Representative small so.
We don't have any idea.
What comparison might be.
And would not be.
Accurate to say.
That of four megawatt wind farm
on a piece of property would
make it significantly more
valuable than.
A dollar an acre.
I perfectly understand doesn't
need.
Of for the project for the
developer for the R. B. but I
would I would like to have some
comparison as to what the
counties and schools are given
up with respect to the I. R. B.
as opposed to the no why are be
of being go shifted that's not
out there all.
For.
Mr chair represents got all that
I can
Testified to is that the very
counties rural counties Mr chair
representative
are working to not only bring
this legislation forward last
year are part of that group in
concert with the transmission
and renewable energy developers
there now Mr chair and
representative working to bring
this fix forward because in fact
the needed development that is
going up.
The needed development the tool
does not work for them so the
counties Mr chair and
representative are a key part of
us for this legislation and for
the fix that this legislation
allows I think perhaps in very
large part because they are not
seeing the development they
would like to see right now they
would like to have another tool
to spur that development as that
tool exists across a wider range
of other industries whether
that's fossil fuel generation or
otherwise
and number two Mr chair and
representative there's been
great care taken in this
legislation to ensure that no
entity especially the local
schools are worse off if this
tool is utilized than they were
before they're going to be
better off Mr chair
representative there's been
special consideration for the
more rural school districts as
Mr Burke detailed and
It.
I think that that helps to me at
least summarize why the the and
the counties and other raw
advocates are part of the group
bringing this legislation
forward asking for this
legislation to be brought for.
Representative thank you for
your answers or perhaps not
answers thank you Mr chairman
that's aligned.
You Representative Scott
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative small
I served on the New Mexico
finance authority and we we
would and the inter Committee we
would always hear the challenges
that the.
mainly went the land developers
were having and and the nation
part of the state in mainly was
right away I just couldn't get
their highways a that was a a
real obstacle
you know that this this fix here
is another obstacle
and I I guess I want to direct
my question to
center Ryan
he's been involved with his
Renewable energy project for
twelve years and how you come
along on the ride away take to
build these transmission lines.
Yes thank you Mr.
Senator right here Mr Ryan.
I think regional far afield from
the the IRB's transmission lines
raised a lot of different issues
yeah I'd rather focus on this
bill.
Okay I'm sorry Mr chairman a.
That that this this was a big
big issue to get this yeah okay
kicked off and obviously the our
baser part port part of that so.
Jennifer
the steering wheel the law of
course here but to.
I agree it's a legitimate issue
I just don't think we can tackle
the to that.
Very complicated bill.
well I I I just to.
I guess I'll wrap up my comments
obviously the counties and the
and the school districts are or
what are working on a fix and I
appreciate Representative
Barbosa expertise in this.
This is a.
A very complicated a formula
there's been worked out so
hello I'll leave it at that
thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative small.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative
Townsend for second time
briefly.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
I would like to have
a look at this.
This amendment I think is
currently.
You're at and as I understand
that.
The state loses a lot of the tax
base in IRB world.
Counties came.
The schools.
Although they get more than they
would without the construction.
They're getting less than they
would.
If that was
Based on fair market value.
The.
My only.
Thank G. R. T..
And and I think that's I just
think that alright is there.
I don't think for a minute.
That any part time at that
proposing a one point four four
million dollar project.
Is to let.
Well from a particular County.
Eight or ten million dollars.
Override their ability to
collect over a hundred million
dollars.
And so I would just I just want
to make sure that the kids of
New Mexico.
Especially.
Mexico.
Derive benefit.
From these projects that are
being placed in their community.
I think it's important to note.
That there is no severance tax.
Or production tax generated from
this electricity.
The.
Reported lane does most of it
doesn't stay in New Mexico it's
transported out.
So these companies are common
in.
they're placing the signs in
rural New Mexico.
But they don't have a choice I
get that.
But.
The.
Thanks.
Dennis to Rome New Mexico
significant.
And I think.
I think the utilization of these
are IRB's.
Is being exported at.
Rural New Mexico.
And I haven't heard any of the
proponents.
Argue that with me.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman
Of.
Representative small.
It was stated just and I think
very accurately that this land.
That is in a lot of these rural
communities
could be worse this just even a
little over a dollar and a half
an acre potentially.
Currently.
When a an electric transmission
line goes through with a the.
From a trip a traditional source
of energy.
there's no there's no
opportunity.
For tax abatement whatsoever if
a gas line work to go through
natural gas that there is no tax
abatement for that as well.
so.
The reality is in the
metropolitan areas the land is
worth a lot more.
And.
any sort of construction with
the new business or a new entity
that goes in on that property is
improve the school districts
have that many more
opportunities for increased
taxes in the school district.
if you live in a rural community
you have very very very limited
opportunity for.
Property tax to go up.
And
I'm looking at that.
On page three.
of.
In this bill online nine it
says.
Not not that that the tax would
not be less than the amount due
to the school district in the
tax year immediately preceding
the issuance of the bonds so in
other words.
They can go down from a dollar
an acre I don't know that
there's any comfort in that for
me.
I don't know that that I see
this.
As
anything that the schools would
want to negotiate away it's one
of the very very few
opportunities that they have for
their tax base to go up.
and I and I don't.
I can see where eighty eight
county negotiating.
These are bees.
can find you know a road or
something like that that gets
increased but as it is right now
what they would be giving away
is there year over year tax base
for those schools.
So I understand that a regular
transmission line whether it's
the electricity or natural gas
line that goes through
the.
G. improvement to the land goes
into place.
And then it gets assessed at the
new right.
And that is what's collected.
And then it's distributed out to
the schools in that area as well
as the committee the the
whatever communities are
effective whatever counties
affected.
Last year when we change this
law.
We change that.
From.
All right electric generation
section we change with electric
generation we added transmission
and I think former
Representative Grupo
was correct when he said that
I that I are bees are usually.
Put in place for because we
understand that we're we're
negotiating away something but
there's usually jobs or
something else that's going to
bring tax base to those local
communities.
In the instance of a
transmission line or some some
permanent fixture.
there really are very very few
jobs after the initial
construction phase goes there is
whether it's whether we're
talking about the.
Green energy whether to green
energy project or a or a natural
gas line or a
carbon based source it really
doesn't matter there's not that
many jobs there's there's really
after the initial construction
there and are virtually no jobs
associated with the maintenance
of those lines I mean you have.
Periodically you know of people
checking and making sure and
that there's no leaks or no
problems there are no.
It is just maintenance ma'am
it's just.
Average maintenance for those is
very very few jobs or
negotiating way is.
And I want to be very very clear
for everyone else if you live in
a if you live in a metropolitan
area need to understand this is
one of the very few sources.
Of tax base that these rural
schools have is if someone wants
to put some sort of.
The pipeline or a transmission
line through their community
that's what we're talking about.
To the to the to the greater
point.
We're in the process of trying
to transition away.
From traditional sources of
energy.
Towards green energy.
But what we're doing is we are.
In every instance and here's
another we're we're trying to
find a way to give a tax break.
To those projects so
simultaneously we're doing away
slowly right now the there's
even a moratorium on on on this
you know a national moratorium
on certain projects taking place
that are fossil fuel based.
When we're right here we're
talking about Trump something
that if we're talking about is a
thank you.
In energy economy source but
we're taking the economy out of
it we're taking the the tax base
out of it so we're we're we're
depleting one tax base.
And we're cutting.
The the revenue from the other
potential tax base.
And I and I just don't know how
we can do it and for for those
once again in the metropolitan
areas if you Representative
Metropol near you realize what
you're doing is you're giving
away.
The minimal opportunity for for
taxes to increase on property
for improvement when the
metropolitan areas or any city.
Has the ability for new business
to come in and every time an
apartment building is built any
Project this bill the property
value goes up.
And I I just.
I think earlier was stated that
that somehow what what was put
in place last year's is a boon.
For in store for school
districts.
I mean I I just don't see that
this is this is just the natural
it's going to keep those rural
communities.
Looking forward to more of those
fossil fuel based transmission
online databases to
Representative transmission
lines pipelines because that's
where they're going to get
revenue from so that I think
that'll just further create this
divide that we have I do like
the six the only thing that I
like.
That's been presented today is
the amendment.
But the overall bill that's
being presented today.
I it just further harms and and
and right now we've got losses
in the state from.
For rural districts as to an
insufficiency of school of
funding for their school
children so
That's just a statement I do
have two questions to ask and I
don't know who's the right
person to ask
but.
This is not limited to as I
understand.
The transmission lines that
originate only from a.
The generating source in New
Mexico.
Or only that goes to a
community.
So so I think that I guess the
question that that is in New
Mexico so the question is can
transmission lines.
That originate in another state.
And just go through New Mexico
and and and up to date a person
who's receiving that or a group
that is receiving at our
community receiving the.
The our generation power
generation.
They're able to negotiate for
these
These bonds as well as that is
that correct Representative
small.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya Mr chair
representative I at as a
reminder to all of us these are
voluntary this would be a
totally voluntary process Mr
chair Representative Montoya one
of the reasons that we have
rural counties and others
helping bring this legislation
is that the transmission is
needed to spur development of
renewable energy especially wind
power in their regions which
bring the property tax benefits
to the individual owners of
properties to counties and to
the school districts that are in
those rural counties so Mr chair
representative I a if there's no
benefit for New Mexico
communities then they would not
answer this voluntary I. R. B.
process.
So Mr thank you Mr chairman I'm
gonna restate the question so I
can hopefully get an answer.
These are these.
Would not be restricted to just
a New Mexico based company.
Companies who are in other
states and the transmission goes
through New Mexico and ends up
in another state they would not
be restricted from.
Applying for these Arby's with a
as we heard I think three times
voluntarily with this committee
so I thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative Montoya at
you are right the voluntary
nature of these the benefits for
local communities that with
their local elected
representatives choosing whether
or not to enter into
negotiations and finalize
negotiations for this tool that
there could be for instance Mr
chairman president of monthly a
because New Mexico has the
second best win power potential
of any state anywhere in the
United States and as this market
is growing we could see states
far away from us be very
interested in utilizing power
generated in New Mexico with the
wind turbine on a farm for on a
ranch that's out in Torrance
County that is bringing if it's
on fees simple land bringing
money to that person who owns
that land as well as to the
county as well as to the school
district so it's not restricted
by state Mr chair representative
the fact that are counties
voluntarily.
Would go into this process would
choose whether or not this was
of benefit to them at least it
gives me comfort Mr chair and
representative that we can trust
and rely upon these local
elected officials many of whom
have testified here today one of
whom Mr Burpo whose expertise
has helped inform greatly this
legislation
so they they would not be
limited in the projects they
could look at Mr chair
representative but I trust that
they would be looking to the
benefit of their community
members on.
In their decision about whether
or not to enter into an I. R.
B..
So thank you for that to answer
a Representative small Mr chair
not not to belabor the point.
And I know we have other bills
ahead of us but I'm I'm kind of
being forced into us question
multiple ways to trying get an
answer.
Just wondering.
A transmission line could begin
in Texas in and in Arizona.
With no customers and no.
Generating source in New Mexico
so no in no end users or no
generating source in New Mexico
the reason I'm asking this
question Representative small is
we're talking about tax
abatement in New Mexico.
We're talking about school
children in New Mexico we're
talking about people who who
will will be giving away
potentially and by the way that
the county commissioners and
hold a great a a much greater
voice in this in the school
districts but they that the
school districts would be the
one who potentially would be
held harmless at a dollar an
acre even though the the land
isn't improve significantly so
I'm just trying to get a
straight answer Representative
small I think it was kind of in
that last answer next all in.
But that a.
Transmission line could begin
out of state and go to a
community receiving that power
out of state.
And the second time I'm trying
to get a straight answer thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative Montoya I'm
trying to give a detailed answer
Mr chair representative Montoya
to a question that prejudices
the.
capabilities in my perspective
and perhaps not of the local
elected officials Mr chair
representative Montoya the first
Texas is its own electricity
market Mr chair and
representative they do not
interlink with other electricity
markets at this time their their
own electricity market second Mr
chair representative.
It is true that multi state
lines including signs the are
eligible for the I. R. B.
projects third Mr chair Mister
Representative Montoya this is
this does not discriminate on
the type of distribution project
Mr chair Representative Montoya
in may be your supposition that
local elected officials would
enter into agreements that have
no benefit for their
constituents Mr chair
representative my supposition is
that even with multi state
transmission lines the budget
for local communities are.
Significant and that they will
only enter into this voluntary
process if those benefits are
greater for the county they will
be greater for the local school
districts and Mr chair
representative we've heard Mr
both testify to the formula
that's included here which
privileges smaller more rural
school districts in the equal
receipt of the of the payment in
lieu of tax funds and
so it.
We can that's the Mr chair
representative I I am answering
I'm working to answer in detail
considering Mr chair
representative Montoya
different scenarios and Mr chair
Representative Montoya as we
heard.
The summary from later Townsend.
The even with the five percent
guaranteed to the state which
guarantees so state revenue
there is some lost state revenue
there is significant Mr chair
Representative mentally a
benefit for counties which are
critical during this time in
rural counties Mr chair
representative on Toyota there
is going to be equal benefit
spread amongst the school
districts in whichever counties
and voluntarily into this
process
And Mr chair representative on
toy that I think.
The fact that we have rural New
Mexicans stakeholders bringing
forward these fixes and saying
that this will help their
communities.
It's not.
In theory this is what rural
communities at least some of
whom are represented in this
meeting today are specifically
asking us for they have a
resource they want to develop
that resource in ways that
benefit their local residents Mr
chair representative Montoya we
allow this I. R. B. tool in many
other instances to develop
resources including on more
rural parts of land throughout
the state.
This is something our local
incident rural communities are
asking for and and and that's
why I'm bringing it forward
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
Representative small at a it's
really in my opinion that it's
been the folks who want to
transmission lines for bringing
us.
Issue forward the the idea that
a.
The idea that an I. R. B. being
a benefit to the local community
is only one there are jobs
because that's that's further
tax base but and I are the one
there are no further jobs is
only a benefit to the company
who benefits from negotiating a
lesser amount it was stated
early on in this discussion that
projects have not gone forward
and if it was really
The.
You're somehow less expensive to
go forward with under the
current tax structure they would
go forward that's exactly what
happens with every other sort of
source of energy
it for transmission so it it
just it doesn't make sense that
this is a benefit to those
communities it's only attention
the benefit because it's not in
the minds of the.
People in charge these project
projects that is for some reason
not financially justifiable for
them and and that's really the
question I have is is at this
point we're trying to transition
to to more green energy sources.
Are they not.
Profitable without tax abatement
because at some point if we do
away with the state's current
sources.
Of the energy and the revenues
from that.
The the green energy sector is
going to have to pick up that.
That cost what we're doing is
we're talking about giving away
that revenue perpetually for
maybe a short term fix so Mr
chairman I I I don't think I'm
be able to get to the answers
and I'm trying to get to page I
just don't see the protections
in this for schools there is
definitely no protections for
rural schools here
I mean I'm not comforted with
the fact that a piece of
property that's worth a dollar
now will be able to even if the
increased greatly in value going
forward that they will at least
still get a dollar value of the
property have thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
Representative Chandler.
thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
this will be a brief question
and I hope in a brief answer and
I have a brief comments
Representative small and Mr
chair what impact will help
payments to the school districts
have on the calculation for the
SCG has that been thought about
and and considered with this
proposal.
At Mr chair representative I
have not discussed at issues
simply but Mr chair
Representative Chandler I will
work I'll get an answer for you
after the committee thank you
for the question.
Thank you for the answer Mr
Representative and Mr chair and
it just a comment I voted
against this bill.
Two years what twenty twenty
it's all getting kind of running
together in my head but and I
voted against the law the first
the large bill.
Because I felt that the IRB
process was not appropriate for
this kind of a project and
having said that I am going to
support this bill because it
makes the original bill better
even though it my philosophy is
such that I don't think it's an
appropriate use of the IRB
process I just wanted to share
that with you and I am tickled
though to hear my colleagues on
the other side talking about the
need for tax revenue.
And I work with them on a number
of them on taxation and revenue
and I'm looking forward to
having a continued dialogue on
how we can ensure were receiving
enough tax revenue for the state
to ensure we can provide good
services and infrastructure
thank you very much Mr chair.
thank you Representative
Chandler if there are no further
questions from the committee
I'll ask questions of my own.
Representative small in Mr Mr
Percoco.
Mr purple your first example was
Torrance County and the bill
payments going to to school
districts that are not in
Torrance County.
Could you explain that.
Thank you Mr chairman of the.
For.
The school districts are located
headquartered in corona and
involve however the the public
education department on the
district line.
Irrespective of where the county
boundaries are so as a result
you have parts of the gross
school district boundary up into
the southeast for our corner of
portage county this same thing
applies to law the Public
Education Department both part
of their boundaries up into the
southeast corner of
of of Torrance County so because
that's where the mill windmills
are going to be located.
Would be located within those
two jurisdictions all the money
goes to school districts even
though most students.
Reside in door county to go
legal school districts so and
none of the other school
districts within the county
Moriarty mountain air a state
yet we'll get a dime of this one
point the you know six billion
dollars one point six eight
million dollars of of annual
revenue.
Okay Sir.
Mr purple what determines.
Both currently in under this
proposal which school district's
budget is it the physical
location of the project or is it
the public entity issuing the
bonds.
Mr chair right now under current
statute the location of the
windmills.
In which taxing jurisdiction
whether it's in the promotional
District of on school district
or state you wherever that is
the determining factor under
this new legislation.
Revenues would be spread evenly
among all of the schools within
the county jurisdiction so
Corona von because they have
jurisdiction you really have no
students but also Mountain there
stands the up Moriarty would get
revenue.
And
if I might Mr chair
right representatives of got it
got off before they answers
question the.
The help that the county is
going to be receiving in the
case of the Torrance County
transaction is forty three and a
half percent what we normally
would have been collected in
full property tax.
And for example right now the
schools
right now all of.
Would receive about twelve
hundred and thirty one dollars a
year and now they're going to
receive six hundred sixty to
seventy six thousand seven
hundred dollars a year for the
one from twelve hundred thirty
one dollars a year six hundred
seventy seven thousand dollars a
year so there is substantial
budget for this project that
particular project the the.
Okay so I I'm not I'm not can
answer in the this so.
When we return our bees for wind
projects.
The.
The help payments were not going
to it all the school districts
Representative if.
It leaving transmission aside
for the moment if there's a wind
project
In a different county how would
the school districts in for
example Torrance County.
Receive payments is it.
And so I I need to understand
are the total.
Are the benefits to the school
districts based on geography or
based on who is issuing the
Iraqis.
What what about Mr chairman of
the the first issue is what the
location of the towers with her
if the wind turbines are located
in Torrance County that portion
of the term of the reports
county will have to be done by
industrial revenue bonds issued
by Orange County yes however are
in Guadalupe County for example
Guadalupe County will have to do
with all my RP and if some are
located down in Lincoln County
the Lincoln County what it's my
RP so that that that's the first
question is the location of the
wind turbines determines which
government or governments.
Must issue the I. R. B. then the
determination under current
statute of who gets the bill
payments is based on the
location of those wind turbines
within let's say Torrance County
are they located some of winter
months in stance field school
districts some of them in corona
school districts on them in the
law school district even though
both through the school
districts are located out the
headquarters of the school the
school themselves located out
County.
The need to some batteries up in
the park at.
Okay Mister purpose so could and
I think you give me the answer
to this but I want us so it's
clear could for example
Bernalillo county.
do a project in Torrance County
issue hired people once in
Torrance County no okay so that
makes a lot of sense for the.
transmission facilities except
perhaps when they struggle
county line what happens with
the transmission line which
almost always is gonna cross the
county line.
Mr chairman it is my
understanding from bond counsel
but we work with that point
county would have to do and I
are the for the portion of the
transmission line imports County
Bernalillo county would have to
do one for the parts and that's
in Bernalillo county etcetera
etcetera etcetera.
Local governments don't have
jurisdiction another of your
selection okay and Mr propose so
I mean that.
Makes you translate that to the
language in the bill but that
seems like a reasonable answer
Then the.
So the transmission line crosses
Torrance County towards family
issues are the funds for the
transmission line and then
every school district in
Torrance County receives a
benefit based on this formula
that includes.
The the mill levy and stuff I
don't I I can't fully calculate
but so every school district
within Torrance County will
receive a benefit some portion
of the benefit is that correct
yes we will do the the formal
will kick in and say you have
let's say for example that the
the the pilot is a million
dollars a year in the formula
says that the school district
should get thirty five percent
and thirty five percent of that
million dollars we'll go to the
school districts in the council
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars will go to school
districts in the county and it
will be distributed evenly
amongst the school districts in
the county so in the case of
Torrance County Moriarty will
get some money of their will get
some money is that you will get
the money Romo will get some
money fund will get some because
they are later the geographic
location.
This I think
Might be my last question so.
If there is a project in for
example Santa Fe County.
Would more yardage with school
district which includes portions
of Santa Fe County also sharing
that the proceeds of that yes
Sir.
Okay thank you for that.
Any further discussion from the
committee and we've been on this
for awhile you know I think the.
The questions are
It's a complicated bill and we
have real concerns about the
bill so
Any further discussion from the
committee.
so we we have moved the in
for discussion.
Would like to move the amendment
for adoption.
Mr chairman I have that option
of the amendment to this house
bill second.
Okay
should be could you take the
vote on the amendment.
Please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Saniona yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
Chair McQueen yes.
This unanimous adoption.
Thank you what's the will the
committee on the bill as
amended.
Mr chairman I move house bill
one oh five as amended.
Second I do pass on house bill
one of five as amended.
And
the motion I think with the
second from Representative
Sarnia.
Okay
The show we could you take the
on the on the bill as amended.
Representative chan yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sari√±ana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend.
Now and I'd like to explain
about.
Thanks chair Stansbury yes.
Representative chairman agreed
my apologies.
Yes and also we move those were.
Could you pass with a vote of
seven to four.
Thank you we would you pass on
the bill as amended
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you very simply
I think it's important for the
committee to understand that
even though the example giving
give them about the tax base
going from twelve hundred
dollars to six hundred and
seventy thousand dollars is
correct but without this it
would be one point two million
dollars and that is important
but because that is that delta
is what is is taken away from
the education system in New
Mexico second with regards to
Representative Chandler's.
comments we would be happy to
work with her
preparing a the Bible Tax base
to this energy source in New
Mexico who pays that nothing
absolutely zero to the taxpayers
of New Mexico today.
Thank you.
Thank you.
In I just want to echo what
Representative Chandler said I
voted against house bill fifty
last summer and to also concerns
about the bill but I do I do
think this is an improvement so
it is
that helps.
So Representative small has left
us for the time being so the
next bill over gonna take up is
house bill one thirty six oil
and gas subdivision parcels if
Representative divert us on the
attendees to be promoted to a
panelist.
Thank you Watson the house
Energy whenever you're ready.
I also need to ask you for my
expert Lucas Williams are to be
promoted as well.
Representative Nibert I don't
see him on the attendee side is
there a possibility that he
could be listed under an
organization name.
Unless it take a law firm
I just sentiment Texas of the
electoral.
It may be a moment before he
gets to a place where you can
log in on
You.
You can you present the bill and
then hopefully he logs in for
questions yes Sir.
Mr chair as the year stated
yesterday in a meeting this is
one of several bills that.
And I hope that would be the
case house bill one thirty six
deals with the the subdivision
Act in New Mexico the a
particular.
What we're trying to do is to
add one exemption so that oil
and gas companies do not have to
go through the subdivision Act
in order to purchase a five acre
three acre tract of land for
purposes of putting some of
their oil and gas facilities
particularly along the extreme
eastern border of legality in
the southern border of both the
we County and Eddy County where
they interface with the state of
Texas the purpose for bringing
this up of Bill is.
In New Mexico.
We have a variety of hurdles
that have to be overcome to
locate facilities are on land in
the subdivision ordinances is
one of those hurdles the state
of Texas does not have those
hurdles and so if you were to
look on Google earth at the
southern state line.
Between US two eighty five south
of lobbying along the state line
and heading west to the el Paso
highway you will see a line of
facilities that are virtually
one hundred feet south of the
state are.
To access those facilities they
use and Eddy County road to
access those facilities in the
state of Texas.
New Mexico and specifically Eddy
County in this instance has lost
out on a tremendous Tax base
because they're located in these
facilities and taxes are not in
New Mexico so this effort is
simply to try to.
Remove one of the hurdles to
encourage companies to locate
facilities yes the state of New
Mexico and to allow the county
to have an increased tax base on
which to pay for the very
services that are being utilized
to
Black access to these
facilities around the I might
just go into
Some history on this
I I had to experts lined up but
by one expert gas Tabor who is
the Eddy County attorney he's
Senator very talent Commission
meeting today during this time
can't be present with us but he
he's worked with Lucas Williams.
One of my partners to brought
this to my attention Jim said
that that.
New Mexico to benefit greatly if
we have this exception there
been some people say that the
counties giving up their ability
control stuff that's not the
case some need ordinances would
still apply Eddy County houses
owning ordinance that prohibits
any oil our.
Drilling and and facilities
within I think three hundred
feet of a occupied structure
that would still be in place
Representative would allow the
oil and gas company to purchase
from a rancher a five acre tract
with without having to go
through the extended period of
time for subdivision ordinance
review and subdivision
ordinances are generally there
to allow the
county government to make sure
that it has adequate the
resources are plans in place to
to deal with our subdivisions of
a property usually for for
business and residential
purposes
oil and gas operations don't
the.
Those those same types of
burdens on county government
and so it seems to me that.
We ought to be able to go
through that process or for that
process in order to have
Representative Eli battery have
a compression side have a our
guests aware of what have you.
Located on the land.
And I don't know if Lucas is
those joined us or not you're
not our test fees these are
Mr Williams would you have
anything that about this.
Thank you chair and thank you
Representative divert up we have
proposed or I I have been I have
requested Representative nine
point two caring and he has
graciously done so this small
amendment to the subdivision Act
so that New Mexico can compete a
little more fairly with the
great state of Texas on our
southern and eastern borders I
have encountered numerous
circumstances where economic
development that could have been
rightfully should have developed
on the New Mexico side of the
line has been located mere feet
away because of the over
regulatory burden up.
That Texas provides to its oil
and gas operators by not having
the same subdivision
restrictions that New Mexico
does in particular midstream gas
companies that are building out
infrastructure throughout New
Mexico for the delivery of oil
and gas across this country are
putting their very expensive and
very of.
Well very expensive and
therefore very tax beneficial
facilities on the Texas side of
the border rather than in New
Mexico while at the same time
using New Mexico roads to access
those Texas facilities.
New Mexico would do well to move
that tax base over the border
and I would very much appreciate
the committee to consider this
small amendment to the
subdivision Act in order to
promote business in New Mexico
thank you.
with that Mr chairman would
stand for questions.
Thank you number
Before of course we go to the
committee will go to the
attendees I see one hand up
already if you'd like to speak
on this please raise your hand
if you're on the phone if you
press star nine the currently
has the same effect of raising
your hand on the ceiling.
so first the first up we have a
very Feldblum.
Hello good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mary Feldblum and I represent
is works oil and gas
accountability project I also
was a planning and zoning
commissioner for five years from
our village was very involved
with when my Republican county
commission in Santa Fe County
was very concerned about oil and
gas development in Santa Fe
County this amendment does not
is not a simple amendment nor
does it just apply to those two
counties referred to by
Representative neither it really
impacts the entire state and
there are gaps in and hours that
the oil and gas and conservation
commission simply does not have
and many counties on do not have
the ability to.
To address concerns that local
communities will have concerning
what is really a very dangerous
industry and the traffic concern
is one of them that is really
overwhelming southeast part of
New Mexico and there are trash
their organs in the county
commissions can can has to deal
with traffic concerns and I'm
not sure why they they don't do
that but in our end Sandoval
County which set developed a
task force to come trying come
up with an oil and gas ordinance
because their regular ordinances
were totally inadequate and this
was not a subdivision issue and
so that there is issues of
financial security for these
companies some of them are not
so solvent there's adequacy part
of fire protection since our
Sandoval County fire protectors
will have to come if there's an
explosion so we're honors are
the hazardous chemicals stored
there is an issue of Norway's
and setbacks that are are go far
beyond what our county ordinance
all would require many county
ordinances would require there
is you know how close do you
want these facilities near
schools your hospitals on and
this this this is the reason why
some counties like Santa we're
considering oil and gas
ordinance on to specifically
address these issues that their
regular ordinance does not does
not address we stand firmly
opposed to this this would
really open the gates I I and a
company could just go to on and
landowner and say Hey you know
we want to try this land and
please us sell us this
subdivision without going
through any require serious
requirements about water traffic
all these issues that local
could with local communities are
very concerned about.
Including in the southeast part
of the state and as somebody who
comes from the old Texas family
I can tell you that there are a
lot of Texans are very worried
about the oil and gas industry
and its impact on the wonderful
state of Texas thank you.
Thank you misspelled bloom next
at we'll hear from Eleanor
Bravo.
Hear me now yes thank you I'm
Eleanor Bravo madam chair and
members of the community and
president of the board of new
energy economy we oppose this
bill this is hardly a small
amendment it isn't and run
around regulations by redefining
persons on page two items H.
person means any individual
state trust receiver cooperative
association club corporation for
our partnership joint venture
syndicate or any other entity
this means any body deserves an
exemption Furthermore the bill
completely cuts out the public
from any say in potentially
toxic drilling for oil and gas
operations it takes away the
primary power of county
commissions to safeguard
residents and preserve quality
of life is Representative
Montoya so eloquently stated in
a in a previous hearing we are
moving away from fossil fuel
economy to a green energy
economy this is a an outrageous
request by allowing gas industry
for special treatment and we
stand vehemently opposed thank
you.
Thank you Mr and next step I
believe we have any piles Grove.
More can you hear me yes we can
thank you right what my name is
Eddie Paul's Grove I'm a
geologist and that retired
regulatory project manager for
the corps of engineers I live in
Rio Rancho New.
I also am adamantly opposed to
this amendment again like
everyone else's said it is not
simplement as everyone knows New
Mexico is is a very diverse
state.
Areas of subdivisions in the
southeast may not equate to the
same subdivisions that we have
here in the Albuquerque based.
There's different surface and
subsurface issues that pertain.
In subdivisions and to me the
bill itself the amendment is is
just fatally flawed it does
remove
the decision making from elected
county officials.
in order to protect the quality
of life for people who have
bought in good faith property in
the subdivision either living
there now with their families or
the intent is to.
Grow their families in these
areas with the understanding
of what is allowable and what is
not to come in at the last
minute and make these changes
does seem like a bad faith
effort the.
Individuals who will develop
these subdivision plans I have
the agreement of everybody at
the time
your you know all the all the
landowners all of the regulatory
agencies.
Develop these plants in good
faith.
Now having said that that would
in my mind exclude any any claim
about taking.
because these plans would
supersede any kind of proposals
that commit now so the the
owners of the property I have
made these agreements and it
just does seem as though this is
a bad faith in run effort to
remove the will of the people
and the will of their elected
officials I have more to say on
that but I will I just wanted to
just say that I am a.
Currently opposed as well I
thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Cosgrove I I didn't
begin with my usual caution of
the previous building brief are
coming to get so far but let's
keep them short if we can't next
we have my aching flower of
water fired the sorry.
Great thank you can you hear me.
Yes okay I'm thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is pronounced
my aching fire TV I'm the are
wealthy Mexico representative
for the Sierra Club Rio Grande
do chapter and we represent over
thirty five thousand members in
New Mexico and West Texas and we
also oppose H. B. one three six
this amendment would allow allow
owner to circumvent going
through the subdivision process
required by counties per The New
Mexico County subdivision Act
should a landowner subdivide the
property for oil and gas
development purposes H. B. one
three six would take away a
counties line you story to
regulate oil and gas activities
and prevent a county from
reviewing oil and gas projects
and subdivided land meaning that
protections for public health
care environment and culture
resources will be stripped and
is why we oppose system I'm
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee for taking my
call.
Thank you for that and that's
where we had Alan treatment.
But so.
Can you hear me now yes thank
you good morning my name's Alan
Friedman a resident of Santa Fe
County.
Well I'm opposed to HB one
thirty six and the.
This bill proposes then as you
all know to NMSA forty seven six
two granting an exception to the
New Mexico subdivision Act of
four questions one for oil and
gas operations.
And this proposed amendment
would negate Act counties
authority to regulate
subdivision for and gas
operations under forty seven six
nine.
You know at the state level well
gas operations regulated by the
OCD of part of the energy
minerals and natural resources
are a division we are OCD has
you know mostly made regulates
downhole issues relating to oil
and gas operation but doesn't
regulate land use issues set for
four counties under forty seven
six nine.
You may know the real result
Santa Fe and San Miguel counties
have enacted oil and gas
ordinances addresses issues of
health and safety and well for
the county residents not
protected by OCD.
In Santa Fe County all right
along with a number of concerned
county residents spent several
years helping to develop the
norm gas ordinance to address
sentence are.
Well yes the heavy extractive
industries other heavy it
interactive industries may be
regulated under county authority
and what section should be made
for the oil and gas operations
thank you.
Thank thank you for that next up
we have.
Mr Michael or McHale at us.
Michael I felt it's all one word
I apologize.
Yes chair.
The queen and committee members
my name is Mike eyes and job I
work for San Juan citizens
alliance and farming can.
we have about a thousand members
who are very concerned about
these sort of bills that would
allow exemptions to subdivisions
of property.
In Rio Arriba county and San
Juan County this could be a real
potential disaster for people
who
have.
Properties that are adjacent to
compressor stations to oil and
gas infrastructure that already
winners the landscape this is a
very disingenuous bell that is
not a simple bill
we are very concerned about any
attempt by the on gas industry
to get exemptions subdivisions
a property in the northwestern
part of the state we're totally
against H. B. one thirty section
thank you for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you we have Jim
Winchester.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester I am the executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico I PAM supports H. B. one
thirty six which we feel offers
a pragmatic in common sense
solution to encourage
responsible development of lands
at a time when we're seeing more
actions that discourage
development of the very
industries that funds forty
percent of our state budget I
would like to point out that
every rule and regulation to
protect human health fresh water
in the environment remain intact
with this legislation and we
think the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward thank you.
Thank you for that and I ate.
Okay we have one more hands from
a a phone number.
Three two eight zero three three
two.
Please introduce yourself.
Hello.
Okay now you're muted.
Now you're on mute go ahead.
Okay show me let's let's move on
With that person we we seem to
be having issues so.
The.
Going to the actually ever sent
over would you like to add
anything before I go to the
committee.
thank you Mr chair I would like
to say that that contrary to
some of the testimony there's
only.
Four lines that deal with the
amendment to this bill they're
all on page five one eleven
striking the word or line twenty
two adding the word or and
adding lines twenty three and
twenty four those are the only
changes to the our existing
statute that we are requesting
and.
This our commitment is not to do
any of the saints.
That the some of the parties
claimed it would do
existing.
Zoning and other ordinances
remain in effect the only thing
that this does is allow a
landowner to sell a tract of
land to an oil and gas company
for oil and gas operations
without having to go through.
The subdivision ordinance it has
nothing to do with any other
ordinances enacted by the county
that would otherwise restrict
prohibit or otherwise deal with
the siding of very S. R..
Operations on land so so.
It really just exempt.
The.
Sale of property to an oil and
gas company from the
requirements of the subdivision
ordinance thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Albert
first we have Representative
Dixon.
I
you at chair and Representative
night Burt I had a clarifying
question that I was hoping you
could elaborate on up when you
were talking in the introduction
about facilities of what do you
mean specifically could you just
describe that a little bit more
do you mean.
Drilling wells or are we talking
about equipment I was just not
entirely sure thank you.
Mr chair and representative
I want to take a stab at it then
left my experts to discuss it in
more detail but facilities would
would usually not be drilling
because the legal rights to to
drill the well is usually
associated with the oil and gas
lease and you would not be
purchasing property from a
rancher to drill your well what
what we're seeing are
particularly along the border
and the thing that we would like
to capture and secure the tax
base from our the.
Downstream type facilities are
that are be located in the state
of Texas and those would maybe
be as simple as S. thank
batteries where they store oil
and gas but our two compression
stations to more elaborate
things that my expert alluded to
earlier gas plants what have you
Mr Williams you might want to
chime in here.
Mr chair if I may.
Mr chair and representative
Dixon Mr divert its correct
drilling operations are not
affected by this proposed
amendment.
The amendment not offended air
quality does not affect water
quality to not affect the right
to drill instead this proposed
amendment will allow oil and gas
operators to locate.
Don't want to answer the
question by restating the
question facilities of the sort
of storing equipment of perhaps
building secure facilities for
the storage of that equipment up
facilities to treat oil and gas
it is not designed to.
Well it is not designed it
cannot impacted drilling
operations to the state of New
Mexico what I can do and what we
hope it will do is move tax
revenue into the state of New
Mexico that is currently being
used literally feed across the
border in Texas.
Thank you Mr Williams
Representative Nibert and chair
McQueen that was my question
thank.
Thank you Representative Dixon
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative night.
Mr Williams.
In the same operation.
We have about twenty thousand
producing wells and about ten
thousand miles of have been
plugged and abandoned in most of
the lance and San Juan county or
federal are you able state and
and you have a lot of any
implants on the west side and so
when you drill and I have to I
have to do this for a living as
a as a land then I have cell
service damages with the
landowner to locate a well and
so what this does is to locate a
a a larger facility usually a
drilling location will take up
to acres three acres depends on
how many wells are on that head
into in the they shrink it after
after the drilling and
completion of the well to maybe
a half an acre but
I don't know if you were
compilation gem of the committee
if you drive on the five fifty
towards Farmington you know if
you look at the community
library and there's a gas plant
there that that waiting to stop
right now it's harvest is about
a twenty acre facility and then
to the left of that plan that's
on the side of the on the west
side of western refining has set
a tank battery facility and and
I'm estimating it's about five
acres and so you know these
these take up a little land
obviously
aghast in southeast New Mexico
where there's a lot of activity
drilling activity
they they have needs for gas
processing plants and usually
takes up twenty acres so
these companies are asking for
tax rebates
they're paying the full freight
all the property taxes and and
all the other gas processing
taxes that come along with it
and we'd rather have those
facilities on the New Mexico
side than on the Texas side so
The I think this is a race more
approach the companies are going
to have to buy surface so to
locate these facilities and they
may have to buy five lots I I
think excuse me for four five
acre lots
to secure enough land to build a
facility so
appreciate to the explanation
that to that Representative
number of.
Four and in San Juan County only
six percent of our lancer
private so we really have to
work really closely with the
county with the zoning folks and
and with the landowners to make
a deal so that's all I have Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative not.
Thank you Mr Kirk uh any other
questions from the committee
before I ask my questions.
A singer and
Representative Nibert I agree
with you it's a very simple bill
in terms of drafting but it has
sweeping implications.
which trouble me.
So
Representative Nibert if this is
a local issue
and we're addressing something
the the the primarily affects
the border counties why don't we
have a solution that addresses
the border counties rather than
taking subdivisions thirty away
from every cat county in the
state.
Mr chair you're not taking
subdivision authority away from
the counties what what you're
doing is recognizing that that
this type of cell.
Really does not result in a
subdivision.
Unfortunately the way the
subdivision ordinance or the
subdivision Act is drafted.
Any time a ranger sales five
acres of land.
That.
Triggers please the subdivision
statute.
And there are some exceptions
there's there's thirteen to date
we're asking for a four key
exception Matt is just
recognizing that this type of of
transaction does not result in
the things that the subdivision
ordinance was designed to to
really capture and so.
We we we use this example are
we.
It's obviously a problem along
the eastern and southern borders
of to counties
Graham example because what's
occurring is there easily going
a hundred feet south of the
state line or east of the
statewide and and putting the
very facilities and without
those impediments
what happens elsewhere is you
don't get the you don't buy the
property you simply waste.
You don't trigger the
subdivision ordinance.
And you still have the
facilities
Representative Strickler
mentioned of federal lands in
San Juan County when you're
dealing with federal and state
lands you get a a right of way
or a business license from the
state land office or from the
bureau of land management to
locate these types of facilities
all federal or state grants it
doesn't trigger the subdivision
order it so it's pretty unique a
along a section where Eddy
County.
Your is losing out on tremendous
the property tax revenues that
that ought to be secure and so
your characterization that that
it has all these complexities I
I don't believe that to be the
case I I believe it to be the
case that that the when the
subdivision ordinance was
enacted
There wasn't a lot of detail as
to to what we were trying to do
and and I think that this is one
area just like agricultural
lands conveying a piece of
property to continue
farming doesn't do anything
are your like wise in the oil
patch are.
Trying to by five acres to put
in a a
thank battery or something
you you're certainly.
Something that is commonplace
it's being done our.
Anyway and unfortunately along
the border it's being done a
hundred feet south of the border
instead of a hundred feet north
of the border.
Representative number I have a
follow up before I address that
however Representative Townsend
it's generally the property but
the chair to go last and I asked
if there is additional debate
president Townsend you have
something you would like to end
before I complete my questions.
Something you would like to add
yes if I may be Mr chairman and.
Listening that lacks the.
Exchange costs made to what
status at your.
If you would allow.
Please do so now Representative
Townsend yes thank you Mr
chairman with respect to what
the comments by Representative
Nighbor I.
Yes in line with the bill but it
is also Committee on our
practices the committee should
I understand I think it was two
years ago I brought the bill
forward on permit at risk I
identified the fact that there
were like at that time there
were like eleven gas plants that
had been built at a rock's throw
distance in the Texas out of New
Mexico at that time I I believe
my memory is correct we were
messing about seventy million
dollars a year recurring tax
base.
But because of this and that's
probably I'm sure to ground
today so Mr chairman I would
just pay it as we're looking at
ways to enhance our of revenue
streams this is a simple I mean
that.
The emissions the plant the
production it's all I mean you
can throw a rock at it in here
that it's in taxes and the only
thing we're doing by of.
They learn to recognize the
discrepancy and the non
competitive nature of our our
permitting is that it's being
built
as I said a rock's throw
distance from the Texas Texas is
capturing the revenue stream and
we think we're winning the
battle it just doesn't make any
sense thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you resent Townsend going
back to my questions
Representative average so.
But.
I need a brief brief statement I
got pretty long explanation
I do think this is a
subdivision.
It takes one piece of land and
it turns into two pieces of land
and that's usually the point in
time where there is some
oversight and regulation so I'm
not when I say subdivision I
certainly don't need you know a
row houses and front yards and
homeowners association I mean I
don't mean that kinds of
division I mean the division of
land.
And your bill.
Exempts this for all thirty
three of our accounts.
Is there not a way you can do
this at the local level without
taking that authority away from
all over counties.
Mr chair
I was.
Looking at that issue and
unfortunately the breadth of the
subdivision Act.
Does not allow.
That type of the exemption I
understood that the.
on occasion we do differentiate
large and small counties and
municipalities of various sizes
Sorry.
I suspect that we we could put
Eddy and Lea County if you're
for a if you all would wish I'm
not sure
That's the proper way of doing
things but certainly those of
the because of the two counties
that that are directly impacted
by this particular situation
because generally up in San Juan
County you're dealing with
federal lands is already been.
Pointed out
there are.
Maybe a few other producing
areas of the state that are are
within close proximity to a
state border but
it seems that the.
Significant.
Tax base issues are.
Right at the very heart of the
hottest oil and gas proppants
play in it in the world and that
is southern Eddy county for
whatever reason that is the
epicenter of oil and gas
activity group for
The last.
For five years and that is where
tremendous investment is being
made and that is where
tremendous Tax opportunities are
being lost for New Mexico
because these these facilities
are easily
located simply across the line
and and that's why.
The issue you know all right I
don't think that the in
practical terms it it's going to
have any effect on the all the
folks in Sandoval county or in
San Juan County or in Roosevelt
County or in Chavis county for
that matter but it is going to
have an impact on on
particularly the border area we
Eddy County.
Well I'm I'm amenable to to to
putting Lee in every county in
the about this those are the
committee because that's
certainly my focus and
intention.
Thank you Representative Robert
I I appreciate that
I I can't support the bill as it
is.
Figure out how to address dress
to.
A limited area of the state
Is perhaps something we should
look at but I don't think we can
do it.
Here today.
So with that being said
What's the will of the committee
really do pass Mr chairman.
We do passed motion from
Representative Montoya.
Second the second from.
Mr chairman I move to table.
Mr sensor is a substitute
motions to table yes okay my
understanding is that substitute
motion takes precedence.
shall be the can you take the
vote on the substitute motion to
table.
Representative Chandler.
Yes to table.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes to table.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Yes the table.
Representative Sari√±ana yes to
table.
Representative Scott.
Senator Strickler.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Representative Montoya.
Yes the table but on explain my
vote.
Thanks chair Stansbury yes the
table.
Chair the queen.
Yes the three other both from
centex in here my apologies
Representative Dixon.
A yes to table.
chair between.
Yes the table.
and that is in eight three to
tabling.
So we've table the bill
Representative Montoya to
explain is the.
Yes Mr chairman it was obvious
that this bill was going to get
table but there was some
expression that if this bill
were modified
maybe there would be some
support so I'm gonna suggest
that Representative night Burt
take the opportunity to maybe
come up with
something that would be more
tailored to those two counties
and if so I'm in a Mr chairman I
plan to try and bring this up in
the future.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Representative divert.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So we have two more bills on the
agenda I'm looking forward to
that small is he in the
attendees are you so the screen
up but he has been president.
The screen up somebody just may
need to text my can Texan.
Right.
Representative small components.
Mr chair do we still have to
work at eleven this morning.
we do have four eleven.
Okay.
Representative small tells me
he's running up now.
Not entirely sure what that
means we do two more bills
my name for sure act fund know
first clean electrification Act
and then mining Forster Act
funds
I've spoken to the speaker and
told him
That element is problematic I
think your response to that
quite honestly.
So I will reach out to the
speaker but will in the meantime
we will press on.
Hi Mr chairman.
Representative small looking
back.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Paul are next bill on
the agenda would be house bill
one thirty seven the clean
electrification Act are you
ready to present that yes Mister
chairman.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you committee members I
apologize for being slightly out
of breath.
Mr chair committee members H. B.
one thirty seven the clean
electrification Act will.
Who.
The stairs in the altitude.
Have got me Mr chairman Mr chair
committee members the CDA
provides a path that.
Electrifying homes businesses
and industries well at the same
time ensuring that electricity
remains carbon free.
Will serve.
New Mexicans provide a road
robust New Mexico responses that
a climate change.
And will also help bring
electricity service.
To communities currently lacking
in that service.
Under house bill one thirty
seven.
Our utilities and co ops would
be enabled and encouraged to
work with their customers to
focus their energy consumption.
Served by clean renewable
electricity Mr chair committee
members this takes on the fact
that as we increasingly
electrify.
The portions of our economy that
are not electrified.
That there is great economic
opportunity but also risk from
climate and other downside risks
unless we ensure Mr chairman
committee member that the
electricity being used to
accomplish these important goals
is generated using carbon free
energy very importantly Mr chair
committee members this helps to
open up markets around carbon
capture use and sequestration Mr
chair committee members and it
will not increase emissions from
electricity even as we Mr
chairman committee members look
to bring more luxury vehicles on
the road electrify Services in
buildings and homes and
businesses that will expand the
use of electricity but again
importantly the clean
electrification Act insurers
that that expansion in use of
electricity it's efficiencies
and opportunities does not
result in an increase in
emissions it does this by
establishing a firm steady
emission reduction path that is
roughly four percent per year.
And it uses a credit system Mr
chair and committee members that
will allow the New Mexico
environment department to serve
this market place to safeguard
the affordability and
reliability as it administers
this law and again Mr chair
committee members to keep CO two
and other greenhouse gases from
further adding to the burden of
climate change that.
Faces all New Mexicans.
Mr chair committee members I
know time is short thank you for
indulging me I do have several
experts will be with me to help
explain the bill today
And very much appreciate the
time to briefly go into this
into look forward Mr chair
committee members for questions
With me
By.
Steve Michael and Pat o'connell
from western resource advocates.
And and representatives from the
natural resources defense
council either no alone or
Ali Honda to help explain parts
of the legislation again I very
much appreciate the time Mr
chair with that would stand for
Committee questions.
Thank you Representative small
did you want to turn over to
your experts very briefly or can
we go to the public first Mr
chair committee I think in the
interest of time I'd be happy if
we can go to the public first
and then go on to questions with
our experts okay so we'll go to
the public comment
Members of the public.
We saw bill after this I ask you
to be very brief.
if you would like to say please
raise your hand please do not be
to put the if someone in your
organization has already speak
spoke and you probably don't
need to speak as well
late in they're just lighting up
so you're gonna need to be
really short first up we have
been C. Martinez.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Vince Martinez I'm The New
Mexico government relations
adviser for tri state generation
and transmission association
price it is a not for profit
cooperative that provides elect
electric generation and
transmission forty to rural
electric cooperatives in four
states.
Which in turn serve more than
one million and use electricity
customers.
Over more than two hundred
thousand square miles in the
west.
You are responsible energy plan
which we announced in January
twenty twenty we are committed
to working.
With the cooperative members to
provide reliable affordable and
responsible energy in accordance
with our democratic cooperative
principles by twenty twenty for
more than fifty percent of the
Energy tristate delivers to its
member owners will be from
renewable sources six years
earlier than the EPA mandate.
In the current form of house
bill one thirty seven we can not
support we have questions
whether the bill attempts to
regulate the generation and
emissions located beyond New
Mexico's jurisdiction.
And we also have questions
whether the bill violates the
federal power act regulating
interstate wholesale electricity
sales and bad tending to reach
beyond the intrastate regulation
the retailer Tricity right and
finally try state are member
owners agreed to significant
increases in RRPS and ETA two
years ago and now this less
legislation seeks to increase
the decrease in emissions by
four percent annually it also
implements fees and fines and
ultimately create a revenue
stream for the New Mexico
environment department on the
backseat ylides and ultimately
the New Mexico tech ratepayers
thank you Sir.
Thank you next up we have
Camillus the parliament.
Thank you can you hear me.
Camilla I amend representing the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club thirty five thousand
members and supporters around
the state overall we think that
this proposal is a good one and
stand and support have supplied
advocates with a couple of small
suggestions to help deal with
any issues of local air quality
and
And ways to ensure that any
credits from other programs are
well aligned thank you.
Thank you next up we have rob
Bates.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative small city
Farmington speaks against of
this bill for two primary
reasons anymore we think that
the timing is is ill fated more
importantly on a philosophical
area we believe that we as a
municipal utility ought to
remain the Thomas the city
Farmington utility is by far the
largest municipal tell utility
in our state yeah compared to
were very small utility we serve
very large territory over
seventeen hundred square miles
the city Farmington itself is
less than two percent of the
rural areas that we serve
including the far reaches of in
into the Navajo Nation San Juan
County and into Rio Rico it's a
very expensive of territory to
serve and we've been doing it
very well for many years we
believe that then this will
utility should should remain
under the governance of the
local elected officials and of
our local public utility
commission we in fact have been
doing a pretty good job but that
in one form or another since
nineteen oh two since nineteen
forty four as Farmington
elector.
For a hundred nineteen years
we've done a great job without
the oversight of the state
legislator of the public road
Regulatory Commission.
Because our citizens hold our
local officials directly
accountable our rate structure
because of our management is we
are twenty five percent cheaper
an average residential rate than
PNM twenty eight percent cheaper
than SRP thirty three percent
cheaper than APS and whopping
fifty three percent cheaper than
our neighbors just to the north.
We've managed to do this well
being both environmentally
responsible and maintain
reliability and the low rates
for example seventeen percent of
our current portfolio is
renewable.
Thirty percent is clean combined
cycle natural gas only twenty
one percent of our of our
portfolios in fact Cole if we're
allowed to be successful with
our project women chant will
reduce emissions on that cold to
words in fact cheaper or lower
emissions than the replacement
power combination being proposed
to replace it
Mr chairman we would request
that at minimum municipalities
miscible owned utilities be
exempted from this regulation
thank you.
Thank you Mr Mays next up we
have.
might as well.
Yes the queen
and committee members my name is
Mike I sent out a within
Farmington work for San Juan
citizens alliance and we stand
in support of this bill we think
that there should be more
incentives for carbon free
electricity in clean renewable
energy we think that this part
of the state should be
participating in that
the one caveat that I would
awful
isn't we don't support carbon
capture carbon sequestration or
the ancient energy project at
San Juan generating station so
any attempt to and utilize this
process to facilitate carbon
capture carbon sequestration yes
Sir thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
bill.
Thank you Mr Rosenfeld except we
have Jason Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Jason
Thompson I am the registered
lobbyists for the western
resource advocates and also here
speaking on behalf of
conservation voters New Mexico I
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward I
know they have a lot of folks
waiting to speak and yes in some
time from the previous reason
statins stated we do stand in
support of the bill and urge at
the committee's passage and that
thank you for the time today can
taking this up and that I thank
you.
Thank you next up we have
Matthew harming.
This morning chairman and
committees thank you madam
mailing the public service
company of New Mexico it's nice
to see you this virtually over
still looking into the SLO's how
this legislation will fit into
the energy transition asked
another initiatives such as a
governor's clean fuel standard
will and we really appreciate Mr
Michaels as of your insurance or
power point of this concept with
a relaxed years however we have
not seen the draft legislation
until it was.
And as many of you know the
Energy space is extremely
complicated including how to
properly plan and implement
emissions regulations we
appreciate Representative small
bring this important issue
because the discussion should be
around reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and how the need for
clean energy goals not just at
the removal from the state about
informing as an example of one
of our concerns is what energy
companies reduce greenhouse gas
emissions it's usually not done
on an equal amount every year it
tends to be choking and the
judge of that some years more
than others and some years less
than others will we ever since
we look forward to participating
in the discussion around this
topic I'm for first to be in the
internal we have more time to
make sure that we're slowly
community transition has and a
potentially future endeavors
such as the standard as well as
give more input from
stakeholders.
Thank you very much chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you next up we have by the
Antonio.
Can you had might be Antonio.
no Porter on my list next.
My apologies my screen that
scroll down and Michael is at
the top of the list so yes on
the borders of top by scroll
back up my apologies as much my
fault for.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Tony Porter and I'm the
founder America's and clean
energy leader for prosperity
works I appear for before you
today as a representative of low
income people in New Mexico for
more than forty years and an
intervenor before the PRC on
their behalf we C. H. B. one
thirty nine through the lens of
climate justice climate change
is a magnifier and in many cases
a multiplier of existing
underlying causes of risk and
there is no bigger risk in our
state and nation building than
being low at a low income person
unless you are a low income
person of color increasingly
unpredictable weather patterns
shifting seasons and natural
disasters disproportionately
threaten these populations
increasing the risks their
suffering their dependency and
the negative impacts on their
health a climate justice
analysis frames global warming
as an ethical and political
issue rather one that is simply
environmental or physical in
nature and addressing it takes
into consideration a variety of
complex issues many of which are
addressed in this legislation
the expected growth of our
economy without an increase in
carbon emissions and associated
climate disruption the reduction
of health impacts that fall most
heavily on marginalized
populations but affect us all
and increase access to point
affordable and sustainable home
energy climate change is not a
distant threat the urgency of
now is evident everywhere if we
understand climate justice as a
civil rights issue of our time
we will not wait to pass H. B.
one thirty nine thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you we have Hank there.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee appreciate the
opportunity to talk with you
today my name is Hank a deer on
the director of the Farmington
electric utility system and
enterprise of the city of
Farmington as you heard from Mr
maintenance
the opportunities the
reliability capability of our
system and the low cost for our
customers are she focuses
including the environment in our
system if you will some of the
key things I would notice again
the four percent year over year
most generation assets or
modifications are done in large
blocks or chunks we're of the
four percent year over year
would cause a challenge to the
utility because that's not the
way things are built or designed
or executed if you well.
I see challenges based on the
renewable resources and their
capacity factors and then for a
very small utility like a
municipality have reaction and
capacity drives purchasing from
the market and the way the
market emissions are derived in
this bill because challenges
especially with the utility on
what's called a scene where they
may purchase power from one
market or the next and that
causes confusion and complexity
with the way this bill is
The other thing with the
municipality is is based on tax
rates or credits so utility like
the city of Farmington based on
volatility as we seen with the
in the extreme I would call it
financing or purchased power
costs in the month of August of
last year as we sing with the
California challenges by doing
this bill it increases the
volatility in a very very small
utility and that increases cost
and risk one of the can be seen
across tomorrow this project as
such I would restate that of
Farmington and FCO supposed to
bill as written.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair next step
with Tammy people are.
This group again no yeah Jamie
are you there.
Can you hear me now yes.
That adjournment we members of
the committee and do anything
record was southwest energy
efficiency project or sweet we
stand in full support of the
clean electrification Act we see
this bill as the next necessary
step towards providing carbon
free energy for all of New
Mexico this bill is also very
important because of the
incentives provided for
utilities to provide electric
service to low income indigenous
households that now a lack
electricity because of the
benefits to every New Mexico and
we ask you to please support the
one thirty seven thank you for
your time.
Thank you and now we get to my
T. Antonio sorry about that from
before.
All.
Okay okay.
You
can hear me now.
Yes okay good morning Mr
chairman members the committee
might be Antonio with Xcel
energy we are still evaluating
the bill at this time so we're
we're neutral but we do have
some concerns you want to say
this but bill seems that temp to
modify the ETA in that it is
more prescriptive on how
utilities need to get to zero
carbon by twenty forty five.
Would you like to flexibility
that's already in the ETA which
has the same goal and that's you
know zero carbon by twenty forty
five but it allows you to
utilities flexibility and how to
get your car and at that in that
time frame well step while still
maintaining system reliability.
The other issue the grid
modernization bill that passed
last year we feel like it
already contains key
electrification language to help
build utilities addressed
reduction of air pollution
including greenhouse gases we're
trying to understand what
additional benefits This bill
brings above what is already in
statute having said that we will
continue to work with the bill
sponsor she can bring in the
bill and continue to evaluate
and how active sex Xcel energy
in our customers thank you.
Thank you for that we have no
long.
Hi this is no along with enough
resources defense council can
hear me.
Yes great thanks I'll be brief I
think we we support the bill for
many of the reasons that I've
already been stated but I'll
just highlight a couple first
it's critical that New Mexicans
be provided with opportunities
to he their homes and water
within technologies that have
really revolutionized the space
in the last few years and
provide for a much lower cost
much more efficient and much
cleaner opportunities for
building heating through clean
electric generation that's
increasingly the status quo here
in New Mexico after passage of
the ETA but secondly this bill
insurers that that isn't just
the status quo but that
revolution towards clean energy
continues at a steady pace and
we'll track the progress
required under the ACA we
support for that reason as well
and lastly I'll just note that
in our view it's a critical
oversight in the regional
renewable energy statute from
years ago and one that the EPA
failed to correct that municipal
utilities are required to meet
the same standards for renewable
energy provision and clean
energy provision we support for
that reason as well and I'll
pause there and thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
for your time.
Thank you
We have a telephone number three
two eight I'm not carried with
telephone number could hear
teaches us please yourself.
chairman McQueen can you hear me
yes.
Hello chair green members of the
committee my name is Ralph runs
I'm a retired energy management
engineer and thirty a resident
of HD twenty four in Albuquerque
I am in favor of HB one thirty
seven the claim of
electrification Act by reading
this bill as the same as I've
heard many comment before that
is that it's going to require
incentivize reductions of
greenhouse gas emissions in
existing possible people's
electricity generation in the
state that are not scheduled to
be or imminently going to be
retired.
I took particular notice of
section four paragraph see that
others have that I found to be
quite outstanding and that is
that it is going to incentivize
investor owned utilities to
provide electricity to existing
low income indigenous households
currently without electricity
service I think that would be so
positive outcome of this bill
and could perhaps begin to close
the gap in our rural underserved
parts of the state thank you.
All right you have a couple of
concerns that I want to bring to
tension of the committee in
section eight new material
variances the language things
big enough that variances could
be submitted frequently which
seems to be a lot of extra work
on NMED the the department is
named in the bill and infection
six compliance I noted that
utilities excuse me are allowed
to self report with a verified
statement their greenhouse gas
emissions and it says much in
that section that it's going to
be the job of NMED to validate
those numbers which is also a
new duty when that duty was not
previously in there already
under funded budget so my
concerns are not only with the
potential for utilities
noncompliance and variances but
also and I get this is going to
be part into the municipal then
municipal utilities but also the
potential for unfunded extra
duties on ME on and the cash on
in M. D. C. D.'s train budget so
despite those concerns which I
hope can be addressed I
reiterate my support for the
clean electrification Act and
thank you for the opportunity to
comment.
From all.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes.
Yeah my name's can grow mold on
the CEO of the New Mexico Rolex
Education
Association.
And.
We have with this I've fourteen
distribution member coops
ten of our Sir by tri state
forest there by western farmers
out of Oklahoma.
And when you go to definitions
on page three or talk about
dedicated generation and it's on
the fourteen distribution Corp
that they have to
Did you find what their
productions gonna come from for
the next twenty four months.
Problematic is they all have all
requirement contracts
and.
That contract does not allow
them to require the designation
but where their generation come
from no tri state is miss
Martinez says serve over for you
state footprint
so any specific generations will
problematic the second thing is
it gets even more problematic
for the for members that are
served by western farmers
farmers operates in organized
markets of the S. P. P.
southwest power pool.
And their generation is bit in
a day.
And they're never gonna know
from one day to another page one
the resources of the market
price for that.
Those can be impossible for them
to dedicate generation for two
year period
a couple of other things
This gets us to a zero carbon by
twenty fifty when we agreed to
that energy transition act two
years ago
they get to zero carbon by
twenty fifty the role to costs
are given some offense they were
given five years longer than
I'll use but they were also
given off ramps that it had to
be technically feasible reliable
affordable.
This bill simply take those off
ramps away.
there are one small there is one
part of this added think would
be beneficial that allows for
the
quantifying of coverage actions
as electrify the transportation
industry but
Came with the sponsor hopefully
we can work something out down
the road but right now on yeah
stand opposition this bill thank
you.
Thank you next up with Carlos
ontact.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Carlos ontact
president of the New Mexico
business coalition.
Our coalition represents
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans our
focus is to make New Mexico a
better place to do business so
that New Mexicans can have jobs
and provide for their families.
We respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill one
thirty seven.
Because it would cause electric
rates to increase significantly
and in turn cause harm to hard
working New Mexican families
were struggling to pay electric
bills.
And feed their families
especially during this very
challenging pandemic time the
state has already mandated that
electric generators must
transition to clean energy
production in unprecedented
schedule.
It is unnecessary to increase
those requirements and further
fast tracked them increasing
costs to both taxpayers and
ratepayers.
House bill one thirty seven will
cost the state hundreds of
thousands of dollars and has no
appropriation making it an
unfunded on funded mandates
houses so on behalf of the hard
working people in our state we
urge you to say no to this
legislation as it is thank you
for your consideration.
Jim McKenzie.
Yes chair members of the panel
my name is Jim McKenzie assume
you can hear me.
Yes
thank you for the opportunity to
comment
I am the co coordinator of three
fifteen New Mexico environmental
organization with eight thousand
members we're standing in favor
of this bill.
And I would just want to
reiterate some of the comments
that have already been made.
The energy transition act of
which we were a part of drafting
and supporting what.
Have a compromise
of it about being
Prescriptive or.
Try to walk on the knife knife
edge of being too prescriptive I
think in retrospect we were a
little bit more too much on the
lack of prescription and so this
this bill is an important staff
to try to find to the wonderful
piece of
legislation the ETA that the
sponsor was also part of so
that's why we're supporting this
thank you very much.
Thank you and I think that does
it for the public comment
Representative small would you
like to address anything before
we go to the committee.
I'm thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you committee
members I would invite a if
there's brief comments
The experts can make them I
would reiterate Mr chair
committee members that there are
there are opportunities for us
to continue working to make sure
our details are correct I would
also emphasize Mr chair and
committee members a couple of
things one.
Relating to the the issue of so
called clunky mess the
legislation allows credits to be
banked and credits are accounted
for in a three year time period
impractically Mr chair committee
what we believe this means is
that many of our strong the cost
to our far ahead for instance or
I'll use they can bank credits
that they already have one that
will that cuts against the Klunk
in this issue and then it's
accounted for every three years
a second Mr chair committee I
would just really emphasized
that.
As we electrify more parts of
our economy in so doing we're
going to drive down the cost of
electricity by spreading those
costs over a much wider net
we're on the cusp of driving
innovation and expanded economic
opportunity and it tapping into
resources that are available
here in New Mexico a very low
cost and so we think that Mr
chair and committee members this
insurers that we do not exceed
our carbon budget and and in
fact we can model and have
benefits accrue to New Mexico
companies and New Mexicans for
banking and reducing our carbon
output as these markets arise in
other states and on a more
regional basis
so that's all I would add Mr
chair I don't know if there's
any additional comments and
we've taken a long time so
perhaps our experts can weigh in
on specific committee questions
Mr chairman and I think we would
stand for those questions now
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative small
first up we have Representative
Montoya.
Representative Montoya welcome
back I understand you took a
trip to the floor.
I apologize the we have work to
do here in this committee I did
assure the committee that the
floor session today is
procedural a limited for session
but never the less welcome back
in Europe.
I thank you.
Mr chairman I I'd also like to
mention that both myself and and
and leader town center in this
committee and are
parliamentarian is home sick and
not here so I'm not sure that on
the floor right now we even have
the right to raise a point of
order on the floor so we are.
outnumbered currently S. if
something were to take place so
I just want to let you know that
Representative small could you
explain the the banking.
Of credit so explain to me how
that would work right now for
different utilities across the
spectrum because I as I would
understand none of them.
At the same place when it comes
to
How much reliance they have on.
Green or renewable energy so I'm
trying to figure out how this
banking system would work.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya Mr chair
I was gonna ask Mister Michael
one of the experts to provide
specific answer.
Thank you Mr chair up.
Good morning Representative
Montoya on so when the banking
works and this is I think you're
aware as on utilities coops
produce clean energy in a year
they are and it's depending on
how how clean energy is
In a compliance period utilities
retire credits to capture the
emission reductions are required
by this act to the extent a
utility or coop has more credits
earned in a period it then they
need for compliance they are
able to bank those credits for
future use in a future
compliance period
so I think that answers your
question
if if there's more I'm happy to
try and explain further.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
represent a small and and Mister
Michaels
so I guess what I'm looking for
is more of an example.
Potentially how if this were
going affect.
Today I know it's not majority
ownership today
not everybody starting from the
same starting position as far as
so what I'm wondering what is
the standard and maybe that's a
better question was a standard
everyone starting out today are
some people gonna be starting
behind the eight ball already
and already need to make.
A changes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you of
some monthly at
go to Mr Michael appreciate very
much your question about the
standard and baseline Mr chair
representative that baseline I
believe would be set in the year
Mr chair representative Mr
Michel can go into once that
baseline is that so that as you
point out Mr chairman some
months where the wild different
electricity providers and
generators will we'll have
different energy mixes this they
will have the same baseline the
baseline will be specific for
them so it won't be an unfair
it'll be a baseline specific to
them and Mr chair representative
from that baseline that is there
for that specific electricity
generator then the it's Mr
Michael can detail exactly how
the credit works to the fact
that we're working to avoid
additional CO two emissions even
as there is increased
electricity generation.
Mr Michael can you detail the.
That the ratio how that credit
applies please.
Yes Mr chair representative my
tire let me try and maybe bring
that hunger is something
particularly.
A tear District city of
Farmington.
as you know is currently are
participate in the San Juan
plant that plant is you know
we're going out you know retire
and close or it's going to be
reconfigured with carbon capture
and you know obviously we don't
need to get into the matter to
that what.
What I will say is that the base
period the city of Farmington
would use is going to have
generation from the San Juan
plant as part of that baseline
when that plant either retires
or captures you know a large
amount of the carbon that's
going to provide you know
credits either with the
replacement resources which will
be cleaner than the San Juan
plant and those credits will
probably be easy and accessible
four percent per year at least
in the early years of this of
this legislation so there would
be credits available well two
and two utilities like
Farmington to be able to use to
manage their compliance over
time at the end of the day by
mid century
you know the city and the other
utilities and coops in the state
would would be at zero with any
mission trajectory that is
streamlined and from today's
levels down to zero over that
twenty or twenty five years.
So
S..
It appears to me everybody has
to get to
At the rate that different the.
Entities would have to get to
zero seems to be higher.
On those who are further away is
that correct so yeah let's say
someone was a it is.
At
twenty percent.
Renewable or green right now and
another was at twenty five
percent.
That's what I'm trying to figure
out is how how the baseline is a
set.
Is everybody sat at the at the
lowest common denominator is
everybody beginning where they
are.
Mr thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative it's an excellent
question and Mr chair
representative the baseline is
that where people are and it's
not as a baseline set to the far
the state had or the far this
behind Mr chair representative
the baseline is set to where
they are.
And then we're looking at Mr
chairman and Representative
small that everybody would have
to go at as I read it maybe I'm
misreading at four percent.
Decrease and how often is that
again could you explain that to
me absolutely thank you Mr chair
thank you representative that
the targets are a four percent
decrease in emissions per year.
The cob yachts to that are one
the credits that can be applied
so if there's a Mr chair
representative a ten percent
reduction in one year those
credits would extend forward.
In and would.
Helped would extend forward and
Mr chair and representative the
accounting is done every three
years so that the target is four
percent per year accounted for
every three years in
practicality this will be
measured every three years and
as previous folks including some
members of the public pointed
out the large perhaps change
from one generation source to
another the credits that are
creating their will apply down
the road and so
It yep what's in this
Accounting system but it allows
the the two ways both governing
of credits and accounting every
three years to make sure that
that's not too high of a burden
in what in fact probably fit
into.
What many of our electric
electricity generation.
Generators are already doing.
So thanks for that answer the.
Representative small Mr chairman
Representative small I.
how many of these utilities.
have signed on to this
legislation I mean.
Hey if if they're doing this
already who signed on.
Who is with us sure thank you Mr
chair thank you representative I
think what we heard in testimony
from two of our investor owned
utilities S. P. S. and PNM is
that there is an openness to
some parts of the bill there are
concerns with others and I can
be corrected but my my takeaway
is that there is a commitment to
work together that there are
sensually features that folks
slide eight some features that
are of concern but there are
elements given that we are
already within the umbrella of
the Energy transitioned Act that
can
be of benefit to all New
Mexicans as well as to private
sector stakeholders
so I would.
Characterize it Mr chair
representative way a as
continuing to work together I
would certainly not say that any
of the investor owned utilities
are standing in support but I do
believe there is great room has
been testified today there is
significant room to work
together and and build a strong.
Sent a strong system for New
Mexico.
Thanks for the answer a
Representative small I I
understand that that none of the
utilities would be affected by
this.
are in support of it
and PNM as I understand is
already under the energy
transition act required to get.
And to this mandate outside of
this so so even if it PNM or to
say that they lack the
provisions of this that they
would not necessarily be
subject.
Unnecessarily to the provisions
in the same way that the others
because they have already
because there because our under
the energy transition actor
already under strict.
Guidelines as to replacement
energy and to that point.
it's become clear I believe
there is as metal or something
that came out this last year
that the significant cost of the
building infrastructure
that PNM is going to experience
is going to require that right
that rates go up.
I increase fairly
quickly
so I I know there are no.
controls in place any price
controls in place.
For consumers in the energy
transition act and I didn't see
in this bill any
price controls for consumers in
this as well that there's no
limitation as to how much
utility rates could increase.
per year if there if there's a
mandate to to to go out there
have to build new infrastructure
and and prematurely maybe
abandon current infrastructure
that they hold M. am I reading
that correctly Representative
small thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Montoya
two quick points one Mr chair
representative
under the energy transition act
that that applies to a public
service company of New Mexico as
well as to as PS in the
questions that it serves in New
Mexico and el Paso electric so
that's that applies the
The reduction in emissions apply
equally to all and there's a
slightly longer time frame is Mr
Bramhall testified earlier.
Second Mr chair representative
what we're seeing right now is
that the
all in cost for generation.
Of electricity from renewable
sources especially from sun and
wind is low and is continuing to
go lower I believe last year
western farmers had a combined
something like a three cents a
kilowatt hour cost for
a renewable plus storage project
that they were betting and
building and so we think
actually this will help to keep
costs down based upon one the
low input cost that is the
renewable energy is quickly
becoming the cheapest way
to generate energy.
To Mr chair representantes Y. a
as we electrified transportation
and have more elector vehicles
on the road as we look to
electrify buildings and other
parts of that that that will
spread out Mr chair
representative the cost of that
electricity generation and bring
it down further Mr chair
representative great question
the last piece of this and why
Mr chair representative it's
important that the clean
electrification Act be
considered even all the energy
transition act as that.
Equal to the nation's leading
decarbonisation targets from
electricity generation is that.
The rate of that new electric
cars are increasing at a very
fast rate these other areas
where there's electrification of
our economy are increasing very
rapidly and so even in the next
to the five to ten years there
could be a rapid increase in the
amount of electricity that's
used for things ranging from our
homes heating our homes our
businesses data centers driving
on the roads except for a and Mr
chair representative the clean
electrification Act aims to make
sure that even as the amount of
electricity that use may
increase very rapidly that that
electricity does not over the
short term lead to a rapid
increase in greenhouse gas
emissions.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative small but that's
not what this bill doesn't just
deal with new generation.
When there is an increased
demand that's what you're
talking about is increased
demand this a
requires that a utility
replace.
The current generation even if
their population is static or
decreasing.
meaning that that the price will
go up as PNM is happening as
it's happening with PNM because
they're having to abandon
current facilities to build new
facilities once that once
they're in place the idea of
what they're what the cost is
for generation you you said
three three cents and that.
example that you gave but that
doesn't include the cost
infrastructure the cost of
infrastructure is what causes
the rates to go up in in the we
have a lot of the poor people in
the state of New Mexico about
fifty percent of our population
is on Medicaid I don't know that
they can afford this I I
certainly don't want to be on
the side of the an advocacy
group over our residents.
I also Mr chair and
representative I didn't see any
exemptions for reliability
is there is there an exemption
that that I mean for instance if
if they.
Yes they do
A utility is currently
At a higher percentage of of
renewable it becomes.
Less easy to diversify
currently.
to renewable sources because of
the right reliability factor
obviously
you know elect a solar only
generates when the sun is up and
wind only.
Generates when the wind is
blowing so there are our
reliability factors that some of
the other states are
experiencing I don't see a I
don't see a reliability
exemption and here or or maybe
the question should be would you
be willing to allow reliability
exemption that that thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Montoya it's an excellent point
I very much appreciate the
question and.
Members can actually go to page
the bottom of page fourteen.
Section eight new material.
In our current legislation Mr
chair Representative Montoya.
There is included as an entire
variants section Mr chair
representative I won't read it
but Mr chair representative the
variance is significant and it
also specifically calls out of
quote here just briefly the
department may grant a requested
variance if it determines that
the variance is required to
preserve the reliability or
affordability of electricity
services
In New Mexico so Mr chair
representative we we have
included that variance provision
in here at related to both
reliability and affordability.
Thank you for pointing that out
representatives of small Mr
chair that brings up a question
the.
Which department.
Thank you Mr chair
representative with the New
Mexico environment department.
So Mr chairman of why would it
be the environment department
that we would put this under we
currently have a PRC Lee I
believe we're headed towards it.
you pet utility department I
would this go to the environment
department.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
represents an excellent question
Mr chair representative because
this look said the mission's
carbon emissions greenhouse gas
emission specifically Mr chair
representative that is already
very much the province of the
New Mexico environment
department it's what they've
been doing it's what they do now
it's what they'll continue to do
and also Mr chair representative
do want to make sure and be
clear that this the this process
especially including the
variance process is done in
conjunction with the PRC and Mr
chair representative the the
public regulation commission
would still retain its very
important role even under the
new.
Funded by the which you and I
we're proud to support
They they retain their their key
role in determining
All sorts of things related to
new infrastructure new
generation or otherwise.
Thank you representative.
Actually I did not support that.
So but I'm.
Currently.
Okay so I as far as going to the
environment apartment what
expertise is Environment
Department have on the.
Reliability.
Or affordability to be able to
grant a waiver currently that's
the whole reason we have a PRC
that's currently why we're gonna
have a
a utility public utility
department I'm not sure what
expertise they have to have to
do anything with this they don't
know anything about to
electricity generation.
Thank you Mr thank you
representative I would go down
to again to page fifteen line
six.
it and that specifically in
consultation with the commission
the department make great grant
a requested variance if it
determines that the variance
again related to the reliability
and affordability so Mr chair
and representative
The environment department
is the entity of the state most
closely tied to
Monitoring tracking working to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
They are tasked with that
responsibility here because we
would say that that's important
and even as we grow we ought to
go back to the conversation Mr
chair representative very much
to your point that would be done
in consultation with
The public utility con
Commission will column moving
forward and and their expertise
in affordability and reliability
so thank you for that other
hands up and I have a lot more
questions if this makes it to
the floor I I will definitely
have a lot more questions the
same time I have one last
question and that is a you
mentioned all of the entities
that are currently.
governed by the state as far as
utilities the you the the public
regulation commission currently
and and the entities that you
mentioned are are to one degree
another already.
regulated by them
municipal municipal entities are
not.
and and I I have I have lots of
questions here I mean I think
there needs to be an exemption
as well for for a utilities that
have long term agreements in
place how in the world it seems
like they're gonna be penalized
if they have a long term
agreement in place that there's
no way they can match these as
this is gonna be very punitive
to those ratepayers if then
there is a and increase their
rates and in reality they can't
even get out of a an agreement
they currently have that as long
term I believe the question that
also needs to be answered is if
they have bought into us
something that is purchased
electricity that's purchased
outside of the state for some of
their needs I think this in and
it runs afoul of federal laws I
thank all of those need to be
addressed going forward
and there's another question on
the that was something you
mentioned early on as well was
that we would be able to with
that credits in place and what
and the.
And the
I guess it would be a carbon tax
I guess is what they would
receive if they weren't able to
comply that we would be able to
more evenly share the burden
that seems very unfair for
utilities that have been able to
keep their rates low for their
customers
and I also think it's very very
unfair to start everyone
baseline where they are that day
because some of the entities
have rely heavily on geo thermal
or or it to some degree some are
we at a hydro electricity and
they're not getting the benefit.
Having already been to some
degree
going down the road of.
In in this effort to make your
electricity cleaner.
So and also for those who are
who are on natural gas which is
already cleaner at the base as
well so if this this does not
seem fair the seems to be cookie
cutter
one size fits all and it's just
going to harm the rate payers
and I and I believe that's where
this is really lacking there is
no oversight here asked to four
ability us a variance to a in
order to the one department that
the only real concern I have is
environmental protection I don't
believe there were well suited
to address the concerns of rate
payers I also don't think they
are are are well suited to even
understand the I the idea of
reliability so I believe this is
not ready for prime time and and
I if the ideas then to.
Put restrictions on some of
these that are not going to be
able to reach at their rates are
going to go up even though
they've been more.
Let's say good stewards of the
environment I I think that is
another big.
The error in this legislation I
and I cannot support at this
time thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Montoya
at I'm afraid that I didn't have
the gavel when Representative
Strickler it's got got on the
board so I don't know whose
first.
As a representative Scott were
you next
next.
Okay Representative Scott you're
at.
Thank you madam chair can
technology going.
For a small.
Representative walked away is
just a little more because it
appears from the legislation
that the.
That these reductions in
emissions.
Are going to be required.
Regardless of cost.
There doesn't appear to be any
provision in the bill to take.
Right sh.
Into account.
As the.
Yes the reductions are are put
into effect is that correct.
Thank you very much madam chair
Representative Scott there are
is a provision in the bill miss
madam chair Representative Scott
this is at the bottom of page
fourteen section eight variances
and Madam chair representative
Scott it's specifically
identifies reliability and
affordability
as criteria to provide variances
and relief from meeting these
targets if they impact
reliability or affordability
As determined in conjunction
with the public utility
commission.
And madam chair Representative
small what was your district
speak with respect to
affordability.
Thank you
then madam chair represents got
I don't know if the experts can
speak to it more closely my best
answer Madam chair
representative Scott would be
that that would be heavily
determined by the public utility
commission who are experts in
that area.
So madam chair Representative
small if for example a.
A utility was asking for a ten
percent rate increase.
As a consequence of.
The installation of a renewable
energy project that would be
considered
acceptable.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Scott I had
actually turned to.
Mr Pat o'connell perhaps to
discuss that eggs at more in
depth the madam chair so I would
turn to to them but Madam chair
representative
I don't know of any cases with
our public utility public
regulation commission system to
be the public utility commission
and that that seems like that
would be a steep increase but
madam chair Representative Scott
perhaps Mr o'connell can add
additional input.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Scott just want
to point out it is very it's
process the first step would be
a request for variance from the
utility so you've got investor
owned utilities that are rate
regulated at the public
regulation commission so that
would be the first Mr sticker
gate test is our is it
unreasonable requests based on
regulation the PRC the other
utilities the coops and
municipals
they would have the opportunity
to say eight if I take this path
I will have to raise my rates I
believe that's a reasonable will
be able to present at through
the variance process and the
department with the guidance of
the commission will.
Be able to determine whether
that's reasonable or not thank
you.
Madam chair representative and
experts can't percent would not
be unreasonable number two.
Madam chair representative small
are you.
It's hard to talk about these
numbers in abstract ten percent
seems like a high number I agree
with that again it would depend
on the circumstances at the time
and for the utility at the time
I would expect ten percent would
generate a variance request from
there the utility of for all
information utility thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Scott just to add
very much appreciate the
specific question Mr o'connell's
additions and I would concur
obviously I'm not on the public
utility commission but as a
sponsor of the legislation madam
chair
Representative Scott the the
example of that ten percent
increase I would think would
trigger a variance request and
approve and and grant of a
variance likely in the event
that this legislation were
passed.
Madam chair and representative
it your position that these
renewable energy mandates are
actually going to lower the cost
of electricity to New Mexico
consumers is that correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Scott.
I do absolutely.
Thank you I note that the lowest
cost of new electricity
generation is in areas of uh
Clemente generation.
increasingly with solar plus
storage Madam chair
representative Scott with
current tax incentives and soon
to be without those tax
incentives those sources of
energy generation are now.
Just cheat the the cheapest
sources of generation they are
cheaper than coal fired
generation they are
significantly cheaper.
The new nuclear generated
generation lectures State
generated by nuclear power they
are increasingly cheaper or cost
competitive with natural gas and
madam chair Representative Scott
they are not subject to the
potential price increases that
liquid fuel sources like natural
gas are and so madam chair
representative Scott
the.
I believe the that renewables
are especially in a state with
such a rich renewable energy
resource allocation that these
are the most cost competitive
sources of new electricity
generation in New Mexico and
that further they will act to
keep electricity prices.
The lowest of any new generation
of any new generation source.
So madam chair representative
small.
It would surprise you are
supposed to learn.
One of the New Mexico
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair thank
Representative Scott as I
pointed out these are the
lowest.
Source in new generation costs
and so presumably Madam chair
representative Scott if there is
new generation with wins that
the lower the cost of that
generation would be higher if
that were generated with a with
another fuel source so madam
chair of St I'm not familiar
with the specific case but in
the case that you mention it is
quite likely that the cost
increase would be higher with a
different source for that
actress city generation whether
that's natural gas or coal or
what have you.
And madam chair.
Representative if this.
New generation capacity was
constructed.
Specifically to conform.
To the mandates that we
currently have in place where
we.
Not experience along growth
we're not experiencing.
All significant demand for.
Additional our.
Perhaps.
The status quo.
Right.
Where they were before.
Might have been.
The lowest cost toward Christy
rebel troops let me move on.
Madam chair.
Matt may I just have it's a very
good question and I think it's a
key point madam chair president
Scott excited to move on with
you just to finish in that area
Madam chair representative if
we're thinking of the same
project I believe that that wind
power was identified as the
lowest cost for that generation
and madam chair representative
Scott the clean electrification
Act envisions a future of
significantly increased
electricity demand from
transportation to wider
electrification of homes
buildings data centers and other
parts of our economy so
we are seeing rapid increases in
electrification in different
parts of our economic.
Both in New Mexico in the nation
in the world and so I think we
should.
This
plans for a future and envisions
a future of increased
electricity demand for sure
madam chair Representative
Scott.
Plate you mentioned to that
Madam chair representative
because my next question was
exactly directed toward growth.
Whether the increased use of
electricity also required to
simultaneously the four percent
per annum declined and.
Emissions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I can turn to the
experts if they want to add.
Anything but Madam chair
representative
the fact that that credits can
be banked that it's the counted
for every three years Madam
chair representation I the stock
on that four percent every year
secondly madam chair
representative I think we do
want to make sure that.
If an as is likely there is a
time of rapid increased use of
of electricity in increased
electricity demand that that
does not generate a rapid
increase in LCS emissions we
want to make sure the and we
know we can in cost effective
economically valuable ways that
are full of opportunity to make
sure that increased.
Demand for and usage of
electricity does not translate
into rapidly increasing
emissions but rather is
generated through
not emissions sources and
finally madam chair
representative want to make very
clear that those ways of both
banking credits.
And of then of avoiding
emissions that are generated
those could be from
certainly from renewable sources
also from carbon capture use and
sequestration where the carbon
is permanently sequestered not
words used for another source
but permanently sequestered or
even other technologies that use
You know for instance that that
gas generation but where that
carbon is is fully captured in
either sequestered or put into
other economically valuable uses
so we do take very seriously
madam chair represents got our
responsibility to minimize the
amount of greenhouse gas
emissions even as we grow our
economy and grow our demand for
electricity.
Press experience is any
indicator.
Madam chair representative.
In a growths in utilization
generation and utilization of
this power.
Will result in a substantial
increases in the cost of your.
Appears to be where we are.
Madam chair representative it's
absolutely the province of the
PRC the he used the.
Even with this legislation to to
check that that reliability and
affordability Madam chair
representative Scott.
As our increase as our
electricity demand increases we
can be sure that the lowest
cost.
Resources to serve that
increased electricity demand
will be utilized with this
legislation and with the
provisions in this legislation.
So that the lowest as in Madam
chair representative Scott the
example that where that the wind
power procurement was the lowest
cost true source of new
electricity to serve.
In the example we talked about
earlier.
Madam chair and.
Representative small.
I won't go into the exact math
that's involved.
Comparing dispatchable.
Fossil fuel or nuclear generated
power with.
Dispatchable.
Renewable energy.
Yes
There is a lot of controversy
and a lot.
What's the best word outlook
for.
There is a significant advantage
with respect to cost.
To the
point when you use these other
resources and compared to these
renewable projects thank you.
These renewable projects are
going to in fact and this is a
fine example of what we're
seeing right now increase the
cost to New Mexico consumers.
Substantially we talk for a
minute about.
The credits the cost of these
credits.
Money is so projected to be
generated as a consequence of
this program.
And who is the beneficiary madam
chair Representative.
I thank you madam chair
representative I would go to our
experts
to to detail briefly the
the credit system and it's
integration with the New Mexico
environment department.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair Representative Scott
her madam chair not sure who's
presiding right
This is our.
Directions credits those are to
the benefit of the utility or
call up customers I'm I'm not
sure exactly what your question
was Representative Scott but
those are the instrument
currency if you will that that
are available to use by the
utilities across customers or
under certain conditions under
the act the sold or transferred
again for the benefit of the
customers of the utility or
cooperatives during those
credits.
This is a high there this is the
vice chair just like to remind
our presenters that we're well
over time and so if folks can
try to keep their their
responses brief that would be
great we stop another bill on
the agenda.
Thank you madam chair.
It's my understanding that there
is a cost of these credits will.
With the with those
expenditures.
Accruing to the.
Environment Department of my
incorrect with the reading of
the legislation.
Madam chair representative Scott
there is a fee of one dollar per
credit that is paid to the
department to fund the functions
of date for to the environment
department I would contrast that
one dollar per credit to a
typical price of a ton of CO two
in carbon markets these days
which is typically twenty thirty
dollars or more depending on the
particular market you're looking
at so that the payment
is far below the market value
those credits I also say that
the payment is avoidable if the
tell your coop does stand bark
on efforts to
to electrify you know homes in
households lowincome indigenous
peoples that currently don't
have electricity.
So madam chair Mister Michael
that would be a.
Conservation effort.
Hurry to.
Previous representation of we're
going to be using more
electricity is that not correct
or will would be used for in
spite of the school conservation
efforts.
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm I didn't understand.
The conservation aspect of this
what I was describing was a
situation where a household
currently does not have
electricity and a utility or co
op would electrify that
household either by extending a
line or perhaps providing you
know off grid
electric production like solar
panels and batteries and things
like that depending on the
economic so what makes sense.
Madam chair representative or
any of the presenters what is
the projected revenue coming
in to NMED as a consequence of
this legislation.
Madam chair representative Scott
next year the revenue would be
approximately ten million
dollars up after that the
revenues would increase to about
fourteen million dollars that
would grow slightly over time as
more more clean energy was
developed.
put that in context my
understanding is the department
budget has been reduced over the
last decade on the the you know
on the order of three times or
more of that amount but I don't
have those exact numbers.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Mr Michael let.
Ultimately will come out of the
back pockets again.
New Mexico ratepayers.
Madam chair representative Scott
alternately those costs would be
borne by customers in context
the cost would be a fraction of
a percent of our customers
electricity bill.
The last year adding fuel to the
fire one last question madam
chair and this was brought up in
one of the analyses that arsenal
this appears to regulate power
generated from the state house
there are concerns were running.
Interstate Commerce concert.
Madam chair representative Scott
know there've been programs like
this in other parts of the
country the important
consideration here is at the
point of regulation is on the
utility or the coop which is in
in state entity it is regulating
those in state entities it's not
regulating out of state power
production so there is not a
conversation the associate with
this bill.
He.
Madam chair sure.
He's the one that utility is.
Is distributing most of its
power from out of state source.
Madam chair representative Scott
yes that's correct.
Thank you madam chair that's all
ahead.
Thank you representative Scott
and we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Representative small.
issue her and and the testimony
from the city of Farmington rob
maces are is our city manager
and I think it dares or utility
manager and we're kind of in a
pickle in San Juan County we've
lost a lot of jobs we lost a lot
of population since the last
census seventy we had a hundred
thirty thousand residents in San
Juan County we're down to
about to.
The four thousand we lost.
Roughly six thousand residents
we lost about eleven thousand
jobs
city of Farmington a.
Is the is as provided and and
their testimony we have some of
the lowest rates in in the state
and we're really thankful for
that
the utility is is quite old
I guess it's in nineteen forty
start in the early nineteen
hundred nineteen forties and
they've been able to pay cash
for their their their facilities
and and this bill risks those
those facilities and in may
because early retirement the the
the fees the estimated revenue
from this bill Courtney FIR and
believe Mr Michael of the
confirm that US two million
dollars
for twenty twenty two goes up to
fourteen million dollars I would
like to know how much of that is
being generated from the city of
Farmington I know its you get
seven utilities
in this you know with this bill
On television and the electric
co ops in the in the
Companies how much of that will
she aforementioned.
Hey.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thanks excuse me I apologize
thank you madam chair thank you
representative I don't have that
answer right now but I will get
that answer will work to get an
answer an estimate offline and
get that to you Representative
Strickler thank you.
So I share and and
Representative small.
We yeah we're we're.
Suffering
Economic or times and and and
San Juan County
the states growth this is quite
to
small I think we we are our
growth rate to from the last
census we had two million sixty
thousand we have two million
hundred thousand SF forty
thousand population increase for
the state it's less madam
reporter sent one row so I'm
having a hard time understanding
the increased electricity demand
one is going down you know we're
losing people losing industry
and so we we have a an abundant
supply of of electricity for our
customer base hope that improves
I hope hope this.
Our economy recovers
but it is going to take five
years according to our economy
are great.
Our best LFC estimates with the
tax department and with the DFA
we we had a good presentation
before tax committee that.
With the the shut down of our
businesses you know it's gonna
be a slower if I your recovery
well that's good because the
last Great Recession
that it is hard in two thousand
nine two thousand two thousand
nine let's say to a case almost
ten years to recover on under
you know our employment
situation and in our employment
Rachel hi
your.
You're very handsome and lady
have the various but a such a
high threshold.
do you sign up to page fifteen
line six and yes there is a
variance component to this but
if you go down further.
it has to made the
they were reliability or
affordability of electricity
service to Mexico and those
factors outweigh any harm to
public health safety and
environment caused by not
compliance that's a pretty high
threshold and then a variance
granted by the department shall
be the shortest duration
consistent with the protection
of public health safety
environment preservation of four
billion about reliability
reliable a lecture she service.
Or have been receiving text from
my
my team and and Farmington and
that's that's a high threshold
and so here city of Farmington
vice chair and and
Representative small city
aforementioned is been proven
and then able to pay to save up
and pay cash for our our our
facilities and
We're gonna be penalized.
With this cap and trade and and
the the family that you have in
here again I understand you
don't have or Perretta Cher that
what is a big concern in the
city of Farmington along with
other partner chant energy is
working on the carbon capture
facility that's on going that'll
reduce the emissions on that
power plant ninety percent in a
serious to reaffirm what you you
said at a later the sequester
there's there's there's the tax
credits federal tax credits that
are implied you get a higher tax
credit if you if you are.
Put it in the ground and then
you get a smaller tax credit if
you put it down the pipeline for
enhanced recovery and and the
oil fields of southeast New
Mexico in West Texas so it's
kind of a
double
Opportunity in in the in the
facility best bang envision will
have a combination of both so I
guess redundancy and they're
they're planning for many plants
at a total cost of one point two
billion dollars so you know
we're talking about a huge
economic
Tempat impact to San Juan County
with the construction jobs alone
and then.
you maintain fifteen hundred
jobs between all the facilities
and that's a huge benefit and a
lot of those folks are Navajo.
You know employees are like
forty percent and then we
maintain our tax base to ten
million a year and then we have
some exciting days
To make solar.
Projects are on the drawing what
works in in our county.
Two hundred met medical water
facilities but with the with the
idea of expanding them they also
have some storage.
I'm when I understand those
facilities will probably go to
your son or I mean the the
lecturers who are probably got
Arizona California to meet their
needs and we're taking advantage
of transmission and the good
news is there's no our base
there's no tax tax breaks for
these entities are paying the
full freight which I'm happy
report but I have to close this
because the only city if forming
ten is going to be.
Really in a pickle.
We have a lot of low income
folks in our county as we do and
all are counties the forty
seventh poorest state in the
nation with our state west of
the Mississippi and we we need
jobs and we need we need to keep
our energy is a.
Low cost components San Juan
County and and we're looking to
attract new businesses and
industries because of our low
cost electricity with you know
from various sources we have
natural gas we have call with
hydro and and all those
facilities are paid for so.
You know I think
the exemption of the Minutemen
Espaillat would would be a good
thing really improve this bill
in my opinion you know we're
we're going for whether carbon
capture which is a
exciting.
Exciting project for those of us
in in the county big job creator
and
we we look forward to the
construction with Sega's kicked
off really we have a lot of lot
of work to do to get to that
point but
The.
Again go over the the cost
factor this city of Aztec that
that's what I was trying to
remember my share or Mr chairman
and Representative small you
know they they have their own
utility and they buy on the open
market so it's really hard to
track you know what you plan.
The electricity is charted for
the term course from and I know
that's an accounting issue and
I guess PRC knows how to figure
that out
you know this is going to be a
little tougher on them they have
a pretty good.
Right base there there
There are costs per kilowatt
hours free regional and I think
they have a whole land of
sources from.
Mexico and and natural gas and
and I believe solar in our area
Representative Senator Strickler
do have a question to ask Miss
Sanchez about the bill you know
what one last thing we with the
With the concern of the
municipalities is there any any
chance that you would address
that concern
I know this co chair judiciary
next we sure like to have some
relief and
Fixing one county and the city
of Farmington.
At.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Strickler we're actually can
committed to continuing to work
on this and to explore potential
areas of improvement so I very
much appreciate highlighting the
area municipality I'm not in a
position
I'm just imposition to say that
for sure continue to put areas
of collaboration.
Okay thank you Mr thank you vice
chair and thank you
Representative small we we look
forward to those discussions and
okay with my team back home and
see how we can make this a.
The less less impactful to
to San Juan County and
our our folks that we serve
which includes the Navajo Nation
we provide a lot of cheap energy
for them so thank you Mr thank
you bye chair thank you
Representative small thank you
Representative Strickler and the
penance all right we are now on
a motion for a do you passed a
house bill one thirty second.
We have a second from
Representative Ferrary well now
go to take the role.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sari√±ana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend no.
Ister Stansbury yes and I'd like
to briefly explain my vote.
Chair Matthew McQueen yes.
Do you passed with a vote of
seven to four.
Thank you Jim house bill one
fifty seven has passed out of
the house energy and natural
resources committee I would like
to know explain my own vote I
understand that our electric
coops and our utility still has
some technical concerns about
this bill and I know it's going
to change it Judiciary next I'd
like to hopefully see the
Sanchez be able to continue
working with our utilities and
Mexico oxen and municipalities
to make sure this bill is in the
best possible shape and thank
you Mr small for Representative
small vice chair small for
presenting the bill today.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
So.
I can hear of is a small you
have your third bill of the day
this is an agency bill I believe
I hope it is.
Straightforward and not
complicated I will say and then
we will proceed through it as
quickly as possible so
Representative small if you
could present your bill.
Yes thank you Mr chair
thank you I just
Sure sure
Yes Mr chair this is a an agency
bill one of two
priorities Mr chair and
committee for the energy
minerals and natural resources
before I briefly summarize the
legislation I do want to give a
significant thank you to of
course to the HSD I especially
want to thank the New Mexico
mining association of Freeport
mac Moran international.
And others including teachers
who Mr chair committee members
Did significant work to ensure
that this legislation
wouldn't it is is acceptable.
By all parties.
Mr chair representative is.
Right fully at house bill one
fifty seven the mining act
forfeiture fund.
It considers what might happen
in a worst case scenario Mr
chair committee members with
some of our largest mining
operations who produce some of
the most valuable products here
in New Mexico and who are whose
work and workers is critical to
our state.
As we have all seen over this
past time with the pandemic.
Sometimes the worst case
scenarios happen this seemed a
prudent time to plan for a worst
case scenario in which at these
largest and and and very
important mines mining
operations that the very
significant reclamation funds.
That if they simply.
Were unable to perform that
reclamation Mr chair
representatives we wanted to
make sure that the state.
Would have the ability to
utilize only those funds as were
necessary that had already been
set aside to perform the
appropriate reclamation
importantly Mr chair committee
members there is no increased
cost to any of the private
sector stakeholders that is the
these large international mining
conglomerates there's no
increased cost Mr chair
committee members through the
diligent work of the mining
association Freeport mac Ron and
others as well as the agency we
simply provide that in the worst
case scenario.
That the funds will come into
the mining for mining act
forfeiture fund they will then
be can be utilized by the state
to perform the recommend the the
reclamation last thing I would
add Mr chair before going to
questions is that
the.
The the any funds that were
unused would go back to to would
not stay with the state this is
simply to make sure that the
reclamation in a worst case
scenario that we all hope does
not come that it could simply be
carried out
on a on a appropriate and
efficient time line.
With that Mr chair committee
members I would stand for
questions and
I appreciate very much your
time.
Thank you for it's a small will
go to the audience that they
wanted on the it's like to speak
please raise your hand of please
be brief we're way over
every time I see that more hands
go up and I regret saying it.
My opponent your first.
Sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Mike forward on the executive
director of the New Mexico
mining association we want to
thank the sponsor and the agency
folks for working with us in
addressing some concerns we have
we stand in full support of the
bill and we hope it never has to
be used thank you.
Thank you for that next we have
twenty Trujillo.
You're currently needed.
Can you hear me now yes.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
members the committee my name's
Tony three on the registered
lobbyist for Freeport mac Moran
down here in the US and
beautiful Silver City Grant
County.
I want to thank also the sponsor
of Representative small
Secretary probe said her staff
they really worked hard on
getting us to this compromise
bill everybody really pitched
and I was going to be a pre file
build when they presented to us
for their for their for our
review the we did it was not a.
Bill that we could support at
that time but after a lot of
discussions a lot of meetings we
ended up with a very good
compromise bill with thank you
for that we stand in full
support of the bill.
Thank you Charlie to Salem.
You're still muted.
You're still muted.
So we are the muted on there and
there are and.
On their end.
Charlie can you and me yourself.
Okay let's go back to Charlie
next up is Rebecca Roose you
hear me now okay we hear you now
let's go to.
Sorry Rebecca thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and Representative
small my name is Charles to sail
and I'm with the New Mexico
environmental law center and we
support the bill of the bill
would insure that money that is
set aside for as as financial
assurance to make sure that
mining operations are properly
closed and reclaimed after the
mining operations cease this
bill would ensure that those
funds will actually be used for
mining reclamation and it for
example and in the event of a
bankruptcy proceeding the state
will retain control over that
money rather than the bankruptcy
trustee you might have some
other interesting how the money
is spent
that that concludes my statement
thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative small.
Next we have a rigorous.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Rebecca Roose I'm the director
of the water protection division
at the environment department
I'm here today to express that
the environment department
supports house bill one fifty
seven for the reasons previously
stated that it fills an
administrative gap and thereby
providing the opportunity for
both EMNRD and in some cases the
environment department to ensure
the protection of natural
resources for future generations
of New Mexico thank you Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative small.
Thank you we have login.
Question that.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and think you're
going small for when I bring
this bill I'm a glass half staff
attorney with New Mexico
wilderness alliance and very
briefly we just support the
speller and encouraging to see
such a diversity of support for
it thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you for that of those nice
and quick that and our public
comment Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
program time a like a like a
motion.
Thank you Representative
Strickler is there any committee
debate on the bill.
Seeing Representative Strickler
to make mission.
Motion passed.
Second.
We have the motion for
Representative Strickler and
second from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana I
believe.
is there any opposition.
to this bill.
So Chevy keep I I'm not sure
who's here so just so we're
clear can can you go ahead and
take a vote.
Absolutely.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sari√±ana yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
Chair the queen.
Yes.
And that is a unanimous do pass.
thank you Representative small
thank you to the committee and
the staff was a long day we got
to the agenda and I appreciate
that.
we are adjourned.
They Mr chair thank you
committee thanks everyone have
any say.
