Good, good morning, everyone.
Let's go ahead and call our
meeting to order. How state
government elections and Indian
affairs.
Before we begin, we have
housekeeping. We are going to
hear how Bill 199.
First
And we'll move that up.
And uh please call Roll.
Representative on here.
representative block present
Representative Borego here.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mia.
Here
Madam Floor leader,
Representative Zamora.
Here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Here.
Madam Chair.
We have a quorum.
I got you. Thank you. All right.
Representative Chairman Linte,
thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Good morning, committee members.
House Bill 199. House Bill 199
allows the taxation and revenue
Department to share certain text
data with the legislative
Finance Committee for use in its
evaluations. I was a member of
the Legislative Finance
Committee over the past interim
session, and this is one of our
endorsed bills from, from that
uh interim session.
The bill doesn't requires data
to be shared through a data
sharing agreement or an MOU.
The bill also provides that no
data can be shared, that is
otherwise prohibited by state or
federal law. House Bill 189, uh,
once again, as I mentioned, is a
component of a series of efforts
designed to strengthen the LFC's
evaluation unit. When I talk
about certain tax data, what I'm
talking about is aggregated
personal tax data, as well as
business tax data to help them
in their evaluations through
LFC. With that, Madam Chair,
stand for any questions.
Thank you. Would you like to
introduce your expert witness
and does he have a yes sir.
Yes, ma'am. This is Brendan
Gray, who is our uh one of our
economists in the legislative
finance.
Madam Chair, yeah, chairs stated
that and I'm here testifying in
support of this bill because it
is LFC sponsored legislation,
not something we typically do,
but.
want to provide that
Thank you. OK, let's go to the
audience. Those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands.
We'll stay with the audience,
those in opposition, raise your
hands.
Seeing none, let's go online.
Do we have any supporting or
opposing comments.
Please raise your hand.
No committee members.
Madam Chair, I do believe we
missed a young lady in the back
under the clock that raised her
hand.
To
OK. Would you like to make a
comment? One minute.
OK.
Thank you for your good eyes,
Nora.
represented a block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Mr. Chair, good to see you.
Uh, a few questions just based
upon
For me, I, I just really care
about.
Security of people's information
and I just want to make sure
that since there are more people
who are gonna have their eyes on
this information. Can you just
walk me through the steps to
secure it, to make sure that we
don't have that shared.
Because it's, it's tax
information very, very personal
stuff. So could you just opine
on that for me, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, and expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, and
Representative, thank you for
the question. I would like to
allow my uh expert to
Go further into detail on that.
Madam chair representative, it's
a great question. I think that's
top of mind for the taxation
revenue Department, um how it
works for them now is they take
a
State, federal training on how
to protect that data. They have
a enclosed system that protects
that data. Um, so they go
through a bunch of processes,
they're constantly, you know,
um,
Making sure that they're
adhering to state and federal
law, which provides that kind of
protection that you're concerned
about. And what this bill would,
would do is it would make sure
that um in that data sharing
agreement, you know, that LSC
staff would have to go through
those same levels, that same
rigorous.
training and protection pursuant
to state and federal law. So
we'd go on site most likely to
access the data, see the data,
pull data the same way they pull
data in an aggregate form that
protects taxpayer data, um, and
that would be what's used in
those so we'd be held to the
same standards.
That the tax and rev department
um is, and they have very high.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, and
thank you expert. So, that, that
helps me a little bit. Uh, so,
when we're talking about the
data pulling the data.
How does that work? Is it pulled
on site and then is it
transported.
Through a cloud software or some
other kind of
Is it a flash drive or a hard
disk, I'm sure it would have to
be pretty big with all that
data. Can you just give me a
little more information on how
that's transported from TRD to
LFC and then how does that work?
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um, as how it works now, we get
some of this data aggregate. We,
I'm a member of the consensus
revenue estimating Group.
texts and rev is constantly
pulling data for that body
outworks, they have a system
closed only accessible on G's
campus. Um, they query that
database, which I'm not sure the
protections there, but I, you
know, they're there. They query
that database and then, you
know, from that query, which has
all the information protected,
that just comes into a they show
us, sometimes we get access to
those spreadsheets. Um, so we
would do the same thing where,
you know, we go on site, we
query.
that data, um, and the only
thing that's coming
You know, over the annex is the
same spreadsheets we have now.
It would just us be there
worrying that data as not going
through the agency.
Thank you.
Sorry.
OK
Check
So kind of representative
elections.
OK. Is that better? Oh, good.
I don't sound like a weird
alien. robot cyborg.
I know.
No, thank you, madam chair. So,
um, there's no penalty currently
in the bill for violations as
there exists a great possibility
of accidentally revealing
personal information about
taxpayers accidentally,
according to my analysis here.
So,
Could you tell me how, how we're
going to hold folks accountable
in the department, and I'm not,
I am not saying that.
like that
or LFC for that matter, but just
making sure what checks and
balances are in place to ensure
that if this data does get out,
In any kind of data breach that
there would be some kind of
consequences, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
great question. I think your
question was, question as I
understood it was, what would be
the consequences if there was
some sort of violation of those
data agreements. Um, I think,
Madam Chair, for the committee,
there would be a consequence. It
would be a misdemeanor if you
look on page 2 of the um Thaksin
Rev FIR I hope you have that age
2 at the bottom of that page,
um, they, they say section 7176
would subject LFC staff.
anyone, um, on and on, uh, who
inappropriately disclosed
confidential tax information to
a penalty up to $1000 and a
misdemeanor. So that would be
penalty and in fact that would
raise that's actually $5000.
So that would be the the
penalty, we would be subject to
the same penalty that ax and Ris
staff are. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank yous
representative, and that
actually
Gives me a little more
Good information to make a
decision on this bill. I just
had a
You know, I, I just want to make
sure people's data is protected.
And, and so if we're increasing
penalties and if there's an
incentive to not release
anything knowingly or
unknowingly, I think that would
be, that would be good. So thank
you, madam chair. That's pretty
much all I had. And thank you so
much for the bill.
Senate of Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chen. Thank
you, Representative, for
bringing this bill forward.
So
Give me an example of whose data
you might pull or or in the past
whose data you wished you had.
And, and what the reason for
that would be, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
great question. I'll start with
a, with an anecdote about why
this data is important and then
give an example of of what that
might look like.
I'm an economist. I'm part of
the consensus revenue estimating
group, we forecast a
Oh
that better.
OK. So we forecast state
revenues, um, and I think from
the evaluator's perspective,
they look at a lot of our tax
expenditures, which make up a
big part of the state budget,
and they say, well, we just
don't know exactly what's going
on with these tax programs. It
would kind of be like, if I as
an economist, um didn't have
access to inflation data. How
can I build my forecast if I
don't have access to inflation
data. Well, for them, how could
they evaluate this really big
state program, these really big
tax expenditures, if they don't
have some.
access to that data. And so an
example of what that might look
like is, um, consider, for
example, um Lida or JTI. We know
that there are companies
receiving um those state
assistants, we have, we know the
amount that they're getting.
From EDD, um, but what we don't
know is what other state um tax
incentives, they might.
be eligible for and not
receiving or eligible for and
receiving um and so that's an
example of how we could match um
how these companies are stacking
incentives. Um, is that working
in their benefit? Is it too
complicated, for example, there
was an evaluation done in 2022,
um on uh Lita and JTip, and that
was one of their notes that, you
know, they like, you know, some
of these companies might get a
million dollars a year in LIDA
or, you know, maybe they get.
million dollars in LIDA, but
they're also getting a million
dollars in tax incentives. And
that's probably a good thing,
but we want to be able to
confirm that and come to the
legislature and tell that story,
and we just can't do that right
now based on our tax data.
Oh, Madam Chan and an expert
witness. So then that
That's gonna help you in a way
to understand.
How much
Find how much uh monetary help
they need.
And, and why is it, what's,
what's breaking down in the
system right now that's, that
you're not getting there to that
point today.
Should they not be required to
in their applications and stuff
to give you all that information
and or is it just somebody might
forget something or what, what,
what's the reason for it?
Madam Chair, Representative,
great question.
We've requested this data in the
past and we haven't been able to
get it in part because
TRD views state law as
prohibiting them from providing
it to us.
So Thaksin Rev, they put
together a great tax expenditure
report, um, in their
perspective, I don't want to
speak for the agency, but from
their perspective, they're
meeting their statutory
requirements, um, and I think
they're hesitant to be in
violation of state law by
sharing additional data with us
and so this would just be
Making sure that they know
they're not in violation of
state law and that we can work
together to
And Madam Chair and presenter,
so is this gonna help the state
in, in
In collecting their taxes or, or
does this affect any of that
whatsoever.
Madam Chair, Representative, no,
I, I don't think.
This will be different from the
tax return data that shouldn't
impact that process at all.
Thank you for the for the
answers. That concludes my
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Representative Vice Chair
Little, and then Representative
Barrego and then representative
Mejia.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Just one clarifying
question, please. Um,
Uh, so this bill would allow the
sharing of taxpayer information
not prohibited by federal law.
Can you tell me what, what
What that is, could you go into
a little bit of examples,
perhaps. Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, um,
An example of something that
would be prohibited by federal
law is federal tax data.
We would not have access to
that.
That's beyond the purview of our
office, beyond the purview of
this bill, so we don't have
access now, we wouldn't have
access in the future.
Thank you. That's very clear. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Senator of Breo.
Madame Chair, I was just gonna
make a.
for approval of House Bill.
Thank you before we um vote on
that Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert
witnesses.
Um, I just have one question.
What warranty is there that we
will know if the tax data were
misused.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
your question, great question.
I'll repeat it just to make sure
I'm understanding what guarantee
would we have.
Know if the tax data was mis
misused, um.
I think our data sharing
agreement, um, as I, as I
imagine it would have.
TRD and their team that
currently check, that currently
makes those checks, making the
checks against us, so that
whatever evaluation we're
putting out would be audited by
that team. Um, so the same
checks that exist now that
enforce that misdemeanor penalty
would still be in place.
You, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. So we have a Du pass
motion by Representative Barrego
is seconded by Vice Chair
Little, please call roll.
Representative ona Nonu.
Yes.
Representative Black
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mehia.
Yes.
Madam floor leader
representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair. 61.
Hey, Representative Chairman,
you have to pass. Thank you.
Good day. All right.
House Bill 228.
Representative Serrado, chair
chairwoman Serato.
Yes, I do.
Madam chair, that's why I have
the closed captioning bill this
afternoon.
Hey, you may begin. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Uh, good morning.
Glad to be here. Uh, I'm
Representative Linda Serrado,
and this is my expert, Luis
Barrias, who is with the
government relations with Amaro.
We have for you today, uh, 228,
which is certain restrictions on
electric fences. Uh, this bill
overall is a good government,
good business bill, but it
provides it allows businesses to
know they have, um, the baseline
to protect themselves. And it
does two things really, and it
really starts on page 4. what it
does is it provides an
Avenue for municipalities to
oversee electric fences, um,
burglar alarms that are electric
fences, and 2, it creates a
baseline for a uniformity for
electric fence burglar alarms to
be set up and recognized by
municipalities. Um, as we know,
electric fences can be a
deterrent to crime, and it is an
action that small businesses can
take on their own part to ensure
that they are, um, you know,
make preventing any crime within
their own reach. It gives them a
sense of security they can take
care of.
Uh, page 1 and 2 and 3 really
maintains all the different ways
that um a municipality can
control an electric fence. This
bill doesn't affect zoning. It
doesn't affect anything in that
framework, but what it does is
it makes it clear the avenues on
page 4, where, um, you know,
they can restrict um electric
fences and makes it consistent.
And I'll, I'll tell you why this
came up. Uh, I'm obviously
represent Santa Fe. It's not
obvious. I do represent Santa
Fe, uh, and very proud to do so.
And in our community, there's a
business that went to City Hall,
asked to set up an electric
fence. They said, great, and
they invested more than $20,000
in setting it up, you know,
every 10 ft there's a posted
sign, there's a wall associated
with it, etc. etc. And so they
got it all set up, they're all
excited, and then another
department within the city came
and said that may not have
broken this rule, but it broke
this rule over here, you didn't
even know existed. And so they
had to take it down, which cost
them another $10,000 and they
ended up not without this. And
so all this does, it just
provides again, that it makes it
really clear that if there's
going to be restrictions.
on electric fence burglar
alarms, that it has to be in a
specific area related to
electric fences, and it allows
them to build whatever other uh
restrictions on top of that.
I'll, I'll hand it over to my
expert remote from Amro who can
give you some more information.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Luis Farias. I am a
government relations director
for Amrock.
Being in support of HB 228 and
on behalf of business customers
seeking innovative products like
battery charge fences with alarm
systems to deter commercial
property crime.
The monitor security
technologies provided for
businesses located on
commercial.
Manufacturing and industrial
sites.
Who needs to include the
protection of outdoor assets.
The system always sits behind an
existing non-electrified
perimeter.
The security technology has
protected businesses in New
Mexico since 1998, and for
decades elsewhere.
It is worth noting that the
system is based on open source
technology.
All of its components can be
bought off the shelf.
Because property crime has grown
to dramatically. More businesses
have expressed a dire need for
this security technology.
These businesses invest
considerable resources to
protect assets and ensure
employee safety in New Mexico,
businesses can face lengthy
delays and uncertainty when it
comes to permitting due to
patchwork of standards and
interpretations across various
jurisdictions. Currently, we
have 95 customers waiting for
this technology.
On average, it takes 180 days to
get permitted with some waiting
for over 500 days.
And delays are not specific to
just one city or county.
To operate, businesses need
certainty around the
installation of security systems
and technology, HB 228 brings
uniformity to the permitting
process.
Allowing businesses to grow and
expand operations locally.
The system is safe and can only
be installed behind an existing
perimeter.
And local government retained
Sony control and the ability to
establish requirements for loan
permits.
The battery charged security
device is a crime prevention
tool, which provides a starling
but safe pause to deter and the
tecrimal trespass.
The system interfaces with a
monitor alarm to detect a breach
and alert to business in a
monitoring operator who verify
an alarm event before police
officers are called.
This is great for the business
who see crime virtually
disappear upon installation.
Reducing the strain unlimited
law enforcement resources.
The system features warning
signs that are located every 30
ft to alert and deter potential
trespassers and criminals. It
also complies with recognized
safety standards established by
IEC.
And the device is very power
with no more than 12 volts of
direct current and is
continuously recharged by solar
panels.
To prevent inadvertent contact,
the security system is always
located on the interior of the
property and behind a perimeter
fence or wall.
New Mexico has the opportunity
to join others like Utah,
Arizona, Texas, and Oklahoma in
passing laws that make it easier
to install crime prevention
security solutions.
In all, there are 26 other
states that have similar laws,
including most recently
California.
Insecure technology prevents
property crime at no cost to
taxpayers, cities, or the state.
I respectfully ask for your eye.
Thank you. With that, we stand
for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience now, those in support
of the bill, please raise your
hands.
OK, let's hear from you one
minute, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name's Luke Otero. I'm
I'm speaking outside of my being
a lobbyist, uh, we also, our
family owns a small family
warehouse commercially zoned.
And we're one of the business,
uh, businesses that probably on
that waiting list to see this
technology and utilize it for
our security of our, our assets
and our property.
Um, at our warehouse.
Uh, we don't mind encumbering
the cost.
It's uh something that we look
at or to.
Feeling secure at night that
our, our property and our assets
are protected, so
Madam Chair, committee members,
please support this bill.
Any other supporting comments?
We'll stay with the audience,
any opposing comments.
OK, let's go online.
anyone on Zoom hoping to make
public comment. Please raise
your hand.
OK, we have Jane Jernigan.
Jane, can you hear us?
I can. Great. Um.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh
Jane Jernigan with the New
Mexico utility Contractors
Association.
Our members construct everything
from the curb down, highways,
bridges, and water treatment
plants, and we have members all
over the state.
We support House Bill 228
because businesses are facing
criminal activity at their
permanent yards and work sites,
and this bill offers an
effective deterrent. New Mexico
businesses need options to deter
crime. This bill expands
security options with no cost to
taxpayers and still maintains
local and ordinances and zoning.
These systems are a tool to
curtail crime but are safe.
House Bill 228 provides guidance
and restrictions to ensure
uniformity across New Mexico. We
respectfully ask you to vote
yes. Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much, Jane. Anyone
else?
Hey, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for bringing this
bill forward.
Why is there restrictions? I
can't the fence be on the
property line.
Madam Chair, representative.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
actually gonna hand it to my
expert on this one. Thank you.
So
Right, so there's two
perimeters, right? We have the
existing perimeter and ours goes
behind it. The reason why it's
not right on that main perimeter
is to prevent inadvertent
contact. So people who go beyond
that initial perimeter have
already demonstrated clear
intent to break in and take
something that's not theirs.
And Madam Chair, and uh
Tell me your name again so I I
can get your name.
Uh, yes, Representative Luis
Farias.
Spell that first name? Sure. L U
I S, uh Luis, yes. So, so Luis.
Madame Chali,
So I picture somebody jumping
over the first fence.
And then they get into the 2nd
fence and they get shocked.
And there
In a trap.
They want to get away from the
electric fence, but they're in a
trap.
How, how would you explain that,
Madam Chair and Louise?
So Madam Chair Representative,
there are actually standards
that guide the installation of
this fence. It's 4 to 12 inches
away, it separates the two
perimeters, uh, there is a loop
1.3 seconds. So there is no
entrapment and our fence is
built higher so that somebody
can't just jump the fence. It
prevents criminals from easily
accessing the site.
Representative and and Madam
Chair and
Let's go back to the first
question, but, but I feel like
they might get trapped in
between.
The first fence and the 2nd
fence.
And even though
I'm sure don't support anybody
breaking into the business, but,
but here we have this person
trapped.
In this fence
Because there's an outer fence
and an inner fence, and he's
gotten shocked and now he
doesn't have.
Maybe the strength or maybe he's
so nervous he can't get back
over the first fence to begin
with.
And, and how do you feel about
that, Madam Cher and Louis?
Representative, if I can tell
you that the system has been
thoroughly tested by medical
experts throughout the world for
various scenarios that includes
people with pacemakers,
children, pets. It is not meant
to harm the duration is 0.0003
of the shock, which is akin to
static shock.
Representative.
OK.
So, so then, uh,
That I'll go on to my next
question is,
Why
Why do we put some kind of
relationship between these
fences, this bill.
An alarm systems.
Cause, cause to me the alarm
systems are already there and
everything and, and we're trying
to add this fence, yet we're
tying the in the bill where
there's some language about the
alarm systems. Why?
Why is that so, uh, Madam Chair
representative?
Representative, I understand the
question, um, these are both
electric fences and burglar
alarms. So, uh, they will notify
either, uh, you know, local
police officers if somebody has
broken in, or they'll notify if
they have a private security
system, they can notify that. So
it's, it is both at the same
time. Um, and so that was
something I wanted to add as
well is that if should someone
be stuck there, they're not
stuck till the morning per se.
They, you know, an official has
been notified.
OK, thank you for that answer,
and then, uh,
We Madam Chair, we also talked
about.
A battery, a 12 volt battery
having to hook up to this fence.
And, and I've ran
Electric fences on my farms and
ranches all my life.
And we do hook up a 12 volt
battery, but then there's a
conversion done on that 12 volt
DC.
To, to
I don't know what
The, the other proper word is
and stuff, but it's not 12 vote.
DC volts won't hurt anybody.
We can, any of us can go grab a
battery and grab both both
posts, and they won't hurt you.
It's the alternating current
that'll that'll bite you. So,
If it's being converted.
To another source.
Or
For electricity or I guess would
be the correct way to say it.
Why does it have to be a 12 volt
battery? Why can't it be plugged
into a 110 outlet, Madam Chair.
Manage representative, great
question, uh, so our system is
not connected to the grid for
Obvious tactical reasons if
there's a storm, if uh wind
event, the system continues to
operate even if the grid goes
down.
It is not continuous in nature,
It forces so that every 1.3
seconds you get that going
around. The battery itself is
recharged continuously by solar
panels, but it is in no way
attached to uh the grid.
Madam Chair Representative, if I
may add, these are standards
that are pretty consistent
throughout the electric fence,
burglar alarm industry. Um, and
so what we, what this says is
that in permitting should have a
locality want to add additional
restrictions on, you know, how
that battery and that, that
power source is set, they can,
but the minimum is that this is
the minimum that that is set
across the state. OK, OK, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
answer.
So
Madam Chair and, and Luis.
Are you the owner of
A fence company that puts this
fence up, man.
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I, I work for Amrock. We are in
the industry, but we're, like I
said earlier, it's open source
technology, so anybody can jump
into the business, and we
welcome the competition
representative and, and I'm
sorry, uh, Louis, but when the
door opened, I didn't hear
everything you said. No you
repeat your answer?
Uh, yes, I work for Amrock. We
are in the industry, but as I
mentioned in my testimony, it's
open source technology. So
anybody that wants to jump into
this kind of business can do so.
OK, and, and Madam Chair, and
Louis, so
When, when you answered the
question a while ago, you said,
our, our, our system.
Works this way.
Are there other systems?
That would work without a
battery.
And, and I just wanna make sure
we make this, uh, uh, a free
market.
Decision for whoever's putting
up a fence. Is there other
fences?
That don't use a battery that
are, that would work in the same
manner.
That have to be plugged into a
110 outlet.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe there are other systems
that do just that.
OK. And, and Madam Chair and
Representative.
That causes a little heartburn.
Because here we are in front of
a committee.
And we're selling a product.
A specific product.
If, if we're gonna, if we're
gonna run this bill forward.
And we're, and we're gonna keep
going with it.
I think that we ought to be able
to make.
Whatever fences are on the
market.
Available to the customers.
We shouldn't as legislators.
Be selling a particular product
and narrowing down the market to
the, to the consumer.
And, and this has happened to me
in, in, I've been serving for 6
years now, and it's happened to
me a few times in committee. I
don't think it's your intention.
To do that
But
If I as a consumer.
I'm looking for an electric
fence.
And for and for whatever reason,
I find a fence that'll plug into
a 110, and I don't want to
involve a battery in the system.
Or I like it for any other
particular reasons.
I don't want to be tied down by
a law in the state of New Mexico
that says you have to buy a
fence that that involves a 12
volt battery.
So to me, I would feel more
comfortable.
If you guys take a look at this
bill and, and open that.
Open that up to where it
doesn't.
Pertain to a particular.
Maybe group of products, maybe
you're not trying to narrow it
down to your particular product,
but
But to me, we need to open up
the market and make it, make it
a free market system for the
consumer.
Um
Other than that, I, I'd like.
The help in keeping the
criminals out.
I, I'm still, still have some
reservations about voting for
this bill.
I look forward to the, to the
debate as we go forward on this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Barraco.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Representatives more
for your comments.
Um
Um
Madam Chair, um, and
representative.
Um, thank you for your bill. Um,
I do have some concerns about it
with regard to um some of the
comments that are in our
Uh, committee analysis and our
fiscal impact report.
And those comments are with
regard to um local.
Zoning authority.
And um
You know, I've been involved in
lots of um
Development of zoning.
And um regulations.
And this bill
Preempt some of that.
And and it concerns me some
because a lot of those
regulations um are developed
over time for specific
communities and Madam Chair, um,
It takes a lot of time to
develop those regulations.
And so we are preempting those
that, that time and that effort
that was uh taken by those um
by those zony re regulatory
authorities and I notice in our
comments, um,
And this is by our staff, um,
the municipal League notes that
this bill removes authority for
some permitting and zoning
decisions from local
governments, an authority which
more appropriate.
More appropriately might be left
with the local zoning and
planning boards, and I know that
those, those groups and those
individuals work very hard to
ensure that
You know, um,
The uh zoning codes are um
unique.
And our specific to those, those
areas that they serve.
And um the other thing, the
other comment shifts permitting
and zoning of authority away
from local governments and um.
Addresses this specific
industry.
And
You know,
One size does not fit all.
And I have, I have some concern
about that.
And I think that
You know
And I know that you've probably
taken a lot of time,
representative, to do, to come
up with this bill, as we all do,
and, you know, we all work hard
to ensure that we tried to cover
all our bases, but
Have you heard from uh the
municipal league, have you heard
from um cities and counties
across the state because.
I didn't see any of your
witnesses here that addressed
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
the comments. Um, and I always
appreciate our conversations on
these. I think, uh, so no, the
answer is we've not heard
directly from the municipal
League except for the analysis
that says this, um, I think part
of this is there I think there's
two pieces. So one, it, it
ensures they can continue to
zone how they prefer, and they
continue to control in the
permitting process. It, but it
outlines that it that any
restrictions on the
these tools, which I would argue
electric fence is, is a burglar
alarm tool. These tools is
through the permitting process.
And again, that just prevents
from one municipal, you know,
department to another one, both
in good efforts, right? And, and
good, and, and good, uh,
intentions, setting up two
different systems that people
have to overcome. One thing I
also wanted to address uh with
with representativesor's
question was that, um, while
there are other systems on the
market. This is aligned with
international safety um
standards that are that are
pretty well.
And so this isn't just a product
that Amaro has alone. This is a
pretty common product throughout
the the nation. So this is, I
know there are times that we
feel that we're picking winners
and losers and I, and for me,
honestly, this is about ensuring
that one small businesses are
looking to protect their
properties. Um, they understand
the rules going in. And it's
very difficult when they have
two different ones. So, um, I
did see that in the FI the FIR
maybe the agency analysis, um,
that the musical league had
concerns, but they've not
reached out to me about how we
can change that in that sense.
Um, this just provides a
baseline and then again,
municipalities can can't shift
how if it's their locality more.
Follow up, Madam Chair, um, so
does your bill require that
municipalities or counties, um.
Or rather not municipalities or
counties, but residential, if
they put this in, these are the
standards that they have to
meet.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative. So this
is disallowed in uh residential
areas. This is only commercial.
Um, and this is again the
baseline. So if they want to
shift the height of the fence or
something along those lines,
they're able to do that and make
it fit within their community
that fits better, because you're
right, what works in Albuquerque
doesn't work in my question is,
Madam Chair, is it required that
those businesses put these alarm
systems in. No, Madam Chairs
representative. OK, so if
The commercial property chooses
to put it in, then these are the
requirements that they must
follow. I thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yes.
OK. I still have some issue,
Madam Chair, um, and
representatives that we have not
heard from those municipalities.
Um, there's not a lobbyists
from, for example, the city of
Albuquerque or the, the county
of Bernalillo or areas that I do
represent, I haven't heard from
that and I'm, and, and.
The concern that I have, Madam
Chair, is that the municipal
league.
They must have weighed in on
this, otherwise, why would that
comment be in the report?
And I, you know, taking that, I
mean that local authority and
sort of pre-empty that does
cause me some concern,
representative, and, and maybe
it's something that we need to
look at in the interim, but at
least I would like to have those
questions answered, Madam Chair.
You representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and expert,
uh Mr. Luis, I, I, I forgot your
last name starts with a V.
Representative Farias is, OK,
pardon me, OK.
Appreciate that. OK, thank you
so much for this. So, I do have
some, I do, I do echo some
concerns that have been raised.
About this, can you go a little
bit deeper for me, Madam Chair,
Representative Sarato or Madam
Chair Sarato on the
What, what it restricts
regarding municipalities and
localities because what I'm
reading here, it sounds to me
like there are some.
Some parameters that it gives
like guidelines. And then it
also says the authority may
regulate and restrict within its
jurisdiction.
Uh, on 123 on page 2, I
percentage size, density. Can
you just go a little bit into
that for me to see what is
restricted, cause I, I do
understand that we're not trying
to let somebody who's started to
invest in this project, they got
an initial approval from the
city or whatever, and then
halfway through one of the, the
Myriad of departments in that
city says, oh, never mind, and
then stops them halfway. So I
think that's the problem we're
trying to
Resolve, but can you go a little
deeper for me into what is
restricted on the, on the
municipal.
Level, and then what parameters
they have to be able to further
uh regulate whatever it is that
we're doing here, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So, um, I'm
going to take your question in
two parts, if that's OK.
No, it's, it's always good. I
like these. Um, so, uh, just to
be clear, page 2 is already
existing law. Um, and so the, it
really says that except as
provided in the next section,
this is what they have to
consider and what the second
that page 4 really does is it
explains outlines what an
electric fence burglar alarm is
because many times, um, that
isn't even, uh, you know,
outlined in municipal, um, you
know, code or, or, or
ordinances, that can make it
difficult because it it kind of,
uh, it's both offense and both
the
burglar alarm, right? So it kind
of straddles these two realms,
uh, and so that kind of
clarifies some of the language
around that. Uh, and then the
rest of this clarifies that if,
if, you know, should they add
additional um restrictions to
this product in there, it has to
be through the permitting
process. It doesn't affect their
zoning or anything like that. So
I think that answers the first
part of your question. I didn't
know if it did the whole.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, I was just
trying to reaffirm that.
Currently they do have the
rights that are already put in
the statute, and then your new
section starting on page 4, it
just guides how those fences can
be applied.
On the level of the local or
city municipality, etc. county,
for example. So,
That, that kind of cleared up my
concern there a little bit.
And then Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just, I know
we talked about Santa Fe.
And
There's a lot of crime in Santa
Fe. I mean, and I hate, I hate
to say it's your district, it's
great, great place to be, you
know, city of holy faith and all
that. But there are problems
across the state as well, or is
this kind of just a Santa Fe
issue that that you've seen
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for that
question. So as my expert
mentioned, they have 95 folks on
the waiting list. Part of the
problem that arises with these
electric fences is how long it
takes to get them, uh, get, get
everything set up. With this
also helps to do is alleviate
that strain on time and
resources instead of having
multiple departments again,
review this piece and, and
figure that out, and it might
take even longer than it gets it
takes to to get the fence
erected. Um, this really
streamlines it so that it, we
know that it isn't a permitting
process that you will see that
these restrictions applied. So,
um, from that perspective, it
should streamline it, but there
are, there is a lot of demand
for, um, you know, businesses to
take their own action and ensure
they can protect their own
properties.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and actually
from the discussion, it sounds
like something I would love just
put in my house, but I know
it's, it's restricted from
residential, so.
Darn it, I have to call my city
and see if they, they can help
me with that. So, Madam Chair,
representative.
I guess the other question I
kind of had was, yeah, we talked
about the municipal league and
their potential concerns. I
didn't hear from them this
morning, so it's hard for me to
understand what they're concerns
are, how grave they may be, or
maybe not great because I didn't
see anyone from there this
morning. And so it just says
they do say it will have a
minimal fiscal impact though on
administering its provisions. So
can you go a little into that
for me because I see on the FIR
there's not really a
Physical impact, no physical
impact is what it says. So could
you just go into that for me a
little bit to see if this could
potentially make costs incurred
to those counties, cities, etc.
Chair, thank you,
Representative. Um, so I believe
that what they must be referring
to is just, you know, looking at
what they're cur should they
have any current ordinances on,
on tap and comparing that to
what this is, might anticipate
that is what we see it as, um,
as we mentioned, we don't see
this as any cost to taxpayers
overall. Definitely not ongoing,
um, you know, this would be part
of the permitting process that
already exists. And truly, you
know, again, for those
businesses that are, I mean, I
don't have to tell you that
especially when you're starting
a new business, figuring out all
the different places that you
need to be accessing for the
re g ul ations that you have,
um, you know, we talked about a
lot, how do we streamline that
process, making this a little
bit easier for to protect
themselves, I think is an
important aspect.
You so much, Madam Chair and
representative, and I'm sure as,
as you've seen and I've seen in
many other places, I, I try as
hard as possible to support
small businesses as much as I
can, right? I want to make sure
that small businesses have
autonomy to actually thrive in
this state, and I think I,
before I make a decision on this
vote, I think I'm just gonna
listen to the rest of the
debate, but I appreciate you for
bringing this forward and I'm
I'm considering just all the all
the different moving parts to
this bill. I know it sounds very
cut and dry, but there are so
many moving parts around here
and, and I appreciate it. So
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Chair and uh Mr.
Mr. Louis, I'm sorry I keep on
forgetting your last name.
Representative Brego.
Madam Chair, for giving me a
second opportunity, um, and,
and, uh, representative, Madam
Chair, and your witness, um,
it's
It's concerning to me that
there's no discussion about the
fiscal impact since you brought
it up, Representative Bloch,
because there would be some
enforcement to, you know,
involved in this. And so that
would be probably at least 1 or
2 FTEs that would have to go out
and, you know, determine whether
or not.
Those commercial businesses have
met these restrictions, so it,
it concerns me a little bit that
the staff didn't raise that
issue. Um, and I just, I have to
question that, uh,
representative of the Madam
Chair, just knowing that those
inspectors are out there, um, I
don't understand how there would
not be a thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. Um,
so I believe the reason why is
that it would be part of the
permitting process. And, and
because this permitting process
already exists,
Or again, setting up a new
structure, setting up a new
fence. This would be part of
that. And again, they would
measure, this would be
additional considerations that,
um, that the inspectors would
already be reviewing. So from
that perspective, I believe
that's why, you know, most many
of the the agency or the fiscal
impact report, neither of them
identified significant ongoing,
um, you know, costs there.
Thank you.
Thank you. What is the.
I have a motion for tabling.
Please call roll.
Representative on.
Note table
Representative Block.
Pass
Represented Borego.
Yes, with the explanation.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mehia.
Yes.
Representative Madam Flo leader,
Representative Zamora.
table.
Representative Block.
Noted table.
Madam Vice Chair.
No to table
Madam Chair.
34 motion fails.
motion to table fail.
Ma'am, Cherry move a you pass.
Uh
Please Carroll.
Representative on Leonardo.
Yes.
Representative block pass.
Representative Borego.
No with explanation.
Posed Lujan, represented Mea.
No.
Representatives, uh, Madam
Flour, Representative Zamora.
No.
Representative Black.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair.
Representative, uh, before.
we have an explanation represent
a Barre.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and if
this motion does pass, um, I
would definitely recommend that
um there's a discussion with the
municipal league.
To um
Get more information about how
This would affect uh city and
county.
Um, codes. Thank you.
Represent a black
OK. Thank you committee. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. You may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, I'm here,
uh, to present the House Bill
238. This bill is to um align
middle and high school
professional work hours with the
elementary work hours of 60.
Hours. And I brought my um
expert witness Rene Sacido from
Rio Rancho Public Schools, and
I'll let her introduce herself.
Hi, thank you for giving me the
opportunity to speak before you
today. My name is Renee Saucedo.
Um, I've been an educator for 26
years, 10 years teaching um high
school 9th grade science. 10
years as a high school
administrator, and I'm currently
working at the district office
as a secondary school
improvement officer supporting
middle and high school.
So I want to um just let you
know that I deeply appreciate
your ongoing commitment to
improving education in our
state.
I would like to express my
sincere gratitude for your
support and education in recent
years, particularly through
passing of, through the passing
of House Bill 130. This
legislation, which allows
districts to count professional
work hours as part of the
required instructional hours
underscores your understanding
of how vital professional work
hours are to the educators in
our state.
Today we ask you to consider a
small yet important adjustment
in House Bill 238. That would
create equity between elementary
and secondary educators,
specifically, we are requesting
that secondary educators be
granted the same number of
professional work hours that are
currently available to
elementary educators. Currently,
elementary educators are allowed
60 hours of professional work
throughout the, the year and
secondary are allowed 30
professional workouts.
that are counted as
instructional hours.
The adjustment will help ensure
that all educators, regardless
of the grade level they teach
have equal opportunities to grow
professionally.
We know the best way to support
our students at every level is
by providing them with well
prepared, highly qualified
teachers at the secondary level,
we are facing many of the same
literacy demands that have been
previously placed on elementary
staff. It's crucial that all
teachers, regardless of the
level they teach, have the
opportunity to enhance their
skills during their contracted
hours.
The disparity and professional
development hours could also
create complications when
building school calendars. Many
families have children at both
elementary and secondary levels.
The different differing number
of professional workdays can
result in a separate calendars.
As a result, attendance could be
impacted with secondary school
students missing school to take
care of their younger siblings
on days when elementary students
are out for in-service days.
Thank you for your continued
dedication to education and for
your consideration of this
request. We believe that
ensuring equal professional work
hours for all educators will
ultimately benefit our students
and strengthen the educational
system.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Committee stand for questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Let's go
to the audience. Do we have, um,
Comments in support of the bill.
OK, let's do one minute
comments.
You hold it. Good morning, Madam
Chair and esteemed members of
the committee. My name is Mary
Parr Sanchez, and I am the
president of the National
Education Association in New
Mexico. I'm also a lifelong
middle school teacher, uh, Stan
in strong support of House Bill
238, um, with the shortage of
educators across the board
today. Uh, it's so important
that we embed professional
learning.
In the school day and for many
of the reasons that the expert
witness gave, um, the educators
I support, uh, thousands of them
are outside of Albuquerque, and
we support House Bill 238, and I
hope you do too. Thank you.
Morning, madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Lauren
Hatch.
Uh, I represent Rear Rancho
Public schools, and I just want
to, uh, on behalf of Reun to
public schools, urge you to
support House Bill 230. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Lily May Ortiz,
I'm the legislative liaison for
the New Mexico School Board
Association, and this
association maintains over 70
different platform positions
that deal with legislation, and
this piece of legislation is one
of our top priorities, and these
priorities have been voted on by
our membership of over 40.
50 school board members
throughout the state. Two of our
top priorities deal with
educated recruitment, retention,
and preparation, and academic
achievement. New Mexico's school
board Association ranks student
achievement and quality learning
as its number one priority, the
LESE analysis on the spill
indicates that the most
effective forms of professional
development for teachers are
embedded in the course of a
normal school day. It's
important for our students that
they received the best possible
instruction.
and professional development
gives time to our teachers for
this critical preparation. We
support this legislation and ask
you to do the same. We thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward,
and we thank you for your time
and consideration.
There's supporting comments.
You will stay with the audience.
Do we have any opposition?
Please raise your hands. Let's
go online.
We supporting
And then opposing.
Anyone hoping to make a
supporting comment, please raise
your hand.
Anyone hoping to make a public
comment in opposition, please
raise your hand.
Hey, committee members,
Representative Zamora,
Madam, I do.
And I second that.
We have a motion for to pass. Do
we have an or little.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward, Madam Chair, I do have
a couple of questions. So as I
was um reading through this, um,
So, uh
Bear with me, I am not part of
the education world, Madam
Chair, and so, uh, I'm just
curious as to
So these classroom.
These hours would be during the
day of a school day is what I
heard. Is that correct?
I understand, uh, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and committee
members.
Thank you. I'll, I'll have our
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair,
um, it, it could look a variety
of ways. It really depends on
how the um school district
manages their calendar, but for
example, um,
I think, I think the answer to
your question is that we're
required to have
1140 hours in the school year
and the 60 hours are a part of
those 1140 hours. So it may be a
full day. It could be a partial
day. It depends on how the um
The district decides to do that.
And thank you for that uh
response.
I think with the other
information you provided this
morning, that's the last I don't
have any anymore. Thank you.
Or a due pass in a second.
Let's, uh, do we have any
opposition?
OK, Representative Brego.
saw it in the in the, in the, is
there a monitoring system in
place?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair Representative,
answer.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
um the
And I don't think I quite
understand your question. Um,
who monitors the hours and how
to, how, how would we ensure
that
If we voted in favor of this,
the hours are going to be
equivalent for both. So all of
our, when we, Madam Chair
Representative, when our
calendars are created, they're
sent in to PD.
They check our hours as far as
um the professional development
that teachers are given.
Those are, there are sign in
sheets, they're the principals
have to monitor the teachers
that are getting their
professional development. Um, I
hope that that answers your
question. I think it does. So
the, the principals would, would
monitor and then send to the
superintendent and then probably
to the uh PED right?
Is that kind of the process?
It's been a long time since I've
been in the education system,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
they're monitored by so on
professional development days,
there's specific schedules that
teachers need to follow. And so
all of those are monitored
either by district office or
principals within the district.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for that.
you. Do we have any opposition
to the Du pass motion?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass. Thank you.
You think Madam chair, vice
chair, committee members. Thank
you.
OK, Representative chair,
chairwoman Chandler.
House Bill 62, we have an
amendment. Let's pass out the
amendment.
Thank you, Representative
Chairman, chairwoman. You may
begin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, hello committee, um, Madam
Chair, what's your preference?
Should we explain sort of the
overarching part of the bill and
then talk about the amendment.
Please. OK. Um, so Madam Chair,
the New Mexico Attorney General
has broad civil authority to
investigate issues.
And this bill is intended to, to
create a unified approach in
terms of how it can utilize that
authority, Madam Chair. There
are are various sections in the
statutes right now that have
somewhat different approaches
and so what this bill does, it
provides one approach for any
civil investigation that the
court that the attorney general
may be initiating and I would
point to a few things, um,
perhaps.
might be a good time to talk
about the amendment, which is
230557.3. Does everyone have
that?
I chair.
Madam Chair, I moved to adopt
the amendment.
On the amendments
representative.
Thank you and I, I just had one
question about your amendment,
and it's also in the, in the
current language in the bill.
I'm wondering why is it that the
district court in Santa Fe.
That you must apply this, Madam
Chair Representative. Um, Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
this creates an application
process to the district court in
Santa Fe as the um
representative correctly noted.
I mean, that's pretty typical in
terms of how um the Attorney
general operates when seeking
court approval for these sorts
of investigations, and I do have
my expert here, um, are you,
what's your general counsel for
um the office of a
Attorney general and she can
expand, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
uh, the reason we closer.
Madame Chair Representative,
thank you for having me this
morning. Um, Santa Fe, uh,
District court was identified
because
That is where the seat of the
attorney General is and most of
the cases that the Attorney
general files is in the district
court, uh, the first judicial
district court. So for ease and
efficiency of process, we
identified the first judicial
district court, Santa Fe County.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, I'm
wondering regarding the district
court in Santa Fe. So for me, if
I needed to utilize this.
change in the law, for example,
in Otero County.
It would go through the AG's
office and then the AG would
work through the district court
in Santa Fe, because that's
where they're located, or could
you just expand for me, for
people who are not living in
Santa Fe.
Why this is in the amendment,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative. So
this would be a civil
investigative demand that we
would apply to the court in
district, the first judicial
district to be able to issue a
civil investigative demand,
which typically is not going to
individuals, it's going to
businesses.
Madam Chair and Representative.
So what if that business was
not, was not in Santa Fe, with
the district court in Santa Fe
need to
Start the process, if it was in
Otero County or Lincoln County
or anywhere else, Grant County,
Luna County, etc.
How would they work in
conjunction to ensure that
they're getting all that
information from the entity if
it is indeed in another county
that may be far away, Madam
Chair, representative.
Represented by understand your
question, the application for
the civil investigative demand
is.
Delineated as the first judicial
district. Once we get the
approval from the court, we
would issue that civil
investigative demand to wherever
the company is located and the
documents and information
received from that company will
come back to New Mexico
Department of Justice doesn't
necessarily mean that if we were
then to pursue a civil action
that we would be filing it in
the first judicial district
court.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative. I guess I'm
just, I just really want to be
clear, so when we do this
investigation.
When we send it to the business,
which may be
Where I am in Otero County.
How do, I just wonder how the
first district court gets access
to that information.
Because it is in Santa Fe
County, and if it's like
tangible paperwork, videos, uh,
whatever kind of recordings,
how, how is that? I'm just
wondering how is that working
with the first judicial district
because we're in the 12th in
Otero. So I just have a question
about that I mean, so assuming
that the court issues the
demand. The demand is issued by
the Attorney General's office to
the subject business and the
attorney General's office.
arranges to view the
documentation that has been
produced, and it would likely be
in the area where the business
exists because it's an
inspection situation if it's
answering questions like
interrogatories, then those
those things are mailed in or
other or sent electronically to
in response to interrogatories.
So the business would not be
moving anywhere in in most
situations, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah,
that cleared it up for me. I
just was wondering how that
works, but if, if they would
come down to the business to
inspect whatever documents, and
that would, that would alleviate
my concern. And then last
question on this amendment,
Madam Chair Representative, on
page
The two of the amendment at the
back says on page 2, line 22 and
23 strike testimony or do you
documentary. Can you tell me why
we're striking that language.
Madam Chair Representative,
Um, testimony is a term of art
and it can refer to answering
interrogatories, and there was
some concern that it also would
apply to actual depositions. We
are not seeking depositions, so
we decided to remove uh
testimony.
Good thank you, Madam Chair,
representative that, that helps
with my questions.
Thank you, Representative. So I
have a, a motion to discuss the
amendment. I'll move to adopt.
I have a second, so we have an
amended bill and we'll go to the
audience.
Providing
Uh um supporting comments on
Amended bill. Do we have any,
please raise your hands.
Do we, OK. One minute, please.
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, my name is Deanna Warren.
I'm an attorney with the ACLU of
New Mexico.
New Mexico has a long history of
high profile civil rights
concerns involving government
agencies from police misconduct
and federal oversight of law
enforcement to disparities in
the criminal justice, education,
and health systems. Recent
cases, including the DWI scandal
involving multiple police
departments and issues with
within CYFD highlight ongoing
challenges and accountability
and oversight.
HB 62 proposes a structured
investigative demand process
which, if applied appropriately
would serve as a tool to
identify and address systemic
civil rights violations. While
the use of government
investigatory authority must
always be carefully monitored.
This bill could provide a
mechanism for ensuring state
level accountability and help
shape a trajectory that
strengthens civil rights
protections in New Mexico. We
appreciate the conversations
with stakeholders and ongoing
work to achieve a balance
between these tools use.
for justice and government
accountability while protecting
against future misuse or abuse,
and look forward to remaining in
conversation with the sponsor
and those who have brought the
bill forward. Thank you.
Do we have any comments in
opposition in the audience. OK,
one minute, please.
Good day, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Jacob
Smith from Sandoval with the
Government to Change Project and
must send a post to HB 62, as
this would give the state's
attorney General's office
additional work and an already
overworked attorney general's
office. The state attorney
general's office has already
demonstrated a lack of due
regard in prosecuting equally
and pressuring law enforcement
agencies to not investigate
crimes equally. um under New
Mexico statute 852, Section C,
prosecute and defend all actions
and proceedings brought to
brought by.
Or against any state officer,
head of the State Department,
board of commission, or any
employee of the state official
capacity. I would also like to
add that the Attorney Deputy
Attorney General is here today,
and I would like to hand him
over this documentation if you
would be willing to take it.
Thank you for your time and have
a great day.
Thank you.
Point of order, Madam Chair.
That is not appropriate.
go online to
Supporting or opposing comments.
Anybody hoping to make supported
comments, please raise your
hand.
Anybody hoping to make comments
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
Committee members.
Represented a block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. So your
bill, I did have some questions,
mostly because of, let's just
start online.
Line, I'm sorry, line 7 on page
7, OK.
So I see that we've stricken
language.
On their Madam Chair
Representative.
talking about custody or control
of an original or copy of a
book, record, etc. Can you tell
me why we struck that language
on page 7.
Madam Chair, um, I think in my
opening comments I noted that
there were various processes
sprinkled throughout the
statutes. This strikes the
process that's underneath. I
think it's the um tobacco tax
stamp Act, and it strikes it
because this overarching.
Um, structure will apply to all
civil investigative demand
cases. So you'll see that
throughout the bill where we
struck it where it exists in a
specialty bill, uh, um, after
law and, and this will apply to
all civil investigative
approaches that the Attorney
general utilizes, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative that helps me on
that one. So, I'm wondering,
Madam Chair, representative, so
With the language that we're
adding in at the beginning of
the bill.
Or we're giving new authority
for possession, custody,
control, etc. So, I saw
something in the analysis that
really struck me.
And I believe
On my analysis on the fur.
It talked about.
The things that were striking
out on the bill. So, New
Mexico's subdivision Act.
Restraint of trade, unfair
practices Act investigations,
and then this one actually
really caught my eye, pyramid
promotional scheme, so pyramid
schemes, how would they be
affected when it comes to
getting documentation regarding
pyramid schemes, Madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
as the FRR says in addition, the
following sections of the law
would repeal again because these
sections are no longer needed
with the passage of this bill,
the overarching approach will
apply to investigations relating
to these statutes as well, Madam
Chair and Representative. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair
Represent. So there would be
nothing changed with the
investigations in pyramid
schemes. Is that what I'm
understanding, um, Madam Chair,
representative, that's correct.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative that helps me on
that. And then Madam Chair.
I was looking at the other
Analysis. Let me see.
Uh
I think the AOC was talking
about the Santa Fe District
Court, and I'm wondering, Madam
Chair, Representative, would
this would this give any
Increased
Workload and burden to the Santa
Fe first Judicial District Court
with the changes in the law or
in the bill, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair and represent, I
think, um, they noted there was
a potential for that, um, as
this will be the process used in
all investigations in Santa Fe.
you know, across the state.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, and I, I
haven't seen the AOC's budget or
their request yet, so I'm not
sure if that would be included
in that, but just something that
I, I flagged, uh, Madam Chair.
Representative.
I did see something else that I
wanted to look at. Let me see.
I think it was on section 62,
I'm sorry, section 1.
D
I believe in your bill.
There was a question I saw about
risks that CID recipients could
be compelled to provide
privileged.
Information despite the
protections in the bill. Could
you just go into that for me a
little bit, Madam Chair and
representative. Madam Chair
Representative, I understand
your question. D starts with the
fact that no civil investigation
shall demand.
And it lists privileged
information.
So it's a prohibition of what
the civil investigative demand
can contain.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but that would
not require any kind of
privileged information to be
provided. Just clarifying that,
madam.
Got it. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative, and I
I may have future questions.
After I listened to more
discussion on this since it's
quite a bill, but I really
appreciate it so far and I thank
you for bringing it forward.
Thank you.
Representative Vice Chair
Little. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'd like to move a do pass on
House Bill 62.
I have a motion for.
Or House Bill 62 as amended in a
second, please call roll.
Representative Ayorni? Yes.
Representative Black, note with
an explanation.
Represented Borego.
represented Lujan, represented
Mehia.
pass.
Madame Floor leader,
Representative Zamora.
No.
Uh, Representative Mejia.
No.
Mad, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair.
43. You would you pass as
amended and represent a block to
explain your vote. Madam Chair,
just quickly, I, I was hoping
we'd have a little more
discussion on the bill and so it
doesn't mean I'm a no on the
floor. I just definitely want to
get some more perspectives on
this and I'll, I'll loop back
around and uh
See what happens on the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK.
Chairman Small.
HGR 12.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning committee. Really
pleased to be back here again.
Um, for house joint resolution
12. Madam Chair, committee, New
Mexico over the past few years
has ascended to be the number 2
financial supporter of students,
uh, for higher education in the
entire country. We're investing
in higher education, supporting
New Mexican students in higher
education, whether that
That's a 2-year uh certificate,
a trade, a four-year degree, a
graduate degree at the highest
levels we've ever done. Um, and,
in a strong and bipartisan way.
Madam Chair, House Joint
Resolution 12 seeks to fix
something uh to catch up,
basically, to ensure that our uh
boards of regents and the
regents themselves have the
highest fiduciary duty, uh, to
the students that they
served to the institutions uh
that they serve, um.
Particularly in light of some
recent challenging situations
across a number of higher
education institutions, not
limited to anyone, Madam Chair,
committee, um, it also uh puts
in place uh uh process. I do
process for removal of a member
of the board of regents that
currently is very unclear and
seemingly right now rests solely
upon whomever is the governor at
that time.
uh
requesting the resignation of a
regent potentially, but that
does not have a very clear
process and certainly does not
have due process.
So, that's uh how joint
resolution 12, we were really
pleased to move through the
House Education Committee
unanimously and look forward to
answering any of your questions
today.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sean Sullivan. I'm a
special counsel with the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Um, I won't reiterate the
particular uh parts that
represented small laid out. I
will simply say that I think
it's important to underscore
that this is not a partisan
request. This is something that
citizens across the political
spectrum expect.
Of our higher institutions, uh,
that they act transparently that
they exercise proper stewardship
of our tax dollars.
But they maintain a sole focus
on their school and the students
and that when they fall short of
those responsibilities, there's
a fair and appropriate mechanism
to seek accountability.
Um, there's a number of
situations that have occurred
throughout the state that I'm
sure we can go into if there's
further questions, um, but some
of those frankly represent
unconscionable violations of our
public trust, and I think what's
important for this committee to
recognize is that the dollars
that, that this body
appropriates to institutions is
finite, right? It's zero sum.
Everything that goes to uh
payouts of administrators and an
impermissible way is, is money
that doesn't go to faculty to
extracurriculars to students.
support services.
Uh, and so I think that this
joint resolution goes a long way
in reinforcing the trust that we
need to have in our higher
education institutions. Thank
you.
Thank you with that, let's go to
the audience. Do we have any
anyone who would like to
Making supporting comment, one
minute, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipschitz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, AFL-CIO representing
uh over 40,000 workers
throughout the state. Uh, we,
uh, stand in strong solidarity
with our educators, uh, uh,
throughout the state, especially
in higher education, we think
the sponsor for bringing up this
measure, as was stated in in the
introductory testimony, uh, we
desperately need greater
transparency and greater
accountability for our boards of
Regents.
around the state, um, and we
believe that this amendment
would add a proper
accountability for those, uh,
body, so we urge your support.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mary Par Sanchez, and I
am the president of the National
Education Association in New
Mexico. Uh, we stand in strong
support of HJR 12, which would
provide needed oversight, um,
To language in the New Mexico
Constitution about the
responsibilities and duties of
regents as judiciaries and
ultimately breaches of this
responsibility and the
consequences which ultimately
could result in removal
procedures, um, part of the care
or a fiduciary responsibility is
the duty of care and uh
recently, uh,
One of the higher ed
institutions in the state was uh
the fire department was called
and they ended up closing a
building, um, in September and
it just recently opened up, um,
due to a lack of this duty of
care in the handling of
hazardous chemicals, um, serious
breach of uh oversight.
Um, so, I'm sorry. So, um, we
strongly support house uh joint
resolution 12 and urge you to do
the same.
Thank you do, we'll stay with
the audience. Do we have any
opposing comments?
Let's go online. Do we have any
supporting or opposing comments?
Anyone hoping to make a comment,
please raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make a comment
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey, I have on the list vice
chair, or I have representative
Anya Nornu and Vice Chair
Little.
Oh, Madam Chair, I was just
going to move a do.
I have a motion for to pass a
second. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
He and chair committee, thank
you all very much for your time
and your support.
OK.
Have anyone here for 192.
OK, let's settle ourselves and
begin.
House Bill 192.
Representative.
All right, let's see how the,
there we go.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee, uh, we're
here to present House Bill 192,
uh, this has been an ongoing
situation for a couple of years
now, uh, 2023 myself, uh,
Senator McKenna and Senator Bill
Burt, um, ran a bill.
Um
To take care of this in the
first place. Uh, what we're
trying to do is, um,
So public safety radios when
Trying to figure out how to
explain this, uh, when Motorola
bought the 700 megahertz.
Uh, band, which wouldn't allow.
Uh, all radios, but public
safety radios in this case to be
able to reach a much further
distance, um.
And we train and the state
transitioned um a lot of those
radios over to that, uh, but
with that came a $20 per radio
fee that Motorola charged
through the department of um
through to it, uh, with the bill
in 2023 was slated to do was to
take care of that, um, from the
budget so that every public
safety radio was paid for in the
state. Um, some places like
Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, uh.
can afford that fee, um, but
other places like, you know, a
lot of the rural areas with
volunteer fire departments, um,
Cuba, for instance, and a whole
lot more that my expert will
talk about it in a second. Um,
can't afford that. So if there
was a uh an incident that took
up a lot of area, a wildfire or
something to that effect, um.
The
The volunteer fire departments,
the smaller departments.
couldn't hear what the bigger
departments were doing. So if
these guys, he's from Sandoval,
he's the chief of Sandoval
County Fire, um, they couldn't
talk to each other.
So, we got the bill passed in
2023. Um, the governor vetoed
it.
The governor a couple of months
later, then came and said that
she found some discretionary
money to pay for it. Um, and it
has been in her executive budget
since. However, um, it is not in
statute that it will be paid
for. So that's what we are
trying to add with this bill
here is to get it in, to get the
language into statute that it
will be taken care of rather
than just being in her
executive, um budget so that in
a couple of years when she is no
longer governor, this will
still, um,
This will still be taken care of
for the for the public safety
radio. So I would like my expert
um to introduce himself.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you first and
foremost for having me here
today and having the opportunity
to speak to you about this very
important public safety matter.
My name is Eric Masterson. I'm
the fire chief for Sandoval
County Fire and Rescue. I also
sit on the board for uh New
Mexico uh Metro Fire Chiefs
Association and the fire and EM
affiliate with uh New Mexico
County. Just a quick story, um,
you guys were all very aware
obviously of the major wildland
fire that happened in Riodoso
this last year and the
subsequent flooding that
happened thereafter.
Many, many teams from around the
state responded to that
incident, the fire, and
subsequently the flood to
provide assistance.
The New Mexo DTRS system, the
digital trunk radio system was
set up during that incident
within Ruidoso and the
surrounding areas.
What that allowed for us to do
is as our agencies responded, as
my public safety teams responded
along with Burnleyo County and
Albuquerque and everyone else
from around the state.
We're able to basically walk
into that situation and
immediately have interoperable
communications with every other
agency that was already there,
whether it be state, federal,
local agencies, we were able to
communicate.
One of the historically one of
the number one complaints in
Challenges that public safety
entities have on any major
incident, whether it's a fire,
mass casualty incident, active
threat situation on the law
enforcement side.
Historically, the biggest
challenge that we sometimes have
is communications.
When agencies don't have the
same radio bands when they don't
have the same radio channels.
We run into problems where there
cannot be efficient operations
on the scene.
This system resolves that
challenge.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is a bipartisan
bill.
And it's really to help the
local agencies. Think of the
DTRS as a state asset, similar
to state police, the state fire
marshal's office, the National
Guard, state search and rescue,
whatever it may be. Those are
state assets provided to the
local agencies so that we can
ensure public safety of every
citizen in New Mexico.
The DTRS system is a similar
approach to public safety.
It's gonna provide that
interoperable communications as
I spoke of.
To, uh, all agencies throughout
the, the state of New Mexico,
including our tribal partners to
ensure that we have a
coordinated emergency response
on any sort of high incident,
uh, situation.
If we have to move forward and
continue paying the $20 to $30
per radio just as an example.
An agency that maybe has 30
police officers could be paying
upwards of $20,000 a year as
they usually have two different
radios, one in their vehicle and
one on their handheld. This is
$20 per month per radio.
Our departments are obviously in
the same situation and with
several other things that are
happening.
Throughout the nation,
legislatively, budgets are
already starting to feel
tightened and we want to make
sure that public safety is not
affected, which is also, Madam
Chair, why we're bringing this
to you today.
Um
The DTRS network uh is well over
60%, if not a little bit further
along on statewide coverage. We
do still have some challenges in
certain areas, uh, but that is
being worked on by uh New Mexico
do it and uh we, we look forward
to those partnerships continuing
to elaborate to build that
system out so that we can get as
much coverage statewide as
possible.
I'll also mention too that the
local entities still do have
quote unquote skin in the game,
if you will, madam chair. Each
radio that the local agency is
procuring is $500 to $8000 per
radio.
Those radios also need constant
maintenance, whether it's
batteries, antennas,
programming, whatever it may be,
and that's all at the cost of
the local agency.
We then work with do it to make
sure that we have the proper
channels and, and allowances to
move forward on it, but the
radios themselves are 100% taken
care of by the local agency.
In addition, some of the rural
areas are still using older VHF
technology to continue to speak
with um some of the more rural
and outlying areas of their,
their territories that are not
yet covered by this. So they are
continuing to maintain and
operate their own systems in
Sandoval County, I pay $400,000
a year to maintain a VHF system
because the Hamas Mountains
don't have adequate coverage yet
because it's a valley, it's very
hard to get some of that radio
coverage in there. So we
continue to partner with the
state on finding solutions, but
I can tell you that
This interoperability has proven
to be successful.
In Riodoso in Las Vegas during
the camp camp, uh, uh, Hermit's
Peak fire, sorry, uh, and in
several other situations
including after threat
situations at schools around
the, the state. So, Madam Chair,
uh sorry, sorry if I took a
little bit too much of your
time, but I wanted to make sure
I got the point across and I
thank you for, uh, again,
letting, letting me present
today.
that we stand for.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands.
OK, let's take one minute
comments quickly, please.
Greg Pettis, uh, fire chief for
Burnley County. This is
imperative that we are able to
get these surcharges covered,
um, the, the
Cost of doing business alone as
a, as a fire department is
continuing to increase, and this
is for Burnley County, we're
looking at close to $500,000 in
just radio subscription fees
alone, so we'd appreciate your
support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Anthony Lebos, uh, Deputy Chief
State Marshal's Office. Uh, we
strongly support this bill in uh
all of our fire departments in
New Mexico like uh Chief
Masterson here said is, uh, the
Subscriber fees are expensive
and that takes away from costs.
Or operationals, you know, to
put fuel in the trucks, to put
tires on the trucks, to put gear
on our personnel.
In interoperation communication
is, is key. Um, you look right
here at the bottom laha the
hill. We have two counties that
meet up against each other with
various
Different, uh, you know,
different agencies. Now they
have the ability with through
the system to switch a channel
and start communicating with
each other. So, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jarrod Najar
on behalf of the New Mexico
Municipal League, uh, for the
reasons previously stated, we
strongly support this bill and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
For their supporting comments.
We'll stay with the audience. Do
we have any opposing comments?
OK, let's go online and he's
supporting comments.
Then we have Jay Zuniga. Jay,
can you hear us?
Yes, thank you. My name is
Jared. I'm a deputy chief for
Eddie County Fire Rescue, and I
was just wanting to speak in
support of this. Not only would
all the other departments have
already mentioned, but I'll
speak for Eddie County. We came
out of the state system this
last year and we brought in $14
million worth of infrastructure
that was added to the state
system. Uh, part of that though,
we still maintain 4 tower sites
for generators, um, all of that
technology at a cost to the
county, and we would still be
required to cover these, um.
subscriber fees also. So we are
in support of this bill where
the subscriber fees are covered
where we can
put our budget towards
maintaining the portion of the
system that we, we own. Thank
you.
Thank you so much.
The posing.
Any opposing comments, please
raise your hand.
Representative Zamora and then
Vice Chair Little.
Madam Chair, I moved to Du Pas.
I'm sure I had a question, a
couple of questions.
Represented a block for a quick
question. I'll be quick, Madam
Chair. Maybe, maybe not,
actually.
Depending, no, I'm just kidding,
Madam Chan. So I'm wondering
number one, why did the governor
veto it? Why would anyone veto
such an important piece of
legislation.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I actually don't have an answer
for you. I've been asked that a
whole bunch of times. Um.
So I'm not going to speculate,
uh, but the nice thing about
what the governor did was pretty
quickly after that, you know,
once we had recovered from
session, she reached out to
myself, Senator Burr and Senator
McKenna, and
Um, said let's figure out how we
can get this to be a permanent
solution. Um, it took a couple
of months as it does in this
building, to figure out where
the money had come from or
where, where it could come from
and um yeah, she delivered on
that promise and um has
continued to do so, uh.
It's in this year's budget, um,
yeah, it's in this year's
budget, um, already, um, and so,
yeah, I'm, I'm glad that that
happened. I, I still don't have
a full on answer of why it was
um vetoed in the first place.
Apologize for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. And
then did your previous bill have
a permanent solution?
Uh
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, um, it's essentially what
this now does, um, it had a
permanent solution, uh, this is
also a permanent solution, um,
to the temporary band-aid that
we have now, so.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. It just is
confusing to me why we passed a
permanent resolution or a
permanent solution to this, and
the governor vetoed it, and it
appears to me that she was like,
oh wow, I vetoed something that
was really popular that would
actually help people and then
she was like, OK, here's some
money, you know, so that makes
sense.
Sounds about right. So, Madam
Chair, Representative, next
question, um.
Motorola, buying this, these
Faculties of.
Has, has this happened? Who, who
had it before and why weren't
they charging us fees for what
was before, Madam Chair.
Mad, Madam Chair Representative
Block, so the, the state had a
system for state police, but it
was just for state police. So a
lot of that information, uh was
specific to the state resources,
um.
This, this digital trunk radio
system P25 compliance. It's,
it's, it's opened up a lot more
doors so that way the state has
now had the opportunity to uh
open that or or open that up for
other agencies to start
participating with them on prior
to that, the technology really
just didn't exist to allow that
to happen efficiently, I think
would be the best answer, sir.
Madam Chair and Representative,
so, um,
I'll do this as quickly as
possible. So the 700 megahertz
wavelength is much larger like
AM radio. Um, so there can go
much further distance. Um,
previously it was owned by the
US government and used for
military, um, when they went to
a different wavelength, they put
it up on the open market
Motorola was the
Winner
Um, and so for the first time,
the public or non-military was
able to use that particular
wavelength, um, which opened up
communication a whole lot
further distance.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That, that is
interesting. That helps me a
lot. So,
I like to think in a more free
market.
Way when it comes to things
which I'm I'm glad that it's a
private company. Have we
considered
Because, OK, first of all, are,
are we the primary user of these
when it comes to just volume,
because it appears to me like we
have 2 radios per officer.
And we have a bunch of officers
all over the state. It would
stand to reason that at least
they're making at least 2.8
million from us. Have we
considered negotiating those,
those rates, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, we are probably
a speck on their spectrum cause
it is a worldwide uh wave
wavelength. So, um, yeah, I was
like, anybody who's everybody
that can use it, your cell phone
uses it, um, internet uses it,
um, I mean, there's a, there's a
ton of utility for it, um.
I don't have a definitive answer
on whether or not we have, um,
but that is the access fee that
they give to most people is that
it's $20 to $30 per device, um,
depending, depending on the
device type and
Well we do have a lot, um, they
have a giant customer base, um,
so yeah, I mean, we're, we're
probably a speck out of that
total user base.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and that that's
all the questions I had. Good
job.
OK, I have a representative Ona
Nonu, Representative Mejia, and
then Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
a really quick question. I'm
gonna play Doom and gloom for a
second. So up until now, do it
has been paying for this service
out of their fund, is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative, so, um,
When it first started the um
public safety departments were
Paying for it, um, until we
brought it up and so for the
last, so for uh fiscal year 23
and 24 and now, um,
It has been paid for through the
general fund, um, it's
additional funding that's been
taken from the general fund and
given to do it to pay for the,
to pay for the adequate amount
amount of radios, um.
So yeah, I mean that's the
answer to your question. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. So it
has been coming out of the
general fund, but appropriated
to do it to pay for that. OK,
so.
What would happen then?
Worst case scenario, if this
bill fails again, if it gets.
failed to be chaptered
correctly, then what, what would
happen?
Madam representative, so we
would go back to um prior to
2023 when the first or when we
figured out for them where the
money was gonna come from and
the departments, um, would each
have to pay the $20 to $30
access fee for each radio. Um,
it comes up to a whole lot of
money and the, the reality of it
is that the smaller um smaller
communities, more rural
communities, um, volunteer fire.
departments, that kind of stuff
who don't really have a budget.
It's why a volunteer fire
department, um, wouldn't be able
to
Pay for wouldn't be able to
afford it. And so they would be,
they would not be given access
to that statewide system and
they would have to be on the,
what did you,
yeah, the BHF, um, radios which,
um if she has one, then I can
talk to her, but if you don't
have one, then I can't talk to
you, um, whereas this, you know,
with the newer systems, we could
all talk to each other by just
going to the right frequency.
Like, that sounds like a much
more efficient method of
communication. So thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I just have
one quick question.
To your knowledge, this radio
system is currently in use in
Chavez,
I don't know the answer to that.
Um, each county is responsible
for the initial um
Investment in the
infrastructure, and I know that
um there is a decent amount that
have them, but I don't know
every county off the top of my
head that has put them in, um,
Yeah, I, I mean, we can find
that. I can find that
information out for you pretty
quickly, um.
Oh, yeah, we can, we can, it
sounds like there's somebody
behind me from do it, um, who
can answer, who potentially
could answer your question.
Hi, uh, good morning, madam
Chair. I'm Michael Rohrabacher.
I'm director of Public Safety
communications for the
Department of Information
Technology. Can you repeat that
question, please?
I was just asking if Chavez
County is uh using this uh radio
system already. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Chavez
County is not currently on the
system, although we're working
with them to establish a system
agreement right now, that
process started 2 weeks ago.
They're currently 65 other
agencies between state, federal,
tribal, and local governments on
the system.
Thank you so much for that.
Represented Brego.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair. um,
uh,
Thank you, Representative
Fernandez and all of the other
representatives that are on your
list. It's really great to see a
bipartisan bill like this. Um,
I'm sorry that, uh, this was
vetoed in the past. This is like
a no brainer in my mind, like
communications for public safety
should be like first and
foremost.
And um I just.
Like
When you said that, I was like,
I cringe that.
Hopefully that was not happen
again, Madam Chair, having
served as president of city
council during COVID.
Um, I just know how important
communications are and
especially for our public
safety, um, officers, and I
just, my father was a
firefighter for 30 years and
communications even in our house
was really important, um, when I
was growing up, so I, you know,
to me this is like.
Just, yes, yes, yes, thank you.
Thank you. We'll go back to a
motion for a do pass by
Representative Zamora.
OK,
Yeah, ma'am, madam chair.
So
The, the
Different people in the state
that aren't on the system now,
they'll still be covered in this
bill and they'll be able to go
on the system, right?
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative, that is correct,
as, as additional, um, as
additional.
Departments um come onto this,
they will continue to be
covered. Yes, that is, that is
the goal of the is for everyone
to be covered, not just who is
on today, it's.
To try and help.
Get everybody that can be onto
the system. Madam, I just want
to make sure we weren't leaving
anybody out in the state that
was gonna cover everybody. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan, motion for
a due pass, ma'am.
Of, um, uh, DuP pass motion by
Representative Zamora, second by
Little. Do we have any
opposition?
OK, you have a due pass. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right, let's go move along
to House Bill 249,
Representative Sanchez.
representative, you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, first
off, I'd like to introduce, uh,
my shadows for the day that some
students from Si Marron High
School behind me. Uh, so
welcome.
They wanted to see how a
subcommittee or a committee
works, so, uh, they're gonna be
on the floor later, but, uh,
thank you,
Madam Chair.
So, uh, this, this bill does one
thing on page 2, line 24 through
3, line one, it allows workforce
solutions secretary to waive the
one week waiting requirement to
receive standard unemployment
benefits in a federally declared
emergency, the federal
government makes disaster
unemployment assistance
available, the federal
government requires every
applicant.
To first apply for standard
unemployment insurance and then
they can receive disaster
unemployment only after they are
denied for standard
unemployment. However, this
creates some unfairness. People
who are getting standard
unemployment are required to go
one week without benefits before
payments begin.
People getting disaster
unemployment assistance must be
unemployed for at least one
week, but they get compensated
for that week. This bill would
end this unfairness by giving
the secretary the ability to
waive the waiting.
Weak. So Madam Chair, I'd like
to uh introduce uh my expert,
uh, secretary there and uh if
she'd like to say a few words.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. uh, thank you
for hearing this bill. Uh, as I
said, um, for those of you who
are in house labor, it's not
very often that we see something
that's unfair and we can come up
with a really quick way to fix
it, but that's what happened
with this bill. So, you know,
anywhere between 80 and 90% of
claimants in a disaster do end
up on standard unemployment, and
that one week of, of benefits
getting there earlier uh could
really make a difference for how
they cope with that disaster. So
with that, we'd have um I'm
happy to stand for questions.
Thank you, let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
Supporting comments.
Any opposition. Let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make comments
and, and favor of this bill,
please raise your hand.
And he comments in opposition,
please raise your hand.
The Committee members, vice
chair Little.
I would like to move a due pass,
please.
OK.
Question
before we call role
representative block
many questions, just one
question. I see in the bill it
says event of a federal or state
emergency or disaster
declaration, uh, does it specify
that it needs to be a natural
disaster or something that is
Cause I know we had the COVID,
which was a disaster. But then I
know the governors also had
different disasters. One was for
gun violence over the summer of
2023, I believe, would that be
covered under this emergency
declaration, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Black. Now those were public
health uh emergencies rather
than nat uh rather than disaster
declarations. I mean, they might
have been metaphorically, they
might have been disastrous, but
um for technical purposes, those
fall under the public health
emergency category rather than
this.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So it would not
be any of those because I know
they were, they were emergencies
and just as emergency for
Or disaster declaration. So I
just want to be super clear.
is provided that an event of a
federal or state emergency
doesn't say what kind of
emergency or disaster.
I, I just don't see any
definitions of that. So could
you just clarify for that just
to make sure it wouldn't go to
something like gun violence
emergency or something like
that.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, it's a great point. There
is a separate section of the UI
laws that applies to the public
health side.
OK, so this in no way, shape or
form would touch in any any way
tangible or intangible.
Public health and safety in any
possible way.
Period. Is that correct, Madam
Representative. Uh, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Block, I'm,
I'm not sure, but um this is
designed for um natural
disasters and those types of
emergencies. Um, I think, of
course, unemployment is a key
part of public health and
safety, um, but yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. Appreciate it.
Thank you. So I have a
Motion for to pass by
Representative Little Al second,
do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass. Thank you. Thank you
Secretary.
OK, let's go move along to House
Bill 208.
Yeah
I was gonna
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
am fully aware that we are all
trying to increase the voter
registration and voter
engagement throughout the state
of New Mexico. And it's, it's,
there's a lot of efforts around
this that I see they're in the
more metropolitan areas. Um, I
am from a district with 2 people
per square mile, which probably,
uh, several of you on this
committee I see probably are as
well. And so to just continue
with our efforts to engage
folks, especially those in rural
and unincorporated areas. We
have a
about 150,000 people who, uh,
request hunting and fishing
permits per year, and now that
we have this fancy Secretary of
State way uh automated
registration, voter registration
that we could add this as an
option when they request their
hunting and fishing license. So
this takes the existing language
and adds um the opportunity to
register to vote during when
they request a hunting and
fishing license. And with that,
I'll stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
supporting comments in the
opposing comments.
Go online. Anyone hoping to make
a comment in support, please
raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
A Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, um,
Is there any statistic or
information that, that uh raises
the issue of this demographic
not having opportunity or not
being registered to vote, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, as
a majority minority state, and
the majority of folks who
register and who request a
hunting and fishing license are
minority populations. I do know
that. And so I know that's one
of our targeted areas to
increase registration.
It's a good answer, ma'am. Um.
I think that's it. Thank you.
Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
wondering why there are no
Democrats signed on to this
bill.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I didn't ask, but you
are welcome to sign on. I would
love for you to sign on.
do that. Thank you. Thank you.
Block.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass.
Second
I motioned for do pass a second.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Committee members, we are
adjourned.
