Representative one.
Representative lu Han you're
here working.
Representative one so I
presented.
Representative Serrato your.
Mr Chairman.
Senator members we have a quorum
One of the the US to all of you
it's a beautiful day in the
neighborhood today and
we have our on our agenda our
first bill.
Which is house bill sixteen role
opportunities interim committee
Representative the Roger Montoya
to put on your bill.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of this committee
and the audience out there
across our beautiful state of
New Mexico.
As an ancestral native of
northern New Mexico.
I have a long.
Vision the beauty the potential
and the challenges that we face.
Our rural areas frontier
villages have struggled.
We have a tremendous potential.
HB sixteen the rural
opportunities act.
Will establish a fourteen member
rural interim committee.
Tasked with addressing and
proposing legislation that will
up lift our rural communities.
It will also seek collaborative
work to do silo to level the
playing field for our rural
communities.
It will also be tasked with
ensuring that every New Mexican
has access to clean drinking
water.
Waste water treatment services.
Electricity and broadband
internet by no later than twenty
thirty.
My team and I have prepared a
brief video to start this
presentation and I hope you
enjoy it.
Okay thank you for that
Representative one thought will
go up we'll go into the video as
part of Representative sentiment
though yes presentation Gabby
offered.
Maybe seven years old.
You said worry about my mother
because she thought I know she
bought the groceries on credit.
And just hearing her talk about
the amount of money that she
owed.
Could err trader at a trading
post.
Really bothered me about the
people that are in those wrecked
mobile homes it's about the
people that don't know how the
frustration that they go to bed
and they think about I mean
there are my kids and I think
what they're going to eat
tonight a lot of times were
competing with larger
communities within the state
that you know for the same
dollars in the same projects
well in our community hospitals
would not work because our our
cell phone tower simply doesn't
have enough capability to handle
two three hundred hot spots
right there in the community we
only have about.
Three places that we could work
at.
And for teenagers it's a little
bit harder to find jobs COVID
nineteen underscored the painful
disparity between rural and
urban communities throughout New
Mexico the challenges we have
here at the city of Anthony has
been health care first of all we
have a lot of people to have to
put all pass on Los crucis to
get in the health care needs
also the infrastructure here in
Anthony and do the around the
starting around in areas is also
a big impact for us one million
dollars in Springer would go a
long ways as far as
rehabilitating city hall for
example our maintenance building
our fire station the severe need
I would explain it is basic
human needs what you consider.
Just like a regular thing like
you open the top and you get
water some of those people have
to buy one some of those
communities don't have running
water and if they do it's not
good water students in the rural
communities there's not as many
resources we can say here's a
risk recreation center where we
can have a contact with you we
can't find those necessary
outreach is in a situation where
kids are looking at poverty as a
generational cycle is not
something that we can just break
and hope that they're going to
be able to succeed with this
tools that they have already
been given and not the resources
that they need to be able to do
so it is difficult to create a
situation where students receive
inequitable education here as
they would anywhere else in the
state the infrastructure here is
so poor we had we're struggling
with.
Getting kids laptops the kids we
did get laptops we're struggling
with the internet problems a lot
of our students are given areas
as you can see we have a lot of
mountainous area here that
didn't have access to any of our
local internet services to where
he'll.
But stuck back in the maybe the
nineteen thirties as far as
economic prosperity there's just
no jobs.
I would say percentage wise no
running water no electricity
about eighty percent of the
population HB sixteen the rural
opportunities act would
authorize the creation of a
fourteen member interim
committee focused on rural needs
the committee will develop
legislative proposals to ensure
access for every New Mexicans to
running water wastewater
treatment services electricity
and broadband internet.
We'll also address economic
development jobs health care
quality education and many other
critical needs what I believe
that those people that live in
cities and metropolitan areas
they should come to the rural
areas and experience themselves
and will drive around all these
neighborhoods all these rural
communities to see how it is
other towns other cities get
more recognition and small towns
like us very again now is the
time to collaborate this
identify and address the
barriers within our rural
communities let's invest in just
and equitable policies to help
all New Mexicans six.
Thank you yeah before that
Representative Montoya
is centered on your
presentation.
No I a have some expert
witnesses I would like to make
sure that Representative
Representative Candie Sweetser
is is moved over that Paula
Garcia from the New Mexico
acequia Association Terry bring
Werner from pivotal New Mexico
the director and Matt procs the
medical director of el Centro
family health I have assembled
this team.
Excuse me did did you get that
merry or Gabby thank part of the
names so if you could give tell
me again absolutely I'll slow
down okay all of Garcia.
Terry Bruner.
Matt Probst.
And I see on the screen
Representative can be Sweetser
my co sponsor that procs P. R.
O. others mass protest and
before we get started I.
I just want to connect.
Re iterate the genesis of this
is the first time
Representative.
Touring listening zooming
meeting the critical partners
who drive local frontier
villages and towns it was so
deeply apparent to me that we
had to act.
And really look critically in
globally at our state in all its
potential and all the tragedy
that exists and wants to really
face and finally form this in
rural.
This assembly really to to focus
so I will stop there and move it
over to back to.
Our check our chair thank you
Representative Montoya and that
will go to your experts I have
up on Garcia.
You're free to add to the
significance of the legislation.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee will let us test
of the US my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm here extensive
part of house bill sixteen as a
former county commissioner from
what I County and as the
director The New Mexico sic
Association I also served as
president of New Mexico counties
pilot initiatives relating to
rural infrastructure tribal
issues and rural emergency
medical care I also have
experience working on land water
and agriculture the reason this
bill is important is that it
would provide a vehicle to
address issues in rural
communities and the systemic
manner a dedicated rural
community with a focus on
addressing the most pressing
needs in rural New Mexico could
help consolidate efforts one of
the issues needing attention as
rural water infrastructure
particularly institutions such
as mutual domestic water
consumers associations as a
county commissioner I dealt with
volunteers who are charged with
providing clean water their
communities they have to comply
with regulations maintain their
systems and address emergencies
all of this while planning for
the future and trying to raise
funds for expansion to serve
their communities the lack of
wastewater treatment in some
rural villages would probably
surprise many in our more urban
areas in my telling only one
side of the town has faced water
on my side of the river of what
can small septic tanks on a hot
summer day.
So this this need is urgent and
it's critical and I know it's
affecting rural communities
around the state also in my
capacity working on land water
and food we have created
apprenticeship program to train
new farmers and hope that we can
create dignified land five eight
eight for people who work the
land this is important in rural
communities it's part of
identity it's part of who we are
as land based people and just
rural people we I stand out here
in support of the bill and I
think we Representative Roger
Montoya for bringing this vital
issue forward and I will stand
available for questions thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you Paula Mexico
go to a Terry Bruner Terry on
yourself and feel free to speak.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Montoya or give
me the opportunity to talk about
the support legislation I've
I've I've been involved in rural
community development for many
years senator Bingaman's longest
serving stage director and then
as the Obama administration's
appointee the state director
position for rural development
in New Mexico where we invested
more than one billion dollars in
New Mexico rural communities
housing community facilities
water wastewater broadband
lecture and what I saw during
that time is a very silent
approach when it comes to New
Mexico.
Structured best and
organizations not working
together a collaborative
on approaches that take the most
advantage of federal funding
that's coming down from the
federal government and interim
committee can really get to the
bottom as to why this silo
approach happening in New Mexico
and what we can do about I
everyone's while it's a great
idea to have in your own
committee that takes the time to
look at kind of these more
general larger issues that are
cross cutting across committees
in legislature and come up with
some recommendations are
proteins that can really work we
all know that in the COVID
recovery that's not only a
health recovery but economic
recovery there will be more
federal resources down I think
about the one billion dollar
fund that's currently available
for tribes in New Mexico
propriety and ice you keeps me
up at night thinking about
whether or not we have a word
needed approach to use all that
money or are we going to do it
the same way we've done in the
past for each tribe just doesn't
on their own
I think about the call I was on
last week in any county with
behavioral health and substance
abuse providers that have more
than a thousand people in need
of services and they're trying
to go it alone without much help
state or the feds and barely
trying to coordinate get by and
that's just one count so when we
look at our approaches we can
get organized work together on
that will be really important in
the future success of the state
so I'm full
support of this legislation are
big fantastic Representative
month with product forward and I
think you could really help us
to make some new approaches
coming out of the COVID on how
we approach our rural
communities to help them our in
the years to come thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Mr Brunner next will go to a
that probe.
Then if you could
you know within a minute kind of
reflect on the significance of
this legislation as well thank
you chairman Representative
Montoya and theme members of
this committee so I'm not the
protests and the medical
director and chief quality
officer for the central family
health we run a system of
clinics twenty seven clinics
across the service area the size
of West Virginia seven counties
providing access to medical
dental and behavioral health
care many of you may recognize
me from the providers
documentary a documentary that
aired in twenty eighteen at the
future our crisis a crisis of
access to health care in rural
America and so twenty nineteen I
went on tour if you will across
America telling that story of
that crisis in twenty twenty I
committed to home to saying I
need to be here because all
those trophies on the wall edges
trophies there's no food on the
table in need in the freezer for
my people and I wanted to give
that to my community a year to
my community and lo and behold a
pandemic hits and it pulled back
the veil could pull back the
veil for everybody to see what
I've always known since I was a
little kid in general idea that
It's easy to say as a health
care provider
wash your hands.
But you don't know if they have
water it's easy to say I have
all called get your visit yet
telehealth why don't have a
computer what will need to
follow why don't have a phone I
don't even have the link to see.
And it's easy to say stay home
orders stay home quarantine if
you've been exposed to a poll
contactor isolate if you have
COVID but I don't have a house
so social determinants of health
mean everything in health care
and now that the bill is pull
back the time is now we need to
do something about this to
provide these services or are
people not only to survive now
through COVID but to move
forward into a thriving future
thank you.
Thank you Matt and lastly
Representative Sweetser of the
morning to Darling do you wish
to add to the presentation as a
co sponsor.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you committee members and
Representative Montoya just
briefly I'll say those of you
that know me well no I'm not a
big fan of more interim
committees right Representative
Fajardo.
But this is this is a very
targeted short term committee
with the true mission and when
Representative Montoya first
presented to me I thought this
is exactly what we need to focus
on the shortcomings in rural New
Mexico so thank you Mr chair
with that I will stand with my
co sponsor.
Thank you representative
resentment there is added in the
presentation.
Sure German Garcia yes thank you
it yes thank you I see where you
have an amendment.
Yes there are I like to
entertain the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Representative are before I go
to the audience.
can you read the
The number at the bottom on the
amendment yes it's H. two line
thirteen I don't know there's
another at the far north of the
amendment that way at the bottom
read that number.
You know like I I don't have
that in front of me I am I'm
sorry.
I have a two one nine six five
eight point one.
The committee should have that
amendment
Representative Montoya up
proceed in terms of the
amendment explain the amendment
yeah it's it's it's really just
the exchange of a word a single
word and it's on page two line
thirteen.
It reads representation to the
committee would read
representation from the
committee that is the amendment
the one we're change.
Okay members discussion on the
amendment.
The land you have a question on
the amendment.
Representative Hon.
No I don't have a question on
the amendment thank you
Representative to the high is
there any opposition so I have a
quick question and I'm I'm I
apologize I can't seem to find
in the shared drive is attached
on the website.
I think it printed materials
and.
Gabby is it on the share file or
is it the just email Act.
I know that there was an email
sent to the members.
We love gonna dismiss that this
morning Mr chair.
Yeah Mr chair I'm unsure of that
at I I kind of just help on the
same side of stuff.
Point of order could you repeat
the number for the amendment
please.
Two one nine six five eight
point one.
And the amendment remains on
page two nine thirteen strike
two and insert into their out
from.
That's the moment.
Representative
So do you still.
That's the text of it that's
that's all we need thank you Mr
members is there opposition into
adopting the amendment.
See none.
The members adopted
Representative you have a.
And amended bill and we'll go to
the audience.
I'm audience are.
In support and opposition you're
going to see a poll.
Up up on your screen and that
we're gonna take twenty seconds
to do the pull in the ball and
and on the Paul you identify
whether you're in support or in
opposition so do that right now
twenty seconds.
Right seconds.
Your.
Okay the.
The ball is done we show up
that there are zero percent in
opposition and one hundred
percent in support in terms of
the audience participation.
Thank you for that
for participating and now those
of you in the audience
and I'll still go to those in
opposition.
is it.
To see if anybody that did not
participate in the poll that is
opposed to the legislation and
you wish to speak the committee
in opposition now is the time
raise your hand if the rays it
the the the race hand button on
the bottom.
Okay I don't see.
I don't see anybody so we'll go
to those in support and those in
support
if you recorded the support.
If you identified yourself as a
supporter on the pole and you
wish to speak
now is the time to raise your
hand and I'll call you in the
order that you're showing up on
my screen first we have a Victor
Davis returning as briefly one
minute mainly because there's no
opposition to a express your
concerns or the legislation.
I need your cell.
What did I just.
I will come back to you.
Fernando Trujillo.
Yourself and feel free to
address the committee for a
minute New Jersey or support.
Another Trujillo I'm you
yourself.
There we are can you hear me now
yes proceed across the committee
in terms of your support for
legislation it is.
Chair members of the committee I
just wanna thank you for giving
me the time to
to speak N. in support for this
legislation on it's very
important for rural and what a
lot of communities we really
had very limited resources so
any kind of development that can
come my way and is really
appreciated I mean even our
phone service is just sucks so
on behalf of my community in the
north that just like thank you
in that think of the sponsors
for this legislation thank you
bye thank you secretary of
wearable.
Identify yourself in terms of if
you with an organization or an
organization.
I mean the Fernando.
Any okay I am well I'm speaking
on behalf of myself but your
brother that's all I needed to
know yeah just be on behalf of
myself.
Thank you rather I will go back
to Richard Harris Richard Harris
on yourself and feel that the
committee for Amanda in terms of
your support for legislation.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to be here I I'm
here on on in my individual
capacity and as the former chair
of the New Mexico community
development council where I
heard directly from community
leaders and community members
about the serious infrastructure
needs across rural New Mexico I
heard from community members who
who's roads were sent such
disrepair that the school bus
that too was responsible for to
live for transporting kids
couldn't safely deliver those
children to their school and so
our children won't have to miss
out on their education I heard
from community leaders whose
water was in such it was in such
bad shape that their residents
put up to twice Oil over their
water before they would before
they felt that it was safe to
drink this interim committee
this process this act will
create an important forum for
discussion of of what solutions
we can bring forward to make
sure that we're creating equity
within our rural communities I
appreciate the sponsor bring
this forward.
Thank you Mr Vance on next I
will go to
lily Irvin Vitela.
Then the year on feel free to
share your concerns up for a
minute please thank you Mr chair
and committee members include
sponsors my name is lily Irvin
Vitela and I'm the president and
executive director of New Mexico
First and also someone who lives
in a semi rural community
I'm I'm wanting to speak with
you all today for a couple of
reasons
I think house bill sixteen does
a beautiful job of.
I think some of the fundamental
inequities that exist within our
state and that
disproportionately impact rural
frontier and tribal communities
access to running water and
safety
kind of addressing of of waste
water electricity and broadband
on their infrastructure issues
absolutely but more
fundamentally their human rights
issues their humanitarian issues
and I think folks said it so
beautifully in the video that
was shared at the top of the
committee meeting about how this
the pandemic has really drawn
back the veil that many of us
were well aware of from our own
lived experiences in New Mexico
and so
you know in in some of the
health body mind and spirit town
halls or community conversations
and town hall we have folks
really understood across New
Mexico we had over five hundred
fifty people participate
altogether how are well being in
our health also has something to
do with our place in the
environments that we live in and
that we can't divorce ourselves
from that and so I just want to
thank the sponsors for their
vision for equity and justice
for their understanding of how
these infrastructure issues are
quarter a health and well being
and so we stand in strong
support and encourage it to pass
thank you so much.
Thank you the next we have
already said that on on
yourself.
Thank you Clarissa appropriate
address the committee for a
minute and and be succinct and
not repetitive thank you.
Good morning Mr caring committee
members thank you so much for
allowing me to speak I'm here is
an individual and founder and
principal of P. two twenty
thirty two you've actually I am
a generational resident of the
Espanola valley I have been a
social worker all of my adult
life and I mainly served you
than older adults in northern
New Mexico serving my elders
over a period of twenty five
years I have gone into a
multitude of homes where people
had difficulties accessing
health care food and financial
resources to purchase
electricity gas and water we're
not meeting even the basics of
what matters the point of the
hierarchy of needs because the
needs are not being met at the
basic level reaching a higher
level of needs is nearly
impossible those needs include
physiological needs safety needs
love and belonging esteem and
self actualization to that point
domestic violence teen pregnancy
the opioid pandemic including
grandparents raising
grandchildren dropping out of
school at mid school level food
insecurity lack of job
opportunities and other things
bureau communities vulnerable to
crime especially that which is
perpetrated on the community by
the by drug cartels and their
minions are lack of attention to
rural and and frontier
communities has meant that
becoming a drug dealer is one of
the highest paying careers but
it is not a sustainable career
are community members either end
up dead or incarcerated neither
of those are acceptable and I'm
advocating this committee to
pass H. B. sixteen to give New
Mexico a fighting chance to meet
the needs of our residents and
getting culturally appropriate
equitable lives lived with
dignity I appreciate the sponsor
for bringing this forward thank
you.
Thank you Representative next
will go to up Paul Gibson on
yourself fund if we address the
committee for a minute regarding
the significance alleged.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and I
especially want to thank
Representative Representative
Montoya for introducing this
important legislation my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide we
work with allies across the
state to identify bills we will
support each year this year we
identified twenty bills is
transformational bills that we
strongly support as a result of
our outreach to rural New Mexico
we heard many of the stories
that you've heard in the video
produced by Representative
Montoya as a result of that up
in part we have identified
several bills we strongly
support that address rural New
Mexico's needs HB sixteen it is
the most important of them over
the past year we've all
experienced the importance of
the importance of the role of
government in our lives we've
experienced the devastating
deadly consequences resulting
resulting from a government that
advocates its responsibility and
we've seen states compete with
each other for P. P. comment
tell us and now vaccines we've
seen what happens when our lives
are left to the decisions made
by big business and by the
market you've heard in the video
the very human impact of failure
to systemically address the
needs of rural New Mexico's New
Mexicans we need to integrate
New Mexico resources and created
efficient well coordinated
effort to address those needs HB
sixteen would bring together
representatives from different
interim committees to Phyllis
facilitates development of a
quarter needed an integrated use
of state resources to address
the needs that we have heard
voice from your constituents
today you have the opportunity
to send a message to mac rural
New Mexico that you care and
that you will do better we take
our democracy in its twenty five
hundred well informed highly
engaged very active members
strongly support HB sixteen and
again thank you so much for your
service all of you.
Thank you Mr Gibson that's the
last of our attendees that are
in support and we'll go now the
committee for questions and
discussion.
I have Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and a very
big thank you to Representative
bringing this forward actually
and a co sponsor as well for
additional and I just want to
say one Representative Montoya
right to me and and and and and
for discussion.
and I told him I'd read and I
read it and then he got back to
me that absolutely this is this
is this is a no brainer for me
to say
having worked
The last twelve years and
No district rebate
And understanding the issues and
different capacities in
understanding the the the need
in our rural communities and
actually you know having family
and coming from northern New
Mexico myself and and in the
building sixteen counties in
our.
Conditional district three and
building relationships
relationships and understanding
the needs and understand the
issues and continuing those
relationships with
My brothers and sisters and my
cousins and aunts and uncles
and.
And just
Having the concerned in knowing
that the that the noted this
these are serious issues and
then having going at having gone
through the interim committees
myself now this last year
ending on several those
committees are addressing a lot
of these issues.
Perfect sense to have the
collaboration of the issue some
of the come together and really
bring those resources and the
information in a collaborative
way so that we understand that
we can really focus in on what's
going on in our our rural New
Mexico
not to say that you know
Southern New Mexico as well as I
did it is well that you know the
northern part is where my my
most of my work is been done and
I just want to say I support
this legislation hundred percent
and thank you for bringing
export thank you for the next
representative of our the.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
thank you committee members of
thank you Representative that
Montoya for bringing this
forward you know I'm reading you
know be in our on the committees
over the last couple years you
know this this will be a statute
created committee and like most
of our committees
I think we have.
gosh if only a handful of
committees that are created in
statute so my question is
Representative
if something happens in this
bill does not make its way
through are you going to
approach our leadership to try
to get this done to rule.
Mr Chairman and Representative
Fajardo I have every intention
of not letting this go I will
seek all ends to ensure that
this committee work the
collaborative nature lo mas
importante.
Will happen
As I said this is my freshman
entree to this world and one
thing I've learned from three
decades of community organizing
and this is my secret recipe is
that you identified a challenge
you enlighten in United group of
dedicated diverse leaders and
you get to work.
If there was ever a time coming
out of COVID.
And all of the issues that we
face as a nation to focus like a
laser on these issues of
inequity this is the time I hope
I answered your question in a
you.
Thank.
Thank you and so it just here's
a here's my concern and and you
know Representative Sweetser
kind kind and made fun of me
because yeah I don't like you
know practice and things like
that so I sat on several disk
you know I said on you know the
Indian Affairs Committee New
World economic development side
to technologies Representative
Sweetser was actually did their
chairwoman at the time of that
committee and
one of the one of the most
frustrating things.
That that I come across and this
is for every single committee is
you get these presentations
because I live in a rural
district as well you get these
presentations and you get these
needs and these requests and
I'll just take you know the need
for broadband across the state
I've heard that over and over
and over again.
And we still fail to take
action.
We are in the middle of a
pandemic.
And we still fail to take
action.
And so I'm not opposed to your
to to the bill I'm not opposed
to anything I'm just frustrated
because I don't want this to be
one of those.
I don't want this to be one of
those times time will be spent
all summer long we travel the
state we get all this great
information and we come back and
we don't make anything happen
and I guess everybody knows we
need broadband in the state
everybody knows we need the
program infrastructure in the
state.
But it never nothing never bent
is my biggest frustration.
Now I will say that when I was a
freshman in the first couple
years of special we have to have
the jobs council.
That was successful.
That created something we came
out of that jobs council with
ideas with bills with things and
people funding is a great
example of that came out of jobs
council we've had that a present
we keep we keep adding to it.
And the jobs council was
actually something that really
really worked and so you know
Representative and and all the
Representative on on this bill
I am really asking them if this
bill makes its way through.
Please don't waste our time.
Make it something useful make it
so at the end of the day we
actually get some substance and
if you have to format like the
jobs council if we have to
massage this whenever we need to
do because that was that that I
found that to be successful.
you know do in such a way that
we actually get something
because you know it's so
frustrating to me yet you know
being been around for so long
and not scenes that get done so
that was more my soapbox and
asking a question
you know I I also will go I know
that it's not fair that I don't
have anybody to make make
awesome videos for me.
The Dallas one eight thank you
Representative representatives
for bringing us for a live in it
will community I don't like the
bureaucracy
of creating committees but
sometimes they can they do work
and so not sure we're gonna go
with this but thank you so much.
Mr Chairman.
Are not next we have a
Representative Serrato.
You Mr chairman and I really
appreciate hearing
Representative heart of those
comments as well you know I
signed on to this bill data to
ago you know if you're talking
Representative Montoya and
seeing the materials and you
know I can say from my district
that I primarily Representative
you know Santa Fe within town
but I also represent a chunk of
lesson again let's see and act
and the line that you see that
gets established at that point
of resources what's available is
very frustrating when you see it
so clearly and so you can almost
it's it's very frustrating so
I'm I'm hopeful for this bill
what can do and the reason I
also appreciate Representative
the heart of those comments at
my question has to do with the
broadband goals partially
because I like that they do set
goals in this interim committee
which I haven't necessarily
heard from everyone but I am
hopeful that we'll have a bit of
about one goals and and I just
was kind of curious
Representative Montoya when you
talk about broadband
accessibility or you just talk
about broadband generally or
access to ensuring that when I
need really starts popping up in
New Mexico that we're seeing in
rural as well Senator standing
with the schools will look like.
Mr chairman and representative
thank you for the thoughtful
questions and comments from
everyone
If you just broadband the
complexity of jurisdiction right
of way to a paga fee just to
name a few the challenge is
enormous how can we actually
execute there are many
incredible bills moving through
our legislative bodies right now
to that end in with my hope is
that through a focus like a
laser intentionality that we
have driven leadership that will
prioritize and provide the best
solutions for a myriad of
landscapes so to speak it is not
gonna be easy I'm not proposing
that this is sort of some sort
of a bill that's going to make
everything happy and lovely all
of sudden in my three decades of
community work and I've become
quite well known for this.
Is that when I decide and to
focus like a laser on something
I will not give up.
I will insure that just like
water moving across the river
will go around the boulders we
will succeed in some way it may
not look the end point like what
I'm seeing in laying out right
now I am fully aware that change
is not easy and that we have to
be ready to shape shift and the
most importantly to be United
across ideologies party lines
with the singular focus of
raising this state to the glory
that it must provide thank you
are sentiment fiber Senator
athletes that have the floor
thank you Mr chairman and those
on the question thank you
representative throughout the
next we have our present Este
ano.
Thank you Mr chairman
also Mr Mattel being a co
sponsor this bill when you ask
me being from a rural community
I think infrastructure waste
water
you know water economic
development it is a big issue in
our rural communities that we
don't get the opportunity to to
be part of and and that's why I
think I jumped on this bill and
Representative Fajardo I will
work diligently with
Representative Montoya that
hopefully this if this committee
is formed and it gets through
that we we do what's right for
rural communities that we work
together as a body of the
legislature to make things
happen for rural communities
because it's very important that
our rural communities are heard
and that as educators bipartisan
that we work together to offer
these services to to our rural
communities and I think you
Representative Montoya for for
us to be a co sponsor and I am a
hundred percent.
In support of this bill and I
will work under present side by
side with you that this bill
does get somewhere thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr Montoya
thank you Representative
Castellano
members that's it on the
questions of the committee of
what is the wish of the
committee.
In the past we have the best
recommendation Representative
said I thought I'd double should
Mr Chairman.
The second that.
Second by Representative Romero
on and Representative because
they are not is there further
questions this question.
Representative Montoya did you
wish to close on this we were
only kind of went to this bill
so if you do have a closing if
you could make a profit.
Mr chairman and members of this
committee and folks listening
across our state thank you so
much for giving this bill the
time that it is due if there was
ever a moment for us to act in a
unified encourages weight it's
now which is embedded access up
to Los.
Representative Montoya is their
opposition to the do pass
recommendation.
Seeing that the record reflect
that all those present voting
intermittent one thank you have
a.
Recommendation on house bill
sixteen as Amanda.
Next we have a House Bill two
one to remake New Mexico State
University Carlsbad as community
college Representative brown but
on your bill.
Mary bring that Representative
brown over to the panelists
column and those.
The experts that you mentioned
early on.
Center brown when you come on
board feel free to presented
legislation.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am bringing before
you know House Bill to twelve
and it proposes to remake of the
New Mexico State University
branch at Carlsbad into an
independent community college.
just over seventy years ago in
the fall of nineteen fifty.
The first community college
opened its doors in the state of
New Mexico.
It was called the Carlsbad
instructional center and was
created by the Carlsbad school
board with very strong support
from the community.
Seven years later the Carlsbad
instructional center positions
itself under the umbrella Mexico
State University system.
It became a branch Community
College that we all know today
as an M. S. U. Carlsbad.
Banding together was done in
order to create a synergy
between the two institutions.
And the hope was that they would
work better together.
Officials at the main campus
we're hopeful also that the
Carlsbad branch would become a
senior school for the campus in
Los crucis.
Right now for a number of
compelling reasons we believe
the time has come for NMSU
Carlsbad to become an
independent community college
once again and this is the
reason for House Bill to twelve.
State law provides a mechanism
for the branch community
colleges to become independent
community colleges.
They remain public colleges are
the major differences who is
governing.
According to New Mexico's
community college act and quote
there should be no new community
college created after January
one nineteen ninety eight
unless specifically created by
the legislature and quote.
So this this provision was are
put into a lot of storage the
proliferation of more colleges
and universities in the state
there's.
He had enough already into the
need to add any more.
So the idea there's a whole
purpose was to hold the line on
the number of soldiers injured
for cities and.
Aspen to twelve would not confer
independent status to an already
it excuse me it would confer
independent status to an already
existing community college so it
is not adding community not
having a college.
Also point out that the the
statute of calls will
construction.
That is to affect the purposes
of community colleges.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee so why independence
and why now.
Well for many years there have
been numerous students are so
the main campus has been
managing the Carlsbad branch.
At the overall thought was that
the main campus has not been
very responsive to the local
needs and this came to a head.
Just a short while ago when and
decided to eliminate the
position of president at the
Carlsbad branch.
That prompted the creation of a
higher education task force.
put in by the city of Carlsbad
and the purpose of that task
force was to examine the
situation.
It was a very well attended set
of meetings actually that the
participants met weekly
throughout the fall and winter
of twenty twenty that was
current and former faculty
members current and former
students of NMAA you see.
A lot of business leaders and
other concerned citizens and
everyone expressed concerns over
NMAA use management of the
branch college.
The task force who took a very
deep dive into the problems that
have been experienced and as
people got together and
discussed more and more issues
emerge and I think we were all
surprised by the number of
complaints that that people had.
if I could sum it up in in in
once audits that there was a
lack of focus and commitment to
local needs of the branch and
everyone of course pointed out
that Carlsbad is not left Los
crucis and the mission of a of a
four year university that also
does graduate programs is going
to be a lot different than a
community college the community
colleges are meant to be locally
focused met to find a place for
local students to begin their
higher education studies and and
to provide other services as
well for the community that I
mean main campus doesn't concern
itself with.
And also there was a very strong
thought that there need to be
more different doors of learning
opened for for the community.
But it turned out that we we
pretty much so that the two
institutions were not really
working better together.
And that it just felt like the
Carlsbad campus was treated as
an afterthought and you'll hear
a little bit more about that I
believe from some of our
experts in New.
One of the big concerns I had Mr
chairman and it kind of shocked
me to find out that some of the
local students were being priced
out of community college studies
because of the way main campus
wanted them to enroll the credit
went to main campus and not to
the locals and the cost of
getting an education was a whole
lot higher because of that and
again we want it to be
affordable and that that was
being taken away I was also very
shocked to learn that the campus
bookstore was.
Was basically empty of
everything there have been a
problem with the purveyor of the
books Barnes and noble and so
students were actually without
books for several months of the
semester and that just shouldn't
of happened there were a number
of other problems and I I know
they're going to come up but let
me mention some of the regarded
a personal development internet
problems transcript of Bill
ability housing issues and in
understaffing of the nursing
program which is there on the
campus in Carlsbad.
And also there's a great deal to
know about a reserve fund that
the branch campus was not aware
of that was meant for the
benefit of the branch campus and
when you don't know about that
you can avail yourself of it.
I think I want to just a match a
couple other things before we go
to our experts and that is one
of the students I believe
commented that we need to have
local governance it makes a big
difference and that it suits the
city of our size to take this
step your curls budget
population has increased quite a
bit Mr chairman and the we have
all the resources of the person.
And and the drive and desire to
operate as an independent
community college.
I think the one thing that the
students have said is that we
need greater responsiveness to
campus needs hearing in the in
the Presbyterian.
So Mr chairman and members let
me just let you know also that
this is been a topic of
conversation the community now
very intensively so
there been polls taken should
should this independence happen
votes were taken petitions were
circulated and we have a vote
from December of twenty twenty
Mr chairman the NMSU faculty and
staff were given an opportunity
to decide whether or not we
should just strive for
independence and seventy six
percent voted in favor of
independence.
a short while later the higher
education task force also voted
and that vote was unanimous.
We also have many letters of
support for this and just let
you know that those letters come
from and we have resolutions as
well to Carlsbad department of
development the Carlsbad school
system the chamber of commerce
at the end of laci P. of Eddy
County.
More P. distraught of from the
village of one thing which is
about thirteen miles away and we
have many letters of support
from businesses large and small
and a great many individuals.
So Mr chairman if I can just get
in one more thought and it it's
all about outcomes.
I did a little research and are
we have a set of books that are
prepared for the legislature in
for the public and these are
done by our legislative finance
committee and the deal with
performance analysis and so it's
these purple volumes that we all
have been given.
And according to the statistics
in this of all you the
independent community colleges
in New Mexico.
Perform far better and have
better outcomes than grants
colleges to.
And let me just give you one
example of this is regarding the
completion rates for students
who are first time full time
degree seeking students are from
twenty sixteen to twenty
nineteen NMSU Carlsbad that
completion rate was only fifteen
percent.
If we compare that Mr Chairman
to the independent community
colleges and there are a number
here in I think six or so seven
actually in New Mexico their
completion rates for that same
cohort of students was anywhere
from twenty point seven so five
points above the fifteen at the
Carlsbad branch all the way up
and hear the others twenty five
twenty seven twenty seven.
Forty seven fifty and so forth
so that the performances
stronger.
And the reason for that appears
to be in this is also in this
volume.
and it says the difference
between the independent
community colleges and branch
campuses may be the level of
communities financial support
and participation it just seems
that independent colleges draw
greater support.
And they were far above the
independence were above any
other two year college sectors
so Mr Chairman with with those
comments what I'd like to do now
is.
Ring on three expert witnesses
and if we could have them
brought over into panelists
status of the first is Wendy
Austin.
As she is going to address the
question of can we afford this.
The next witness will be John
Heaton.
And the after him Craig Stevens
Mr speaker Mr Stevens are co
chairs of the prospect higher
end task force.
So the Austin John Heaton Craig
Stevens thank you Mr chair okay
thank you for that the
Representative
I will go to the experts
and experts up if you could
think of thanks to minutes to
kind of reflect on the your
points of view in terms of the
significance of legislation
wending we'll start with you.
Yes chairman thank you can you
hear me yes.
Okay good okay chairman my name
is Wendy Austin and I'm the
deputy city administrator for
the city of Carlsbad.
I was born and raised in
Carlsbad and I know this
community very well in addition
I have a very strong financial
and analytical background
throughout my career I worked in
banking I work for the New
Mexico taxation and revenue
department I have over ten years
of experience with a fortune
five hundred company providing
financial leadership and now I
oversee the finance director and
other during.
Ross fat.
I'm here today to respectfully
ask for your support of HB to
twelve chairman Garcia for many
years now the community across
that has been neglected by the
main campus and I know that the
current leadership at the main
campus would also agree to this.
Some of this is uncomfortable to
speak to but you need to now
first off the community of
Carlsbad has in place a three
mill levy with no sense at.
The financials for an
independent college are very
strong and there would be no
additional cost to the state.
With from MSU staff I prepared a
detailed Mexico former statement
which here.
And in this detail process gives
me and I use very conservative
projections where I actually
reduced revenue buckets over the
over year over the five year
period and I increased
expenditure buckets over the
five year period and year after
year this independent community
college remains profitable.
Therefore once again I would
like to highlight that there
which should be no additional
cost to the state and so you
know chairman Garcia the three
mill levy enacted by this
community which in itself shows
very strong support at this
college resulted in twelve point
twelve million of revenue in
fiscal year nineteen and
fourteen million of revenue in
fiscal year twenty.
Chairman Garcia this is quite
significant.
Currently the main campus has
accumulated year after year and
appropriate thirties six million
plus reserve of this community's
property tax.
And I say approximate because
this reserve could be more we
can't seem to get a true
accounting of the funding.
In addition and what's most
troubling to this community and
what should also be very
troubling to you chairman Garcia
this thirty six million or
dollar reserve has not been
invested back into the students
of this community either by
degree and vocational programs
nor campus housing.
Additionally chairman Garcia not
only is the thirty six million
dollars not being used for the
students of Carlsbad the reserve
is not deposited in Carlsbad
banks and the interest earned on
this reserve is deposited into
the main campus fund for the
main campus to utilize this
community had no idea that this
funding was there.
Chairman Garcia you will hear
the main campus say the
consolidation and centralization
of shared services is in the
best interest of the NMAA you
system and frankly the changes
have been made by the main
campus are in the best interest
of the main campus not the
bridge college.
This this centralization has
added jobs to the main campus
and eliminated jobs in our
community.
This is this centralisation
benefits Los crucis not
Carlsbad.
Finally businesses in our
community cannot get support
from the main campus in
developing publication programs
we hear story after story about
the main campus not considering
the needs of this community and
this is especially concerning
considering that our college has
a thirty six million dollar
reserves the business's of
students here cannot utilize.
This is not fair to neither the
students nor the taxpayers of
the city of Carlsbad.
Chairman Garcia.
This community has the ingenuity
and credibility to make our
community college the best it
can be serving the businesses
and students that so desperately
need education and vocational
training.
Chairman or CEO and
distinguished committee members
the community college in cost
that should not be forced to
stay in the system does not that
does not benefit the community
or the students that it starts.
And I will give remind you the
pro forma financial projects
very strong financials with no
impact to the state.
And this will conclude my
statements and I want to any
questions you may have thank you
Wendy.
Next we'll go to the other
witness John Heaton John meet
your morning Mr chairman and
committee again my name is John
Heaton and I would like to begin
if I could by making a couple of
points more more clear if I
could
first of all let me just say
that this follows on with the
hearing that you just had
Representative Montoya in terms
of focusing on rural New Mexico
our service area is basically
Eddy County and we have a number
of very rural communities within
our county that we need to serve
much better than we have been so
a couple of points that I like
to make use the communities only
interest is to be able to
provide more opportunities for
our students and to be able to
control our own destiny without
being strangled by New Mexico
state the Carlsbad campus.
Is independently accredited by
the higher learning commission
and that has nothing to do with
NMAA you all colleges branches
universities in the state are
all twelve independently our
campus has its own money through
the three mill levy you just
heard about state appropriations
and tuition the overwhelming
majority of money comes from our
mill levy going independent will
have no impact on the state
budget whether we are a branch
or an independent college the
formula is the same.
We will not add to the number of
colleges in the state as
Representative brown said we
will be converting from a branch
college to an independent
college the chancellor speaks
often of an amendment issue
system but we have no idea what
that really means or how to
explain it to us it means more
centralization more central
control and less local control
for us to be innovative and
creative in offering our
students more opportunities
image you controls the records
and financial systems systems go
down and they don't respond we
have many examples there is not
a set this is not a system it is
grossly inefficient for our
people to be able to complete
their work it and and the
communication between us and
main campus is basically
horrible they can seize and
operations are not allowed to be
replaced even though we have our
own money we can even we can't
even press a transcript locally
if you can believe that.
Carlsbad has a higher cost of
living in Los crucis and they
won't approve adequate
compensation for us to recruit
instructional staff as an
example nursing is fifty percent
understaffed and while at the
same time we were we were
designated as the best nursing
program in the state of New
Mexico.
And that and all of while we are
dropping some two to three
million dollars every year into
the reserve it just simply makes
no sense initi forces their
compensation levels on us even
though they don't fit in many
many of our instances this can
only be fixed by just becoming
independent they eliminated are
present and now we have more
bureaucracy between our campus
and the chancellor they have
hijacked our online students
when asked what a student from
our campus takes a class from
the main campus they not only
are forced to pay nine hundred
and twelve dollars for a
semester for a three semester
court R. three hour course
versus a hundred forty seven for
a three hour course on our
campus and they take credit for
our students which decreases our
student count in the
reimbursement formula the new
policy is highly distasteful we
want to remind you that the
purpose of community colleges is
to allow easy asked access low
cost and for students to live
and work at home NMAA use
financial status cannot be fixed
on the backs of that of their
community colleges.
The branch colleges we simply
don't have their problems and
their cuts hurt our students
independence then we will be
able to be creative and
responsive to the educational
needs of our area without the
delays and denials of courses by
main caps independence means we
will be able to recruit academic
instructors and instructors for
career technical certificates
our workers for our workers and
our diverse economy committee.
Very little change will occur on
the campus in terms of
organization other than electing
a board of trustees and
appointing a president otherwise
the three vice presidents remain
in place as does the rest of the
organization we will have our
own buildings equipments regard
reserves operational fund and a
great staff committee we are we
are like a stepchild to New
Mexico state and it is
imperative we become independent
to serve our students thank you
very much I hope you will
support this bill thank you John
and lastly on the experts we
have Craig Craig
if you could take two minutes to
kind of reflect on the
legislation and not be
repetitive of what the sponsor
stated in her presentation and
what the two prior witnesses
have stated so be succinct.
For free you yourself grant.
Thank you chairman our state
members of the committee our
task forces met every week since
person October we have between
thirty and thirty five members
on the call every week at seven
AM this committee as you well
though has voted unanimously to
support our dependents we have
submitted our preliminary plat
AGD and we're awaiting their
approval to submit our detail.
With the preliminary plan was
submitted a petition of over six
hundred aids twenty five letters
of support from businesses and
resolution from the city of
Carlsbad Carlsbad municipal
schools at the Carlsbad DO date
we have met with the governor
her chief of staff and the
secretary of higher education.
Why do we want independence we
wanted appendix for more control
and direction from a locally
elected board and local
president we can offer more
competitive salaries for faculty
and staff are money can be
brought to Carlsbad banks and
our interests for the benefit of
our call.
H. all we could do all.
But the place that New Mexico
state aid and outreach programs
specifically designed for our
college.
We could offer degrees for New
Mexico state and other colleges
such as the them you.
We can effectively partner with
local industries and businesses
promote more programs and
certifications.
And finally stability for our.
Which by not being dependent we
ask that you pass this bill as
our journey has already begun
are Canadian citizens of
Carlsbad and surrounding
communities are committed to
making this dream a reality we
don't need another study as we
have been studying this for the
last five Bucks we are ready to
work hard for the students
faculty and staff of southeast
New Mexico college so we can say
our colleagues succeed in
meeting the needs of our local
community it's already there.
With that thank you again.
Thank you Greg.
And that doesn't Representative
brown on the presentation yes
thank you so much Mr Chairman as
we go to public comment I would
just like to let you know that
we have several people who are
joining us to to make some
comments and if we could get
that in of at this front and I
think that would be really
helpful for the committee the
first is the mayor prospect
mayor Dale G. and way
school board member Ron
singleton Mr singleton will be
using I believe the computer of
Karl Marx Steiner.
And then we also have retired
NMAA UC president Dr John
Grattan.
And the student's name so of the
Leiria prasada into community
member J. Jenkins so Mr chairman
if you would allow them first in
public comment I'm not sure how
many others we have behind them
I think it would be so helpful
thank you.
Thank you representative will
try to do that I don't know if
if they'll show up like that on
the queue but.
Our best if not we'll just go
with what we have
okay members of the committee
will go to the audience and the
audience
those attendees that are here.
Only on house bill two twelve
you're going to have the
opportunity to take a little
Paul.
I am the poll basically States
whether you're in opposition or
in support of the legislation.
And
after we do the poll then I'll
go to those in the audience that
wish to speak if you're here in
opposition and or in support and
you do not wish to speak that's
fine.
but those that do wish to speak
all recognize you first in the
opposition and then then the
support so now
members in the audience you'll
have a poll that all spring up
on the screen and we'll take
our.
Twenty seconds at the most so
start feeling in the COVID
support or in opposition.
Five seconds.
Okay.
Also we're the poll basically
shows seventy nine percent in
support and one twenty one
percent in opposition.
And we'll start with the
opposition.
So those of you in opposition
that wished to express your
concerns to the committee
regarding the Oct the opposition
to house bill two twelve raise
your hand at this point.
There's a little raise hand icon
at the bottom.
So those in opposition
Raise your hand if you wish to
speak in opposition to the
legislation.
Okay we have
One panelists so far and that is
a Dan our resume.
Mr visa are feel free to reflect
on your opposition to the house
bill two twelve and identify
yourself as well.
Thank you Mr chairman of my name
is Dan Arvizu I'm the transfer
of the make New Mexico State
University system and I wanna
rise kind of in opposition to
this particular bail all for the
following reasons I think you
know I would put it in one word
I think it's premature
let me start with saying first
of all that we have been in the
process for more than a year all
developing a restructured
integrated system initiative
which are at camps to track to
tackle many of the problems and
issues that you've heard
describing some of the previous
speakers out regarding this
bill.
Really there are issues that we
as a system I think need to
address I think it is important
that we maintain partnership
like relationships with all of
our branch campuses and we're
working diligently to try to do
that
the initiatives that were about
really are really focused on
improving communication
integration of relief around the
three smaller branch campuses
which have suffered significant
losses both the in terms of
enrollment and and and I think
other measures that we care
about over the course of the
last decade and it was very
clear to me personally that does
something different needed to
happen and so we're we're we're
very much focused on that New
Mexico State University I find a
bunch of a different type of
services to each of our branch
campuses that are centrally
managed for the purpose of
getting some economies of scale
and that we have everything from
student support services to
admissions to graduation support
a variety of things that relate
to business offices audits
external audits the trick
payroll procurement human
resources institutional equity
services legal counsel
advancement the government
relations institutional analysis
reporting requests and
administration public relations
and marketing internet phone I
do all of these things are part
of what is centralized in terms
of administrative services not
to mention things like like
facilities environmental health
and safety and number other
compliance like issues all of
those things are being re re
evaluated and and streamlined in
a way that can help us meet the
needs of the of the educational
structure in in higher ed it in
New Mexico with the the various
you're serious challenges that
we're facing as a state both the
headwinds of you to the pandemic
and the financial crisis at that
has precipitated as well as how
do we get back to a point where
we can restructure and help
create jobs and and be part of
economic develop.
So a big makeover going on at
you know at the at the system
level I can say that many of the
issues that have been brought
forward our our it at least from
our perspective not fully I
think better we the regents of
New Mexico state had directed me
to make sure that we have a
independent review of all of
those allegations relative to
things that need to be improved
and many of them do have merit
and in the cases of things like
that the like the budget in the
thirty six million dollar
reserve account that is Carlsbad
money no one is trying to take
it all of the interest on that
account goes back to Carlsbad
none of that will be in anyway
disadvantaging the community
that was never part of the
intent and certainly not things
that we want to do Carlsbad pays
roughly seven hundred thousand
dollars to the main campus or to
the to the system for those
administrative services I would
find it hard to believe that
they can duplicate all those for
for that amount of money and and
we are actually trying to reduce
that and also then there's
energy that relates to economic
development and for IT of other
things so as I look through all
of the things that I think are
important in order for us to to
kind of make a decision what is
in the best interest of our
students our system the the the
the communities of New Mexico
including Carlsbad I find it to
be it's important that we do the
due diligence that's necessary
that's what are regents are
asking us to do that study will
only take a matter of a few
months but it would be I think
informative because of much of
what has been discussed already
is maybe the due diligence done
by their by the community but
it's not been shared with us and
we certainly can't validate that
it meets all of the the concerns
that that I think you know we're
we're trying to address so we
all of those things in mind Mr
chairman and and members of the
committee I give you since we
are strong recommendation that
we wait until we have a little
bit more information regarding
what that needs to look like and
if at the end of the day.
A it looks like like this these
independent studies which again
are to be focused by
dispassionate third parties
independent people of that they
can in fact during the day in
terms of the decision process so
I would say you know we we
haven't closed the door on the
back of independence is not the
right answer but we don't think
necessarily at this point we can
we can subscribe to a unilateral
declaration that independence is
better than than a improved and
enhanced integrated system which
I believe strongly that we can
accomplish over time so with
that with those remarks of Mr
chairman and members of the
committee happy to answer
additional questions as time
permits but I want to yield back
my time and just say thank you
for the opportunity to speak in
opposition of this particular
thank.
Thank you chancellor or those
Comments and
we're still in opposition to the
legislation.
If anybody else wishes to
address the committee.
now is now is your last chance
to raise your hand.
I don't see anyone else that
would like to address the
committee in opposition I will
go to those in support of the
legislation
those in support if you could go
down to the bottom of your
screen there is a race hand but
please click that on.
Right now.
Okay I see some hands up.
I see
Four hands up.
Want to see more gently over on
the panelists sign.
I don't know how he got sick at
the.
Okay those in support most will
start off in the order that
Representative Brown suggested.
More.
The.
More on.
I hope they're related.
In general a from the start
where
Series.
But more
Feel free to address the
committee at two minutes please.
Good morning chairman Garcia and
members of the local government
land grants and cultural urged
committee my name is Dale
January I'm the mayor of the
city of Carlsbad.
I strongly support this bill and
then for the growth of that
call.
Our community reach the decision
to pursue independent of our
college after much research
institute it was not an easy
decision works only made after
speaking with current.
Former faculty staff and
students local business leaders
and other stakeholders and with
other colleges and universities.
We also carefully evaluated
every financial condition.
All colleges becoming
independent isn't something that
happens every year in New Mexico
we were fortunate to have up you
excellent past you generals to
service more in particular San
Juan college in Clovis Community
College and we are only asking
for the same prior treatment
they received.
The members of our community
overwhelmingly support this
effort.
We received a petition of
several hundred signatures as
well as letters of support local
businesses.
All municipal schools the city
of Carlsbad chamber of commerce
the department of the
development of all voted against
in support.
What crew members who are higher
education task force unanimous
and seventy six percent of the
ranch campus faculty and staff
and that also will begin play
remained in.
When we met with chancellor or
be sued several months ago he
also pledged to support whatever
decisions are made by our
community for students Dr van
Winkle is also told us he was
for the decision we reach we
know everyone of you is
committed to improving
educational opportunities in New
Mexico.
Representative take bold actions
such as this which we believe
will also allow us more
opportunity to trying and worst
our work.
While the students are the top
priority we also want to do what
is right for faculty and staff.
They have struggled for many
years to get Los crucis to
approval Vigil basic charge in
the meantime about thirty six
million dollars in money that
belong to this college sitting
in banks outside of Carlsbad
thank you Kristin overwhelmingly
isn't being used for this campus
it is a clear case where local
governments is the right thing
to do thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you more
Next we have a Ron singleton.
I don't see you on the attendee
side with the hand up.
Run if you're there I mean
yourself and feel free to
address the committee.
Again makers make your
statements short.
we will have to break at eleven
to go down to our floor or
general session so keep that in
mind in terms of the time that
we're dealing with.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes okay not run singleton I'm a
of forty three year veteran
teacher from the Carlsbad school
system.
A thirteen year member board
member master board member and
past president of the New Mexico
school board association well
our board voted to send a
resolution to you the other day.
Supporting the community's
decision that they would like to
be an independent unit.
And we overwhelmingly support
that Mr Chairman one of the
things since I'm a graduate of
all high school way back in the
dark ages one of the things that
I've always considered a
privilege about education is
that we are trying to do exactly
what is right for our kids.
And the during this trying times
that we're in right now we need
to really step up to the plate
for our kids so all this would
be a tremendous thanks for our
kids to be able to go to the
community college that is
independent we can do that I
think we we show everybody that
we can do this we have a
tremendous staff we have a
tremendous campus we have a
tremendous early college high
school program we have a
tremendous nursing program so Mr
Chairman I'm gonna leave you
with that our people deserve
what is best for our kids and
this is better for our kids so
thank you.
Thank you run next we'll go to a
doctor Gratton.
Thank you yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee it's my pleasure to
join you this morning I'm
joining you from fort worth
Texas I'm John Grattan I retired
as president of NMSU Carlsbad
effective July first of two
thousand twenty so I'm going to
speak a little bit different the
the the the people spoke already
have done a very very good job
of outlining some of the issues
but I want to spend my time more
talking about the importance of
the president's position at all
the community colleges and and
the my concerns are what is
happened
I think nobody in the community
college system the the beauty of
the community colleges at the
community college can react very
quickly and meet the needs of
the the business and the
students and the community in
order to do that it is
imperative that the president be
a active member of the community
live in the community take part
in community activities.
B. O. R. working entity with the
advisory committee have
relationship with the advisory
committee maintain relationship
with business and industry
across the the service areas so
that you can reach out and that
the business industry knows that
they can come to that individual
and talk to him or her as to
what is needed and have the
trust in that individual that
that individual will do
something with the the needs
that have been expressed by the
business industry or the
students I think that's impaired
of it's a community college
system is going to work.
The actions are taken by
amendment issue and and I I work
with an issue for eight and half
years I've got some dear friends
and and miss you I was very
upset by this move there was no
interaction that I could tell
that took place between Carlsbad
or the college within an issue
with this action was taken I
didn't have any action of it
when I submitted my letter that
I would I'm gonna that agents
border tire and and leave the
system because it just came to
that time I actually turned in a
recommendation for for who I
thought should maybe take my
place
Nothing was said as to that
takes that being occurrence
until after I retired I moved to
Texas in in June July of two
thousand twenty and then I
started getting calls of this
thing going forward so and
wrapping up Mr chair members
committee I think the action
taken by amendment issue as
definitely handicap Carlsbad and
and the Carlsbad community
college in terms of serving or
meeting this mission which is to
to serve the the citizens of
Eddy County and the students of
Eddy County we have the number
one nursing program the state.
Very proud of that we've got
probably want to recognize when
the best RT college programs in
the state proud of that also but
I think the action taken by
amendment issue has handicapped
the college in terms of
continuing to meet the needs of
the community and therefore I
stand in complete one hundred
percent support of this bill in
terms of the college moved
independent status thank you Mr
chairman thank you members the
committee.
Thank you Dr Bratton next we'll
go to Valerie Quezada Valerie
you yourself and feel free to
address the committee and their
support for legislation.
Members of the committee my name
as well as.
Currently I am a senior the
calls that early college high
school taking courses with NMAA
you working towards to associate
degrees early college program in
the college courses have been
beneficial for my future as well
as the future make years has
allowed us to work towards
higher education master rate
than normal you're introduced to
college classes as juniors
although NMAA you see has
provided higher education press
up until now and for the past
early college graduation classes
I believe that.
College provided many
opportunities in terms of higher
education for us.
my years of taking classes at
MSU I've heard many students who
have had their academic pathways
limited because the necessary
courses are not offered here an
independent college would allow
more growth and provide students
with a variety of courses they
could take locally since what
will be back on our work more
important.
Not only is beneficial for
credit college and early college
students overview students as
well many high school students
decided to leave to other
colleges because that
appropriate degree plans for
career pathways are currently
offered at UC as an independent
community college I believe
there would be a significant
increase in enrollment thank
you.
Thank you whether they are and
also lastly.
We have a J. Jenkins.
You're free to address the
committee.
Unmute yourself.
Mr
Is it Mr Jenkins.
Senator Browne.
Or or Mr.
Our.
Yes Mister Jenkins Mister
Jenkins yourself and feel free
to address the committee.
I think you're on mute it right
there.
Say something so that we know
that your your light.
Mr Jenkins.
Unmute yourself.
Gabby can you are muted I'm.
Mr chair he is on muted it I I
believe he may be having some
audio issues on his and.
Okay.
Representative brown we're going
to go to the committee for
questions and if I Mr Jenkins is
able to reconnect all recognize
them at that point.
It regardless if we're still in
the beta discussion on the bill.
so Representative that's it for
those in support from the
audience now we'll go to the
committee.
For questions and discussion.
Members.
I see Representative Serrato.
If you Mr chairman thank you the
sponsor of this bill I do have a
few questions that I'm curious
about so I I do see that the the
goal is to maintain all the
contracts that are currently in
place and I'm curious how that
hello renegotiation would be
approached it any different away
than that already outlay.
Yes Mister chairman represents
wrote a thank you very much for
that question so a lot of you
know there are logistics that
have to be handled when there's
a transition to independence
and so we have exemplars of how
that's done and yes there would
be and and we do and let me just
say because we know there's a
lot of work to be done and that
there's a certain sequence in
which it has to happens the bill
provides to effective dates the
first is that it's House Bill to
twelve passes at the effective
date of the provisions of
section one of the bill.
The act will be July first of
twenty twenty one and that is
sort of like the birth
certificate so to speak and then
the next effective date would be
more that will close to your
weight be April ten of twenty
twenty two and that's what I'm
calling the closing date so
that's the date by which the
paperwork would have to be
completed and there would be
opportunities of course for some
renegotiation and all that and
the both sides would have person
who you know would be involved
in those discussions but yes yes
represented Mr chair there would
be some room for negotiation but
in the main everything transfers
over when we have this bill
drafted at the council service.
They put in a statement it's on
page two of the bill I believe
that some.
If you were substituting on any
existing contracts we're
substituting the name of New
Mexico State University across
better that are the main campus
to and the name of the new
college it was a vote of of of
the people who wanted to vote on
the issue that would be
southeast New Mexico college and
I I don't know that we mentioned
that yet.
So that there is a transfer
provision here that's supposed
to make this as simple as
possible thank you Mr thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative around and then I
I did hear from some of the the
folks that commented and and
also from your witnesses that
many folks felt that there would
be additional programming and
I'm curious how that would be
considering you know a state
university has so many resources
you know com is a scale as
mentioned earlier I'm just
curious how that was how you all
felt that the would be able to
increase your programming.
Thank you madam Mr chairman and
Representative so I think things
are really student driven and of
course with a lot of form I see
a needs assessment from the
community from business and
industry and things like that so
we do know that there has been
there have been many requests to
add some courses to add some
certificate programs a lot of
things that you don't you know
you can it you can do a lot of
learning at a community college
it's really geared for all kinds
of students and so
I could probably I I know I have
a list here of what's been asked
for in the past but it didn't
happen and so people are
frustrated they're some
industries that have really
asked for some special training
opportunities and they were even
willing to invest to help that
happen and.
Nothing it's just it's just it
that the response is not very
good to these requests and we we
just think that the local
community understands its needs
better than people who live and
work three hours away his focus
is on a whole university system
as opposed to a discreet
distinction unity.
Thank you chairman and thank you
representative I and then this
is a basic question I apologize
I I presume this is going to be
a public institution will this
be a private institution I just
wanna be clear about that part
yes Mr chair and Representative
thank you for that question it
would remain a public community
college
so that that wouldn't change it
just be independently governed
thank you Mr Chairman
representative I appreciate your
patience on that one and my my
last question is I I also know
that you know one of the folks
in favor had mentioned that some
of successful efforts at close
going to college and and sent
the cultures and want our
teleclinical to did those have
studies or reports that we're
done ahead of time or where
those
with those enacted separately.
Thank you Mr chair
representative cerrado so we do
have the documents from those
colleges we've talked to
consultants and people who were
involved in those transitions
and you know everybody is
required to follow the statute
in terms of the procedures that
we have to go through but they
yes they had a comprehensive
plans
You know they they actually do
provide some road maps and Out
also justifications quite
similar to what we have raised
in support of house bill two
twelve so we have we have no
books of all kinds of
information and again we did
have the benefit of the public
survey a poll so we you know we
we believe the community is
speaking.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative that's all my
questions I appreciate your time
walk me through all of that is
very helpful thank you.
Thank you residents around the
necks we have Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative brown I have a
question so how would you guys
be funded at this point you know
it's kind of.
I'm on House Appropriations
we've been working on the budget
the Joe budget already and they
probably been doing this since
the in terms
how do you guys proposed to get
funded if you were to become a.
Community college a native and
community college from New
Mexico state because as we know
those budgets have already been
worked on and we've already been
going to committees with that so
how how would you guys propose
a.
Mr Chairman representative see
also it it wouldn't really
change there is a I guess you
could call it a formula of that
all public colleges in New
Mexico whether they're
independent or branch I do
receive state funding and so
that would continue basically
the bill provides for I just a.
Taking the whole package of the
branch and putting it under the
name southeastern Mexico college
the funding would continue just
and I might just add Mr chair
and representative that as a
kind of stated earlier I believe
we're going to see some
endowments that will be made to
benefit the cost is going to be
a lot of local investment that's
going to happen and I I'm
convinced of that I I I know
people are already talking about
that whatever they can do to
support an independent local
college of that still community
college in a public institution.
as far as any other funding goes
you know I think everyone
supplements with grant funding
and things like that and that
you know what we would certainly
pursue those opportunities as
well.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay Representative brown so you
guys would have to go onto a two
millimeter correct because I
know in the committee college
when I served in the committee
because we run a two mill levy.
Mr Chairman representative so
Carlsbad is extremely well
positioned in that we have a
three mill levy in place that is
continuous and so we actually
are better off than most I
believe
community call branches have to
have a one mill if
coach wants to be independent it
must have a to mail but we
already have a three million the
voters have already provided so
I I think we're in really good
shape.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and just one comment that I
have been on the community
college I I think higher
education is get better on how
things are run for higher ed I
think I'm having you know so
many institutions like Las Vegas
is a small community it's great
that we have it but I think a
hired just need to reposition
themselves and start looking at
how we can offer that education
and have these community
colleges and universities work
together so we can offer those
those degrees it is whether it
be a two year degree in one four
degree but I I think they we
need to get better at that in
you know that's just a COVID I
think I have an I thank you
Representative around and thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator next we have
Representative of the line.
Thank you Mr chairman and at
thank you Representative Brown
for green is set for to it
I just want to ask him questions
and into it to go back to some
of the things that
Representative director was
working at as far as.
When.
You're building out programs and
you don't have the university
there and and we need to the
accreditation issues that
community colleges eight is that
going to be an issue for you.
Mr chairman and members of the
house it will not be an issue
Carlsbad Carlsbad community
colleges independently
twelve that will not change so
we're you know we're well
positioned there as well and
what was the other part of your
question I'm sorry.
You were asking about some.
Chair and Representative.
We're you know.
I think community colleges grow
or come about that they are
they're looking for the this
back the backing of the majority
you know bigger university for
the purposes of bringing and
being credited program into
their into their probe into
their college
and I'm just wondering are you
going to be moving program I
think we have some information
stating that engineering
you might hear programs is that
correct.
Mr Chairman representative that
I don't I don't believe that is
correct that's not what I've
heard what we really want to do
is be able to have partnerships
with other universities like New
Mexico tech we you know the
community colleges Candie feeder
schools it hasn't really worked
out that way with the
relationship with an MSU main
campus and they've told us as
much there will disappointed
that more of the community
college students from this
branch don't go to main campus
many of them go to other other
places so the accreditation
would be this you know we do
have to do in terms of adding
programs we think we have a
pretty good finger on the pulse
of what the the community in the
region need in terms of
education and training so
everything would have to follow
the same standards anything else
and I'm I'm really are actually
not very I'm not worried at all
about that because it has to
happen the right way and it
will.
If I may Mister chairman thank
you sure thank you okay.
Representative are.
Representative finishers.
We can hear you there at the
end.
Restate restate your question
sorry I would.
I'll be back Mr chair back to
the Representative issues that
it sounds like you want to say
something.
So sorry the audio is not
working too well here I'll I'll
go ahead and pull up there
because I know we're short on
time but we could you know talk
off line about this as well I'd
be happy to.
Yes.
With our with our community
college programs would you say
that there Mr chair
Representative their most mostly
to your programs it's degrees
and but or
how would you expand into the
the four year programs at
universities offer.
thank you very much Mr chair
representative on this would
state community college which
offers to your programs and and
and the state statute allows for
technical type studies as well
but we would not endeavor to be
a four year institution that is
not the plan and by by law we're
we're in the confines of the of
two year studies.
At thank you for that Mr thank
you Representative Rapp but
doesn't that did it the
opportunity of having the
university there offers some of
that are offered higher degrees.
Mr.
So Mr Chairman representative so
what happens branch colleges are
often times are bridges to
additionally the third and
fourth your studies or or beyond
us so what we can what we
envision is having more of
relationship with other New
Mexico our universities four
year colleges so the students to
go through the local brick and
the local system our local
system the local school will be
encouraged to it will right and
it happens all the time our
faculty tries to get students to
go to the next step if that's
their desire so those
relationships can still be had
with MSU main campus with the
amendment you with U. N. M. you
know this is part of what
happens with community colleges
so I don't I don't see any
reduction of that maybe even
both will forge some more
productive fruitful
relationships we certainly have
a need for science stem stem
type studies and leading to good
jobs and we believe we can
enhance that by having an
independent status and be free
to work those relationships for
example with tech UNM and so
forth.
Mr chair Representative Brown
thank you for the dancers I
yield back.
Thank you Representative on the
run down and.
See any further questions from
the committee I do have just
some some some some comments to
make
I see Roger monthly a resident
funded you have a question.
Mr chairman and Representative
Brown thank you so much for this
let legislation I I work very
closely with northern New Mexico
college and I became aware about
six months ago of a remarkable
movie and with without running
the risk of being a mediator or
patronizing in any way I just
want to share a brief passage
from an article if I may.
I New Mexico public colleges
lunch innovative collaboration
new partnership.
To students services in their
communities Clovis New Mexico
February twenty first twenty one
I public New Mexico colleges
today announced a groundbreaking
partnerships that will
fundamentally change the higher
education student experience
Clovis Community College central
New Mexico community college
northern New Mexico college on
one college in Santa Fe
community college have have come
together to develop a single
shared system of student
continuing education workforce
financial and human resource
services it's the first of its
kind in the nation I bring that
out is there a way.
To provide constructive remedy
rather than contention and
infighting in this resolve and I
know that may sound patronizing
as I said but I'm always one to
look for the best and most fluid
an important outcome for
students and staff and the
community as it as a whole so my
question is are you aware of
this.
Have you been invited and if so
why aren't you working with this
movie.
Mr chair and Representative so
really thank you for that that
question and the answer is we
are aware of the independent
community college association
it's it's really a very
formidable group of they do a
lot of things together and and
this is exactly the kind of
thing we've actually had some
discussions about the
possibility that we would still
need to have independent status
before that happens but yes
that's exactly the kind of
opportunity that we're looking
for and you know I I don't want
this to be contentious either I
I really appreciate New Mexico
State University
it has it has served well for
many years but we're at a point
in time now where it's just not
working well and it hasn't for a
long time and they're going over
to you know when.
Problems of a Representative in
the past and then reported and
honestly I have a two page
single space list of problems
that have been experienced and
not privative I mean campus yeah
I don't even want to read that
was quite frankly I I don't want
to go there but just to let you
know when the committee Mr chair
that that this relationship just
isn't working and hasn't for a
while and there been times where
they've been overtures we'll fix
it but it it doesn't happen and
so we're just we're just kind of
so that space now we're saying
let's let's be bold and what's
so let's have an independent
community college and let's pour
everything we can into it for
the sake of the students.
Thank you said the month of your
you're new to.
Okay on your question
Representative Representative
and Mr chairman thank you just
to to the to the point of.
Any time we can collaborate
effectively and I know that's
difficult there's strong
contention it's just finding a
way to have the autonomy which I
totally get I'm a community
organizer and and when things
are working on the ground for
the people that matter you wanna
fight for what's right and I
commend that but I just want to
look to other models in the
state that are working to sort
of unifying in streamlining and
provide the best possible
outcome for students and the
institutions themselves I yield
back.
Thank you.
that does in terms of questions
I just have a comment to make
You know Representative Brown
All right.
I definitely see the need for
this study.
The chancellor mentioned to
really take effect.
All right I feel that we need to
give New Mexico state the
benefit of the doubt.
To kind of put their position
for.
And maybe the study my.
Suggest.
In addition but what concerns me
is that if we were to move this
legislation forward with the two
best recommendation from this
committee.
We're not gonna see that
peaceful transition occur.
They're in Carlsbad we're gonna
see basically see a contentious
transition occur and I really
hate for that to happen.
And
But
having said that you know there
are issues.
I think we need to further
expound and if the committee
wishes to put forth an
alternative motion to do pass
then I'm going to entertain that
Representative said I thought I
recognize you thank you Mr chair
I would and can I make a motion
for a pass no recommendation.
The motion is in order is there
a second second second that Mr
Chairman.
Second by Representative
Castellano there for the
question discussion on the
motion.
I see none secretary to roll.
On a no REC.
But.
Representative Black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative lu Han.
Representative.
Representative Montoya yes.
Representative Serrato yes I'd
like to explain my vote.
Mr Chairman more you have to
factor Representative hygiene.
Senator Representative lu Han.
You hear me now yes yes my voted
yes.
Mr Chairman thank you.
Members I have loads of our
seven.
In the affirmative one in the
negative.
House Bill to twelve.
Yes is this committee on a no
recommendation Representative
Serrato to explain your vote
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the Representative the
sponsor of this bill as well my
I thank you in this way because
I'm very I'm very interested in
what the Education Committee has
to say about this bill and well
you know I I am very close to me
very beneficial my district as
Santa Fe community college I
will huge help to our community
and they tend to side with
independence I am very curious
that and I'm concerned about the
timeline in San Juan I believe
that was about a two year period
or so between when the committee
voted for independence and what
actually went into effect until
just that time line and I wanted
to hear more from the provided
me so thank you so much I look
forward to get learning more
thank you Representative Serrato
and thank you representative
brown for bringing this
legislation forward
members
We have another bill.
House bill one ninety to extend
Human Rights Act of public
bodies Representative about us
because of the time.
Constraint in terms of we're
just two minutes away from the
for session this will be the
first bill that we will here on
Saturday at one PM.
And so we'll add it to our
Saturday agenda.
And with that the committee we
stand adjourned and trickle down
to the floor at best you all
this week.
Thank you Mr chairman of this
you have a good week everybody.
