All right. Good morning,
everyone. It looks like we are
webcasting right now, but we're
having trouble with the zoom. So
we're gonna go ahead and proceed
right now. Once the Zoom
connects, then we'll take public
comment. Um, and hopefully, by
the time we get to the public
comments portion of the first
bill, we can start there. Um, so
let's go ahead and start with
taking the role, Barbara.
Representative Cullen.
Representative Gonzalez here.
Ranking member Lord.
Representative Mason.
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado, here we have a
Thank you, Barbara. Thank you,
everyone. All right, so, uh, the
first bill we had HB 37, we, uh,
was asked to roll by the
sponsors. So we're going to go
ahead and start with HB 519
African American Arts Center
directors, uh, presented by
Representative Herndon
Representative Herndon?
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, before you to
present House Bill 519. It
focuses on managing the
African-American Performing Arts
Center and exhibit hall. The
bill outlines the creation of a
board of directors to oversee
the center's operations,
maintenance, and staffing in
consultation with the cultural
affairs department.
And Madam Chair, uh, with that,
I stand for any questions that
you might have, I would like to
introduce my expert here with
me. Her name is Donna Owens.
She's a member of the, of the uh
board of directors of the
African-American Performing Arts
Center Foundation.
Like your expert like to say
anything or should we just,
she's just here in case we have
any questions with it.
Perfect. So it looks like our
Zoom is still down, but I, we
can begin the discussion amongst
the committee.
Um, is there any questions from
the committee on the
Representative Mason?
I'm quite prepared, Madam Chair,
representative.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, one thing, and I haven't, I,
I'll be upfront. I haven't got
to study this like I wanted to.
I didn't.
We were late last night getting
out of committee, but uh who is
going to.
What, who's going to be the
adminis administration.
Administrative agency now. I
didn't see one specified, you
know, was the.
North Central New Mexico. So,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, represented to Mason,
the uh uh the
African American performing arts
center would be administratively
attached to the Department of
Cultural Affairs.
Uh
Also, I noticed.
On the
Uh, no appropriation.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Mason,
the money for operating the
African-American Performing Arts
Center is in House Bill 2.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
is basically this this change
the the state fairs no longer.
The funds that were being used
by the state fair will go to
the.
To the cultural agency now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that is correct.
Representative Mason, the money
would be transferred to the uh
Department of Cultural Affairs.
Uh, once the legislation passes.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair. The one last question,
uh,
Madam Chair, representative.
During the state fair when it's
all going on.
It, uh
I know at our fair and our
teaser we have a rodeo grounds
that's separate.
During the fair, the
Fair association takes over
control of scheduling events.
Will it be something like that
with this or?
Just the coordination between
the two Madam Chair, members of
the committee representative
Mason, it would be a
coordination between uh events
that would be happening at the
performing arts center and the
state fair since the building
still sits on those grounds.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, that's all for me.
Thank you. Thank you, Mason, Rep
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, presenters,
representative. Um, I do have
some questions. I think this
bill, um, does two things, face
the board of directors.
Creates the board of directors,
but it also has implications for
the existing state fairgrounds.
Um, could you elaborate a little
bit more on the relationship
between the board and the state
fairgrounds, particularly in
analysis and in the board, it
looks like there's gonna be some
implications to the building
itself, the transfer of funds,
the impacts of possibly moving
the state fairgrounds. Could you
maybe elaborate a lot more on
what this means for the building
itself and how the board will
look to manage this with the
possible changes.
the state fairgrounds.
I
Madame Chair, um, members of the
committee, representative, what
will happen is the funding right
now there's funding for both the
maintenance of the building as
well as the operations of the
African-American Performing Arts
Center. So what both will be
transferred over within their
context. So one for the
maintenance of the building, the
other for the, uh, performing
arts center and its operations
and its contracts.
I'm sorry, did I answer your
question or, or is there
something else I guess, um, you
know, especially now with, you
know, the possibility of the
state fairgrounds moving and,
you know, with the building, you
know, maybe what are the future
implications of that for the
board being that this would be
the building.
Or you're bored to manage. Is
there some future plans for that
building or how that may work,
should that transfer happen?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative, one of
the things that we've noticed is
that the planning and what to do
with the state fairgrounds is
still in a planning stage, so
that $500,000 that was given by
the uh the governor for that uh
purpose is still being set out.
I think that this is a great
idea that that performing arts
center will be right there if
there's gonna be housing built
there.
Can you imagine being able to go
to a performing arts center and
walk through it right there, not
having to drive your car and to
see outstanding performances of
African-American culture. And
that's what I see happening.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. Um,
it looks like we're working on
the tech issues right now, but I
did want to come to the room. Is
there anyone against this bill,
HB 519 in the room, please raise
your hand.
Is there anyone in favor of HB
519 in the room, please raise
your hand. Um, we can go ahead
and take the microphone for
about one minute.
And he'll hold on to the
microphone for you.
OK, thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kate
Stetson. I'm the vice president
of the African American
Performing Arts.
Foundation. We raised money for
this organization that does not
actually currently exist, and I
think it's very important that
this city and the state have
Um,
An entity like this where the
very uh cultural affairs can be
showcased the uh APEC, which is
what we call it, not only has a
museum and has teaching rooms
and classrooms, but it has a
performing arts center, an
actual stage, and it's very busy
all the time, so I think that
it's
Time to be, I'm a lawyer. I
think we need to have an entity
that is responsible for um
scheduling these things, taking
care of maintenance for the
building, etc. etc. So I'm very
much in favor of.
Thank you. I'm an interrupt real
fast. So we've just looks like
we've gotten Zoom online. So if
you are watching on the webcast,
you would like to make a comment
on any of these bills. You can
go ahead and go over to the zoo
zoom sign up sign up.
We continue with public comment
in the room.
Madam
Chair remembers
my my
Well, well.
Test, test.
This is like,
yeah, yeah.
What
Just.
That's cool.
That seems better.
Let's go ahead and continue with
public comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Amaka Tupman. I am a
student at the University of New
Mexico, and I stand in support
of this bill because it ensures
the long term success and
autonomy of the African-American
performing Arts Center.
By establishing a dedicated
board of directors. This bill
empowers the Senate to be led by
those who truly understand and
value its cultural significance.
The APAC is not just a venue. It
is a vital space for preserving
black history, uplifting
artistic expression and
fostering community engagement.
This bill strengthens its
operations, resources and
impacts for generations to come.
I urge you all to pass this bill
and invest in the cultural
richness of New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you. Seeing no further
comment in the room. Is there,
are there any attendances online
attendees online that would like
to speak, please raise your
hand. We're on House Bill 519
African American Arts Center.
Directors.
Anyone opposed online?
Right, seeing none, we've had
discussion with the committee.
We've had public comment. Um,
I'll take a motion.
Madam Chair we do pass.
Second, thank you. We have a, a
motion for a due passed by Vice
Chair Sanchez, seconded by
Representative Anita Gonzalez.
Is there any opposition to the
motion?
Seeing none, you have uh show
that the record show that the
all present voted in the
affirmative. Uh you have a due
pass on House Bill 519.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. And again, because we
have, uh, because Representative
Block was so gracious, we'll go
right into 419, the correctional
reentry workforce program.
Um
Our attendants are going to go
ahead and pass around a document
um that was referenced last
week, the partners for re-entry
opportunity workshop
development, uh, presentation.
Now, just to be clear, we, we
did hear public comment already.
We did have a discussion among
the committee. I know there are
some amendments that we, that
have been, that are coming as
well that did hit the 24 hour
mark. Um, so, you know, we'll
take limited comments if we can
keep, uh, public comments so we
can keep those to the, the
amendments, that would be great.
But do you want to go ahead and
introduce your, um, amendment.
Uh, Representative Herndon, yes,
Madam Chair.
Everyone, you should have that
amendment in your books move the
amendment for discussion. So,
uh, so we have a motion from
Representative Sanchez to move
the amendment to 419 for
discussion, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going to let my sorry, one
second, I apologize. Yeah, and
just to be clear, this is moving
the motion for discussion is a
0231199.1. Yes, madam Chair,
that is correct. And that should
be in your, in your packs.
I'm gonna let the committee have
a second to catch up because we
just, we're just rolling.
Um, right, looks like everyone
has materials. I'll go ahead,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, I'm going to
allow my experts to explain the
amendment and in context with
the request and our discussion
the last time.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
members of the committee. Uh my
name is Nina Chavez with
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico. Um, House Bill 419 is a
crucial investment in New
Mexico's rural workforce and
economic development
infrastructure. This bill
ensures the funding is allocated
to expand workforce training,
career development, and
wraparound services for
individuals across the state,
specifically the re-entry
population. We have a friendly
amendment which proposes to
clarify the fiscal agent as
Newmark, uh.
New Mexico Association of
Regional Councils explicitly
states the appropriation serves
prison reentry uh individuals
statewide and outlines the
primary uses of the funding,
line items include case managers
for up to 15 months, peer
mentors, data analysts, and
wraparound services, um, other
than housing support, so
transportation, communication,
digital literacy, other other
soft skills and technical skills
to help with workforce
preparation and readiness, um.
And um, I will stand uh that's
my conclusion. Thank you, ma'am.
Is there uh
Is there discussion on the
amendment by the committee.
Representative Mason.
And let y'all know that I'm
here, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, mainly I want to thank you
for.
The work that you put in on this
bill since we've last and I
think most all of my concerns
are.
Or, uh, you've addressed well, I
think in uh I appreciate you.
Working with us all to
Get this as I stated in the last
committee, you know.
We all want these.
These men and women.
To be productive members of the.
Actually be given to the society
instead of taking from society.
So
Really
It uh
I guess on the question, the
Department of Finance, Goodwill
is that who's gonna be
administering most of the funds.
Madam Chairwoman members of the
committee, Representative Mason,
um the fiscal agent will be at
Newmark in New Mexico
Association of Regional
Councils. It will go through an
RFP process where we help
multiple providers that have
been a part of the coalition for
10 months, um, we'll submit
requests and, and, and utilize
the, the awards through that RFP
process to provide those
regional services directly to
individuals.
Thank you very much. That,
that's all I have, Madam Chair
representative.
Thank you. Uh, um, vice chair,
Madam Chair, move to adopt the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
motion to adopt the amendment?
Seeing them, uh, let's show
everyone, uh, voting in
affirmative to adopt the
amendment.
So you have an amended bill. Um,
I'll take some comment from the
public. Is there anyone in the
room opposed to House Bill 419.
Is there anyone online opposed
to 419?
Is there anyone in favor of 419
in the room?
Is there anyone that would like
to speak on it?
Can we go ahead and take the
microphone around? Keep it to
about a minute. He'll hold on to
the microphone for you.
Um, and then,
And apologies and uh if there's
anyone online that would like to
speak in favor of 419, please
also raise your hand online.
Madam chair members of the
committee, uh, my name is Ralph
Martinez and, and I'm a
community activist and um I
currently run a reentry program
out of the New Mexico State
Penitentiary alongside a 3 time
Food Network champion Fernando
Ruiz. Um, we have an individual
with us here today who just
recently got released from
prison and um I myself have had
past experience in
incarceration. And so I know
personally the need for
um, for re-entry methods back
into society, um, back when I
was going through some of my
trials and errors in life, and I
didn't have an opportunity like
we have today with these
re-entry measures that we've
been able to establish and just
thinking of the many more
opportunities that we can give
these individuals. It just, um,
it just really opens my heart,
and so I just want to thank you
guys for your support in this.
Um, I just wanted to get up here
first and foremost, and thank
you guys.
This is like, um,
This is a different opportunity
that I've had. I've been locked
up other times before and coming
to New Mexico this time, this
opportunity with this program is
open doors for me.
So I just really wanted to come
up here and thank you guys for,
for giving it the opportunity.
My name is Fernando Res. I went
to prison for trafficking guns
and drugs.
I did my prison time in Arizona.
Wearing stripes and pink
underwear as well which are our
pile's tent city.
In the last 7 years have
happened to win 3 Food Network
competitions, I beat Bobby Flay.
I won chopped. I won guys's
grocery games.
I just opened up my own
restaurant here in Santa Fe
called Escondido and agua fria.
Like Grou said, we're doing this
re-entry program in the prison.
We didn't have these programs
when I was coming in and out of
jail and or prison.
And like Isaac said, we're
giving opportunity. Isaac's
living with me at my studio
apartment here in Santa Fe.
We're looking for a house to
rent. He's working with me at
Escondido.
Um
This is actually working. We're
looking at it, we're seeing it.
We're about a year and a half in
we get we start a new curriculum
March 10th with another 15
students.
And we see what it's doing for
him, so.
Thank you.
Hello all, I'm Amaka Tupman, and
I stand in support of this
amendment because it, sorry,
because it's investing in a
reentry workforce development
and is investing in public
safety, economic growth, and
second chances, like everyone
had just said it's important to
give these people another chance
to reintegrate back into
society. I've seen the effects
of programs here in New Mexico
and it's incredibly important
you all support this amendment.
Thank you.
Thank you.
See won't know further in the
room. We do have one common
online, um, Pascual Maestas.
Members of the committee, Madam
Chair, good morning. My name is
Pasqua Maestas. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Association of Regional
Councils. We are the statewide
organization for the councils of
government, um, want to thank
you all for hearing the
amendment this morning and
letting you all know that we are
supportive of this bill, the
measures in it, and are looking
forward to working as a fiscal
agent should this bill get
passed.
Also I would like to stand for
um any questions if the
committee is, if Madam Chair, if
you would allow that for the
committee, um, any questions
that you may have for you, Mark.
Thank you. So we'll come back to
the committee. We have an
amended bill. Is there any
comments or questions? Oh, I
apologize.
We do have one more, I
apologize. Uh, Patrick Barrett,
would you like to speak?
Yes ma'am. Can y'all hear me?
Uh, my name is Patrick Bear. I'm
the executive director of New
Mexico Center of Black
Excellence, and we stand in
strong support of this House
Bill 49 and we hope that you do
a due pass cause this is so
important, uh, what is it, I'm
sorry, our organizations work
with um young men to address gun
violence here in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, and this program
will, will be very, very
beneficial for uh men and women
that's coming out of the
department of correction, so we
say.
Saying that strong.
favor of House Bill 419. Thank
you.
Thank you. So that's all the
comments we have online and in
the room. Um, we've discussed
the amendment, we've discussed
the bill. Is there any further
discussion among the committee?
I just want to say thank you
everyone for coming out today.
Thank you for, I know it was a
lot of hard work and I
appreciate you working with the
committee on getting these
amendments that truly make it
stronger. So I appreciate your
work on that.
Madam Chamova do. We have a
motion for a due passed by Vice
chair um by Vice Chair Sanchez
on HB 419 as amended. Is there a
2nd, 2nd by Representative
Gonzalez. Can we get a roll call
vote?
Representative Cullen.
Represented Gonzalez, yes.
Ranking member Lord? No.
Represented Mason.
Yes.
By Che Sanchez.
Cheer Serato? Yes.
Never 4
to vote. I mean,
Or to vote on a do pass.
41, sorry, this is you have a
due pass on House Bill 419 as
amended. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Next up we have Representative
John Block. Thank you for
letting Herndon do all hers
together. It was really helpful.
Appreciate it, um, and we have,
it's 5:21 Agritourism Promotion
Act.
thing.
Representative.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, good to see you all.
First time I've been in your
committee, so be easy on me, OK?
Just kidding. Thank you guys.
Sorry.
Well, I think you'll like this
bill. I think that everyone can
get, get along with this
legislation. So, as you've
probably seen from the actual
bill, we're on a 0.3 already. So
we've been doing a lot of work
on this bill before we've even
presented it. So we've uh really
considered all the places in New
Mexico that we need to ensure
that they can fall into this
legislation. So, Madam Chair and
members, I'm honored to present
House Bill 521, the Agritourism
Promotion Act.
And this will strengthen New
Mexico's agricultural economy
while fostering educational and
tourism opportunities in the
state.
So New Mexico's farmers and
ranchers, they have a long,
they've long played a very
critical role in preserving our
rural heritage and agritourism
presents a unique opportunity to
generate additional income while
also sharing our state's
agricultural legacy.
With visitors and residents
alike. So, however, the lack of
clear liability protections has
discouraged many from engaging
in agritourism in our state,
limiting the industry's growth
and potential benefits. So HB
2521 provides reasonable
liability protections of
agritourism operators, ensuring
that farmers and ranchers can
welcome guests without fear of
unfair litigation while
maintaining accountability for
negligence or reckless behavior,
so we will have some checks and
balances in that as well. So
agritourism is a growing sector
nationwide with states like
Texas and North Carolina already
adopting similar protections to
encourage investment and
expansion.
According to the USDA census of
Agriculture, New Mexico had 326
agritourism operations in 2022.
Generating over $20 million in
revenue for our state, a number
that has increased from 18.6
million in 2017.
As New Mexico's rural
communities face economic
uncertainty, the bill provides a
critical tool to support local
farmers and attract visitors to
experience the richness and
insurance improved and the
framework for responsible
operations established, HB 521
will create economic resilience.
For family farms, boost rural
job creation and enforced New
Mexico's seven. or $7 billion
tourism industry. And so, Madam
Chair Representative, I also
would like to introduce my
expert witness, RB Nichols from
Otero County and if we can have
him say a few words.
Good morning, madam Chair,
members of the community, uh
committee, uh thank you for
having me here. Um, I'm
representing the New Mexico
coalition of Agritourism
operators, uh Otero County and
also uh my family's farm,
Nichols ranch and orchards. Uh,
my family, I want to give you a
kind of a a personal take on
this bill this morning. My
family homesteaded in New Mexico
in 1882, and my family spent
farming and ranching since then.
I'm the 5th generation, uh, the
4th generation, my dad Bob is
behind me in the audience.
Um,
And with that comes a lot of
history, and um it is a history
of decline and struggle.
Uh, when my grandfather was
doing this in the 40s and 50s,
there were trains uh in semis
that would take loads of apples
out to the rest of the country
from high rolls and Mayhill and
the Honda Valley, and um since
then, uh, those farms have been
pushed out by the big producers
in California and Washington and
the local producers were unable
to compete. It was a struggle
and it also um was a deterrent
to younger generations, um,
continuing it. So, as I grew up,
I saw these historic farms get
pushed out and the um
You know, these trees get pushed
out and, and they're no longer
with us, um, and I watched my
family struggle and barely get
by, um, and we always had a
little bit of agritourism. It
wasn't called that back then,
but you picked farm, um, but in
the last 5 years, we've really
pivoted to it and embraced it,
and it has saved the farm,
literally, um, it allowed us to
um not struggle and just barely
get by, but survive and
reinvest, replant, uh,
in infrastructure and be more
successful, um, but at the same
time, while the farm is being
saved, every time we invite
someone on the orchard, we are
risking the farm and um
We want to share um what we have
with the public, um, we have
field trips, um, I take kids all
around the orchard and teach
them about the whole life cycle
of fruit and, and how things are
grown, uh, where the fruit comes
from. Um, we have families from
multiple generations coming, uh,
each year, um.
And the challenge is I can't
even get insurance for pick your
own fruit, and the insurance
that we can get is um increased
by 200% in the last 3 years. Um,
and so this bill will enable us
to continue um operating in this
fashion and others to do so will
support tourism and agriculture
and um.
Yeah, it's not without
precedent. There's equine
Liability Act and the Skiing
Act, and we're not asking for a
free pass, um,
It's just that there are
acknowledgement that there are
inherent risks if you come out
to a farm, um, of course, we
won't be protected if we have a
hay ride and we don't properly
check breaks or something like
that, but this is just for the
inherent risks that exist.
Thank you. And so we will go
ahead and take comments, um, if
there is anyone opposed to this
online, please raise your hand.
Is there anyone opposed to 5:21
in the room, please raise your
hand.
unpopular
Uh, is there anyone online that
is in favor of this bill?
And is anyone in the room who's
in favor of this bill?
Can we go to um the attendant
will hold the mic for you and uh
just keep it to around a minute.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is David Lucero and I'm,
uh, my wife and I have JL Farms
in Fort Sumner, New Mexico.
We planted an orchard about 4
years ago and, and we would love
nothing more than to have a UI
operation and and have field
trips and people come to our
farms so that we can show them
what we're able to do and how we
produce our fruit.
This bill is really not about
the insurance, but really more,
because the insurance will take
care of itself.
Once we passed the legislation,
it'll it'll bring insurance
companies back who are willing
to support us and, and provide
us with that type of coverage.
So I, it's, it's something we
really like to see happen on our
farm, and we hope that you'll
support this, this bill. So
thank you very much for your
time.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gillian Joyce. I am
government relations for Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union. We stand
in support of this bill, because
in the 21st century it is
essential for our agricultural
community to be able to
diversify their incomes in every
possible way, if we are going to
continue to have a secure food
system. At the same time, in an
era when only 1.5% of our
population works in agriculture.
We need every single opportunity
to educate the public about our,
how our
agricultural community operates,
so that we can have a more
informed consumer base.
Unfortunately, liability issues
are a major deterrent to
participating in agritourism,
uh, across our state. I see it
on a regular basis in my work.
This bill will uh increase
opportunities for agritourism in
our state, which will make us a
more resilient food system in
the long run. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Kelly
Fajardo here, I'm back on behalf
of the Mexico Livestock Bureau.
Um, we're really excited about
this bill. It's a critical step
toward expanding agritourism.
It's a growing industry and it
helps farmers diversify their
income. It support to rural
economies, and educates the
public about agriculture. The
bill provides reasonable
liability protections and
sharing agricultural tourism
operates operators are not
unfairly sued from from the rest
such as livestock and natural
terrain, but yet still holds the
bad actors accountable.
States like Texas and North
Carolina have already passed
similar laws, and this bill
strengthens agriculture and in
rural areas around New Mexico,
and we ask for your support.
Thank you.
We have one comment online looks
like uh Pascual Maestas.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Pascal Maass. I'm the
mayor of the town of Taos, and
want to speak in support of HP
521 over the past few years, we
have been working hard on our
destination stewardship plan to
help us manage tourism in the
future, and the plan identified
agritourism as an important
sector in the economy in
northern New Mexico and helped
to give our farmers and ranchers
an additional source of revenue.
When they are barely making it
and that's at best sometimes. So
we are in support of HB 521 and
ask for a do pass today. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, we'll bring it over
to the committee, uh,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives and
speakers, um, not more of a, a
question, more of a comment. I
just want to echo my support, so
I do have a rec parks tourism
background, so I fully
wholeheartedly support, um,
bringing this industry
specifically into agriculture,
um, also, you know, my
educational background, so I
think this has tremendous value,
not just economically, but also
from the education perspective,
um, oftentimes we take our kids
multiple times a year to outdoor
education facilities such as
yours, um.
learning firsthand, up close,
um, there's a lot to be learned
in in the outdoors. There's a
lot to be learned with, you
know, those hands on, um,
experiences and um I really do
appreciate the balance in this
bill, um.
You know, they're there, there
has to be, you know, that
balance, whereas you are willing
to accept responsibility should
there be willful disregard,
neglect, or anything
intentional. But I think as
intended, um, it's just giving
you all an opportunity just to
do right by your communities and
just to bring this very valuable
resource to New Mexico. So I
stand wholeheartedly in support.
Thank you.
Red Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, uh,
I too
I'm excited about this, uh, it,
uh,
I think it's
A good piece of legislation and
and needed.
You know, it's uh
We've seen a decline, I know.
Uh
I don't know that I even know
them.
Mention the Runyon farms.
Up there
But, you know, they have a
But they had a they had a
traveling food that they took,
they brought the Artis, and they
took to the fair in Lovington
and
I mean, very
Well received by all the
communities.
And all of that in a year or so
ago, they were forced.
Quit
Doing that and uh
It, uh, it's a shame, you know,
The kids, the, the town.
Citizens that aren't involved in
agriculture and need this.
Connection with with
agriculture.
You know like they say, you
know, if you eat, you're part of
the agriculture.
And, you know, it's as
Representative said, you know,
it's, we have to include in
that, you know, if you're
negligent, this doesn't help
you.
It, uh
But
Hopefully it'll keep the
negligence of the
This negligent lawsuits for
killing the industry.
Again
Uh, proud, proud for the
legislation.
Don't get the big heads.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Ranking member Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative now expects 3
hours of debate. So hold on.
Yeah, yak yak.
Um
Oh my gosh.
OK, so, um, Madam Chair
Representative, it's interesting
these things you learn with each
bill that comes forward. I'm
learning now about the laws of
inherent risk, meaning if you
want to go ride a horse, if you
get bit by the horse, it's
common sense. I was also in my
district, we have got um Mca
Pumpkin patch, which is huge out
there. We've got beans with
other things, and I was just
having a conversation with him
on how incredibly hard it is to
get underwriters to even insure
you here.
Because of the law of inherent
risk. And to me it just seems
like common sense. If you're
going to anywhere, let's pumpkin
patch, Apple Farm, whatever, you
could trip and fall, and apple
could fall on your head. I mean,
in multiple things can happen,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And I just saw the huge increase
of liability insurance too, when
you do find someone that will do
underwriting. It's a tremendous
amount of money because it goes
back to that law of inherent
risk, which this is addressing,
at least on some level.
Um
So I appreciate this coming
forward because how I see this
is you're just saying you got to
sign, it says, hi, this is a
pumpkin patch we have got a dogs
and go for holes and if you fall
in them, you know, watch out,
watch where you're stepping.
Don't trip over a pumpkin, uh,
you know, you should be careful
when you're walking around.
There's a multitude of things
can happen that just to me that
seems like common sense. So, um,
Mr. Speaker and Representative,
if you'd like, I could quit now
or we can continue for the next
3 hours.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
if you'd like, you'll just uh
warm me up for the floor
session.
Madam Chair representative, I,
to me it just it makes just
common sense. You're putting a
sign up that says, hey, look
out, you know, things can
happen, you're out in the wild,
there could be a bee running
around that could bite you.
So, thank you. That's, that's
all I have. um, Madam chair and
representative. Thank you
Representative. Um, I just had a
brief question, a couple of
comments too. So on our, I think
this is our agency bill, agency
review from NMDA. They outline
what are different uh
agritourism in New Mexico and
includes pumpkin picking patches
as uh ranking member Lord
mentioned, corn mazes, you pick,
uh operations, petting and
feeding zoos, hay rides, cut
your own Christmas trees, flower
flower farms, dude ranches,
demonstration farms.
agricultural museums, living
history of farms, on farm
farmers' markets, winery tours,
wine tastings, rural bed and
breakfast, and garden tours. Um,
this seems to be a real, uh,
A broad sweep of the different,
you know, aspects of agriculture
in New Mexico. I'm curious, um,
is Arotourism included as
outdoor recreation, like, are
you all allowed to access those
ground grants through outdoor
recreation or is it considered
separate?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for that
question. I believe there is
overlap, um, and, and it should
be a coordinated effort, um, in
the definition I, I, I thought
it to be as broad as possible,
um.
To bring everyone into a big
tent and um
Encourage them to um
To expand this and provide the
public um with opportunities to
enjoy the outdoors, essentially,
um, and, um, and bring them to
our beautiful state and teach
them about our rich heritage.
Uh, there's a lot there, um, I,
we have the oldest, uh, you
know, winemaking in the country
and um that's a fascinating
fact, and, um, you know, we, we
can go toe to toe with France
and uh people need to know about
that.
Yeah, thank you. I, yeah, I
appreciate that, and especially,
um, you know, we think of like
you go to Europe and you can
explore castles, but, you know,
in America our heritage is much
more related to the earth that
we, you know, we're part of and,
and have all these traditions,
we don't want to see die out. So
I appreciate that. I also want
to point out in here, it's
interesting because the, the
Justice Department says that
this is providing them an escape
from liability for simple
negligence, but I don't see that
because looking at the the NMDA
review of this, it's very clear
that
That you, that that
agro-tourism uh companies,
groups, firms would still be
liable if you were willful or
wantonly reckless, um, if you
knew that dangerous conditions
um are particular animal could
be dangerous and did not make
that known to the person, um, or
that you actively partic or hurt
somebody. So you'd really, you
know, this does not cover, as
you mentioned earlier, should
you be willfully negligent in
your work and your service, but
really just
Anything that comes up on the
farm that as as agriculture is,
right? Um, that that would be
what this limited liability
would take care of. Is that what
you also see it as?
Thank you.
Yeah, I, I will just add to that
this absolutely does not protect
negligent behavior in any way.
And I do understand the DOJ they
have to be very careful with,
with their analyses. So Madam
Chair, representative, uh, it,
it, it would exclude people who
intentionally cause harm, and
they will remain fully liable
for that. But when it comes to
actual
activities that would be
something that could be an
inherent risk. So for example, I
was uh a couple of years ago, I
went down to Mesa to go pick
some grapes for one of the local
vineyards down there. I love Rio
Grande winery. Shout out to
them. But they have a great
picking.
Event every year. I think it's
in August, September, it
depends. And so you, you get
these little clippers and stuff,
and it's an inherent risk when
you're clipping off the grapes.
So there, if you do get a little
little cut or something that
could potentially
be included in what we're we're
trying to protect here, and I
will let uh RB talk a little
more about that if you'd like.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
if, if I made the analogy to
skiing, I am choosing to go
skiing, and that involves snow,
which is cold, uh, a mountain,
which I could roll down, trees
which I could hit, and you know,
high speed, um, no one's forcing
me to do it. I'm choosing to do
it. Now, if there is a giant
hole in the mountain that no one
has um blocked off or advised me
of, then that would be
different. Um, I didn't.
sign up for that, I expect it,
it's New Mexico, so reasonably
smooth slopes, um, but not a
crater that I can fall in, and
it's the same with the with the
farm. I can't remove our farm is
on the side of a mountain, uh,
and that is intentional because
we, um, the irrigate its gravity
fed, so it flows down the
mountain and uh and it helps um
water the trees. I can't level
that. I can't change the terrain
is uneven. I can't change that
there's bees out there.
that um that uh you can, if
you're not paying attention, a
tree could poke you in the eye,
or an apple could fall on your
head, um, but it's you're
choosing to go to the outdoors
and experience that and part of
experiencing that is that
there's some danger and risk.
Um, we asked to be uh insulated
from that, um, but not if we
are, um, again, we have a
sinkhole, which is not natural
to the farm, and it's just
appeared, and I don't tell.
people about a child falls in
it, that is different.
I appreciate the example. I, I
did, I appreciate it because I
wanted to really lay out for
anyone watching and listening,
what the differences are. So
with that, um, seeing no further
questions, I'll take a motion.
We do pass, ma'am.
We have a do pass motion for
right for ranking member Lord on
HB 521, seconded by
Representative Mason, um, let's
go into a roll call vote.
A.
Representative Cullen.
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Ranking member Lord.
Yes.
Represented Mason.
Sanchez,
Madame Cerrado, yes, unanimous
with that you have a due pass in
521. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for coming all
the way up. We appreciate it.
Alright everyone, that concludes
our meeting today. Uh, we
actually have our, our last
committee dinner on Thursday. So
please, uh, RCP with uh Barbara,
if you get a chance, um, and
otherwise, we have our committee
at 9:0 a.m. as usual on
Thursday, um, meeting adjourned.
Yeah, it'll be good.
And we go 36.
