That's okay madam chair we would
like to thank the committee for
bringing this legislation for
manager I'd be very brief we
really appreciate this yes as a
strong supporter of this
legislation one of the issues
that we've been talking about
this legislative session's
retention of our police officers
what is been said that we're
losing police officers at a rate
much higher than we were seen
for and unfortunately at the
same time we're not seeing the
interest of people of our young
people to join our brothers and
sisters in law enforcement and
this is having a tremendous
effect on the services that were
able to deliver.
Police agencies are having to
balance their direct address of
crime against the the ability to
serve the communities for
quality of life issues so short
and I just have an effect on the
quality of life services they
were able to find setting a
tremendous effect on what we
find to be additional driver of
crime which is less police
officers on the street and we
find this is affecting the
entire state of New Mexico chair
so the best and worst
legislation as we feel it
invests in our most dedicated
public servants those who
continue to give well past their
initial retirement eligibility
we find it's very important
there are people that are
driving on each and every day
continue continuing to serve our
citizens New Mexico and this
invest in them so one of the
things that we notice it I know
there's been discussions about
bonuses for retention which
which we do support this is a
much stronger incentive in
contrast the bonuses is
something that's sustainable for
those who are committed to
continuing the public service so
with that ma'am we stand strong
support this bill demonstrate
the the support that we're
seeing for law enforcement we're
very appreciative of that with
that madam chair I would ask
that the current secretary
Baker's that that few comments
as well please.
Madam chair representative of
Oakland sponsor and members of
the committee my name is
Benjamin Baker I'm the deputy
cabinet secretary GPS but I'm
also a twenty five year veteran
of the of law enforcement
professionals in the state of
New Mexico I have worked in our
largest jurisdictions as well as
some of our smallest most rural
communities over the course of
the last five years so the
perspective I guess today is
based upon that experience
briefly not to to go over what
the secretary RT spoke on page
I fully endorse and agree with
one of the trends that we have
seen in the last ten to fifteen
years in my observation
experience is not only
difficulty in recruiting young
folks to come join the ranks of
public service particularly law
enforcement.
But more specifically retaining
them past the instant that they
become eligible to retire and
this is becoming increasingly
problematic and with increasing
frequency I find that when I
look around the ranks of New
Mexico law enforcement I don't
see very very many of my
colleagues or that I went to the
academy within that I've served
with they have since left the
instant they become eligible all
too often what we see is folks
leave.
They pack up their families they
moved to an adjoining state and
they provide the same good
public service in a similar
profession in a different
community to me this is one of
the unkindest cuts of all
because as you folks are in the
legislature fully aware as you
see from your programs and work
on our lost one F. T. E. on a
spreadsheet doesn't necessarily
equate to one F. T. when a
twenty five year or twenty year
veteran public servant leaves
this profession through
retirement replacing them with
the for example twenty one year
old version of me is not a one
for one trade and that
experience that dedication that
surface area for us to judge
their credibility and their
competency is something that we
feel could be rewarded and
offered by employers
particularly through this
hundred percent heard a benefit
opportunity if we can keep New
Mexico public safety folks
employed for a period of time
longer it is worth the
investment particularly our most
veteran folks which this we will
we will target thank you very
much for your consideration of
this matter we are in strong
support and I'm happy to remain
on and answer any questions that
may be of service of thank you.
Who who will follow.
Thank you madam chair at this
time chief of police of the
Albuquerque the lady that.
Chair members I think.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here this morning I just want
to break this down and how this
is very helpful to us not just
as a city what as a state I
think we need to look at this in
several levels are first of all
of you know there's always
concern about you know is this
good for para every employee
who's in the system should be
concerned about that we just for
for Mister tribunal and he
talked about how you know this
repair the next thing you know I
want to talk about thank how is
this good for staffing are you
know I'm the chief of police of
that worker keep these
departments are just just for me
to that stating rex school.
Hundred officers current.
All.
We lost you we hear you now.
The.
If.
You're talking about how it's
good for staffing EBT has sixty
about sixteen hundred employees
of when you look at sixteen
hundred employees and you look
at retaining those employees one
of the things that benefits us
the most is increasing careers
when I first started to think of
Baker nobody's left for my class
all of us with the exception of
one to ten thirty two thirty
other people are gone off from
from my graduating class.
Every time we can find we get
extended career we should do
that and it's good for Brady
reason right now one of the
things that well we're losing
his experience of losing
experience because individuals
get that maximum age and date
retire and just have to retrain
individuals that because this
have to reading experience.
I think we lost you again.
I think you could be out as long
as you guys still seeing.
What we
we we can hear you.
Okay so are you on and enjoy the
keeping your member is you know
this is really good for staff in
keeping people on the job this
is really good for experience
although the pair board hasn't
taken an official spot on this
they're saying that it is good
for or para I think some of the
things we have to remember is in
the end this is good for the
employee for what I call a
lifetime benefit you know I know
they talk about possibilities
retention bonuses all these
other one time things those
don't benefit our.
I'm gonna take your video on
perhaps that would assist in the
audio.
You try it
Benefit that will assist are
unemployed for the rest of their
life it's a win win and the very
last thing you want to talk
about is how this could help us
as a state we're always short
positions statewide I'm
consistently trying to look to
bring in our more people to help
us with specific projects we
would have one of the best
retirement programs in the
country and I don't care if an
officer comes somebody comes to
be going off strict New Mexico
state police Albuquerque police
department what is the state if
we could in the night and
advertise nationwide about our
retirement to whites and for it
to come up here it would benefit
the economy of the state it
would benefit us being able to
fill positions and it would make
us a stronger state so I urge
everybody to support this
legislation all the boots on the
ground are going to see this is
a good thing this is something
that will benefit us it will
help us and it will also enable
us to increase our recruiting
efforts across this country
thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else Mr chair.
Madam chair no I think of it the
to you have you are not
continue.
I just can I add one more one
more thing I sent everybody I I
forwarded everybody a copy of
this letter.
I'm ready and the committee and
I was wondering if you've got it
so the last got sent out I said
that last night some of that's
in downturn you this morning
thank you very much if we look
explains everything that that
we're talking about.
Along with the F. I. R. and with
that that that and chair of the.
And it just stand for questions
or.
Thank you thank you Mr chair we
will now madam chair
just real quick I know he's
sending that to us Mike you
Google fragmented I try to open
in three different ways it is
just shows all kinds of symbols
I don't know why.
I'm not able it says is you
know.
I'm sorry I I and unless some I
called the analysts to see if
you can send it to me in a
different form.
And I'm
not again but.
It's real weird I.
Are all Representative we need
to move on but we'll go ahead
and make note of that and and
see if we can assist you.
We will go ahead now to the
attendees.
And by.
To speak and I'm gonna go head
first to see who will be here
speaking in opposition if you
are in opposition.
Would you please raise your
hand.
Anyone in opposition right hand.
Okay state no one in opposition
all those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay
when we will begin good morning
with Mr John locations.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
what The New Mexico federation
of labor we testified on this
bill when it was brought up on
Thursday in favor of it I'm just
here to simply say that we
continue to support this measure
and thank the sponsor for
bringing that up thank you very
much.
Thank you and next on the list
we have John Willoughby.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you so
much for the opportunity
wonderful to spend Saturday
morning with you guys this is
common sense legislation that
thanks outside the box and put
can Sir really conservative
fiscally conservative resources
where we need it most.
This is what we need in the
state of New Mexico I urge this
committee to vote and pass this
legislation you've got all of
law enforcement the chief of
police the department of public
safety asking you to consider
your police officers in your
first responders when you
consider voting for this
legislation this is what we need
in New Mexico I urge you to
support it thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you.
Next on the list we have Josh
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen just
want to echo the comments
already stated and thank god
chairman I'll count for bringing
this forward not only will this
help with law enforcement and
first responders which we
represent some smaller of police
and sheriffs agencies around the
state as well as state
corrections and detention
facilities around the state but
this also help with the
retention of other about circle
workers blue collar workers and
other workers across the state
of New Mexico so this is a great
tool this is something that will
definitely help with our
retention issues and short
staffing issues and again just
want to thank the chairman and
you madam chair for bringing
this forward and we urge the
committee support thank you.
Thank you.
And I will go to the attendees
one more time to see if there's
anyone else wishing to speak in
support of this bill.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I see that there is
a committee room three fifteen I
wonder if there's anybody there
that would like to speak up
notice thank you Mr chair hi is
there anyone in I don't know how
to do this today just speak up.
That's been the other
committees.
If there's anyone in room three
fifteen
Representative that.
I just checked there's no one in
the okay all right thank you I
guess they just put it on in
case there is okay thank you so
there are no other speakers Mr
chair
you stand for questions we go
back to the committee and that I
be at anybody from the committee
what is the wish of the
committee I see Representative
I'm going to go will be up.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative I just wanted
to say that I think we've heard
a number of variations of this
legislation so I appreciate
this legislation because I think
it comes to address a lot of the
issues that have been raised
over the course of the last I
think we can a half so whenever
appropriate I'm I'm I'd like to
do a motion for it to pass.
Thank you Representative level
that motion
next on the list we have
Representative Cadena Cruz I've
been a close.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
chair on one as well.
Are you.
As everyone knows I've been
supportive of allowing a narrow
band of the employees to return
back.
To work and they are.
Law enforcement and.
J. O. person and at the rank and
file level.
I've also been in support of
having our educators are
teachers we turn back to work
and the reason that I have been
supportive of those efforts is
that based on the significant
issues that we have a New Mexico
around crying and the lack of
teachers in classrooms I believe
that it's a time for all hands
on deck and that would be an
effort towards out I believe
that this also is towards that
effort of all hands on deck and
I will be supporting madam chair
and I would like to second that
motion.
Thank you all thank you
Representative although that
second also thank you.
And next on the list we have
Representative that last.
Madam chair
I was just trying to I was able
to find the vote I want to
reported maybe some other things
or I was able to open it so real
quick Madam chair representative
so.
This.
I I just was trying to figure
out in in in bear with me what
the difference was from this to
the other several bills that
were thank you to be fifty
seventy three in a row well I
what makes this one different
that can you just in general
explain.
Madam chair of that and I'm on
us pretty basically I think that
Mr Trujillo could probably
answer this better than me but
this is a basically other bills
are double dipping Bill.
And this is just a retention
bill this is just a let's just
stay on for another few years
that's all this is so this this
this is an incentive that
employee the state on that's all
it that just doesn't do anything
else whatever follows with that
that's it goes on everything
will be the state then Mr here
you probably would be able to
give him the legal stuff better
than I can.
Yes Mr chair on madam chair and
representative to us us yes the
the bills you heard of
previously had to do with
allowing people that were
currently retired of return to
work and earn both their pension
as well as a salary at the same
time this bill would allow
somebody who is currently
working and getting close to
maxing out of pension at ninety
percent of hopefully helping
them have some incentive to
continue working
and go beyond that ninety
percent so they would continue
working a little bit longer
putting into the fund longer
they will get a higher pension
but they're also gonna start
drawing that pension for a
shorter duration of time to the
otherwise would have.
Okay Mister chair representative
of secretaries to he also I get
it so what you're telling me is
rather than them we're all the
other ones they were retiring
and then run the pension state
not a short stay period then
coming back to work back into
the workforce for a maximum of
three years or three or thirty
six months this is is giving
them an incentive to stay a
little longer they're not going
to make sure please correct me
if I'm wrong Madam chair
representative Representative
and and secretary it'll keep
them longer than senators to
keep them employed longer with
the department so that
if the state an additional three
to five years and I don't know
where that break breaking point
is that threshold is then they
draw from ninety to a hundred
percent
retirement it my understanding
is that that would you try to
explain to me.
Madam chair and representative
says that that is correct and
just for reference in most of
our state plans of an employee
currently would Max out after
thirty years they would hit that
ninety percent this would allow
them to go up to thirty three
years and four months to get to
that hundred percent threshold
and for law enforcement law
enforcement would have to stick
around about twenty eight and a
half years to to Max out at that
amount.
So it does it does allow
somebody if they want to stay
longer you know because
currently if somebody hits that
ninety percent threshold they
can continue working they still
have to make the contributions
to us but they're not seeing any
additional incentive in their
retirement.
Madam chair representative so
what is average what what in
just a thank.
I'm sure they're different I was
just I want to make sure I
understand this right Madam
chair representative undergoing
Mr secretary to heal so is this
just for law enforcement reserve
other
Other other pairs in this I I
didn't catch it because I I
please and.
I'm sorry I wasn't able to open
it so just a little bit it came
out a little squares and all
kinds of weird.
Fragment is still gonna like.
Sure sure Mr a or madam chair
and representative us us the way
the bill is right in his it
would apply to all para
memberships to
Law enforcement anything public
safety and anything in the
medicinal plants General plans
would be able to take advantage
of this.
Madam chair representative
Representative and and secretary
so what you're telling me is.
These are different but each one
is a little bit different when
they can retire the percentages
of retirement is that correct.
Yes madam chair and
representative assessed correct
a parent ministers of thirty one
different plans to choose a
budget with different
eligibility requirements so
somebody in a lower plan you
know what price have to work
fifty years to get to that you
know hundred percent threshold
of somebody in law enforcement
and which is a higher plan with
higher pension factor would be
just under twenty nine years.
What is it right now
For law enforcement Mr Madam
chair representative.
Right now for them to retire
what what is it.
So currently Moster state
minister for law enforcement I
have a three point five percent
pension factor I can retire
after twenty years after that
twenty years they would be able
to to draw a pension of seventy
point five percent so they can
go up to seven ninety at the
twenty five year mark and now if
we look at two hundred eight be
able to work and contribute to
about twenty eight and a half
years.
I get you know thank you
Madam chair representative and
then for teachers I'm just
because I'm gonna go through the
litany of thirty different ones
I I just want to kind of the big
the beer I don't know if those
are the bigger ones but for
instance teachers can you do the
same thing for me on teachers
Madam chair representative
secretary.
Representative U. at I I can
answer that when we did not
touch teachers on the yes Sir
the following yes or no are
usually different plan all right
E. R. B. as a whole different
animal and I I honestly I was
scared for budget.
Okay so teachers are not going
to be
Madam chair representative
teachers and I got to be
included in this madam chair and
representative of what my
understanding there's other
teachers are very happy with the
house bill seventy three that
best on the floor last night and
they're okay with the with what
we what what what what we got
right now and they're okay with
the pay raises that they're
getting it.
Mr chair if I may real quick.
Madam chair representative us us
your B. they actually don't have
a cap currently so they the
teachers do accumulate service
at two point three five percent
a year but the they don't even
stop at a hundred percent level
so if teachers nice mostly I
used to work at a or B. mostly
with professors stick around
forty fifty years of there are a
number of of members that they
have that retire need more than
a hundred percent so this bill
actually capped at a hundred
percent for parent members.
Madam chair representative and
and thank you guys I just I
wanted to understand the
differences you know
Representative or chairman of
twenty I had a conversation a
state about the the FIR which
you said they don't give it up
if I are at this point should
like we're accustomed to I guess
you don't have the
Over the call the actuarial
information I guess to do that
I'm not really sure what white
white because it doesn't show me
anything any numbers and stuff
and and really my my my point
was I didn't know where it
started where it stopped madam
chair and I didn't know but what
I do know is that is one of the
biggest reasons that it it it.
Hurts our credit rating and I
just want to make sure that you
know if we're able to bump that
in and I don't want to be
responsible for one of the guys
for something that we lower our
our
Our a credit rating.
So I think that's it I I see so
the Mexico basically you're just
adding those years some of or
three somewhere I is that right
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
associate to it ranges from two
percent a year up to three and a
half percent a year.
I apologize Madam chair
representative I meant the extra
time was it a three to five
years I'm sorry I didn't care
for that yes yes Mr chair it
would be a or I'm sorry madam
chair representative anywhere
from yet two and a half to three
and a half years to to go from
ninety to a hundred percent.
In my last question is I know
that Madam chair representative
the state police was in full
support.
Of the.
Other.
Bill are they in support of this
parable.
Representative device says I
think you heard from us
secretary Baker and that the and
that's been and that the and the
secretary of I'm sorry I got
mixed up very well we in that
the secretary Baker but that
they they can speak up we have
the state police for.
But you've already heard from
them but go ahead secretary
secretary.
Or W. secretary which everyone
wants to.
Certainly thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon
Representative Terrazas
I think that the explanation
given earlier by the secretary
was was really sufficient the
incentive to keep our longest
tenured most experienced
employees in their current non
retired capacity is something
that the department of public
safety and the New Mexico state
police are in full support so
this bill house bill two forty
three is something that is for
export yes.
Thank you madam chair
representative and
Representative Alcon chairman we
we all have should be giving
each other a little better
breaks no to meet this madam
chair.
Slept last night so you know we
we we fumble a little bit that's
okay at the end of this scope
like the fuel business madam
chair representative we don't
sleep a lot of time so I'm used
to that so anyway I think with
that that kind of clarified a
lot of things I I the only other
thing was just the
which is a big deal
the the
It does say in its impact that
has on the states credit rating
was really my biggest thing at
and then coming into a blind
thank you for allowing me to to
get a little bit more
information and and answer those
questions I I of course anything
we can help our our officers and
and and other departments that
in in order to retain the the
people that we need thank you Mr
chair that's all I have.
Thank you Representative and
next on the list we have
Representative bash.
Yes.
I heard
reference to first responders
and other people does this bill
applied to firefighters and
ambulance personnel.
Mr chair here.
Mr here's your denture that okay
yes Madam chair representative
bash a yes it would apply to all
act terra members.
So whatever their occupation is
okay so not just police officers
are law enforcement correct very
good thank you that's my only
question.
Thank you Representative.
Are there are
Any other committee members who
have would like to speak.
Any other questions.
Just one more question I'm sorry
madam chair and it was a simple
one is there gonna be anyone any
other committee that's going to
hear this on the financial part
of this
Of this bill.
Madam chair and not
representative of us of this
bill has no fiscal impact I mean
there's nothing that there's no
the would you cut their there is
no reason there is no money
coming out of appropriations
that would affect this bill.
Well there's no appropriations
budget to this bill.
I get that right was I
understand what you're trying to
say.
What is get asked Madam chair
representative was there's no
other committee that may be
overlooked para.
Madam chair representative to
divest as there is really no
committee that overlooks the.
That's all those my only
question thank you Madam chair
representative of.
Chairman.
Thank you.
And
If you have any closing remarks.
I want to thank you madam chair
the only thing I want to do that
is a this is not my bring storm
alone okay I got a call from the
governor's office and we started
documented that that would be
five phone calls.
And we I know the decided that
we could do something at the
beginning it was just police
officers and the and accords
being me and I I was thinking
just like Representative the
last as I wanted to prove but
then I found out that there was
just no way that I the play that
one game by Senator but I could
get and I think we're helping
everybody that is a government
employee as covered under there
I had to get a better a
retirement.
With that madam chair I don't
have anything to add.
Thank you Mr chair and I will
now
go back to Representative Rubio
the state promotion.
Thank you madam chair and
Mr chair just to confirm I know
that we were we're on your
committee substitute correct so
I I just want to make sure that
I got the motion correct of the
I I move for do not pass on
house bill two forty three into
two passed motion on the
committee substitute for house
bill two four three if that's
if that's appropriate.
Yes Representative appropriate
thank you and it was of.
Representative Art De La Cruz
the second incorrect.
So we have a motion by
Representative Rubio and a
second by Representative Bella
Cruz the secretary could you go
ahead and take all.
About.
Okay.
Representative Baca.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative Cruz yes
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative terasa.
Yes I would please like to
explain my vote.
Representative were about my
last year yes.
Welcome chair yes.
Okay eight.
Representative Representative
black and Representative Bakar
XP.
Eight two zero again yes okay
yes that's correct on a vote of
eight to zero you have a good
pass
Mr chair and now or
Representative also states plans
both short madam chair I just I
would yes because I absolutely
want to help or law enforcement
in the other agencies and and
and the lack of of employee of
the employees that they're
missing and and to and retain
them but my only.
My only concern again was
solvency of the of the pair find
and that to me is a fiscal
impact but and that's why I was
without getting into a back and
forth we're thirty minutes while
the fiscal impact on on on the
solvency of para.
I just wanted to state my my
deal that.
In my.
My opinion solvency is a fiscal
impact thank you madam chair.
Representative and out
Representative sure I've gone I
just wanted to say thank you for
bringing forth the bill I was a
little slow in making that
comment before I called the help
and as the vice chair I usually
wait along with the chair you
are we end of the COVID.
To do that it was a good win win
situation for everybody and I
appreciate you bringing up or
what and so it you we do have a
due pass and that was the only
order of business today correct
Mr chair.
Madam vice chair yes it is
that's all
the everybody can go get some
sleep.
What I want to thank the
secretary deputy secretary Mr
good man everyone looking for
today especially on members
again or
helping us through this
committee today and being
present after a very very long
night and early morning
appreciate it.
we are adjourned.
You later on the floor
a little we're supposed to be a
you're supposed to have your
computer on right now because
you're on your on call.
Are you still.
Still but still but thank you
eighty in our business we never
we answer the phone twenty four
seven we're constantly on that
book so Hey thank you very much
good good a good bring that bill
up and I appreciate you Mr thank
you god bless you it thank you
everybody and I mean everybody
thank you.
Okay.
But.
