That.
Protection is been commissioned
this.
I have a list.
Appropriate.
Incineration violence that
classes.
Go.
The.
That.
Best.
Showing.
We.
This body that I missed out that
that's not appropriate I don't.
One person this is true Michelin
terror out of the truck
administra.
And I just want to take the time
to show that actions should be
condemned in the strongest
possible terms and I appreciate
Mr speaker.
The opportunity to them what I
think is appropriate to have
range on administrative roles
Kranz and threats of violence
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Mr speaker.
And the gentleman from Santa Fe
in the last year and doing
circles on.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker up to what
the representative Ely used in
the state Mr speaker in all in
our society just seems like it
takes a person.
Thank you for person to
criticize you.
The Interstate thank you did a
good job get on that roll to for
all of us we probably all will
do that and it is on call for
and you know we shouldn't stand
for that kind of criticism by
nobody to any member of the body
and you know it happens all the
time everybody sees it instead
of the usual thank you Mr
speaker.
Are there.
Other announcements.
The gentle lady from going into.
Transaction is.
Clear to me.
Number two.
I was big enough to members of
the house I'm doing fine
contemplation Revenue conception
for hostility Levin admitted
with the margins across enacted
by the fifty fifth legislative
structure for session twenty
twenty one as I progress
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
Mrs.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the duly
New World and those kind of
Senate finance committee says
ten percent of the emergency
clause have been reading for fun
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and because the
signatures of the officers of
the house Representative.
Senate chief clerk Mrs with
interviews.
Speaker I'm directed to inform
us of the dimly interns and goes
cap on the front of the line
after.
Jessica has been running for
offices in the Senate vote
session classes provisions of
the offices that has
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is an interview.
Directed to inform house of the
Senate has passed Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy seventy seven and
quest the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk Mrs Lee entered.
Thank you.
Once transaction is.
to.
Mr speaker.
Been referred house agriculture
water resources committee
substitute for house bill two
forty one has had it under
consideration persons
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted Martinez
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
COVID report.
For for for agricultural water
resources consumption for
hospitals to forty one all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
As a committee for is about to.
Mr speaker session revenue
estimate for hospital to seventy
one has had it under
consideration persons
recommendation of defense
respectfully submitted thank you
Mr.
Speaking of adoption of the
committee report on an option.
As opposed to seventy one all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
I
was.
Committee for is about to.
Education Committee from
hospital to twenty seven
legislative considerations
persons recognition that it
affects Representative G. Andrés
Romero checked
as many forms for the
differences referred to in the
journal so they're acted upon
individual hearing objection is
so ordered Clark to read.
Bill two eighty seven to pass to
the provisions of finance
committees.
How to.
To pass to the.
Terry Affairs Committee
Representative Sweetser.
Speaker move adoption of the
report and option of Canadian
point on house bills two two
seven two point seven in two
eight nine all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Proposals may be present.
Mr speaker state government
elections in the first committee
members been referred house bill
sixteen as a member has had it
under consideration point things
recommendations to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
judges check instances of the
committee for trying to get
their act fund single vote and
referred to the journal so
they're acted upon individual
taxes hearing no objection it is
so ordered clear to me.
House bill one ninty two as
amended to pass.
Ninety for the I'm sorry
hospital one million for a new
path.
House Bill to seventeen do
passed as amended.
House bill two thirty to pass.
House Bill to sixty eight as
amended two passed respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Reduction Mr speaker your
introduction of favorable
committee reports and house bill
sixteen is amended one ninety
two is amended one ninety four
to seventeen is amended to
thirty to sixty eight as amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I'm sorry all this was nay
committee for to drive.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill two zero
nine has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation that it do not
passed the house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill two oh
nine two passed respectfully
submitted over Armstrong chair.
Move.
Your adoption of an unfavorable
committee for our house bill two
and I've been a favorable
committee for health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill two oh nine all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was named committee for is
that.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too it's been
referred house bill two fifty
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it do passed and that's
referred to the state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
over Armstrong chair.
Move adoption.
The option of a favorable
committee report on house bill
two fifty all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
I'm.
This may committee endorsed
adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill thirty as amended has
had it under consideration and
report same without
recommendation as amended
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Consent that the committee
reports for together act fund
single voting reflection the
journal so they're acted upon
individually.
Actions ordered click to read.
House bill one nine zero two
passed as amended.
House bill two fifty three do
pass respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption of the
favorable committee reports on
house bill thirty as amended one
ninety amended in to two fifty
three all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
On this was named.
The reports or drive.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to is been
referred house till fifteen has
had it under consideration point
seems recommendation that it do
not pass but the house taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill fifteen do pass
respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
You unanimous consent of the
committee reports were together
act on a single voter reflection
journals and directed to provide
individually here no objections
order for to read.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill two
sixty two two passed
respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
The committee reports were
injection of energy will commute
for House Bill fifteen with a
favorable committee part of
taxation revenue committee
substitute for House Bill
fifteen and a favorable
committee report on Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
prostitutes sixty two all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Hi Committee point without the.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team is
been referred house bill
fourteen as amended has had it
under consideration for things
recommendation that I do passed
as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Unanimous consent to have the
committee reports right together
acted upon a single voter
reflect in the journals on
individually during objection it
is so ordered where to eat.
House bill one sixty five to
pass.
House bill two thirty eight.
Do not pass but house to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight two passed
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
We would option Mr speaker and
options invoking you for that
house bill fourteen is a yes the
one sixty five and favorable
committee.
Hey Tom in working the report on
probation finance committee
substitute for a school to
thirty eight all those in favor
please signify by saying aye
I'm.
This was the committee reports
are adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tumors been referred house bill
eighty seven has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that I do pass
and that's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair unanimous
consent of the committee reports
were together acted upon a
single voter reflection the
journals of the rectification
individually no objection it is
sort of where to eat house bill
one fifty do not pass house
Education Committee substitute
for house bill one fifty do pass
and thence to the appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill two eighty two do
passed as amended and then to
the provisions of finance
committee.
Senate bill fifty one do pass
and thence to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee reports we are on
induction of the favorable
committee report on house bill
eighty seven an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
fifty five but a favorable
committee report Education
Committee substitute for us the
one fifty federal committee
reports on house bill two eighty
two was amended in Senate bill
fifty one all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
I think this was may committee
reports reductive.
Mr speaker you're touching
taxation and revenue committee
to it's been referred house bill
two seventy eight has had it
under consideration point same
as recommendation that it do not
pass that house taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy eight two
passed respectfully submitted
this Martinez chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee portrait together
acted upon a single vote and
referred to in the journals of
their act on individually
hearing no objections order
clear to read.
House Bill to ninety one do not
pass house taxation and revenue
committee substitute substitute
for House Bill to ninety one do
pass respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
Speaking of a COVID after the
mid reports run induction of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two seventy eight but
a favorable committee report on
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy eight hundred
unfavorable Committee reporter
hassle to ninety one but a
favorable committee report on
taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety one all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
this is name committee reports
that.
Mr speaker your state government
elections and in Affairs
Committee to home has been
referred house bill one ninety
eight as amended has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that they do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee portrait together it's
to the point of some friction in
the journal so they're acted
upon individual.
no objections so ordered where
to.
Also health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ten to pass.
House Bill to twenty one do
passed as amended.
House Bill to sixty one as
amended to pass.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty five.
Do passed as amended.
House bill two seventy seven as
amended to pass.
House Bill three oh one to pass
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker we are
options of favorable committee
report on house bill one ninety
eight is amended health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to ten
hospitals to twenty one seventy
two sixty one is amended House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty five as
amended and hospitals to seventy
seven as amended and three oh
one all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I
suppose maybe.
What's redacted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee term is been referred
house bill one eleven has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill one eleven do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair unanimous consent
of the committee point read
together acted upon and single
vote and reflection of the
journal is so they're acted upon
individual hearing objections
ordered surgery.
House bill one fifty six do you
pass as amended and thence to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill two oh one two
passed.
House bill two forty four to
pass respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker you're on induction
of an unfavorable committee
report on house bill one eleven
that are favorable committee
report on Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
eleven house bill one fifty six
as amended house bill two oh one
and house bill two forty four
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I think why the supposedly
committee reports are adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to missing
for house bill one fifty one has
had it under consideration
forcing its recommendation that
it do not pass that house
health.
And Human Services Committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty one do pass and that's
refer to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted over Armstrong chair
unanimous consent to the
committee point read together
acted upon any single vote for
to travel as a direct to the
point individual.
Objection it is so ordered where
to eat.
House bill two fifty nine to
pass and that's to the
provisions of finance committee.
House Bill to sixty nine.
To pass as amended and thence to
the Judiciary Committee.
House bill two seventy two do
not pass the house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy to do pass and then to
taxation revenue.
House bill two eighty four do
pass and then to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
over Armstrong chair move
adoption.
Your introduction of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill one fifty one but a
favorable committee report on
housing agency services
committee substitute for house
bill one fifty one and favorable
committee reports and hospitals
to fifty nine into sixty nine as
amended and favorable feed
report on house bill two seventy
two the favorable committee
report on health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill two seventy two
and a favorable committee report
on house bill two eighty four
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I.
I all this was named.
Committee reports are adopted.
Eight million.
Thank you Mr speaker we can get
introduction of legislation.
interjections order.
Where to eat.
Senate bill three seventy seven
introduced by senator Munoz and
act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures Senate bill three
seventy seven.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy seven having been read
twice by title is referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Generally for.
Thank you Mr speaker we can go
to third reading of legislation
no objection it is so ordered.
Members are going to start be
we're going to start with item
to that we are waiting on the
floor amendment so that item
three gentleman from twenty and
are you ready on that item.
I am Mr speaker would you please
give me to that point.
Let the record reflect election
necessary for placing House one
I was admitted with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken.
Gentleman to explain it all.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
body house bill one of five as
amended is a more or to Senate
bill seventy two that's
sponsored by senator bill house
bill one of five and Senate bill
seventy two correct a mistake
that we made last year Mr
speaker and body when we added
transmission into the industrial
revenue bonds statute with along
with electric generation
projects
we added amendment that
unfortunately Mr speaker and
body has made it financially
impossible and imprudent for
counties to explore these
voluntary industrial revenue
bond agreements and has since
seen those agreements also Mr
speaker and body house bill one
of five again duplicating Senate
bill seventy two.
Comes back it keeps the spirit
of the amendment by
prioritizing
I. R. B. funds for schools
especially rural school
districts but does so in a way
that will still allow counties
and other municipalities to
voluntarily explore and perhaps
choose to enter into these
agreements and in so doing bring
millions of new dollars to their
communities which we have
actually seen in many of our
rural counties be of great
benefit to them and it
constituents they serve.
With that Mr speaker I would
stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Chavis Eddy and Otero
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the.
The gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Eddie Lee and
yes it's Eddie Chavez and Tero
leaders hands.
Thank you Sir.
H. as you are aware I
I got some problems with this
bill.
And I think it would do the body
good.
Just a step back and look at
this process.
But because
Speaker and and gentleman there
have been a number of counties.
That have done wonderful things
with higher based.
Lea County I think had little
luck and I think they have.
In recent years have
Probably approved over four
billion dollars of of Iraqis.
In our inner.
Mostly in our community but in
the county of the hall.
But.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What's going on with the Arby's
today.
In particular.
One senator around what spurred
this.
Is the fact that
This.
There's a project Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That's a one point four billion
dollar project.
That would use the IRB process.
And most people don't
understand.
The fiscal impact of that I. R.
B. to the state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
aware of of.
How much the state loses in this
process.
That.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen my familiarity with
the specifically in the electric
generation and transmission
projects.
Mr speaker and body we've
actually included a five percent
off the top amount that comes
directly to the state Mr speaker
and gentleman this is to my
understanding over and above
what other industrial revenue
brought.
Industrial revenue bond projects
the amendment for the widely
disparate uses there's actually
more that comes to the state for
the statute we're looking at
today with electric generation
and transmission projects.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Shares I.
Here's what I know of.
And I believe it to be fat.
That on a typical big linear
project.
like this one point four million
dollar project.
About half of the.
Is going to be labor and
materials.
And a half of that is going to
be engineering and and those
things.
And the IRB world.
The county that issues that I.
R. B..
The M..
Sets the state up to lose the
next case.
If it's a one point four million
dollar project.
About forty two million dollars.
And that losses because.
That almost half of that
project.
Is going to be exempt from G. R.
T..
In compensating Tax.
So Mr speaker and gentleman.
I'm all of that out grown our
community you know that I work
hard to do that.
But in this case.
I tried to figure out mind
anybody would do this.
And then it dawned on me that
they County a rural county with
a lot without a lot of.
If they didn't have any
severance tax you know they
didn't have any long gas they
didn't have any big employers
and now.
They would see any of these
projects as a windfall that they
got some big.
Although it isn't nearly what
they should get but it would be
something.
And so the I. R. B. as in signed
off on in many cases.
Without the state even being at
the table.
And the state loses those.
G. R. T. taxes and those
compensation taxes in on one
point four billion dollar
project if half of it was of
that magnitude.
And yes G. R. T. and
compensating Tax was about.
I am half or six percent I think
that's reasonable.
There's a forty two million
dollar loss to the state and my
mess in my missing that of
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Mr speaker gentleman the our
bees are negotiated individually
and so I think some depends upon
what those negotiations are Mr
speaker gentleman
I I agree that many of our rural
counties Torrance County I know
the Sandoval county which is
Senator Steinborn urban is
strongly in support of this
legislation they do want the
voluntary option to enter into
these agreements and finally Mr
speaker gentleman reading the
LFC reports avidly as I know
many do
the last year twenty twenty kind
of in the summer as we were
continue to be in the midst of
both low oil prices uncertainty
about volume in production.
And and in the middle of the
pandemic I distinctly recall LFC
and that analysis nonpartisan
analysis highlighting the state
receipt of of tax return of of
taxes from a number of large
wind projects some which I
believe have undergone this I.
R. V. process.
And so
Mr speaker gentlemen I think we
put actually more safeguards
with this five percent off the
top to the state we have
increasingly
really adept counties and school
districts to get the best deal
possible and the state I think
recent experience shows us the
state is actually benefited
substantially from a number of
these projects not in
competition with other Iraqis
that actually don't have the
same safeguards we're discussing
here today but so I I feel that
the evidence we've seen from LFC
receipts from these projects
actually show the that we are
making good revenue both at the
state level and very importantly
Mr speaker gentleman at the
county level.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
going to argue with you about is
that better.
For a County.
And should I County have the
right to.
Gosh eight.
What goes on there county.
I I agree whole park.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
forgot to ask you do you have a
expert witness with you today.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I do actually have to
expert witnesses one Mr speaker
and gentleman robber folk he is
a financial adviser a former
member of this body who hails
from Santa Fe County as a
Republican member and Mr speaker
gentleman also John Ryan another
former member of the other
lesser chamber the Senate at as
well.
Good
Mr speaker and gentleman
So take me through this five
percent number you you refer to
five percent of what what is
what is that what is that
compared to what they should
have
explain how that works.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
So that the five percent when
when accounting negotiates and
industrial revenue bond they get
up till payments payment in lieu
of taxes and why are counties
and other municipalities really
white these tools and why this
form of local governments local
control is something that folks
really why is that they're able
to structure those to meet their
needs so Mister speaker
gentleman for all industrial
revenue bonds except for the
ones we're talking about today
electric generation and a
lecture transfer the five
percent on transmission.
They they just get whatever that
County negotiate what we added
into Mr speaker and gentleman
for these transmission projects
is that five percent off the top
comes directly to the state of
New Mexico in order Mr speaker
gentleman to ensure that the
state is getting sufficient and
significant revenue really kind
of right at the beginning and Mr
speaker and gentleman this is
one of the things I think that
likely led to again the LFC
noting specifically how these
large construction projects
which both electric generation
and a lecture transmission are
why these really benefit of the
state at the height of the
pandemic and at the depths of
some of our lowest oil prices
and concern about oil volumes in
twenty twenty well Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Let's just say.
That this project for the.
Just to make it simple.
Is a one point four billion
dollar project.
And fifty percent of that under
an I. R. B..
With the laminate the proponents
ability our requirement to pay
G. R. T. in compensating Tax I
know that number is about forty
two million dollars what is five
percent number you're talking
about in dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'll be
happy to answer that question
the.
At.
That specific question Mr
speaker gentleman the answer to
your hypothetical question is
two point one million dollars
but Mr speaker and gentleman
at my experts tell me that in
Torrance County
the for on the first year of one
of these I R. B. agreements for
generation the state received
fifteen million dollars and so
Mister speaker gentleman I
deeply appreciate the concern
and I think in the approach this
updated approach which was
worked out as I understand it
over the summer with a lot of
diverse stakeholders and
different conversations.
We we actually risk get more
back to the state for important
state services likely seen last
year again with the LFC and I'm
a bit of a broken record there
but I thought it was really I
know where the that the LFC
noted how these projects have
helped the state budget during
some particularly tough times Mr
speaker and gentleman I I
appreciate that but I want to
make sure we.
We get this down to the meat and
potatoes.
Without an I. R. B..
That proponent building a one
point four billion dollar
project is going to pay will be
required to pay the state about
forty two million dollars in G.
R. T. in compensating Tax.
That's one that I that we know.
To your offering.
In that protection of five
percent two point one million
dollars now what I should hi.
That's like
Six hundred thousand dollars
from everyone of our districts.
So Mister speaker I am
I think we have to stop in and
look at this process.
And and I think the body is you
know we have been blessed.
And I do mean that.
Our state has been blessed with
a grand.
We under resource.
And it is it's huge.
In the methodology that the
proponents of that I. R. B. BL
they're sitting there close to
you.
Are wanting us to approve deny.
We will not get one sent.
Of severance from one kilowatt
of electricity that's.
Produced not in the.
We're gonna lose forty two
million dollars of G. R. T. in
compensating Tax.
And they're going to take all of
that power.
That we have subsidized our
taxpayers have subsidized.
And they're gonna send it to
California and make money on.
Now that's absolutely the fact
is I know it am I wrong Sir.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
LFC is own analysis and their
fax Mr speaker and gentleman
speak directly to the fact that
the state has benefited
substantially Mr speaker and
gentleman the fifteen million
dollars that the state receives
from the some of these
construction projects and
Torrance County in the first
year with more to come Mr
speaker gentleman the idea Mr
speaker gentleman that we would
deny local governments we would
deny local control.
For industrial revenue bonds
when that same control existing
across a wide swath of
industries from construction to
manufacturing to health care to
the Intel plant that we know
exist just a little bit down the
road and down the river there in
Santa Fe County to copper wire
manufacturers that are in Dona
ana county right there on the
border the idea that we would
deny this tool for one specific
industry when denying this tool
actually that is harmful to
these local governments who are
telling us whether it's in
Torrance County Sandoval County
or others that they need this to
support their local citizens
when LFC is telling us that the
state budget is benefiting
substantially from these large
construction projects I think we
should give them this tool with
these additional kind of
additional supports for the
state and I would add Mr speaker
and gentleman.
That the I hear the point around
recurring revenue that is with
regard to severance taxes but Mr
speaker gentleman.
I just firmly.
Believe that the way to get to
that recurring revenue it's a
different form we're not
suffering a mineral from New
Mexico's earth but we are
gathering a resource on New
Mexico's land when it comes to
some of these other lecture city
electric generation we I agree
we should get on a recurring
revenue from that and I know
there are a lot of folks looking
at that the wait to get there is
to treat these industries just
like any under other industry
oil and gas or otherwise health
care manufacturing construction
Xcerra treat them as a mature
industry treated our local
communities and local
governments as the competent
local governments that they are
whether that Sandoval County
Torrance County Dona Ana doesn't
matter where and I think that we
will make a whole lot more
progress a whole lot more
quickly in some of these areas
together in that way and I think
just add briefly Mr speaker
gentleman Senator Nevills Bill
there over in the Senate.
As I understand it passed
unanimously out of that tax
committee where folks are
looking at that same recurring
revenue issue so I think we can
do this together but we need to
treat this industry as a mature
industry eligible for these I.
R. B. statutes just as so many
of these other industries are
and allow our local governments
the tools to do the best for
their services
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
great was part of that but the
part that I think this body has
to understand is that.
Yes.
Yes I. R. B..
Was bringing.
Three or four hundred employees
and the the state like you
alluded to the one and Valencia
County or.
Or did anything but.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This process.
Is clearly.
A proponent.
Who has a very very very few
long term employees after
construction.
This project this proponent.
Uses New Mexico land.
To make.
A significant amount of power
hundreds of megawatts.
And the state is not getting up
in the.
Now they're gonna capture that
forty two million dollars of
savings on G. R. T. and quite
frankly while I'm at it of Mr
speaker and gentleman the reason
that FIR.
Is written it as it is is not
but because.
There is an expenditure from.
Hi General Fund.
Yes they are not capturing the
loss.
Of income coming in from G. R.
T. and compensating tax.
Now.
This is when.
I would love that we could put a
spreadsheet up on the board.
And and talk about.
How the state.
Budget because the state does
not benefit from this process.
nearly.
Like they would.
If the IRB was not.
Approved by one county one
county.
Of the thirty three can approve
and I are be without the state
being at the table.
They're not even involved in the
negotiations.
And the county but because they
want a little bit.
They reduce the property taxes
they spread it out over time.
They give away the G. R. T. in
the compensating tax the county
gets a little bit no doubt about
that.
In the state loses.
Huge.
On top of that there is not a
cent not one penny.
Recurring revenue coming from
the power This generated.
Now.
I would.
I would like in that to.
My friend from Lee County going
over and drilling the well in
Lee County.
And taken the production off of
that well.
And send them that the
California.
In the state and get it done and
we would all be up in arms about
that we would sit we would all
cry fail.
He didn't get an I. R. B. when
he drilled the well I don't know
if there.
I don't even know if they're at
their allowable for that but.
The fact of the matter is.
That.
The loss we cannot sit here and
say.
Well we we straighten this out
we're going to put five percent
on the front end of this for the
state's gonna do real good the
truth of the matter is the state
loses horribly.
They get two point one million
dollars instead of forty two
million dollars.
That's crazy.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
an amendment.
That has been passed out I hope
it's up Mr speaker.
A general there's ninety seven
amendments Sir can you please
tell us to to a two numbers for
sure to get the right one.
I don't want you to miss one.
Mr speaker that two oh two
number on this one is point to
two oh three oh nine point one.
Okay has been passed out it is
on the website gentleman to move
the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman this goes online to
exactly what you were.
Speaking to earlier
Representative this ammendment
simply.
habits.
Municipalities and counties.
From deferring States G. R. T.
collections.
When they are negotiating.
Payment in lieu of taxes.
With project developers prior to
issuing industrial revenue
bonds.
The second point is this
ammendment and No Way affects
the ability of municipalities
and counties to defer local G.
R. T..
And local property taxes and
revenues.
When negotiating payment with
taxes with project developers
prior to issuing.
Our base.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
what that does.
Is simply this it says that the
accounting.
Wants to the for our property
taxes that they wanna.
Manipulate that within their
county for their development.
More power to.
But they should not be able to
give away.
The equivalent.
Of six hundred thousand dollars
from every one of our districts
every one of us.
Because they.
Happen to allow us.
Five percent.
Which is two point one million
dollars.
I hope you understand.
Where I'm coming from
Representative.
In the the a gentleman from
Diana is this a friendly
amendment thank you Mr speaker I
just have a couple of quick
questions to determine that.
Okay great Mr speaker gentlemen
what this was this ammendment
that you're proposing applied to
other industries Mr speaker
gentleman with the supply for
instance to the industrial
revenue bond for the Intel
facility down in Rio Rancho with
this Mr speaker gentlemen apply
to any of the industrial revenue
bonds for pipelines in the
southeast part of the state with
this amendment apply Mr speaker
gentleman to the industrial
revenue bonds for copper wire
manufacturing that exists there
in Dona ana county.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
would apply to every single one
of them but because no County.
Not my County not sure can only
not in the county should be able
to give away state Rep in the
without the state be in at the
table.
Thank thank you Mr speaker
gentleman and has this been
worked out with Mr speaker
gentleman has this been worked
on with the association counties
with our other local
municipalities.
I don't think it has worked I I
I haven't put it before I'm okay
thank you Mr I think that Mr
speaker I have the floor.
I I would tell you.
Gentleman.
That every one of them is going
to anchor more income but
because of the US than they will
with your.
Postal being utilized across the
thirty three counties.
Thank thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman I think the answer
I heard there was no Mr speaker
gentleman seeking to
unilaterally use our this local
control and local local power to
address local economic
development projects flies
directly in the face of a lot of
what I've heard on this floor Mr
speaker gentleman
the fact that a specific set of
of projects in this case when
which server some of our most
rural counties with some of the
most significant needs an
amendment that was put on a
previous bill on this floor by
you Mr speaker and gentleman
that has stopped development of
these I. R. B. projects which I
think is been incredibly harmful
in singles thousand industry
unfortunately I can go so far
with what we have in this bill
which actually goes a step
further for local schools for
the state but Mr speaker and
gentleman I would have to stand
strongly in opposition to the
unilateral attack on and of and
then of a very important
economic development tool that
is used in all thirty three
counties and if we adopt your
amendment would potentially
stall that use across all thirty
three of those counts on fortune
I have to stand in opposition
thank you Mr speaker thank you
general.
Mr speaker and gentleman the one
think that I would tell you is.
You would have to admit.
That every county every
individual County under the
process of these IRB's that
you're talking about.
Usurped the authority of the
state.
Because as your own testimony on
this particular project that we
dreamed up this one point four
billion dollar project.
Yes half of the was taxable
which is.
From my experience on large
linear projects is reasonable.
What the state's going to get.
Under your.
Proposal.
Is about two point one million
dollars.
When they're due.
About.
Forty two million dollars.
And so I agree with you.
That there are places for IRB's.
I've never used one that I I
know of of instances where
they've been used in the energy
business.
But in this case you have a
proponent.
Coming in was one point four
billion dollars in your pocket
enough to to build a one point
four billion dollar project
under this scenario that we're
talking about.
But they don't want to hold our
school children whole.
And they wanted to get an I. R.
B..
Which is nothing more than a tax
subsidy.
That's all it is and if you look
at the definition in the tax
code that's one of the
definitions.
They are spreading their
responsibility to the children.
In in doing that.
Cause us great problems I think
I are being very good.
I think there's a place
important.
I'm not arguing that.
But in this particular instance.
The state of New Mexico.
Is losing horribly to a
proponent this has one point
four billion dollars enough to
build a huge project.
But they don't have enough to
pay your taxes really.
That just doesn't sound right of
Representative.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis ready.
And Turrell you.
We had to deal.
One.
For the.
Of the new members on both sides
of the aisle.
Let's screw through the
structure of a or B. for just a
moment.
Basically what this amounts to
is a governmental entity.
Upgrading to calm the project.
Is that.
That is accurate Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavis.
What are the consequences of
that governmental entity owning
the project would be.
The project not subject.
To gross receipts compensating
or property tax apple is that
correct.
That is correct Mr speaker and
gentleman in this case and in
many cases the proponents of
these projects in an effort to
entice rural counties.
Will entice them with.
Something I mean
Lower taxes are a little bit of
tax but what they're really
after.
Is that.
Sidestepping of G. R. T. and
compensating tax that's the
elephant in the room.
So Mr speaker this count and go
shooting pain reduction less
proponents of these projects.
The proponents.
Would.
Countershading came and say look
what you are kidding.
But because this land this is
Matt texted two dollars of early
Kerr.
We're going to bring in this
construction project and.
And those valuations will
skyrocket.
And you're going to be much
better off if we give you.
This.
Compensation.
For the for our activities but
the little bit of compensation
does it better payment
resembles.
For the tax.
Not at all in a rush your
speaker and gentleman.
That's what the body after.
Capture.
Is the fact that under this
process the state that's our
general fund.
Yes losing on this project that
we dream of one point four
billion dollars which is a real
project.
They're gonna lose forty two
million dollars of tax revenue.
And for that.
The state's going to get two
point one million dollars.
That the county commissioners.
Negotiated on our behalf.
So.
I think you answered my very
next question.
Is present at the table during
these negotiations as a matter
of routine.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
state is not invited nor are
they at the table.
Mr speaker.
For most of these projects the
projects were described by the
gentleman from don ideas of the
Intel's the copper manufacturers
found all the border your rental
in Montreal.
What is the primary incentives
in those projects for the county
the state.
To benefit from our body.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
jobs and if this project was
bringing in long term jobs
families school kids tax payers
I wouldn't be standing here but
because that is a good project.
But these some people off.
Coming in.
Negotiate and I. R. B..
And they're not they're not in
my opinion.
They're not being a good service
some
and a good constituent those
districts but because they're
negotiating lower taxes lower
property taxes.
Their side step in G. R. T. in
compensation taxes.
And.
They don't have.
Just a few a handful.
Of full time employees.
That that operate manage these
projects of and a lot of those
are contract people that come
and go.
If we were getting the kind of
jobs that they got that these
other places that you describe I
would say Hallelujah because
there's nothing New Mexico needs
more than jobs this line doesn't
give people jobs.
Mr speaker.
One from Travis you're exactly
made the next point I wanted to
make and that is reside
fundamental difference.
Between a menu for the wafer
manufacturing facility in Rio
Rancho a copper manufacturing
facility in up Dona Ana County.
Thank you material processing
facility in Lee County and the
fundamental difference is not
chan's not fifty spot hundreds
of high paying ongoing jobs.
So that your baby issued for
years to come.
None of which occurs with
projects in question with this
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavis I'll be
proud to support this amendment.
And the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
John from Chavis at in Tero
yield I'll be happy to.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
You quoted a couple in numbers
there what did you say was the
total amount or did you say what
the the the loss to the state
would be in revenues.
In this case.
At using six percent.
As a combination of compensating
and G. R. T..
Versus the five percent.
that the that the
Representative identified it
would be a loss of about forty
million dollars.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
as you know I sit on the tax
committee.
and Mr speaker and gentleman
today we.
Passed a bill out of the house
bill two ninety one.
And house bill two ninety one
is.
putting money into.
Into elector a good program and
where we're taking that money
for from Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Is from.
Personal income tax so all all
New Mexicans who pay income tax.
If you're above the hundred
thousand dollars and joint
income between husband and wife.
Or
partners the speaker and
gentleman your your in your
personal income tax is going to
go up.
And Mister speaker the other
area where we went to go pay for
this
new program.
Is to reduce the capital gains
tax deduction.
that capital gains tax deduction
continually is represented as a
rich man's tax but if you have a
for one K. or us.
You're a.
A very solid member of the
middle class and you're
investing for the future Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
where we're taking that from if
you have a capital gain if you
sell home.
And you don't reinvest that
money back in a new home within
a year you're gonna have a
capital gains that's anybody who
owns a home and sells that home
and doesn't.
Take all of the money all of
your earnings and.
put into a new home you'll pay
capital gains that's average New
Mexicans and Mr speaker and
gentleman
That if if this one project.
Which is going to be negotiated
away that we're the one specific
project we're talking about
today this is just one project
where this could happen this can
happen project after project
after project.
In every community any time that
there's a power line emerging
power line that goes through.
we are allowing those local
counties to notion of ocean and
go straight away the state's
portion.
That forty two million dollars
that you're talking about would
pay for almost one year.
Of the tax increase on average
New Mexicans Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That is unconscionable to me
that we would allow.
A county commission.
To negotiate that money away on
behalf of the state where your
feelings on that Mr speaker job.
Mr speaker and gentleman my my
point when I I got into looking
at this last year and in New.
I think it's about an
opportunity before New Mexico
New Mexico has a god given
blessing of William.
And.
And it's a real resource.
It's not going to move it's
here.
And we have not done a thing to
capture it.
we are being abused in my
opinion now.
By some coming in.
In rural counties.
And.
They negotiate.
A deal that's a little better
for the county I I get it I mean
I I agree wholeheartedly it's a
little better than.
Then.
And in some cases they had very
low tax values on on property
because I had no industry out
there so they're getting
something I get that.
The problem is.
If we don't stop.
Right now.
And circle the wagons and decide
how we're going to monetize this
resource.
It would be no different than
having a premium and the
Delaware.
And allowing somebody to come in
and drill it all up.
Ship it all out in the state
didn't get a dime.
And so I think fundamentally for
the body.
Yes it's a game changer and it
could be something that makes a
difference if you drive anywhere
just through eastern New Mexico
today.
You're seeing a lot of these
when generation towers going up
which is a good thing I'm all
I'm I'm all about it.
But they have to be.
They have to be
They have to be responsible to
the resource and to the state
they have to be responsible
should the.
To the community center in.
The one thing that the
representative from done Anna
said that I wholeheartedly agree
with.
Is the amendment that we put on
I put on last year.
Did cause a little problem on
these great big projects on the
front end loading.
And
in the first six to ten years.
Counties could have a negative.
Cash flow they could have more
money leaving.
David was coming in and that
needs that needs to be
corrected.
That I was
I was a little aggravated when I
got into it and started looking
at it but because.
The proponent of that project of
that big project.
I knew was going to capture.
Significant property tax
savings.
They were gonna capture forty
two million dollars.
In G. R. T. in compensating tax
savings.
And that proponent could have.
Help the county whole.
Say it was a million dollars a
year for ten years they still
want to come out thirty two
million dollars plus the
property tax savings.
To the benefit.
And so it made me start
thinking.
That we really needed to set
some parameters as the body.
To control this going forward
because if we didn't.
The reason they're coming The
New Mexico right now because
we're subsidized in the fire out
of them.
And they're not coming here
they're coming here because we
have wind and we have subsidies.
And for both of those we get
nothing Representative.
So Mister speaker and and
gentleman.
Seems like a really really good
deal for a.
A wind.
Generating station and a
transmission line from that
station to be able to do this in
New Mexico but is it.
Currently the way this the way
this bill as written it is not
limited.
To something that could be a
jobs generator in New Mexico as
a matter of fact I believe this
particular transmission line.
Begins out of state goes through
New Mexico and goes out of
state.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
the discussed description but I
gave you earlier where we are
looking to take away from New
Mexico tax payers.
In house bill two ninety one.
Personal income tax.
We are taking money away from
them.
In almost the exact same amount
that we're asking.
Allowing.
And out of state company to run
transmission lines through New
Mexico and giving them a break.
Without state involvement
whatsoever we're we're doing
this the county commission in a
couple counties get to make this
decision unilaterally so Mister
speaker John that that this is
agree just to me and if I can
ask you a different question
here the speaker and gentleman
you're somewhat of a
Expert I think would be the
easiest way to say that on.
lines going through New Mexico
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
that you have negotiated and had
Of.
Pipelines going through Mexico
and you stated earlier that you
were never able to get and I are
be.
And Mr speaker and gentleman I
know.
That one of the reasons that I I
heard you explain it maybe you
can explain this to the body.
Is how much money goes into
trying to find.
The proper right waste.
The least expensive way to get
from point a to point B..
And.
In looking for an I. R. B..
How many times.
Were you willing to walk away
from a project after investing
millions and millions and
millions of dollars of site
recruitment.
And exploration.
How many times was it thank you
walked away from a project
because you couldn't get Nairobi
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
company that I work for the
companies that I work for never
utilized an IRP
Maybe we should have I mean when
I look at forty two million
dollars.
Maybe maybe when I was writing
for that brand.
maybe I should have but.
The.
It all comes down to just be in
real.
Engineering then the land.
Is available.
Where it's available and right
of ways available where it's
available.
And so once you have.
That located
sometimes.
I would I would I'm it wouldn't
surprise me that on the one
point four billion dollar
project that they have spent ten
percent in up front engineering.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
would you just walk away from
that money if you didn't get
Nairobi I mean what we're being
told is that these folks are not
going to.
follow through and and in
reality I think that you have a
lot of high powered folks on the
side of the company is trying to
get the R. B. and a lot of times
you have folks in in a smaller
community that might not be as
well prepared to be at the
negotiating table.
so it appears to me that.
Something is going to be offered
to them in reality even if they
offer a really good.
Even if they offer near market
value to them for that our our
buyer be in the gate.
A dollar for dollar almost in in
return.
It's the state dollars I think
that are the real big dollars to
be had well Mr speaker and
gentleman I I don't want to I
don't want to leave here tonight
with people thinking that I just
don't like wind generators that
is absolutely not true it those
guys when they
put tariffs on private land.
They changed the lives of many
ranchers in those lease payments
I've seen some of them I've
heard about others and their big
money and so that's just not
true.
What I'm saying is as prudent
business people on this side of
the finance.
In the house of representatives
and then the Senate we should
not give away our seat at the
table.
We should not allow one County
who might get.
A few million dollars.
Which is more than they had
given away forty two million
dollars of our money without us
being at the table it's just
doesn't make sense.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I think that the body needs to
realize exactly what we're doing
here what we are ceding state
authority.
To county officials and I I
think that in the same way that
we don't what and and that and
has was mentioned by the sponsor
of this bill how we have
advocate for not taking power
away from the counties at the
same time we should not as a
state government give power away
to counties to give a waste
dollars that should go into
state coffers which as I stated
earlier we are looking to pass a
fairly massive tax increase on
the backs of the people who live
here in the states so I I look
forward to supporting your
amendment thank you Mr speaker.
These are for the debate on the
matter.
Gentlelady from Dona.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
Motion is to table the
amendment.
Vote of yes and the amendment
will have been tabled a vote of
no we'll be back on the date of
the amendment the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Alcon votes yes.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes.
Those are closed by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
twenty four in the negative the
amendment has been tabled.
Gentleman from Chavis AT and
Otero you still have thank you
Mr speaker I just the.
I I can count as good as anybody
and now.
I I just want the body to know
that.
What this bill is.
In my opinion is.
Corporate welfare.
Yes
It is a
it's a it's a bill that that
allows.
Our.
Constituents.
To be mistreated.
It's a bill that allows.
Our districts to be cheated out
of.
Gentleman.
It just wanna make sure that
you're not.
Speaking about the motives of
the sponsor because we were
saying when you know this bill
is going to.
That member you know people be
abuser checking various athletes
said just wanna make sure that
we're not now and I appreciate
that we're speaker that is not
my intent at all.
I said this bill
The representative from Daniela
I would consider a friend of
mine and I would think that if
he felt as strongly as I do
about this he would be
Tell me what he thought to and
so on I am telling.
The body.
That.
That that simple with this bill
you'll have someone come in to
New Mexico they're gonna spend
one point four billion dollars
they're gonna pay two million
two point one million dollars
taxes when they should have paid
forty two.
And
And we get absolutely nothing in
severance.
They pay not a dime not one for
anything so with that Mr speaker
I appreciate the time.
The gentleman this further
debate.
The gentleman from.
San Miguel Torrance.
Santa Fe Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from going and up
please you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman from San Miguel
Torrance in Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and no I'm not I just have
a quick question.
You don't Cadena.
How will this help local
economies and rule it and really
come to meet as well if this
were to pass.
Thank you Mr speaker microphone
than.
But thank you so much Mr speaker
thank government.
I really appreciate that
question because it lets us dive
into not only some different I.
R. B. projects Mr speaker
gentleman we can look at some of
these when it comes to a
different energy I. R. B.
budgets Mr speaker and gentleman
in fact back in two thousand and
nineteen in Lee County Lee
County I'm sure hopefully with
the support of representatives
from there did a two hundred and
fifteen million dollar
industrial revenue bonds for a
solar farm Mr speaker and
gentleman earlier tonight I got
to visit about.
Projects in Torrance County
rural Torrance County Mr speaker
gentleman where the county is
now able to provide better fire
service and EMS because of the
receipts that they negotiated Mr
speaker and gentleman on these
wind generation projects
projects Mr speaker and
gentleman and body that last
year's amendment has stopped
installed and kept these
counties from serving their
locals residents their citizens
to the best of their ability Mr
speaker gentleman we know of
projects in seven different
areas from the northern part of
New Mexico all the way down
south into Dona Ana County that
because of last year's amendment
are stalled and are not
happening and that's not just
some abstract thing Mr speaker
gentleman these are communities
hard hit during the COVID
nineteen who are looking to
provide better EMS and fire
service Mr speaker gentleman
they're looking to shore up
support for things like meals on
wheels and Mr speaker gentleman
they're looking to invest in the
kind of economic development
that those local citizens with
their local representatives
choose to focus on Mr speaker
gentleman.
Not my job to tell Torrance
County you can't have a tool
that Lea County takes advantage
of to the tune of four billion
dollars which I think is what we
heard earlier not just on other
projects Mr speaker German but
I'm solar projects.
Mr speaker John and I think it's
it's really kind of not fair of
us to single out this one
industry that as we see it Mr
speaker gentleman is providing
significant opportunity and we
heard before Mr speaker
gentlemen I'll certainly agree
yeah landowners are getting five
to eight thousand dollars per
winter on their land and that
can mean the difference Mr
speaker gentlemen between have
been to lose that family farm or
to
selloff in whole or in part that
family ranch especially Mr
speaker gentleman and you know
as well as anyone under the
current drought conditions.
If they can put up that wind
turbine on their land then that
family can keep that land
productive keep that land in the
fund family and make money off
that land but Mr speaker
gentleman we have heard
repeatedly and we have heard
from constituents all across our
state none more so than in the
northeast part of our state the
rural eastern part of our state
that if they can get
transmission to those when
projects.
Then they might lose that family
farm they might lose that ranch
that county Mr speaker and
gentleman isn't gonna be able to
find that extra EMS service or
that extra law enforcement
protection that their citizens
want Mr speaker gentle and I
think what we're hearing
generally is an argument that
eventually maybe this will come.
If we start one industry if we
deny one industry tools afforded
to every other industry Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
don't think it's necessarily our
job to tell certain communities
what industry they can or cannot
use these tools for Mr speaker
gentleman if we wait these years
that doesn't just mean out you
know no sweat off our back now
Mr speaker and gentleman that
means that family farm or that
family ranch doesn't get income
that is desperately need during
some very tough times and going
into a very tough Water here Mr
speaker gentleman that means
that that community doesn't get
that extreme just service and
I'm not speaking hypothetically
Mr speaker and gentleman the
county leadership from Torrance
County has testified in
committee on this legislation
the amendment last year which
has stalled Development.
And the need to fix that that
before that will to make enough
money to put more EMS service
out there for their communities
for their residents and for
folks who want to live in rural
New Mexico hello I think we
should be service this is a
great revenue generated for them
it allows them to keep that land
Mr speaker and gentleman
productive in just the way that
it has been for generate for
decades if not generations and
it allows them to pass that down
to their children and and to see
maybe children come back to that
land.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman I really fear when we
say that this tool that you use
all across our state and again
we have this simple and twenty
nineteen in Lee County Mr
speaker gentleman.
Part of our state route Gen
resources that support our state
that soffit to do a two hundred
fifteen million dollar
industrial revenue bond for a
solar farm out there when we
tell Torrance County or when we
tell Rio Arriba County we tell
Guadalupe County or others that
know the tool that folks have
used all over the state for
decades we're gonna change that
tool we're going to tell you you
can use that tool we're gonna
squeeze your community for a
little extra money Mr speaker
gentleman when we look at our
state right now twenty two plus
percent reserves historic
investments in education and
we're gonna say we're gonna deny
communities the chance to
develop their economies in the
way that those locally elected
boards those local communities
have been doing and I've asked
for now for every year since
I've been in the legislature.
I just think that so it's a
really bad precedent Mr speaker
gentleman I think it's deeply
concerning as we come out of
this pandemic that we would be
changing the rules for rural
counties who have seen
substantial benefits and are now
you know we would put them
behind the eight ball and say no
you can't negotiate this you
don't know enough or we're not
getting our share Mr speaker
gentleman the facts are that we
are upping the state share with
this legislation we are setting
a positive president a precedent
that that twenty nine to project
in Lee County they didn't follow
that precedent but I think we
are set a new precedent there
but to look at some of these
changes and to look at the
amendment that was put last year
that has put a screeching halt
so this tool that is impacted
seven different areas around the
state that we know of
the I think it does a whole lot
more harm than good.
It stops development that is
desperately needed that is
saving family farms saving
family ranches supporting rural
school districts as we speak.
And if we're gonna put a halt to
that development say Hey you can
pick up Mr speaker gentleman in
a year maybe two years five
years ten years doesn't matter
to us now what that does matter
to is those local communities Mr
speaker gentleman and so to come
back to your question which is
such an important one should we
give local communities these
tools and enjoyed all across the
state for a wide range of
industries that we just saw Lea
County take advantage of back in
twenty nineteen to the tune of
two hundred fifteen million
dollars I would say yes and I
think we have raised the bar Mr
speaker down with this
legislation.
But to see that this legislation
fail or would be to tell these
communities so you have to wait
another year or two or three or
four can I would feel very
comfortable wearing Mr speaker
down meant that in fact.
If we deny this industrial
revenue bond tool to communities
or if we change it as the last
amendment sought to do that we
would be consigning local
communities to worse economic
conditions we would be yanking
the rug out from locally elected
bodies who have invested time
money and effort to go down
these routes in a very thought
out well thought out way and we
would be doing so for for very
small came to the state and deep
loss all across our state
doesn't matter Republican or
Democrat that would hurt folks
off across the state.
So Mister speaker gentleman I
appreciate the question will go
on I think folks the body of her
how important this is and I just
appreciate at you coming from a
rural area us about the
importance of these tools for
rural economies and these
locally elected boards and and I
think we have a good opportunity
to say we support those
communities these tools and
those elected officials tonight
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jennifer.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Dona Ana you know
Torrance County being in my
district of the yeah I hope to
payments that help was called as
far as the HVAC system.
And.
As help with technology and
internet now that the kids are
virtual according to my
district and I think this.
Very important that we we keep
this up committees to help
educate our kids in Albuquerque
and are looking good looks as
possible I thank you for reading
all forward momentum long at all
and I will yield Mister speaker
thank you.
Thank you John there is further
debate.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Donna and using.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from the.
I
was very happy to hear more.
Good friend the gentleman from
Chavis bring up.
The difference between.
These.
Renewable energy projects and
oil and gas service which is a
billion dollars to if we could.
And do a little comparing and
contrasting.
In New Mexico.
Hey horizontal development
project.
Will cost between eight and ten
million dollars to drill and
complete.
So billion dollars would.
Would be a goodly number of
these we've got forty rigs
running in southeast New Mexico
so a couple of months of
economic activities you quick to
this to this billion dollars
that we're talking about.
With a renewable energy project
Mr speaker and gentleman or any
of these petroleum projects
eligible for.
Or do they participate in.
Or benefits from industrial
revenue bonds.
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen my last understanding
of the the rig count Mr speaker
gentleman at the conclusion of
last week was actually sixty two
rates
that we're operating in the
state of New Mexico which I
think we can all agree is a very
good and important thing Mr
speaker and gentleman I'm not
aware of that of whether either
our and asked some of taken
advantage of the industrial
revenue bond process Mr speaker
judgment I'm quite sure that
many components in the value
chain half for the oil and gas
industry as they should as is
their right have taken advantage
of the R. B. process Mr speaker
gentleman Torrance County.
Valencia County in fact most
counties across New Mexico are
blessed with the.
Hydrocarbon resources that we're
deeply fortunate exist down in
your neck of the state Mr
speaker and gentleman but it
doesn't mean Mr speaker
gentleman that we should deny
those communities in those parts
of our state the opportunity to
compete and develop
economically.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
don I know the short answer to
my question.
Thank you.
Sort of got around to it but the
short answer my question was no.
These projects did not
participate in or benefit from.
Once they pay.
The full story.
Of gross receipts in
compensating tax and when the
oil is completed when it starts
to produce these hydrocarbons
nine percent of the gross.
Nine percent.
Thanks to the state in the form
of various taxes.
Now let's move over if we could.
These wind projects that are
under consideration today.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you describe for me.
The.
For the proponent.
Participation in an industrial
revenue bond.
The budget for the proponents.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen you know briefly I'm
excited I appreciate you asking
that question Mr speaker
gentleman speaking to the
different tax structures that
were as it relates to these
different industries Mr speaker
gentleman you and I know that
there are substantial G. R. T.
deductions for the oil and gas
industry as there should be
and the fact Mr speaker
gentleman that they benefits
substantially from those and no
one's arguing Mr speaker
gentleman that they support in a
substantial way the state in New
Mexico those Mr speaker
gentleman those are resources
you know the severance their
severed from the state those
resources don't come back
Mr speaker gentleman like Mr
speaker gentleman of course the
renewable resources that they
are there is an infinite amount
of.
There two totally different
things Mr speaker John.
Now to your next question Mr
speaker gentleman to the
proponents.
I yeah and and speak
specifically Mr speaker
gentleman some of the
depreciation of intangible
assets and the G. R. T.
deductions and other deductions
of the oil and gas industry
enjoys and rightly so I A. B.
our important in that area Mr
speaker gentlemen I have
Sandoval County I have Torrance
County I have financial advisors
who work with those counties in
addition to some of the the
developers of these projects who
are proponents and Mr speaker
gentleman.
I know it may not.
That you know be a welcome fact
perhaps but I think this body
has to
Fully accept that local
communities all across the state
of New Mexico especially in
rural New Mexico whether that's
in Torrance County whether
that's in Guadalupe County
whether that's up above
hopefully and you County Mr
speaker gentleman whether that's
there in Rio Arriba or many
other counties.
These local communities see
substantial benefit from
developing the energy they are
fortunate to have in their
boundaries Mr speaker gentlemen
and we just got through visiting
briefly with the gentleman from
Santa Fe from San Miguel
Torrance and and Santa Fe who
spoke about the education
benefits that come from these
increased help payments payment
of the taxes that were
negotiated as part of industrial
revenue bonds.
Mr speaker gentleman.
Those are the most important
beneficiaries and advocates that
I've been proud to
begin conversation with to be
supportive of
they Mr speaker and gentleman
their voice isn't going away
much is it seems like some may
want to take that voice away by
taking these tools away from
these local communities to do
just like communities all across
the state do.
They are a key proponent in all
of this Mr speaker and gentleman
and there voluntary negotiated
partnership with whether it's
wind generation proponents or
other generation proponents the
natural gas higher industrial
revenue bonds that were past
their in Luna County and others
for some of the power plants
those are the sorts of local
economic development that I feel
we should be support and we
should be faster does this allow
the ability to develop projects
sooner on different scales more
quickly to gather more benefit
sure and just like I spoke about
earlier Mr speaker gentleman
when you talk about denying
entire communities and entire
sections of the state the
ability to develop their energy
resources because they don't
have a transmission land there
and until they get a
transmission line they're not
gonna see these when powers that
bring five to ten thousand
dollars for those local family
farms and local family
references that is far making
them Mr speaker and gentleman
from needed revenue it is
denying them Mr speaker John the
ability to set their economic
future to determine their
economic course and it's
something that I you know last
year's amendment frankly I
deeply regret and I am excited
that we're here the chance to to
fix that amendment while still
raising the bar Mr speaker
gentleman that solar I. R. B.
that happened in Lee County the
billions of others dollars of
IRB's and I don't know the
specifics of all those those
didn't go to the same level that
we are setting with house bill
one oh five.
So
just down Mr speaker gentleman
by repeatedly reminding the body
that the proponents of this
legislation of these projects in
need of transmission to develop
their energy resources determine
their economic future these are
these role introduce role
economies Torrance County and
others who want to do this
because it makes sense for that.
Mr speaker gentleman from
dollars you.
I appreciate the answer.
But I'm going to ask my question
again more SLO's.
For the developer of the project
that is a little.
A little less condescending
Would you please
You know making the decorum with
you during the debate please.
Mr speaker I apologize from the
answer that are received I
thought perhaps that the
gentleman from Donna had not
Senator still to my question.
Okay.
For the developer's one billion
dollar renewable energy project.
Asking for the question hi will
be what would be the said
senator Chiz why are they doing
that is there any financial
incentives.
To be for that developer.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there are financial
advantages for local communities
and for project developers Mr
speaker and gentleman these
voluntary agreements which so
many other counties enter into
for so many other different
kinds of projects which your
county Lee County.
entered into for a solar
project.
Though they they give these
local communities Mr speaker and
gentleman and the project
developers the chance to
structure financially in ways
that are mutually agreeable that
mutual agreement is essential Mr
speaker gentleman maybe that
front loads some of that tax
burden maybe Mr speaker and
gentleman it delays some of that
tax burden or spreads that tax
burden out Mr speaker gentleman
in some cases maybe at a ladies
some of that
tax burden that is there but
these are local agreements
between
these rural counties are rural
constituents working to get the
best deal for their communities
working with project developers
and so are I can't say it any
different Mr speaker gentleman
then.
There is mutual benefit and I
think.
When we acknowledge that we
honor these local communities
and their choices.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Donna and you
know.
Do you.
Our deal.
Why.
Would be the difference between
those hundreds of drilling
projects in southeast New Mexico
and the lack of participation in
the industrial revenue bond
process.
One one.
Those folks not eligible.
And developer base eligible when
they to.
Our characters.
To the location.
And the resource and the
transmission capability just as
surely.
As oil and gas development this
character.
To the location of the reserve
for.
These folks.
Really.
Where else in obtain results.
That are present changes to
their company.
Eastern New Mexico.
The wind resources there.
The transmission lines.
Are you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo Valencia committed.
In this house of representatives
to service center.
The petroleum industry by twenty
first.
Billions of dollars of economic
activity we have committed to
sunset.
The oil and gas.
You're supposed to committee
renewable energy.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
can you tell me what.
Given these folks are kept in
the state they want to be here
in the state I want to be good
neighbors why would we give a
one.
Forty to fifty million dollars
in tax revenue within twenty
five years from now that's all
we're gonna.
Can you explain to me.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the land.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I'd like to make a
couple of quick points one Mr
speaker gentleman are petroleum
products are as we all know
after president Obama lifted the
embargo with Congress back in
twenty fourteen are now traded
globally Mr speaker gentleman we
are blessed that we have these
resources we are fortunate and
we should all be very clear eyed
Mr speaker gentleman that those
petroleum resources are traded
on a worldwide market.
And
it is that worldwide market Mr
speaker gentleman that
determines that that is so
important to their production.
Secondly Mr speaker and
gentleman.
My experts referred me to a Moss
Adams study that estimated New
Mexico wind energy pricing drops
from number one that is Mr
speaker gentleman the most
advantages to develop these
billions of dollars that
hopefully we all agree is a good
thing for local communities it
dropped from first to fifth Mr
speaker gentleman amongst
western states if we remove this
local economic development tool
this the industrial revenue bond
so Mister speaker gentleman
going from first to fifth going
from the best place for
investment investment Mr speaker
John meant we're hearing tonight
that supports local school kids
that supports the M. S. another
key local services to fifth
that's a huge loss for these
communities Mr speaker and
gentleman
The.
so I I I and I wouldn't know the
Germans in a little frustrated
with with longer answer so I
would I was and they're Mr
speaker gentleman do we want to
drop from first to fifth for
folks who want to come in and
invest in these rural
communities that we here help
our rural residents that help
bring Development to these areas
I would rather stay in first Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
donated given.
The locations of these
facilities are largely captive
particularly.
With respect to transmission
lines given.
This renewable energy.
We are shifting to will be.
So important in the future
perhaps this is twenty fifty.
I would like to introduce for
consideration amendment number
one.
To house bill one of five as
amended with the emergency calls
in Montana member number.
Yes point two one nine nine four
six point one.
Sergeant the the leader and I
would just if you're solving all
the problems.
so the two two numbers to one
nine nine four six point one
Germany's movement in general
it's not explained.
Members for consideration Mr
speaker and what this very
simply to us.
Is the eight the current wall
which allows municipalities and
counties to ensure.
Our whole please.
For electric transmission lines
that's all it is.
The gentleman here is just a
friendly amendment.
That thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen it's a lot.
As I look at the amendment Mr
speaker and gentleman it
unfortunately it's not friendly
Mr speaker gentleman just to to
say very briefly.
Mr that Mr speaker gentlemen to
deny this treatment which this
legislature in a bipartisan way
chose to offer just last year
would be a one hundred percent
about face would undermine our
commitment to our community's
much less to private industry in
our state Mr speaker and
gentleman and I think
unfortunately Mr speaker
gentleman it goes even more
Mr speaker and gentleman the
line transmission to areas that
have significant re when
resources are denying this I. R.
B. is like saying you don't get
a pipeline to go to another
energy source or we're gonna not
give you the same tools for a
transmission line as you have
for a pipeline or another source
to get that energy to market and
Mr speaker gentleman I know this
is not the intent but I want to
speak to my fear of what would
happen if we pass this amendment
which is that Mr speaker and
gentleman we would be telling
communities that we're that that
you don't get the same sort of
tools to get that energy read
economic development in your
county.
You don't get the same sort of
tools that everybody else gets
in the state to help develop
their economies and Mr speaker
gentleman when we have entire
communities that are benefiting
greatly from these sorts of wind
resources in this case and we're
going to yank back a tool for
getting transmission lines out
to those communities I think it
would substantially Mr speaker
and gentleman harm the economic
development for those areas and
and I'm just not willing to do
that in this legislation but I
appreciate Mr speaker John in
the amendment in the opportunity
to briefly visit about.
The gentleman the gentleman from
San Juan to do is to be
commended Representative about
twenty thank you Mr speaker and
this gentleman from Lee yield.
Two more for rural two engine
one from San Juan.
Mr speaker before eight.
Gets my my question on this
It's been stated several times
that we would be denying
communities in New Mexico are
the particular project we're
talking about is not a project
in New Mexico.
the speaker and gentleman when
that's being generated is out of
state and travelling through
this the the lines through the
state to the to accept the state
so particular project that is
bringing that has been the focus
of this legislation.
Is
Not a New Mexico based project
so Mister speaker and gentleman
let's talk about New Mexico
based projects.
Couple years ago we passed.
The.
ETA.
We passed.
The requirement.
That that public utilities.
Public electric utilities in New
Mexico.
that are governed by the PRC.
How to.
Half to.
Go to green energy for
replacements affect the mandate
I believe is to get to zero
carbon electricity it by in I am
forgetting now is it by twenty
fifty.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
Saying that projects would not
take place in New Mexico.
Doesn't sound right if for
determining that all new
projects have to be winter
solar.
So transmission lines would have
to take it be put in place.
For that to happen so I'm I'm
I'm just curious about the
description that we would be
denying Communities matter fact.
I think if we were to take
transmission lines out of this
it would drop dramatically help
communities more because they
would be in a position where
they would not have to Nick or
be in a position to being even
asked to note negotiate
negotiate away through an I. R.
B..
Greater taxes.
It doesn't make sense to me that
we mandate something.
We give them a monopoly quite
frankly.
And then we take away the tax
base from that.
So Mister speaker and an
intelligent I'll let you respond
to that real quick Mr speaker
Jim.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Transmission lines in particular
are captive.
They're not going to get re
routed around a particular
county and zigzagged across the
state because of the existence
or not.
Of an industrial revenue.
And the fact that these or
destined to become such an
important.
Portion of the New Mexico
taxpayers we don't have any
choice but to turn to these
folks.
For tax money.
That's the public policy that
we've been following for the
last couple of years.
And given that.
Given that we are not denying
any developer the opportunity to
do anything.
All we're asking them to do is
pay there will.
Representative.
Develop.
It's the taxpayers of New
Mexico.
Have the pockets of the citizens
of those counties.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
When we when we mandate.
Something like this.
What we're doing is saying we're
giving an advantage a great
advantage were telling other
sources that are.
Fossil fuel based that.
You can't.
That's a great advantage for a
business when you're when you
are given a mandate like that.
That was the ETA that we passed
for utilities that are governed
by the E. T. by the PRC or the
public regulation commission.
Mr speaker and gentleman through
this legislature.
And during this session we've
seen the same.
Mandates.
For utilities that are not under
the purview of the PRC.
So what we're saying is all
electricity all future
generation has to come from the
sources.
So Mister speaker gentleman that
it really does not make sense at
all that we mandate something
and the only source of the only
remaining source.
Of tax because there is no as
was mentioned there is no
severance it's been mentioned a
few times or this debate there's
no severance because it's not a
natural resources in the ground
being severed from the earth.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
talking about
a resource that already is not
going to pay that tax so that so
the severance permanent fund
will over time deplete.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
what we're talking about is the
only two remaining sources.
Of tax base from these projects
is the G. R. T. when the project
is built.
And then the property tax.
That is left.
And we're looking through these
the ire bees and I by the way Mr
speaker and gentleman the other
thing that is not part of this
is there is no there are no
permanent jobs.
They are very very very few
permanent jobs for maintenance.
The end up in a situation Mr
speaker and gentleman where.
This new.
Green energy economy that we
keep talking about has no
economy to it.
Not even tax base.
As we continue to chip away.
So the only choice the only the
only other option that we're
gonna have is to go to the
remaining New Mexicans and
continue.
To raise our taxes.
So couple years ago we passed
house bill six once it is fully
implemented which is another two
years away from now.
We will have increase the taxes
on every other New Mexican who's
paying taxes by five hundred
million dollars plus we have
another tax increase that we
heard today in tax.
In the meantime where we the the
the the group.
That is that we keep on saying
that eventually that will
replace.
The tax base.
That comes from oil and gas and
coal the fossil fuels that are
plentiful in New Mexico.
Which K. all of the other taxes
including they are very very
very worker.
Intensive.
So the other taxes that come
through the other services.
That continue to provide.
Services to the oil and gas
industry or to the coal electric
industry.
Including what are.
Payroll taxes personal income
taxes from very very high wages.
We're going to replace that
with.
No jobs.
And through this.
Very little increase to property
tax.
And and read reduction of G. and
G. R. T. to the counties into
the state it in my reading that
correctly speaker John Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan you are exactly correct.
This industrial activity that is
going on in Houston New Mexico
mail is the only game we have
him tell you.
It.
A significant source of state
revenue absent this will be
process.
With with the IRB process in
place.
We for years to come our
database for going.
Thanks.
That.
As we sunset the petroleum
industry will become crucial.
To our ability to maintain
budget.
You are exactly correct Sir.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
So through this.
Process we allow.
It continues it be it was said
several times that we would be
to nine this.
Ability for these community for
this one industry I think that's
what denying IRB's to this one
specific industry but that's not
the case Mr speaker and
gentleman transmission lines
previously.
I have always been excluded.
Weather was a fossil fuel
generation plant that was
producing electricity and
putting it through the lines.
And with the legislation that's
before us today.
Fossil fuel.
Transmission lines fossel for
fossil fuel electric
transmission lines are still
going to be denied I Arby's
gentleman from San Juan we're
debating an amendment about
disclosures we're not debating
anything about other industries
or what industry can.
can participate so if you could
please keep your comments in
your debate on the amendment
that is what you recognize to do
I would certainly appreciate it
as I I think the members would
as well thank you Mr speaker and
and thank you Mr speaker
the reason that I believe these
are connected Mr speaker is
because what we're talking about
disclosure for.
This is going to be something
that's going to that we believe
is going to be necessary because
of the fact of all of these
other taxes.
That are not attached to this.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
If you could just briefly
explain the disclosure purpose
of this of your amendment.
And why this is important
because of the fact that there
are not these other taxes
associated with this so Mister
speaker and gentleman just if
you could to briefly explain
that to the to the body.
Mr speaker Jonathan San Juan not
quite sure that I understand.
The question could you ring for
is that for me you're right Mr
speaker and gentleman we were
talking about the that is the
other amendment that will be
care shared here in just a few
minutes disclosure is not what
we're talking about.
So Mr speaker and gentleman.
The what I I'm not sure the joke
the two oh two number that the
gentleman red is.
Excuse me Mr speaker two one
nine four six point one.
Okay we'll gentleman this this
present one is still has nothing
to do with whether or not only
gas company can participate in
this revenue bond so my earlier
point still stands you keep your
questions to the amendment that
would be appreciated the fact
that you did not know whether
your prefer comments were
related to the manager and I
want to make a comment also the
streets affected all members
would appreciate if you keep
your debate and your questions
to the amendment which was the
purpose for which you were
recognized thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker so I guess
I'll start from the beginning.
so Mr speaker and and gentleman.
Other transmission lines.
Currently are not.
Able to.
Participate in our base is it
for the reasons that I stated
earlier about all those other
taxes and that there are no
permanent jobs with transmission
lines.
Two factors.
First.
Permanent jobs associated with
the transmission line
construction jobs only.
And second these transmission
forms are captive.
Where the power is being
generated and power is being
concerned certain.
For the purpose of the projects
under consideration.
All of this power is moving out
of state.
So there is no.
From a transmission line.
To the state.
X..
Structure in phase.
A small increments property tax
that's it thank you Mr speaker
for reminding me why I was
asking the questions I was
asking earlier so Mister speaker
and gentleman.
Back to my previous point.
If for mandating this activity.
Why would we then give a tax
break for the activity.
Gentleman from San Juan Bates
made.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman these B. as well and I
plan to vote for your amendment.
The gentleman is a further
debate gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Motions to table the amendment
yes the amendment will be tabled
or no we will be back on debate
of the amendment the vote is now
open.
Three seconds to close.
Including all those without a
recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative dal.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Lente.
Representative Terrazas.
Those close to eleven forty two
in the affirmative twenty one of
the negative the amendment has
been tabled with an emergency
clause.
Generally.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Daniela obviously disappointed.
I continue to believe that
these.
Higher lease or.
The tools.
For use in developing.
The is one noble energy problem
jerks I believe that those
counties in the state.
Or settling in many cases for
crimes.
When there should be a hello.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
Are you.
There's further debate next we
have the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe and Taos
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
distinguished gentleman from an
ATA.
Mr speaker I yield to the
distinguished gentlelady from
Rio Arriba Santa Fe and Taos.
Thank you thank you kind
gentleman.
You explain to me of the
transmission lines and jobs and
the money that comes into the
state with the development of
transmission lines sure Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
very much thank you for that
question Mr speaker gentle lady
we've heard here tonight that
there are no permanent jobs when
it comes to transmission or even
the construction of these wind
farms solar projects and that's
just not true Mr speaker gentle
lady we have the Western Spirit
line which is being developed
here in parts of of New Mexico
just a little bit south here we
go under we go through I twenty
five Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
told that there will be a
hundred permanent jobs for that
transmission line that's not a
transmission line that spans
states that's the transmission
line.
Transmission line Mr speaker
gentle lady right here in New
Mexico Mr speaker gentle lady
when it comes to whether it's
linemen who are working on these
lines or when it comes to the
wind technicians Mr speaker
gentle lady in fact the demand
for those jobs far outstrips the
supply that's why Mr speaker
gentle lady and our own Mason
lands community college here in
New Mexico when somebody signs
up for that project sign up for
the degree so when technician
not when they come out when they
sign up they know they're going
to have a job they know that
those skills are in demand and
Mr speaker gentle lady when we
look at the breadth of
transmission when New Mexico is
number one in the economic
potential for developing these
resources the hundreds of jobs
permanent jobs I think that will
support our incredibly
significant Mr speaker gentle
lady to these communities Mr
speaker gentle lady these are
communities these are
Albuquerque or even Las Cruces
or Dona ana county where there's
you know several hundred
thousand people these are
communities Mr speaker gentle
lady that if you have one line
that.
And here's or her family that
move out to a rural part of New
Mexico because they're gonna be
servicing this new transmission
line that is unlocking resources
in New Mexico they can become Mr
speaker gentle lady an integral
part of that community as rural
communities welcome folks in and
become integral parts of those
communities so Mister speaker
gentle lady there are permanent
jobs one hundred jobs just when
it comes to the Western Spirit
transmission line just in the
state of New Mexico.
And when we think about these
construction jobs Mr speaker
gentle lady.
That's not something to sneeze
at when you have a thousand plus
people working on a multi year
projects that has multiple faces
Mr speaker gentle lady if we ask
the residents and the
representatives of some of these
rural communities they have
construction workers who came
there a couple years ago and are
gonna be there a couple years
from now because Mr speaker
gentle lady their skills are
required when you're
constructing these massive
industrial projects Mr speaker
gentle lady when they moved to
that community or they're going
there they seek to move their
family whether that woman or man
who's working on that project
moves their family out there
those are deep and substantial
benefits to these communities so
Mister speaker gentle lady
these are different sorts of
jobs at different scales but to
say they are not permanent jobs
is simply not accurate it's not
in keeping with what we're
seeing all across New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady and if we
simply when we get back to this
bill which seeks to four the
same tool for these communities
and their resources that they
want to develop then we're
looking at unlocking.
Thousands of construction jobs
hundreds if not more of
permanent jobs and that means a
whole heck of a lot in rural
parts of New Mexico and that's
why Mr speaker generally I know
it's been a long debate tonight
but that's why the leaders from
Torrance County.
Leaders from Santa Fe County and
many other parts of New Mexico
are saying just give us the same
pool give us a little bit higher
threshold this extra five
percent of the state give us a
little bit higher threshold than
an Intel or than any of these
other projects but give us the
same tool so that we don't have
to wait year after year after
year to see our resources our
communities about.
Mr speaker I'd I'd like to add
that I are bees in the economic
anchors for rural communities I
think that's what people need to
understand
All we have is we have wind and
we're right that they just a you
just did the on the four hundred
and fifty million dollars with
the petty
with Indian nation for a haircut
the solar and I hate getting at
patching nation and and the
county work with them to do that
again it's to to develop anchor
communities I anchor economic
engine really for rural to rural
communities and and just to give
you an example of what's going
on in north New Mexico
I'm really proud of the people
of Rio Arriba county we we in L.
we so we and this and this this
this body helped create this we
structured a plan to but so that
Rio read that so that the
northern New Mexico community
college could could build a
solar plant out on their
property and this solar on a
plan to the solar farm would
provide would provide the energy
for the L. retail campus menu
this is a hundred year old
campus okay they were operating
on propane they couldn't operate
as a campus unless they got
solar by providing that solar
energy farm for the campus they
not only provided the energy for
the retail campus at from
northern New Mexico college but
they also provided enough Jenner
energy to see to the to provide
energy for seven hundred homes
in that community so almost all
of L. return now is generated by
solar energy as well as a
hundred year old campus that
could not open up they could not
open up that they had to exist
on probate and just to give you
an example of what the community
did we have to work with five
different school district school
board districts and we have to
respond money because what we
wanted to do at the northern we
wanted to create a.
Center for the technical trades
for plumbers and for a
pipefitters and for electric
shins and so every single school
board in our district has to
bond it passed a bond to provide
for the sustaining revenue at
northern us so that we could
create a campus for dual
enrollment for high school kids
so now in five different school
districts in northern New Mexico
we now have concurrent
enrollment programs dual
enrollment programs where as
they they turned sixteen in high
school they can take a
concurrent enrollment they can
become an electrician or a
plumber or pipefitter going to
northern's campus in all retail
we provide that transportation
school bonds paid for this tool
enrollment program and was
supported in five different
districts in northern New Mexico
we couldn't have done that
without a solar energy farm
creating the energy so it was it
was a total it was a total
community effort led by Rick
Bailey of northern New Mexico
college and his board of
directors and the boards of five
different northern rural school
districts and why we wanted to
do this is by creating these
jobs for kids in our schools
are.
Two years later getting there
they're giving their partnership
with the tournament ship that in
these traits they will get the
sixty thousand dollar a year job
at the lab and the lab doesn't
have enough people for these
jobs so it was a whole community
effort to do this but we used we
use solar to create this and we
need more are IRB's in the north
kind gentleman we needed to
anchor a rural community and I
and I must say we are in the
process now in Rio Arriba
putting together an economic
a development plan based on a
based economy or even just jobs
for the the county Rio Arriba
and what we want to have as a
three year plan rural bring in
people we develop a plan with
the leadership of the north and
then we start working and we
need we need vehicles like I. R.
B. is to help us complete this
process so I kind gentleman I'm
I'm very grateful for you
bringing this bill forward to
this body because in rural New
Mexico we need is a free tool we
can get to create an economic
base for our future and I I
think you very much I'm Jim.
Thank you generally there is
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona ana county
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
distinguished gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you gentlemen.
Mr speaker I've had the
privilege to be on.
Several sides of these issues
over the years.
And it's interesting health
thanks develop an I'd like to
talk about a couple
deficiencies in the industrial
revenue bond process to to
highlight several things in this
bill.
The first is.
There are situations where you
have a municipality.
Who can grant industrial revenue
bonds for a project outside the
the municipal limits of that the
municipality and the fact the
county government.
Without their permission.
Likewise you can have the
county.
Choose to issue industrial
revenue bonds for projects
within the municipal limits of a
The best power.
And.
Those things.
Always affect a variety of.
Recipients of property taxes.
And so when I read this bill and
the the changes that are being
proposed we we have this give
and take and ultimately yeah
with most of these projects that
comes down to county commissions
issuing approval of the
industrial revenue bonds.
With the maybe input from the
affected school districts.
Yeah my concern on pages page
three and pages six and seven.
Is the.
Changes in this bill that go to
the issue of school districts.
And.
Early on in my legislative
career.
The issue of one power has been
at the top of the list and
Lincoln County New Mexico.
Because the area around corona
New Mexico is one of the.
Best win resource areas in the
state of New Mexico and yet it's
on tap to the to date because a
lack of transmission lines is as
probably the distinguished Madam
from Dona ana county knows.
The.
Bility.
To negotiate terms and to yes
these industrial revenue bonds
issued go to the county
commission.
Mechanic Commission chooses or
doesn't choose to accept
recommendations from the school
district.
When I was on the county
commissioner Chavis County we
had a wind project east of town
that was wholly within the lake
Arthur school district and it
involved only a few towers.
And the county decided which is
a hundred percent of the bill
money to the late author school
district.
I would suspect that that's
pretty unusual the county
usually tries to take care of
itself first before worrying
about other governmental
entities but on that one it was
small very little money involved
In the big picture and so we
decided a hundred percent of
that the money will go to the
lake or other school districts.
Other projects.
Came before us and.
The decision is how does the
county number one take care of
the increased demand for
services it provides you have to
make sure that the pill payments
are of sufficient amounts to
take care of increased services
of the county provides.
Sheriff deputies.
Potentially additional burdens
on the road crews maintaining
roads it's after
The schools are also impacted
particularly on these types of
projects because there could be
a tremendous influx of of school
age kids during the construction
phase and then all of sudden
you know the projects over and
and the children are there but
there's the schools have have to
bear of whatever blessings and
burdens are associated with that
influx of of students so you
have to take care of schools and
I understand
gentleman that's what we're
doing here is trying to deal
with some school issues so
Mister speaker and gentleman.
In looking at this.
And I'm gonna use Corona as an
example.
Corona is an isolated community
it's a very large school
district covers many square
miles in the central part of the
state.
And if that wind farm and it's a
transmission gets developed in
around Corona New Mexico.
It's going to be the recipient.
Or there's going to be in the
duster revenue bonds issued
probably in the future some have
already been issued for for
projects.
And if I read the bill
correctly.
The industrial revenue bonds in
the bill payments.
Under this the bill are going to
be not only utilize to pay the
Corona school district.
But the bill payments are also
going to benefit school
districts that are.
Forty sixty miles away you don't
see these projects who are even
related to the projects and have
nothing to do with the project.
And yes I see that the the
division is going to be equally
made within the county am I
reading that correctly Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
there is an equitable share of
the increased co payments and Mr
speaker and gentleman as you all
know in the legislation we add
the state
the
The state mill rate in order to
get a roughly a five percent
higher share that go to the
schools Mr speaker gentleman for
these projects you are correct
that within the municipality of
where
the project would be developed
that the that extra five percent
those proceeds the entire bill
payment would be shared equally
amongst the school districts Mr
speaker gentleman and briefly
the reason that proponents of
the legislation including
the counties and other
stakeholders wanted to do that
is precisely the very rural and
spread out nature of where some
of these projects can be and the
fact that.
If development occurs all in one
school district that's actually
maybe that district and this was
an example Mr speaker John that
was related there and Torrance
County that the population based
lived in a different school
district and most of the kids
attended school in a different
district but because the of the
majority of the project was
developed in an adjacent
District that at least according
to the expert terrace testimony
had fewer kids that it seems
that most of the people in that
very rural area where they there
you know really spread out
population lies that it didn't
it didn't benefit folks the way
that it should happen so Mister
speaker gentleman out of an
abundance of support for rural
districts
this equitable approach and
another just briefly Mr speaker
gentleman go down and in in the
area that I represent when it
comes to the state Las Cruces
public schools much larger area.
Much larger tax base more
diversified industries when you
go north and a half public
school district the fact that
both of those districts if an I.
R. B. was pursued the fact that
the hatch district would benefit
equally to the Los crucis
district seem like a positive
step to support those smaller
district.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
There might be a few isolated
instances like that but there
are definite instances where a
school district the project will
be wholly within a school
district.
And that community working well
there are a hundred percent of
the burden and yet.
Introduce a governmental
entities sixty miles or further
away are going to receive equal
benefits under this bill.
And let's just take Corona again
because it it also extends into
Torrance County ironically.
So project in in the corona
school district.
Is going to benefit.
That stance.
It's going to benefit Moriarty.
And I would submit to you
gentlemen that those two
communities are not going to
have any association with the
burdens of the project it's
going to be there on a corona.
Possibly
Maybe a little bit and Bonner or
over and shows those open that
you're going to have a sharing
of the benefits from that
project the bill payments from
that project going to school
districts that are farther far
removed and in many instances
won't have one additional
student attending their schools
because of that project.
And and in the same simple.
Read also school district is
going to benefit under this bill
from that project in corona and
I haven't counted how many miles
but it's a lot of miles from
Ruidoso the corona.
And.
Yet read also schools won't bear
any of the burdens or any of the
additional students or anything
else from projects in corona and
self when when we were talking
to the transmission companies
into the potential when
companies out there.
My advice to the superintendent
of the corona schools was to
make sure.
That he cut a deal with the
county commissioners and
benefited his district.
Because his district was alone
going to bear the burden of this
influx during construction and
then any additional students at
the happen to stay there as you
stated earlier and distinguished
alum the children of the people
who will be servicing the the
wind towers in the transmission
lines what happened.
And.
Yes.
You have other school districts
are going to participate in that
and and if the.
Property tax for rate that
property tax would go only to
the one school district would
not.
Mr speaker gentleman
sorry can you ask that again
briefly I apologize I was
tracking all the way until the
very end.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes the
if there were no IRB's issued
mobile payments if the companies
paid property tax and that
proper their project was solely
within one school district the
property tax payable to for that
project would go solely to the
one school district and the
county and the other
governmental entities there and
but but the only school district
that would benefit would be the
school district in which that
project
why is that correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and thank you for
restating
and I apologize for missing the
first time.
If fate if an IRB if if if no I.
R. B. was that was taken Mr
speaker gentleman the situation
that you outline would be
correct but Mr speaker gentleman
when we look specifically I'm
being told by my experts who
were part of the
Is some of the projects that
you're describing in corona and
I know summer on going out there
Mr speaker gentleman they're
telling me that a substantial
amount of the folks who are
working on those projects the
families who are there because
of those projects the families
in my state are actually living
Mr speaker gentleman in estancia
in Moriarty and therefore when
those kids they go to school
when those folks use the roads
that in some of these instances
when it's so rural that Mr
speaker gentleman setting up
this equitable sharing again if
communities in counties choose
voluntarily to implement these I
are bees.
It presents a new and innovative
way to support these rural
districts who Mr speaker
gentleman you know as well as I
they're hemorrhaging people kids
are growing up they love the
area and they're not coming back
so if we're able to redirect
funds into local schools be able
to have the sort of economic
development and investment that
these sorts of projects can
bring.
That that Dennis equitable
sharing in these approaches are
positive and just to conclude Mr
speaker gentleman the fact that
the labor and the
the folks who are drawn to these
projects for whatever we and
whether they're part of the C.
met creating the line crew or
everything in between.
They're gonna be living and some
of these other adjacent
communities and so having this
equitable sharing that's only
within the.
The districts in that
municipality is a way to share
the benefits and and from our
reading understanding there
there's other perspectives but
for more reading it presents a
an extra support for rural
districts that otherwise can
very much lack that support and
we'll see new people coming to
their area if we may choose to
drive those forty fifty sixty
miles that you outline.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Yes the R. B. is issued by the
county commission.
And agreed to by the school
district effective maybe some
other governmental entities are
involved.
And we have this.
This bill becomes law.
Not only is the school district
taking as yet.
From the taxes that would have
otherwise been generated.
Their bill payment is now taking
a hit because they're having to
share that with.
Many other school districts and
that now I understand if you're
if you're the far was school
district your get something that
the the you get a benefit out.
But the school districts that
are impacted the school district
that's impacted.
Is really getting cents on the
dollar the bill payment that it
otherwise ought to get so so.
In all I'm really concerned that
in your effort to provide some
equity.
We're really.
Not being very equitable to the
very people and the very
district that is bearing the
burden of the project.
And that is my concern with the
with the provisions on I think
page three and then pages six
and seven regarding the sharing
and at and I don't know how you
how you resolve that I know that
if if I were advising the
superintendent of some of the
schools IBM the county
commission demanding that I get
what it's going to cost me to do
and then they're going to have
to negotiate the rest the the to
maybe make a much bigger bill
payment to make it equitable
under the terms of the is group
of the megashare of Bill
Clinton.
One other Mr speaker and
gentleman one other thing I
noticed that the when when I
went through the pill process on
both sides of the table.
That is somewhat.
Of a mystery.
The the.
The the bill payments get
negotiated the the
discussion ensues between in our
case
to county commissioners the
county manager and and then
Senator representatives from the
company that was proposing the
project and it doesn't matter
what type of project.
Basically in this level they're
all the same.
And maybe a couple lawyers.
And those things get the Goshen.
When you get to the public
meeting where the public really
gets an opportunity to discuss
these things
There's not a lot of information
find and and the.
The amount of money that project
would have
generated if they had to pay
because of the property tax
slide like the rest of us that
never gets discussed the how you
arrive at the bill payment never
really gets discussed you try to
get the school school the
schools on board because you
don't want them Corona rose Act
here as a county commissioner
you want to get the soil water
conservation district school
board you want to get the other
governmental entities aligned
with there's really not a up a
good process to to to show
people what also involved and Mr
speaker I would as the gentleman
if if you thanks a.
Those types of that type of
information should be
Maybe.
Expose the little better or the
that some of those terms of the
deal should be made publicly
available maybe a little more
light shone on on those issues
Mr speaker and gentleman works
would you agree with that are.
You like the current process.
Thank thank you so much Mr
speaker thank gentleman
gentleman like you having served
in local government I'm very
aware Mr speaker gentlemen of
the multiple steps in the
process so these sorts of IRB
agreements only go through when
it's an ordinance and Mr speaker
gentleman there are at least
three public meetings that are
part of that ordinance
including the final one where
where can potentially be adopted
Mr speaker and gentleman our
communities our local
governments go through these
sorts of deliberations and
discussions again when it comes
to an I. R. B. and the ordinance
level that those rise to Mr
speaker gentleman I've seen
first hand where proposals have
been taken and proposals have
been rejected Mr speaker
gentleman just last year down
and
In in Los crucis for instance a
proposal was offered and
ultimately it was rejected Mr
speaker gentleman I've seen
proposals offered in reject
rejected in the sense that that
just a area in so Mister speaker
gentleman what I've seen is
actually a balanced and a check
and balance public process that
includes significant disclosure
significant opportunities for
public comment on a very local
level several weeks in between
where local elected officials
you'll run into someone at the
grocery store
you know want to get out of
COVID and all that you know back
to our regular routines where
where folks will absolutely tell
you what's on their mind pro or
con so I would say Mr speaker
gentleman that the process as it
is currently is now I've seen it
work multiple times therefore I
would have to say that I'm
comfortable with the way that it
is working.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
a.
Different than my experience
were
basically these things go on we
don't receive very much public
input on the idea of the process
at all and the I think the.
In my experience even including
the Lincoln County experience
which maybe got a little more.
Interesting because the schools
were or a little more act in the
process for the they have
generally gone through without a
lot of
I wouldn't say opportunity for
public input because the
opportunity certainly that.
But the actual input has
generally been lacking in my
experience because the
information is just not readily
available or at least
That doesn't seem to me to be
readily available and I know
when when I was on the
commission yes you publish the
you publish the ordinance in the
newspaper and it has all the
terms and stuff that you know
and I know that there are a lot
of things are are buried in
their or our behind the scenes
type stuff and so on this point
of the that the that I was
hoping maybe you might agree
with by amendment but maybe not
for Mr speaker I will now move
amendment number one to house
bill number one oh five and this
ammendment is point two one nine
nine four seven point two.
A gentleman is with the
amendment it is on the website
has been distributed gentleman
to explain the amendment.
Mr speaker and and kind
gentleman the this amendment
does exactly what I was trying
to.
Get you to agree to and that was
signed a little more light on
the actual information that goes
into the goes into the insurance
or the negotiation and then the
issuance of the industrial
revenue bonds and basically this
just requires the proponent to
supply certain information that
set forth on on page one of the
amendment in autumn state one
two and three.
the municipality prior to the
issuance of the bond of shells
highlight those things that's on
page two and paragraphs B. one
A. M. B. and M. paragraph two
and then similar provisions
dealing with the accounting
process which are on the
following two pages are the
following a page and a half
percent and section six so one
deals with the municipalities
the other deals were counties
but basically it's to require
the dissemination of information
that's pertinent to the project
it's costumes design
as well as the estimated tax
revenues that it would have
generated if the bonds don't
issue as well as the amount of
the payment in lieu of taxes
that have been negotiated for
for our desire
as well as the number of jobs
that potentially be created well
as I think short term and long
term
so.
If based on on your comment I
don't know whether you'll see
consider this to be a friendly
amendment but I do think that in
my experience having a little
more light shown on this process
would would bring a little more
information to the table would
give not only the schools but
the public a little better idea
of what these industrial revenue
bonds means and what has really
been negotiated.
You know the gentleman from
Daniela is this a friendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker I deeply
appreciate the spirit with which
this ammendment is offered Mr
speaker as we discussed and as
I've had a real chance to races
and then.
The these sorts of things I have
seen disclosed discussed debated
and in some cases of what the
projects going forward other
cases projects not going forward
so Mister speaker gentleman I I
don't I I will say that it's on
friendly at this point for
really two reasons Mr speaker
gentleman one in the my
experience I have seen these
sorts of things work very well
and these sorts of of
disclosures and robust public
discussions with many different
viewpoints Representative fairly
robustly and again seen some
projects move forward other
projects not secondly Mr speaker
and gentleman.
At.
Back to some of the earlier
points thank you unilaterally
changing a tool that is used
across the state by local
communities for local economic
development changing that on a
whim here at the legislature
you know I unfortunately it came
back to bite us and me last year
in a similar sort of way and I
just unfortunately I I don't
think that those sorts of
substantial changes without
stakeholder input but have not
worked out in the best interest
of these local communities and
economic development I
appreciate though deeply the
amendment in the spirit in which
it's offered but it is on
friendly.
K. as in on the amendment
gentleman from the.
Thank you Mr cool gentleman from
Travis yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
certainly yield to my friend
from Lee County.
Gentleman this ammendment
actually souls.
One of the problems the.
During the committee process so
Mister.
On this piece of legislation.
During the committee process.
Information was requested.
From the developer of the
project.
Specifically asking.
What your obligations the.
In the.
This R. or B. is not the issue.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What do you think the answer
was.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
suspect it was I don't know or
we have not calculated that
number yes.
Mr speaker was actually a little
more creatures that it was.
That is proprietary information
that we are not at liberty to
disclose.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Since that result in these are
our babies appear to me to be
incredibly one sided.
Okay
developer the proposed project
work sentences if if you will
issue on our pre for this
project we'll give you this
much.
But Mr speaker and gentleman.
No.
Process.
Is.
Conversation about how much you
would.
In the event that the R. B. is
not the issue Mr speaker and
gentleman you've represented
that you've been on both sides
of these.
Of these negotiations has been
your experience.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Leith.
That has been my experience
because you as a county
commissioner you always have
your county tax assessor
estimate the value of that
project and and it may not be of
an exact number would you try to
get a pretty good number of what
that would mean in terms of of
tax revenues so you know
relatively where your bargaining
position is.
On the other side they to
generally run some numbers
because they're locating a.
Project some plans with and and
as you pointed out the Mr
speaker and gentleman and yeah
and yeah and discussions earlier
with the gentleman from done
yet.
At least with respect when
projects you have to go where
there's with not only when but
consistent when that will
justify the economics of your
process project so I suspect
that most when companies will.
We'll have done some work with
respect to what are the
potential tax rates and and why
do we
need industrial revenue bonds
issued and what is a reasonable
amount of payment in lieu of tax
monies that we should offer to
the county to offset the the
potential tax liability that
they might have otherwise in
court.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you agree with me.
That negotiating without all the
information from a few
negotiating from a position of
of an adequate knowledge.
With these projects how much
these projects cost and how much
money they generate on the part
of county commissioners can you
can you imagine going into a
negotiation.
With an expectation of coming
out.
With a positive result with one
hand tied behind.
Mr speaker and gentleman no and
in fact on the sample I gave you
about the lake Arthur schools
giving them a hundred percent we
ran those numbers have and we
knew exactly what the county was
giving up in terms of tax
revenue.
For that project and we also
understood what the bill
payments that were being offered
would do and and decided to give
a hundred percent the like are
there schools because number one
it's a very small school
districts and they needed the
money.
This
amendment is purely and simply
about transparency.
It is and simply laying all the
cards on the table.
These agreements are finalized
and then.
Advises all of the parties
involved.
The developer.
The county commission.
In the state exactly what the
consequences will be is that
actor Mr speaker and gentleman
it's accurate it requires the
proponent of the project to.
Latest.
Latest information out it also
requires a County and I suppose
and municipalities
who's ever issued in a July that
information out to the public so
it can be discerned with whites
on the project.
Mr speaker and gentleman with
all this information from.
How can the public called hand
could do public no.
Whether this was.
What is our current commission
was performed in a workmanlike
manner or.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
ladies as pointed out by the
gentleman from Dona Ana County
you do have to go through a
public process to pass the
ordinance at and in order to
issue industrial revenue bonds
you have to issue them through
an ordinance process so there
are opportunities I say
opportunities for the public to
be involved in public hearings
on the issue.
The issue really is what
information is readily available
to the public to make.
I suppose maybe informed
questions to see the accurate
information and to discern
whether or not.
They they want to engage in that
debate because generally in the
ordinance at its much like our
bills there's a lot of words on
paper but directly discern what
those things mean without the
information that's provided and
in this ammendment I would I
would suspect that very few
people tumbled to all the
details that would be provided
have yes this ammendment were to
be affects to this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis and interested
transparency.
In the interest of laying all
the cards on the table.
Before during and after this
process in the interest of
letting the public know exactly
what they're getting.
For the industrial revenue bond
issuance.
This looks like a good amendment
public proud to support thank
you Mr speaker engine.
To further debate.
The movie.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment generally this motion
is a table the amendment voted
yes we'll table the amendment a
vote of no we'll be back on the
date of the amendment the vote
is now open.
Thirty cents to close.
That's a close.
But those without a recorded
vote.
Representative Chasey.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes to table Representative
Harry Garcia both yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes the table Representative
Roybal Caballero votes yes.
This is not close that out of
forty four in the affirmative
twenty four in the negative the
amendment is tabled.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from San Juan
Representative Lujan.
Mr all of these are generally so
the floor.
Mr speaker thank you
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman of I
am really concerned about the
impact
particularly to the school
districts that are very rural
who have some of these projects
and transmission lines that will
be going through them and
siphoning off some of that money
to the larger cities that will
will benefit from these as well
I'm tremendously concerned with
that I hope you'll take a look
at that it's impact is the same
then move forward and Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you for the
debate I appreciate your
answers.
Thank you speaker thank you
gentleman there is debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Dona Ana you.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you.
I just have some clarifying
questions if I may I believe
this.
This piece of legislation are
those that ball do this
presented in rural economic
development interim committee
last year and I had asking
questions then and I never got
any responses back so I just
wanted to clarify some things.
So when we're talking about.
What.
By mental protection that.
It's stipulated in the thank
goodness for for the public
public goods.
Wildlife reserves there did this
crosses and also these not to be
crossed the Rio Grande and I'm
wondering if those issues that
were discussed through more
mental protections or concerns
were addressed through this
legislation for.
Four Mr.
Mr speaker.
Thank Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you for the question Mr
speaker gentle lady as it
relates specifically to the
industrial revenue bond process
I would say yes Mr speaker
gentle lady again these are
voluntary local agreements and
course that's the subject of our
legislation tonight these are
voluntary local agreements Mr
speaker gentle lady entered into
by the representatives and the
residents of these local areas
Mr speaker gentle lady who I
think we can count on to know
their local areas exceedingly
well to know Mr speaker gentle
lady the concerns that may exist
including from an environmental
perspective Mr speaker gentle
lady.
As this relates or as some of
your concerns relate to federal
land and or federal water issues
than those would not be part of
the industrial revenue bond
process but Mr speaker gentle
lady although outside the scope
of this legislation there is a
wide array of the very highest
scrutiny for specifically
projects that up excuse me Mr
speaker gentle lady
you know take place even one.
One inch one mater one mile
often times much more on these
federally owned and federally
managed properties so in both
cases Mr speaker lady gentle
lady I think the environmental
concerns
Can should and are taken into
consideration for these
projects.
Mr speaker and gentleman I.
That answers my question
completely I I think I still
have some concerns with this and
getting some answers because I
was.
I was told I would have that
conversation was not provided
that.
So I still have some questions
of from your answer I I don't
know that it covers.
I have and yes some of them are
related and go to the the
federal jurisdiction this area
for this project you know for.
So that is why so I guess I'll
look to see if there are
answers.
Mr speaker.
Met thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady that those
that's not in the scope of this
legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady it is an
important point that you raise.
The most strict level of
standards including
environmental and impact
statement and approval by
federal land management managers
whomever they may be is required
before the construction of
either the
the generation or the
transmission projects so Mister
speaker gentle lady although not
in the scope at all of tonight's
legislation the strictest
standard at the federal level
subject to approval from the
environmental protection agency
as well as the individual land
management Ms B. they the of
land management the they the
United States Forest Service and
the department of agriculture
the that the bureau of
reclamation along the Rio Grande
and the various wildlife refuges
those are all required Mr
speaker gentle lady.
This piece of legislation is
just.
First step so to speak of
getting getting this proper
business projects into their if
elected.
Position.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady this legislation is
simply affording the industrial
revenue bond tool for local
communities be they counties do
they municipalities to its
affording them the voluntary use
of this industrial revenue
revenue bond tool within their
jurisdictions and that can be Mr
speaker gentle lady that can be
for various stages of projects
including the construction of
the projects but this simply
affords them the voluntary use
of this tool available to the
rest of New Mexico communities
for a wide array of other
industries and economic
development projects.
Thank you Mr speaker this
legislation is not passed
through weren't what is it what
would it mean for this project.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally it's a great question
I deeply appreciate that
question Mr speaker gentle lady
this legislation isn't not in
relation to any specific project
be that transmission or
generation Mr speaker gentle
lady an amendment placed on the
house floor in twenty twenty
last year.
Has financially disadvantaged
community counties from entering
into these are voluntary I. R.
B. industrial revenue bond
agreements such that they have
to pay more than they are taking
and for a number of years to out
to local school districts
therefore making the specific
tool literally unusable for any
project that has to do with
electric generation or electric
transmission so the consequences
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
not and acting this bill tonight
is that we tell every single
community across New Mexico they
cannot utilize the industrial
revenue revenue bond tool for
either electricity generation or
for electricity transmission
projects some of which are
central to these communities
economic development because no
County well financially want to
enter into these because Mr
speaker gentle lady the counties
based upon an amendment placed
upon this house floor last year
We'll have to pay.
Far more than they receive it in
especially in the opening of
five to six years of those
agreements so and another way to
put it Mr speaker gentle lady we
take away this tool that has
been central to developing
billions of dollars of
industrial infrastructure
including electricity generation
across New Mexico we stopped
this tool from helping build
transmission ride as communities
are looking to tap in to their
electricity generation potential
and therefore I fear that we
would cause significant economic
harm by delaying or perhaps even
entirely doing away with many of
these projects.
Thank you
Mr speaker
There's just so many questions
in my mind right now with this
and what this means for future
projects and other projects with
broadband perhaps other other
types of projects this would
enable our make things easier
for those type types of.
industrial are given the
benefit.
If this is an act.
Mr Mr speaker gentle lady to the
extent that the development of
transmission lines and we've
heard from our rural electric
coops who are interested in
these to the extent that the jet
the development of those
transmission lines of Ford's
additional development either
through the lines or through the
right of way that four other
benefits to the communities I
would definitely agree with you
the potential is there at least
to benefit in these other areas
and if we don't do this then we
would see negative consequences
in those areas.
Thank you Sir.
I really appreciate this this
gives us.
Incident answers to the
questions I have and I probably
have somewhere down the road and
that really piece that creative
discussion
on your back thank you.
Thank you thank you generally
this further debate the gentle
lady from Katrin Sapporo
influencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
one from Dona Ana yield I yield
to the gentle lady from captions
the coral and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you kind gentleman I raised my
hand I put my hand down I raised
my hand to put my hand down but
I can't help myself any longer
Mr speaker kind gentleman I have
three different transmission
entities are coming through
three different.
Some have been really good
others have been mediocre at
some terrible so Mister speaker
kind gentleman I just wanted to
bring
the attention of the body that.
In my district I have ranchers
and environmentalists on the
same page.
Never in my life have I seen
such a half of our people
against the transmission lines
against the wind turbines then I
have counties were signing
resolutions against it and I
have other counties that are
making agreements with.
So in the end Mr speaker and
gentleman our.
Brian you know that this is
something that's needed in New
Mexico but I also know that it's
something that is.
Detrimental to the landscape our
of one of my constituents who
have concerns I know that the
entity is all the entities are
doing their best to mitigate
what's going to run across New
Mexico and we're lucky we have
something that we can do that
we're just like the wind
turbines are you'll see a bill
into County if you drive south
of the border and you'll see the
new transmission lines going in
across there they've changed
their direction several times
trying to
help with the
Wildlife refuge in the areas
they've changed directions for
ranchers and farmers.
But in the end Mr speaker kind
gentleman
find a little ironic that we're
talking about local re elected
bodies being able to make
decisions on what's happening
when we don't always take that
into consideration our double
standard one minute we're taking
it into consideration in the
next we're not so we have to
think about Mr speaker
curriculum and what's best for
our communities what's best for
New Mexico and I will leave it
at that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The generated this further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative Ely thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo and
Sandoval so Mr speaker and
gentleman.
at I'm confused by this bill and
I think maybe you can help me.
If this bill passes it gives the
local communities the option of
using Arby's for transmission
and other electrical purposes
that correct Mr speaker
gentleman yes so Mr speaker and
gentleman.
as as the speaker reminded me
the other day committee my
memory goes back to the horse
and buggy days and I will tell
you that I was a Sandoval county
commissioner.
When we were doing our bees for
Intel.
And I can tell you that they
have Sandoval County.
Did not have the option.
Of doing our bees we would not
have Intel in New Mexico that's
a fact and I negotiated the last
I. R. V.
with the Intel back in two
thousand four sixteen billion
dollars that provided for I know
we do get to sixteen billion but
it was a sixteen billion dollar
I. R. B. that provided for all
kinds of projects in Santa Fe
County and assured that we have
a workforce that was well paid
both Keralites in Rio Rancho and
I think the residents of Rio
Rancho in the Sandoval county
commission currently would tell
you that Rio Rancho New most of
Krauss would not be nearly as
prosperous as they were without
Intel that even if Intel has
declined is still a viable
company New Mexico in is it
currently expanding and all of
that started with the IRB's so
as I'm reading this this doesn't
include our local communities to
do wire because what it does is
it gives local communities which
we've heard so much about
impassable it's a different
issues all we want to return
power to local communities just
does this this doesn't in any
way endorsed local communities
to do anything but it gives them
an extra economic development
tool is not what it does to I
just Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker German you're absolutely
right it gives them the same
economic tool for many of these
much more rural communities
whose economic development
opportunities are different but
not.
At all less important than the
economic development opportunity
you outlined closer to a metro
area it gives them the same
school and it says that we trust
them to use that tool in a way
that's beneficial for them and
their residents.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I do
have to tell you that we're
there was something funny that
occurred to me as you were
talking about local control that
I remember then governor bill
Richardson wanting to come down
to Sandoval County and tell us
how to negotiate the R. B..
And I had the misfortune of
having to tell governor
Richardson that wasn't gonna
happen Sandoval County was going
to call the shots with the Intel
that'd make the governor happy
but it sure made the residences
Sandoval County.
And it was a good and prosperous
thing for San Juan County I
guess one of the things I'm
interested in I've never done
bond work but one of the things
that I'm interested in is this
holding harmless school
districts I see makes it
virtually impossible are the
unintended consequence of the
past bill to get the Arby's for
the purposes that you've
described that's why you need
this bill is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman yes Mr
speaker gentleman based upon an
amendment that was adopted last
year that required counties Mr
speaker gentleman to essentially
pay out
far more than they are getting
in especially in the earlier
years to school districts it had
the unfortunate outcome of
meaning nothing for no one no
money for counties from these
projects and no development of
these projects in those counties
nor for the school districts Mr
speaker and gentleman and so
what we come back to the body
this year with.
In recognition that the a
particular role nature of these
economic opportunities.
Is a a way works through with
local stakeholders in order to
really make sure that in parts
of rural New Mexico where kids
are leaving
populations are dwindling we're
gonna find a way that these
economic development efforts
support not only the local
communities large or small as
they may be but also these
school districts and in so doing
we think do something that's
very positive for
there especially rural parts of
New Mexico where these economic
development opportunities really
reside most substantially.
Mr speaker John thank you for
that answer I was curious
the idea I have some looking at
the FIR says this is a duplicate
of Senate bill seventy two who's
carrying a bill in the Senate so
that we know.
Mr speaker gentleman and very
proud to say that senator
Neville it in from the the
northwest part of our state is
carrying that piece of
legislation Mr speaker gentleman
as I understand it he's also
been a local representative and
county commission engaged in
these I. R. B. projects and Mr
speaker gentleman has seen fit
to sponsor this legislation so
far far less debate perhaps we
should say that and then in our
body Mr speaker gentleman and
all at one point receiving
unanimous approval Mr speaker
gentleman but all it is to state
is that a local elected
officials now I state elected
official has
seen fit to utilize this tool
and seeing the benefits of this
tool the industrial revenue bond
process and seeing fit to four
that tool to many parts of rural
New Mexico that.
I need this to or at least are
asking for this voluntary pool
their choice whether or not to
use that in order to benefit
economically and to support
their residents and I know
throughout a long debate tonight
Mr speaker gentleman it bears
repeating now but places like
Torrance County have been able
to better educate their kids
provide more services for their
residents through the use of the
industrial revenue revenue bond
pool.
Allowing that for transmission
will only grow the opportunities
speed up development bring more
benefits and it's gonna fix a
problem Mr speaker gentleman
that that unfortunately
happened last year on this for
this house that essentially took
this tool away from communities
seeking to develop their wind
energy resources specifically
and so I'm I'm excited that we
get the chance to fix that
tonight we do so we raise the
bar Mr speaker gentleman and for
the same opportunities you
enjoyed with Intel to other
communities in other parts of
our state Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you and thank
you for this thoughtful
bipartisan bill that will have
both rural and urban communities
thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker this motion having
been debated for three hours I
move that the debate cease no
objection it is ordered.
Close.
Thank you so much Mr speaker
thank you body I deeply
appreciate tonight's debate I
relish the opportunity we have
to support all parts of New
Mexico with an equal opportunity
voluntary tool the industrial
revenue bond project so that
communities can develop their
economies using their resources
with their people and with that
Mr speaker I would move that
house bill one of five as
amended do now pass we are on
final passage of house bill one
of five is amended the vote is
now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The
clerk to call the member without
a recorded vote.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes what is closed with a vote
of forty four in the affirmative
twenty five negative house bill
when I was admitted without an
emergency clause has duly passed
the house.
Mexico that item number two at
gentleman from Johnny and I are
you ready on house bill ninety
three.
Yes Mr speaker determined to the
point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for passing house bill
ninety three as amended on final
passage has been taken gentleman
to explain the bills.
Thank you Mr speaker
HB.
Three ninety three is a is a
bill that is intended to help.
some of our more will come on
some of our most affordable
students in New Mexico of this
bill is to help students of
students who are are
experiencing homelessness and
who are also in the foster care
system
as we know many of the students
experience for dramatic events
in their lives and what we're
looking for us to do with this
bill Mr speaker is to.
For schools and school districts
to consider alternative means of
discipline instead of expulsion
and or suspension
as as we me and as many of us
may or may not know you know
especially with our homeless
students up if they are deceased
school is a safe place for them
and if they are in school there
are on the streets so if if I we
can also school districts to
consider utilizing of
restorative justice or not or
other similar means of working
with these kids and keeping them
in school that's what we want to
do so that is the purpose of
this bill Mr speaker is to keep
our homeless and our foster
youth in school where they
belong and with that Mr speaker
sent for questions there is
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the
representative from Donna Andrea
and we you'll German.
If we use your I.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Dona Ana kindly
yields.
Thank you Mr speaker yes ideal.
Mr speaker and gentleman so the
way I understand your bill is
it's a.
As in the requirement of doing I
believe it's called.
Interventions prior to.
either a suspension or expulsion
taking place is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct yes.
And Mister speaker for the
benefit of the body the
paragraph on references found on
page two.
And it's in Sumpter paragraph B.
as in Bravo.
And I did have the opportunity
to to speak with the gentleman
from Dona Ana prior prior to the
debate.
And I do have and then I'm gonna
offer Mr speaker.
That amendment is and I would
move house floor amendment
number one to house bill ninety
three.
As amended in when you're ready
Mr speaker three the two oh two
number for the body please go
ahead.
Thank you Mr speaker the to to
numbers point two two zero three
four nine point two.
Thank gentleman to explain in it
I believe it it has been
distributed it is on the website
the gentleman to explain his
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker what this
amendment does is it's it keeps
in place the need for the
interventions that are described
in this paragraph.
However it makes a couple
important exceptions one of
those exceptions is if a student
brings a deadly weapon on
campus.
And the other exception is if
there's a clear likelihood of
the student committing great
bodily harm to other students or
schools person.
And so it if any of those two
circumstances happen the
students still gets a due
process hearing all of his due
process rights are still
satisfied this doesn't change
any of that.
All this does is it allows the
the school to either suspend.
Or expel the student without
having to go through all the
exhaustion of of interventions
that just that's described in
subparagraph B..
Thank you gentlemen with the
gentleman from Indiana is this a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker yes it is.
All rights.
That is good news.
I'm gonna pass on the free to
the answer is there debate on
the amendment.
Is your objection to hearing
house floor amendment number one
to house bill ninety three as
amended is adopted Jennifer send
one you still have the floor
thank you Mr speaker so I I feel
this pressure now to talk for
the next two hours and fifty
five minutes now there's no no
debate on the mental depression
all gentleman feel free not to
debate.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to mention that you know.
Our children students the that
our transit is an issue in our
state and I do appreciate the
changes that this bill makes in
an effort to keep those kids in
school and you this topic came
up tangentially in in house at
this morning and and that is if
you looked.
At the lifetime earning
potential of someone who
graduates from high school
verses those who drop out it's
substantial difference in
lifetime earnings and so the
extent that we can keep some of
the students and school and get
them to the point of graduation
I think it's going to be
obviously better for those
students and also better for our
state so with that Mr speaker
you'll back the floor.
The gentleman this further
debate the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert to.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from dynamic county
yield.
Mr speaker yes ideals look I
don't want.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen couple questions and
we went over these and and
committee one I've heard this
bill.
The first one is.
The.
Bill talks about the requiring
some local school boards to.
Put in their policy that action
and and my question Committee
was.
Why do we need to take.
The discretion out of the local
school boards and endorsed this
policy upon.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
crimes Allman I I I you recall
this comp is this of this
questioning during the committee
hearing and I'm and I remember
seeing that these particular
students so we're trying to
protect or is this more
especially the whole students
are protected under the
commitment Act and that activity
is a federal law which provides
the students does additional
help and resources.
That said Mr speaker kind
gentleman there are the policies
in place at the local school
districts that up.
Already in place to protect the
students what we're trying to do
with this bill is just add
additional protections to the
students so they can remain in
school to continue their
education.
Mr speaker kind of.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I see
a program of the on page two
that but basically it says that
the individual schools more
establish their school this
propulsive but really it can
only establish that policy if it
contains those
Requirements that you put in in
paragraphs that a and B. and C.
up above is accurate.
Today Joe Mr speaker and
gentleman yes and so it that
that's.
It also
with the what I like about this
bill is that it allows the the
discretion to do that you know
even if if the school districts
Mr speaker kind dominos already
have these types of policies and
to play in place we this bill is
a gonna supplant that it's going
to supplement that that for them
so the what we're trying to do
is cover all our bases and
ensure that there's parity among
all in New Mexico districts in
our charter schools that would
allow this to process to to take
place for these particular sub
for this for these to particular
subgroups not necessarily for
the population in general it's
we really we're really targeting
these these subgroups of
students for a very small
percentage of the student body
in the state Mr speaker and kind
don't.
Mr speaker and gentleman laden
my last point is that.
Basically you could ask to
students that are engaged in the
same act same type of activity
and yet one.
Will be.
Maybe punished differently than
the other one because one of
them fits that category in which
your bills trying to address is
that the outcome.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
Hello Mr speaker and gentleman
it up it really depends on the
situation what happened at at
the school and what happened
between the students you know
the I would like to to think
that there would be of parity
and that the people with the the
students would be treated
equally however this this bill
is meant to allow the students
who are almost in particular to
have some extra protections put
in place to keep them in school
that's that's that's the main
point of our bill is to keep the
students in school.
M. Mr speaker and gentleman that
that's a that's a point though
you could have a a policy that
would potentially deal with one
student who's not homeless in a
certain fashion and yet with
respect to the homeless students
you would have a different
policy is that and and that
results in different
discipline being meted out to
those two students just based on
their.
Status is either having a home
or not having a home is that
correct.
Mr speaker kind element of what
we you know to to to to that
point we also know that homeless
students are disciplined at
twice the rate of their appears
for homeless that's why we're
asking for these protections
because Mr speaker kind
gentleman homeless students
usually and especially youth who
are on their own don't have
parents or guardians who are
able to advocate for them and
are aren't able to be there for
that for that particular scene
when this type of situation
arises that's why we're we're
asking for the for the use of
protections in place for the
students to have the opportunity
to at least get her out and at
least you have the outside
situation taken into
consideration before being
suspended from school.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know I guess those statistics
don't surprise me in the
probably statistics that go back
even to the dark ages when I
went to school but the fact is
that you have students.
Who could be disruptive in class
and.
Under this policy there the
school board would have to
figure out how to deal with
those students who are homeless
through may be disruptive in
class and at the same time meet
the goals of keeping them in
school keeping them on an
educational path and and and
someone engage us I suspect
and you know my big concern as I
stated in committee was.
Teachers have got to have the
latitude to.
Have some discipline in the
classroom and to create a
learning environment for all the
students because none of the
students can learn unless we
create a learning environment in
the classroom.
And and so that all right.
I certainly.
Law the goals that you're trying
to achieve I just want to make
sure that we're not sacrificing
the learning opportunities of
the whole to accomplish these
goals of of giving the students
who come from from
Situations that none of us would
want a child to have to grow up
in.
You know our hearts go out to
the same time we have to educate
our students we have to do a
better job educating our
students and so I would R. I
hope that you've gotten that
line where we needed to be but I
still expressing concern that
this policy may lead to some
disruptions in the classroom the
teacher can not the.
Of.
Adequately address and that the
school boards
may just turn a blind eye to and
and I hope that doesn't happen
but as I see the issue there
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for for your answers
there's further debate John from
Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from the field.
Mr speaker yes I yield to the
kind of general.
Gentleman I'm going to.
Pursue San Juan questions as my
colleague from.
From Travis.
There were a couple of terms in
here not being an educator.
In schools in the vernacular
could you flesh out form of
serval terms or in your bill
restorative justice practices
and positive behavioral
interventions could you give me
some specifics Mr speaker and
gentleman on what that might
mean in English to alignment
for.
Mr speaker kind dominos the
those those terms are used up
and based on a they're they're
you they're taking problem
models are and are there are
evidence based models that take
into consideration the outside
of factors in a student's life
not necessarily related to
school so Mr chairman Mr speaker
and and kinda meant you could be
storms are used by many of
mental health professionals by
social workers by counselors to
implement certain strategies to
help and to work with the
particular students who who are
experiencing homelessness or in
analysis from home since Mr
speaker kind gentleman it could
be any student whatsoever these
these and these methods can be
applied to so the the the to
answer your question Mr speaker
and gentleman these are terms
that are one seeing used from
evidence based.
Programs that professionals in
in the deal with those issues
are the ones that use those
methods and those are those
strategies to help keep students
in school or to help them with
other of potential mental health
or trauma issues Mr Mister
speaker and I don't.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you list the disruptive student
that so.
Struck another student in the
classroom could you describe
with one of these practices with
some specificity how that might
be happy what the handled.
Utilizing these principles.
Mr speaker kind gentleman but.
I would dare to say that a
teacher would necessarily
implement those practices
because in my experience
teachers are really trained and
that so Mister speaker kind
gentleman if an incident like
that were to happen the
classroom then usually those
students are referred to that
screen faster or to a social
worker for them to to up to
investigate what happened and to
implement these practices of
they're necessary Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman
New York state involving
population described in the bill
is very very broad even up to
students that or.
In a household with divorced
parents.
Thanks to just declares about
half of the country anymore so
you could make a case I suppose
the virtually all students in
the classroom would have some
form of disability or or nearly
some form of disability that's
described and your bill is that
that is.
Is everybody going to trump the
treated equal.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
Yes and in those all the
students will be treated because
they already these systems
already in place in in the in
the schools are schools these
types of systems already in
place the this isn't out of
anything our new or or
revolutionary that we're doing
here Mr speaker Mr kind almond
we are are simply asking the for
the opportunity for these young
people for these students who
have been identified as such to
have the equal opportunity to
stay in school and not be
suspended so that said Mr
speaker kind gentleman up this
would be a very good practice to
implement in my opinion for
everybody and not just
specifically of students who
fall under these categories I
think these types of restorative
justice and
programs and
strategies that that counselors
and social workers can use can
easily apply to any trial in any
class of Mister chair Mister of
speaker and I don't.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
conversations again on often
educators so.
Would probably.
Thank you appreciation from the
problems.
The teachers and administrators
face put but they describe to
me.
Our current situation is such
that there are virtually no
consequences for misbehavior in
the school system.
And that's a problem.
Okay what's.
The real world air.
In fact consequences.
I'll give you this one for
example and then closed on line
of questioning but I had
superintendents local school
system has a number of important
instructors because we we can't
find enough New Mexico or cross
border in Texas instructors
additional classrooms for
instructors.
As percent as knowledgeable
people.
This country.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
this was related to me was it's
a bit of a culture shock.
In the classroom Hey student
goal dropping bombs on.
I just don't know how to react
to that situation and also truly
no consequences for the.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
With respect to the line.
That was strong between students
rights and the teachers
abilities to maintain control
and enforce discipline.
My concern is.
This legislation may have moved
too far in the direction.
Of the students.
However teachers need the
ability.
Without repercussions to gently
but effectively.
Disciplined students otherwise
what we're left in the
classroom.
Is chaos thank you Mr speaker
and thank you to everyone for
your answers is further debate
the gentle lady from Chavis
Representative.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman from done in a
yield place.
Mr speaker I yield to the
kindly.
Mr speaker thank you very much
some of my questions were
brought up by the the.
Speaker right before me.
That Mr speaker I do have some
concerns here.
Hi of the did on this bill
whenever of the still on the
Education Committee at didn't
vote in favor of it.
Because Mr speaker gentleman of.
Our teachers need the right.
Need to have the respect of
their students Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Dona Ana.
They don't right now with a lot
of these cases because these
young people realize that these
teachers can't do anything about
that students behavior in the
classroom.
Mr speaker gentleman.
I'm looking on page four to your
bill.
Starting on line sixteen
continuing done up on to page.
I.
Used in this section.
Other at first childhood
experiences.
Means potentially traumatic
events that occur in childhood
may include poverty.
Experienced violence or other
abuse or neglect.
Witnessing violence in the home
or community.
Having a family member attempt
or die by suicide or growing up
in a household with substance
abuse mental health problems
instability due to parental
separation or have some members
being in jail or prison.
Mr speaker.
Any of these young kids and it
doesn't matter if they're four
years old or eighteen years old.
They can turn on the television
or look at the front page of the
newspaper in witness.
Acts of violence in the
community in our state in our
country and in our world isn't
that correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker trying to lady yes
that that is correct we do have
there are many children Mr
speaker kindly that have been
exposed to those type of things
yes.
Mr speaker often sent a few kids
I would say most kids.
You can turn on any national
news state and be able to see
some of the greatest things that
do happen that might affect kids
but if we're going to get keep
the blame off on something else
something else something else we
can just keep going on and on
and on Mr speaker gentleman from
done in a way way back whenever
you weren't even born yet to
help make ends meet in the
profession the.
We were involved in at the time.
I was the substitute school
teacher.
And I love being in the
classroom with the shin people.
There are believed there was
always one student that like to
disrupt the whole class.
In this one particular.
T. T. substitute teaching job
that I had I was there for two
months.
And it got to the point where
the student that was being
destructive taking down to the
principal's office and us it if
you don't call the parents I
will he may not come back to the
classroom until his parents come
up here.
And you know what it didn't take
a school board to make the
decision what was gonna happen
to this young person.
It was the parents.
That control.
When a position person came back
into the classroom.
That person had changed was
receptive to what we were trying
to do is a class.
And there was no more acting up
in the classroom that Mr speaker
gentleman we have taken all of
sortie away.
For more state school boards
from our principles from our
superintendents and most
especially from the teachers Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Our educators and that's a key
word or our educators.
Need the backing of their
principle of their fellow
teachers at the superintendent
of the school boards and most
importantly Mr speaker of the
parents.
In right now in today's society
we do not have that backing from
the parents Mr speaker gentleman
it's a sad state of affairs for
today's young people.
Whenever they receive a free
education that is guaranteed by
the state's constitution.
What have actually had goes on
in the classroom with the
teacher cannot teach with that
disruptions continually most
times in the classroom Mr
speaker.
Gentleman from done in a can you
give me an example of
restorative justice practices.
Mr speaker kind kind gentle lady
Thank you thank you for that so
I'd like to
Preface this by saying that the
particular student who was
misbehaving in the classroom and
was disciplined by his or her
parents and you probably went
home and and got in trouble with
them is is something that the
students that were targeting
with this bill don't have they
can't have they don't have their
parents or a parent to come pick
him up they don't have a not a
good place to go home to
the don't know where they're
gonna do their homework they
don't know if they're gonna have
a meal for that evening.
So this Mr speaker kind gentle
kindly this is something that.
We have to.
Take into consideration before
we discipline
the students before we get to
the point of suspension of Mr
speaker madam generally.
So I I I'm I'm working towards a
to give you to give you the
example of a restorative justice
so the soonest it was miss
behaving in class did anyone
ever ask or look into why this
particular student was acting
the way he was.
If someone Mr speaker John kind
kindly would have taken the time
to pass this young person why
here she was behaving in this
manner or even for someone to go
to the home and see what the
whole situation once they then
they would have understood why
and this child was acting out
and this is very important as to
restorative justice Mr speaker
kind.
Is that we restorative justice
and use other types of evidence
based practices will show us to
the adults in the schools and
and and social workers or
counselors.
To dig a little deeper to find
out why the student is behaving
the way they do instead of us
just arbitrarily you know
disciplining them or pounding
them but I would yeah I was in
school when those still pounding
going on Mr speaker then kindly
so those those things are now
how what we would like to see.
Welcome service or school
principals and our social
workers to continue into
consideration before us to miss
to spend it what the
circumstances are one that is
trying to make those decisions
what made this trial act the way
here she did maybe recorded
their craving attention we don't
know what's happening in their
holes we don't know what's
happening in their lives away
from school so Mr speaker meant
kind kind lady I think my
explanation was a very good
example of restorative justice
and that way we can implement
that in using or we make those
decisions before we suspended
the student not necessarily
discipline student but suspend
the student Mr Mister speaker
kindly I hope I answered your
question.
Mr speaker gentleman of.
Kind of in a way Mr speaker
gentleman of.
With the way things are right
now thank goodness some of our
young people in our state ease
are starting to go back to
school on a very limited basis
that Mr speaker then I have
great concern whenever you said
maybe somebody needs to go check
out the home situation Mr
speaker and gentleman from done
in.
Have you ever have you checked
with CYFD lately to see how many
referrals state of fat to go
into the home and actually check
since we've this shut down has
been it's been a year now.
To see how these young people
that might be experiences some
learning problem.
Have as CYFD been called in.
In that I'd like a ratio if you
didn't have those numbers what
it was in two thousand twenty as
it was compared to two thousand
nineteen do you have those
numbers by any chance.
Mr speaker kind gentle lady I do
not have those numbers because
the very first step of
intervention is finding someone
from the school going to go to
the home is so before before we
before many times before CYFD
and all social workers are
called and the school social
workers the school counselor and
even the school homeless liaison
units each school district has
almost is this charter school as
a whole the status on is the one
that goes out there and does
that and just in case and
evaluates and studies to see
what's happening in the home
before it gets to the point I
was referred to see one of the
so Mr speaker and gentle lady
there are interventions in place
to access currently to work with
the families before CYFD becomes
of all
Mr speaker kindly if an if then
plan CFTC wiping the sleep from
of all that's when school
personnel that and calls CYFD
for that assistance.
Mr speaker gentleman I did note
that
Lots of times and I've heard too
many horrifying stories since
the shut down started and these
young people were not allowed to
go to our schools.
Lots of stuff that.
Would literally make you sick
was going on as some of these
homes and it just.
My heart hurts for the session
people Mr speaker I'm going back
to the last section I was
referencing on page four
sixteen.
you know what.
I I really have a problem with
to use in the work poverty and
there.
Mr speaker.
I was a.
I mean this is kind of hard for
me hold on to second.
Mr speaker of poverty is no
excuse.
For not being lower.
Mister speaker whenever I was
going to school.
And we were all friends at their
own cotton wood just about all
very for.
Very very poor.
We had lots of
Then that will be working on the
farms finally get their families
over there there might be
anywhere from.
Most families out there on
caught with our money included
lows eight kids and arranged on
up from there.
And I know that there was one
family that had fourteen
children in their family.
Mr speaker.
It didn't matter because those
parents realize that their kids
needed to be educated if they
were going to succeed in America
that was their dream for their
children.
Mr speaker the parent parental
involvement was very evident and
all those students out there
that I went to school with that
are still my friends today that
Mr speaker going on down to the
next one on line twenty one.
You said experiencing violence
or other abuse or neglect with
the pilots also include
bullying.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
You Mr speaker kindly I I would
legislation so it occurred to
the point that other children
are picking on these particular
students because they haven't
been able to bait the because
they don't have water whether
living or they can't afford
school supplies and it is a
result of that there is bullying
happening or because to those
students then that I would
consider it an act of violence
and less it escalates to that
point but yes that is part of
the issue as to why the students
may act out and lash out towards
other students Mr chair and
kindly.
Mr speaker doesn't have to do
necessarily with homelessness or
anything
they're just certain people
people that want to dominate and
it doesn't matter if it's in
grade school or middle school or
high school or even in our adult
lives and lots of people can be
the Foley.
With nobody really recognizing
why the other person might
withdraw into themselves or act
out another way so Mister
speaker I think that's the.
Conditions that one Mr speaker
as far as and it was brought up
earlier growing up in a
household of.
Parental Senator separation and
we're looking at rates in the
United States as a whole of
fifty percent divorce cases that
most marriages that does make me
very sad at the sometimes the
divorce is better for the child
if it is the end of if that
marriage might be.
Suffering from.
The use of agency or alcoholism
or drug use or whatever the case
may be.
So I think to look through
everything under parental
separation or whatever the case
may be I think that we're.
Most kids in today's school
system half of them you're
you're gonna figure.
Do you come from a home where
there there has been a force
taken place where the parents
are separated Mr speaker and
gentleman.
If we could do anything to help
our kids in today's education.
It would be parents.
Step up.
And be responsible for your
child.
You brought this child into the
world you are responsible for Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Every parent.
Deep down all.
Once your kid to have a good
life and if we're going to get
that done we have to get our
parents involved in every person
that serves on the school board
member of the governing body of
this the charter school.
Their desire is to see everyone
at the students at their school
succeed Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And therefore.
I do not like.
The bill to bar local local
school boards.
To be whittled away at it till
there's nothing left.
For them to be able to do to
help our educators in the
classroom.
Be able to teach our students of
our state Mr speaker gentleman
thank you very much.
For the day the gentleman from
San Juan Representative a month.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
consulate.
Thank you Mr speaker
A lot of my friends growing up
kind of fit the category of
disruptive.
In school so
some of these.
memories.
I understand I think what the
what's your
Bill is is is trying to do
because
As a disruptive student it is
maybe just looking for attention
at times for
doesn't have that that home
life.
To that.
That positive reinforcement back
on so I think I understand what
this is trying to accomplish.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am a
little concerned that that it
may go a little a little too far
in the new language on page two.
And then reading it with the
amendments.
Or the amendment that was put in
place
Just reading in context here.
Only.
Let me see.
Starting on line eight every
local school board every
governing body of a charter
school shall provide its
displace despite disciplinary
sanctions.
That suspending or expelling a
student from the school shall be
used only following the
exhaustion of interventions.
Such as restored well I need to
stop there following the
exhaustion of interventions so
Mister speaker and gentleman.
Obviously there are some things
that
have to be dealt with
immediately.
this is take away from that Mr
speaker and gentleman if there
is.
You know pushing shoving of
fighting.
Threats it is there anything
that would that would.
That that.
Could not be done immediately
because it appears as I'm
reading it shall only be
shelling be used following the
exhaustion of interventions
surely there are some things
that need immediate action.
but I'm not reading that there's
a.
That that that's allowed am I
missing something here the
speaker John.
Mr speaker kind of one that was
I believe that was the first in
the amendment that that we
drive.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
the amendment that was adopted
on the floor.
Only deals with great bodily
harm.
And reading in that amendment
that was adopted in the Flores
says student brings a deadly
weapon on campus or one us
student presents a clear
likelihood of committing great
bodily harm.
Or other staff to to other
students or school personnel so
so Mister speaker and gentleman.
what I'm what I'm thinking of
the was pushing and shoving.
And fighting
I'm not sure if that rises to
the.
Level of great bodily harm.
and I'm not sure with this put
in place and all of our schools.
I think there'd be an argument
as to whether or not.
Minus all of these other things
that that are here because it it
goes ahead and and and speaks
about a deadly weapon firearm.
Lodhran voted any weapon that is
capable of producing death or
great bodily harm I is it I'm
just wondering what what who
rises to the level do you think
of great bodily harm I mean
pushing and shoving.
I don't know if that that gets
that level
so I'm just trying to find out
where the bar is that immediate
action could take place.
Mr speaker trying to amend so
disciplined for suspension and
expulsion can happen immediately
you know that this would include
removing the student from from
from the classroom and and the
amendment Mr speaker and
gentleman up allow those
of suspension and expulsion for
weapons for for for likelihood
of great bodily harm you know
why else would you want to
suspend a student a homeless
student or any student it out
with that without the without
those without those
interventions in place and we
have to Mr speaker and gentleman
we have to trust that or
principles are school
administrators are counselors
and social workers.
That the do that the evaluate
the situation and they and the
deal with that they're at the
school level unless it exceeds a
school level and maybe go to the
superintendent but I think and I
have faith there are a school
administrators in our schools
support staff are more than
capable of handling these type
of situations and that they're
able to.
Help the students when they need
the help and to discipline them
when they need to be disciplined
Mr speaker General.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I understand that in
the case of in particular where
where at the homeless is been
mentioned several times.
where there might be no place
for that child ago but
As I read on page four and page
five descriptors don't just talk
about homelessness.
We're talking about poverty
I would imagine poverty need
would mean people living below
the poverty level.
and so are there that's a
sizable number of folks in the
state but they have a home.
To go to
or it has another descriptor
experiencing violence or other
abuse or neglect neglect as
well.
Does that mean there they could
be a latchkey child I was a
latchkey child.
I I would go home and there were
no parents there they were
working.
so
neglect also is pretty broad
I mean this goes way beyond
homelessness says witnesses by
witnessing violence in the home
or community.
Have a having a family member
attempt suicide
Growing up in a household with
substance a misuse.
Mental health problems are
inability or instability due to
parental separation that's a lot
of folks once again that the
number is actually over fifty
percent of our population has a.
Has a broken family I mean they
may be remarried that that it
transportation takes place when
that for the when there's
divorce.
so I ended the if if this were
just to deal with children who
did not have a place to go to I
I understand that.
But Mr speaker and gentleman.
It appears that this process
could take a bit of time shy of.
Shy of there being.
The the.
Extreme risk of violence or
bodily harm that that it that
appears I'm glad we did adopt
that amendment I think that is a
good amendment.
But I it appears to me that.
We will be.
Potentially.
Keeping kids in school who could
be.
Have propensity to fight the
fighting
and and and threats of violence
we we had a hazing bill that
passed out here last night for
college students
I mean there's a lot of bullying
that takes place.
The and it appears as if.
If they if they fall into one of
these categories.
We're gonna have to be real
careful as to separating them
because it says here that we
need to take non punitive
intervention.
the appears as if.
We may not even be able to take
amount of classes is that is non
punitive.
Then to leave them in the
classroom or can they be
separated into a study hall or
something like that when I was
separated and so study hall for
maybe once or twice being
disruptive.
That was a punishment.
so I'm I'm reading non punitive.
Intervention can they be sent to
a study hall and separated from
their classmates.
Mr Mr speaker gentleman so
When you were reading the the.
When you're reading the other
items on that list up it
reminded me of an intake so you
were basically doing an intake
and so that's what our social
workers in our concerts do when
they work with kids up this bill
Mr speaker and Angelman this
requires warrant those
professionals to take those
factors into account.
or school professionals will you
know account were cheap those
things into consideration when
we talk to the students went
when they do their valuation you
know this is something that
those the those of of you in my
or my my colleagues who are
social workers or know about
this about these practices know
very well that this is part of
the practice of of of
working with that student in
order to help them get to where
they need to be is so
Why not so we we were looking at
at Mr speaker echo development
of removing the students in the
classroom for our sending them
home because of their actions
without fully investigating
without fully betting the
situation that those students
are and and and and I'm talking
present particularly for
homeless kids.
Then we are hoping will students
because we're removing them from
the safest place to for the can
be.
So so Mr speaker and gentleman
so these are steps these are
processes that we he or that we
should be taking to ensure that
these kids stay in school that
is the number one goal of this
of of of of my bill is to keep
these kids in school so if you
have balls in school suspension
or want us to to study hall or
any any other measure that I see
is a good alternative as to out
of school suspension that's what
we're looking for we're looking
for.
Pardon me we're looking for that
alternative to keeping them out
of school so in a way Mr speaker
kind gentleman you you you of
kind of proved what I'm trying
to accomplish here is by giving
those kids that alternative
to not being in school.
Mr speaker and and time zone.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman
So.
Is the teacher able to.
Unilaterally for disruptive
behavior.
To remove the child from the
classroom I guess that's really
what I'm trying to get to here
is if the child is a disruptive
belligerent.
Cursing.
maybe saying threatening words
maybe let's let's the slower it
let's just say that they're just
being continually disruptive.
Does the teacher.
Have the ability to.
Send that child out and say the
child cannot come back in and
we're talking children here I
mean some of these children are
seventeen years old in high
school.
Some of these children are two
hundred and twenty five pounds
if there on the football team.
is the teacher able to remove.
That two hundred twenty five
year olds.
Child from the classroom and say
you can't come back.
Or does the.
Or does the teacher have to
refer that child at the next
scheduled opportunity to meet
with a.
School social worker because it
appears to me that that that
social workers jobs going to get
a lot busier.
And it appears to me there might
be a line outside the door or
they're going to have to
schedule them.
What what is that.
How does that teacher what
authority does that teacher I
was a few minutes ago you state
you stated that we want to trust
the teachers we want to trust it
kind of appears to some degree
that through this we're saying
we don't trust the teachers.
But what authority in the
classroom as a teacher still
have.
So that she is able she or he is
able to do their job.
With
us as teaching the other kids.
can I can that individual be
removed from the class for
disruptive behavior.
Mr speaker of the gentleman up
first of all I want to make it
clear that teachers do do not
of discipline students in the
classroom.
Teachers are busy teaching
academics and to be and they
don't have time to be dealing
with with discipline that's when
those students are referred to
the press full or to the school
counselor so as far as
disruptions in the classroom are
concerned Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That is pretty much down to
classroom management and many of
our teachers have that down
packed up our teachers are not
part of the team that decides
whether a student is suspend
rock that falls on admin and or
counselors or social workers so
the teacher for the most part to
continue teaching in her his or
her classroom even if there's a
of the even if there's a
disruption because that this
freshman can be removed and
taken that person can be removed
and taken to the principal's
office or to the council's
office to to work out the
situation so the to to say that
the that the teachers are are
are being
asked to do something above and
beyond up well that's not true
because there are you there
giving other things already to
do that are above and beyond and
discipline is not one of them
and Mr speaker and gentleman so
we need to we need to be very
clear the distinction that
teachers do not discipline in
the classroom teachers not
dispense discipline teachers
don't decide whether students
going to be suspended or not
that is up to the administration
and the support staff Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman that that none of my
comments were meant to suggest
that that is a roll of teachers
have now I I'm just talking
about classroom.
Being able to make sure that the
that there's a learning
environment for all of the
students there that destructive
behavior doesn't have to be
tolerated by a teacher.
that that's really what I'm
trying to to get to it so we a
teacher would still have control
of the classroom by by your
state is Iraq's cleared Mr
speaker John.
Mr Stewart Mr speaker I and
gentlemen I'm sorry would you
repeat that please.
So so the teacher in a classroom
Mr speaker John would still have
the authority to determine
whether or not if a disruptive
kid.
Would be in the classroom.
if there was a disruptive Act.
That that child there's nothing
that just the in the in.
That would be in the way of that
teacher having that child
removes go to the preachers that
go to the principal's office
supported for to the a guidance
counselor or to whoever is is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say authority over I would say I
would call a description.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so what we're talking
about here is whether or not.
That the individual the child
that it won't for whatever the
heck behavior is taking place
just that they would not be sent
home from the school doesn't
mean that they would have to
stay necessarily stay in the
classroom with the destructive
behavior.
Just I'm just trying to get this
clear my mind is that correct Mr
speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is correct.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
John I think I've finally
getting in my mind point where
it's clear one last question.
with.
This process.
Where we where we would be taken
into account.
Several different.
Circumstances.
I'm wondering.
If.
In the instance of a.
A school student.
Of.
Falling short of the potential
of great bodily harm that
determination at that were to
take place.
But there were some threats of
violence or some very
insensitive comments towards
other kids for
bullying through words or
intimidation.
Are we potentially putting.
The school to the school
districts in a position of
greater liability.
If then that individual who had
not necessarily gotten to the
point of violence.
And so I just kept there in the
school and and.
Later on there was actually
some violent act that were to
take place.
And that child.
and previously would have been
potentially suspended for that
activity.
But now we've done everything we
can because of these other
circumstances that we've taken
into consideration.
Is there a possibility of those
school districts could be in
greater liability yes that
students were to then act on.
To that point may have just been
threats or bullying and it has
become physical violence.
it appears to me we could be
potentially putting more
libelous position if you agree
with that or do you disagree.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
disagree a the fact is that the
school by complying with this
bill and the state law would be
a depressed so the liability.
So thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman so we would be
liable and not the school
district okay thank you for your
answers Mr.
the speaker and gentleman.
For the debate before.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Speak with the gentleman from
doing and a yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
committee thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman I don't know if I
have any real questions but I
have read this piece of
legislation on a number of
times.
And I'm wondering.
I guess I do have a question
because I'm wondering if you
looked around the state.
Any of the school districts to
see if there are programs in
place that could help address
some of the issues that you're
referring to and in the bill.
Mr Spiegeltent the gentle lady
yes as a matter of fact you
follow we're are talking about
we're talking about homeless
students each school and each of
is the school district and
charter school has a has a
homeless liaison that works
directly with with with these
students
and I speak of experience
because I was a homeless liaison
for my school district for
twenty years so I have a lot of
experience in in in knowing what
the situations are for these
children and up what the what
resources are available to them.
Well miss I'm asking this
question not to question your
abilities are are your
experience but.
Rio Rancho school district we
have a couple of programs that
is that are are very good
programs to help address all of
these issues that send your
piece of legislation and we have
one a new program called
rephrase that are works with
middle school.
Students and we had independence
high school students.
Independence high school that
has worked with many of our
tribal students and in fact I
participated in their graduation
this past drive by graduation
this past summer and so
I just talked with the
superintendent.
And I'm what's in this piece of
legislation.
And read it to her and she says
we can not put anything else.
expect.
Our teachers to address these
issues in the classroom.
And so in our district we have
the independence high in the
reform program and the very
popular programs that are
working for the area so that's
why I asked the question had to
look around because there's been
some very innovative things done
with
at the Rio Rancho public schools
districts that I think could be
models for the state and because
I've had the opportunity to be
involved with some of their
programs I'm not saying that
there's not a need.
For this piece of legislation
but I think we have a model
program program already in
place.
And and and I will not be
supporting this piece of
legislation.
Not because I don't think that
there are issues there.
But I think you if instead of
continuing and continuing to
pass.
New record requirements on our
educators we need to look at
some programs that are in place
and see if those programs can be
duplicated statewide.
And so Mr speaker and gentleman
I would offer up to look at it
maybe meet and talk with.
Dr Cleveland was a
superintendent of Rio Rancho
public school district because
the one thing that she has
always done is try to address
these problems head on and
working through other programs
I've put program monies and to
some of the programs they for
kids who had addiction problems.
And so
I know that there is a need.
You know for our to address
these issues.
But I just don't believe that we
need to put any more
requirements on our educators
and so my question again was
looking at.
Some of the programs that are
already in place versus putting
additional requirements on our
educators.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
I've been getting kind of upset
about the debate tonight when I
graduated from college at the
age of twenty two I taught high
school is this valley
California.
So I wasn't very much older than
the students that I had there.
The lady from Chavis are talked
about telling the principal but
she was not going to have the
student back into our classroom
until the parents talk to her.
Or or actually I think she said
that parents talk to the
principal but what I found very
effective and
children of there was a lot of
migrant workers a lot of farm
workers and job.
The ranchers and farmers in the
Salinas valley.
But when I had a problem with
the student I called the purists
and that's what made a
difference and
But what I found is that.
Over the years and there have
been many since that day you
know I was doing this long
before most of you were born
there's been a lot of changes.
And a lot more to not only is
for educators to paste for
children to face we have now the
reserves of the adverse
childhood experiences and I
think that's what you're trying
to get at gentlemen from John
Adams is trying to reduce the
trauma for these children.
Help keep them in school to keep
them safe.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is absolutely correct yes.
So when my children were in high
school here in Albuquerque they
went to highland high school
I want high school I'm
the most diverse student body in
the state.
There were students from all
walks of life.
Probably every Indian tribe with
Asians students black students
Hispanic students many many
Vietnamese students.
One I was there hi would became
a charter school for a few years
in fact I helped write their
partner in the form of
governance council and they
started doing in school
suspension one of the reasons
that they did that in school
suspension.
What they were getting punished
they were properly removed.
In this case I don't think it's
I think you're contemplating
something a little different
than not.
With the judges thank.
Hi
They have classrooms where the
school the students went they
did their school work but they
weren't in the classroom
disrupting as they had been.
What they were able to do with
that program is keep the
students from.
Billing to pass to the next
Grace or assembling the credits
that they needed to graduate.
Them off the streets to because
one of the.
Related to sense that we have
rising crime in the afternoon
when the kids get out of school
is when kids are unsupervised
our parents are at work.
And that helps deterrent from
getting involved in the juvenile
justice system.
So.
What I do support this concept
and I don't really see that
you're burning the teachers I
think what you're doing.
Is providing them with an
opportunity.
To bring together a solution
that is less.
Harmful to the child and frankly
when if I have a student who was
this.
This behaving in class it always
made me feel bad too I felt like
a failure I felt like I'm not
meeting the needs of his child
so I think the in school
suspension idea that you're
proposing.
It is more of a solution than
what highland high school was
doing back when my sons were in
school there but
One of the things that was that
is just because people are poor
doesn't mean they can't learn
and I endorse that
wholeheartedly.
But there are some barriers to
successful performance in school
when children are homeless.
If they don't have let's look
right now with the.
Damn it has revealed the the
lack of the equity in
the technology is necessary for
students to keep up.
With their school work.
And if you have children who are
suffering that.
And you are
It trying to deal with all of
those things you really
What do you what you're doing is
you're you're creating barriers
for children because of their
homelessness because of their
poverty so now we have decades
and decades of research on
adverse childhood experiences
and why don't we want children
to have first of all
it's inhumane that they have to
suffer these traumas.
But it causes them to have that
health outcomes.
They often actually have a
shorter life expectancy.
The state if they are
experiencing trauma again and
again yes I trying to.
Problem solved with a particular
child you're able to reduce the
trauma you may completely change
the course of that child's
existence but you've also
changed.
For yourself and for the other
students because they start to
see that there's another way to
reach.
All and to have them contribute
to the classroom.
Poverty is not a barrier to
loving your children are all
wanting them to succeed but
there are it does create other
structural and
Systemic barriers or that kind
of success that she worked for
them to have.
There are.
Right.
On what we are experiencing
waves of violent crime you know
when we
People who are incarcerated.
What we find is they are often
people who have experienced
adverse childhood
that the asus themselves I
remember a colleague of mine who
ran.
A respite program.
For adults with disabilities in
Albuquerque it's not part of
another agency that provides
adult and early childhood
services.
But there was a
a child we actually.
Literally tortured by
incompetence.
inhumane parents and he then.
The young adult.
Tried to right.
some college students so.
We're perpetuating violence
we're not keeping ourselves safe
unless we try to but situations
and I have to say I'm I was
offended by
some of their dialogue tonight
about.
The teachers have no control
over their losses they have no
recourse I think that's
demonizing teachers.
It's.
Students.
As if they are all.
Bad that they all are
disrespectful.
There are certainly some
students who are challenging and
I I have to tell you my respect
for teachers.
Is.
Almost unlimited it's really the
hardest job I ever had.
I taught at the high school and
then I taught middle school.
I'm.
Special education
frankly when I was
able to do so I move down to
early childhood.
Because I felt like that's where
we can start to for these
problems for the adults.
Now.
There's no doubt in my mind that
if you talk to doctor Cleveland
in Rio Rancho she's going to
have great Judy it.
And she's one of the top
superintendents of the state.
She is spectacular I know her
she's a friend of mine but my
guess is she would endorse this
bill.
Losing my voice so I'm going to
have to be why I think I got a
little excited about this
because I don't want.
For us to be speaking negatively
of students.
Or of teachers I want us to
stay we have to do every single
thing we can to keep students
safe and help them realize their
full potential.
And restorative justice is
perhaps a conversation this
legislature should have some day
about.
How those who committed crime
and those who have been the
victims of the crime can
actually come together.
And change that behavior going
forward.
in fact there's a gentleman
who's a professor at New Mexico
State University and I can't
think of state right now but he
is an expert in the field of
restorative justice and he has a
lot to offer us those of us who
are on the criminal justice
reform subcommittee and courts
corrections and justice interim
committee Halford and speak and
I think his
body of research holds great
promise because you you turn
around not only the Vic to slide
so maybe this tier and all the
other students who have been
suffering for some bad behavior
of the student but between that
perpetrator around as well.
So I commend you for this bill
and I and this is the ask which
supported and I I'm really
grateful that you have offered
it to us this opportunity thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Colfax more Rio
Arriba and six major not.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from Dona Ana will you yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am I
too have been sitting listening.
Almost speechless with some of
the comments that you have been
adored this evening about your
bill I
It shocks me to hear that some
of our members have a very
limited understanding of basic
child development.
A sense of compassion.
A sense of understanding for
what I guess is modern ideas
you're not in the nineteen
fifties.
Penalizing students and
addressing them in the way that
we've heard tonight is just it's
I'm verged on.
On anger and I I want to be
Senator and I want to be useful.
This is adverse childhood
experiences that data and that
work is been around for twenty
years it is not new.
The term restorative justice may
be somewhat new.
But it's based on.
Just being compassionate being
a week understanding that when
there's a student in front of
you and this is indeed Mr Mr
speaker and provide gentleman
what your bill does is it allows
us to look at the individual.
Our students come to us and
public education from a whole
host of settings somewhere
tragic summer in severe poverty
summer coming from codes that
don't have anything to do with
poverty and yet there's severe
trauma there as well.
I think what your bill is
getting at is.
Addressing issues in public
education we can support the
best possible outcome by paying
attention to the new wants to
the needs there's a program
that's emerged in the last five
years I've seen that I'm very
proud of for our state community
schools I've had the honor of
bringing some of those programs
into our schools in the Espanola
district and what they do is
they compose an ecosystem if you
will of wellness we're
professionals come together to
work with the school community
to address those needs as they
come up so I don't want to
belabor this too long I I just
want to say that I believe your
bill will pass and I look
forward to casting my vote to
that end I yield back.
There is further debate the
gentleman from where we are
Representative Ecker.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman and friend of mine
from done in a yield.
Mr speaker yes I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you I just have a couple
questions that
to clarify a few things for me.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
One of the
When when we separate when we go
through this how does the
separation in the modern the
monitoring process or hi how do
we separate a monitor during the
intervention process.
Mr speaker of German I I'm sorry
I I don't understand your
question can you please rephrase
that.
Sure so.
I I understand that if we if we
have a consistent problem that
we may separate we have
something like an in school
suspension Mr speaker and
gentleman.
How do we monitor.
The progression of the student
during during the process how do
we how do we basically have we
ensure that we're improving and
and what's the documentation
process that goes along with
that how do we show that and
then it's something and and so.
As as we continue on Mr speaker
and gentleman was with the
student and and say that the in
school suspension as as as
listed in that back in the
school school room and that
continues how just walk me
through.
The concept on the documentation
process and and how do we get to
the point where.
we've exhausted all of our
resources I'm just.
This is totally out of my
bailiwick Mr speaker and
gentleman and so I'm just trying
to understand.
Mr speaker development unit it's
a it's a very it's a very long
process so to to my knowledge
when a student gets to that
point obviously there is our
referral that is made obviously
there's paperwork that that the
school administration has to do
they have to get out of if
available parent or guardian of
signatures and and and up
approval of the discipline
measures up while they are in in
school suspension there is
usually a monitor or each
teacher in there with up to date
they still continue running that
is so one of the most of the
things that I want to make I
want to make the point that they
do continue learning while
they're it's in school
suspension and up and that's and
that's very important so many of
this documentation that is
correct.
For the students supplied the
school staff meeting the after
it after going through this
process either side of the
screen worker or counselor is
kept in that professionals files
so so those those files
obviously are are confidential
and and and the if they are they
do keep that information they
keep are the the police have a
plan for them they fully help
other interventions in place
they really have a meetings for
discussion with parents so or
guardians so this is something
it's an ongoing process they're
just not gonna you know it's not
a catcher released type thing Mr
chair John so you know there
there are supports in place
already of the schools that can
help the students to that you
know we're not inventing
anything new here these these
supports are already in place
and and and and I want to thank
you for asking that question
because this way I can explain a
little bit from by on my
knowledge of how this process
works that the the process is
quite extensive and there's a
lot of information collected
just four is what types of
interventions and what type of
services and or
Referrals are made for that
student.
Mr speaker don't.
Mr speaker and thank you
gentleman for that that answer
it this this seems very.
I know the system and I know the
teachers in the school systems
that I get to deal with I I know
there their concern in their
desire for their students and so
you know I know it's is so well
thought out process I'm just
kind of concerned and and I hope
Mr speaker and gentleman that
you can help me with this so if
we've had a student.
That has.
Has had a propensity for
aggression and we've we've gone
through this school suspension
back and forth they've gone out
of that we've gone through
counseling.
We've identified what those
issues are we continue to work
on counseling and we get to a
point where where the assessment
brings us to where.
We want to bring them back in
with with the rest of the
students.
What happens Mr speaker and
gentleman if that student
becomes aggressive aggressive
again and then maybe either
hurts a teacher.
Person and administrative hurts
and fellow student.
In and what risk is there to the
assessment process the the the
People is that made the decision
to bring the students back into
the group is there a risk is our
potential for lawsuits there
what how to how do we ensure
the.
Yes I agree that we need to to
do everything we can to the
student but I don't.
What school how we what happens
if another child is as hard and
there's a lawsuit brought on the
school because the student was
brought back in.
Based on the assessments done
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Joe.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
representative Thompson.
Sorry Mr speaker when I said
that that one was a my intention
the yield back I was just.
I get to use the same thank you
to the wrong people.
So if I may continue I would
like to and if not then I'll
gladly you.
Gentleman as I yes I.
Thank you all are
so my question Mr speaker my
question gentleman is what risk
and how do we are actually
what's the rest of the students
to the to the administration to
the school district for a
lawsuit because they they they
made the assessment they brought
the student back up.
But thank you Mr speaker thank
you John for that question and
this is going to allow me to
elaborate further on on the
process that you had just asked
about earlier so.
If there are more severe
underlined issues with that
particular student that's when
of what I would call the heavy
hitters come in our school
psychologists and and other
preventative health
professionals that would be
available to work with that
student and if that particular
team identifies for fuel so that
the student.
Would be better served in and in
a research all treatment center
or in an alternative school then
they would more than likely
refer that student to that type
of to that type of the of the of
the spokes space so so thank you
bye bye asking this question you
all of you know I've Mr Mr
speaker for a gentleman you I
want to to elaborate and expand
that there are you making.
Deeper more rural
up so services and opportunities
for the students to continue his
or her education so if they if
they don't necessarily need to
remain in that school they can
be given other alternatives but
the important thing is is that
their education continues that
they're in that safe space that
that that's the that's the focus
in that city and that's the
intent of what of what we're
trying to accomplish here Mr
speaker and gentleman so it was
so you know they're just not you
know set free in the General at
in in in school with the general
population and the of of the of
the screen if they are deemed to
be our.
With more severe issues for more
severe trauma then there are
other alternatives that the
executive that they can be
placed and alternatives up as
opposed to.
The regular school building but
the important thing is is that
they continue their education
and they continue to be and
that's a space where they know
that they'll be loved and
supported and where they can get
you know some some some some
some food to eat and support
they can before they can at
least continue learning and and
Paul and pursuing their
education Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you for that answer
Mr speaker and gentleman I I may
have not done a good job of of.
Say my question.
If we have a student.
Brought back in that the this
does have problems.
And has been some level of
violence before.
They have been assessed and
they've been allowed to come
back in to the school system
with Sir and there's school room
with her schoolmates.
And that person becomes violent
again.
Is there a potential for a
lawsuit from the family of the
of of an injured child or a
family of the teacher or family
of the administrator and and how
how's that dealt with thank
thank you.
That's the question Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you thank you for that question
so under the bill it's really
not any different than under
current law so the liability is
always based on the totality of
factors of what happened and
what occurred so whenever
so we have to the school the
school the school district the
school administration has to
demonstrate or show that they
exercised reasonable care.
When making to this type of
situation.
And and so this isn't any
different from
I I would say to promote for a
student who was a homeless that
has those types of issues or the
hat or that brings that type of
of of of energy into the school
so so we it really depends on
the circumstances I and it Mr
speaker and gentleman I really
don't want to create you know
swap of of with within in
general in generalities but what
I would like to see to make sure
is that each circumstance in
each case is totally different
from another one from one or
another Mr speaker and gentleman
you I I I can't I I can't I
wouldn't I wouldn't even try to
give you a definite answer on
that because each situation and
circumstances very different and
we don't know what types of
interventions we don't know what
type what are what precautions
were taken we don't know what
services were offered to that
student and in that particular
situation so he indicated to
give you a general answer I
would feel very uncomfortable in
doing that with because every
situation is different Mr us
speaker and John.
I appreciate that answer Mr
speaker and gentleman
Another question I had Senator
several of the people to talk to
that.
A broader issues with respect to
homeless.
Mr speaker and gentleman do we
have.
Thank.
Issue statewide.
With respect to.
Homeless students that have not
been identified in the system Mr
speaker and don't.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I I
understand exactly what you're
asking you to please replaced.
Sorry one of the Mr speaker and
gentleman one of the one of the
criteria.
On
adverse childhood experiences is
of homelessness and so do we
have.
A problem in the state of New
Mexico in our school systems
where we have not identified our
homeless students.
Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker gentleman thank you for
that question so for
The the homeless liaisons at the
at the school districts and
charter schools have identified
about sixty five hundred
students statewide the issue.
When it comes to identifying
still homeless students is and
and I basically all my
experience when I was trying to
identify who was students is
that the the railing don't
the following tear themselves as
homeless so you really have to
you have to really dig and you
really have to do your homework
when it comes to working with
with with these children and and
and and young people so Mr chair
and you Mr speaker and gentleman
you know.
We the federal government does
offer resources they do offer
funding which funnels through to
look through the to the schools
two title one and there is
professional development and
there is training for the lease
on to work with these
populations as a matter of fact
I'm glad that you that you
brought that up because this
bill is a result of that so this
this bill originated with a
PED's education for homeless
children and youth legislative
advisory committee and this data
by the committee comprises of of
of is comprised of mostly use on
another another professionals
work was important students at
homeless youth around the state
so this is a direct result of of
of what of what they're seeing
on the ground they have the
boots on the ground or seeing
this Mr speaker and gentleman so
to to answer your question the
the.
The report the identification
process is always ongoing it is
a constant constant thing it's
constantly going and of so the
or homeless liaisons and anybody
who works in homeless youth that
homeless children really have
their work cut out for him and I
think you well if I had it my
way I'm doing a lot more funding
we hire a lot more people to
attend for these these children
and youth Mr thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that answer and so when
we identify a student.
In our school system is homeless
who do and and I understand what
you were discussing with federal
program that is a CYFD that we
we have work with that student
now.
Mr speaker and gentleman no it's
PED.
C. B. D. research element of all
Mr speaker and gentleman the
Public Education Department PED.
Her thank you.
And so Mister speaker and and
gentleman so we have a student
that's under the age of eighteen
that we've identified as having
no home.
And we turned in a report Mr
speaker and gentleman to PED.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
there's a process there's some
paperwork and speed called out
and they are identified and
placed in the of the Mickey
bento awful sophistication Act
and the those students are
reported it to the the not the
students themselves but the
numbers are reported to PED so
only CYFD Mr speaker and
gentleman only becomes involved
when the team that is working
with that particular almost
student order or child believes
that the student is that they
are in danger or there's another
circumstance that leads them to
to refer to the US CYFD
department Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you for that response and
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around this of so give me give
me a little patience this is a
this the like I said this isn't
my forte
So we we have a student the
that's the defined as homeless
Here she may be with this
Their their parents.
But they they don't have a home
that they're living in.
And or we might have Lisco was
the worst case scenario.
This is a student that.
is truly on their own.
Do we treat that differently Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman but we
do not treated differently and
once again it really depends on
the circumstance and in the
situation that that particular
student at I would say the the
youth is stand so many of the
youth that we identify as
homeless in the state
or are pretty much pretty much
on their own some more couch
surfing summer staying in
shelters there's a lot of
different circumstances that
that have driven these you to to
be in it seems to be homeless
and what the school and the
school districts do already is
they offer these students
support in and they offer them
academic support they offer them
school supplies clothing hygiene
products you if a student in
particular does not have clean
clothes the school and our
school districts that have
washing machines they offer that
from the students so you you the
social worker or counselor or
homeless liaison determines that
a young person is in danger or
is in a very dangerous situation
then the bait they more than
likely worker for that to CYFD
Mr speaker and gentleman but it
really depends on the case it
really depends on the
circumstances of the students or
of the youth so we can't really
I I wouldn't I wouldn't dare to
long you know or put under one
definition or classify them one
certain way it really really
depends on the situation that
these units and find themselves
in Mr speaker and gentleman.
I appreciate that answer
gentleman and Mr speaker I do
appreciate you indulging me and
give me some lessons with
respect to some of the depth of
your bill I know we probably
took a little too far on a on a
rabbit trail but at the end of
the day was good for me there
are some things Mr speaker and
gentleman within your bill the.
That brings because first
concern for me
As bill progresses hopefully
gentleman we can discuss things
and and you can educate me on
that maybe we can.
Give me to a point where I can
completely support the
legislation but I do appreciate
your time I do appreciate it
appreciate the legislation in
the issue you brought forward Mr
speaker I do you know by now
thank you okay someone is going
to make sure you're done Mr
speaker all right
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker does the gentleman
from Dona Ana you'll.
Mr speaker I I yield to the
gentle lady thank you so I'm
gonna talk about I've heard so
much my emotions are all over
the place from anger to sadness
to confusion to concern so I'm
just gonna talk a little bit Mr
speaker and gentleman so in
terms of poverty no kids who
live in poverty.
It's not that they can't learn
it's that they don't have access
I grew up in Crown Point on the
Navajo reservation I had I have
played sports I had friends with
people I was friends with people
who didn't know what an elevator
they never seen an elevator they
have been to Gallup a few times
but there were no elevators in
Gallup they don't have money to
drive to Albuquerque to go to
the zoo they don't have money to
go to movies I mean I grew up
amongst poverty I I I my parents
were both professionals we
didn't let it poverty but where
we live what's all of poverty I
had we went on vacation every
summer kids living in poverty
don't get to go to Disneyland
they don't get to go to mount
Rushmore they don't get to go to
legal plans and learn those kind
of things in the state will
those are not things that you
learn in school but indeed they
are it's the experiences you
know we have standardized tests
that show a picture of a
sailboat.
My friends didn't know what
state what was they never seen a
sailboat that's your best with
just so it's not the fact that
they live in poverty at the fact
that they do not have access to
things that people who have more
money now Mr speaker and
gentleman I work at a school
with APS.
That had over one hundred
percent turnover every year and
you know some kids were there
every day all day we get the
school closed to Montgomery and
Carlisle and what would happen
is the kids would what the
family would move into some of
those apartments there upcoming
Carlisle and they would stay
until they got evicted and then
they would have to go elsewhere
and they might go back to the
reservation if that's where they
might go back to their family
home up north they may go they
may go sleep on someone's couch
elsewhere a hundred percent
total in one school.
And that makes me think.
A lot of you in this body will
remember the more you for.
And
I make it emotional here he was
in the school and I knew him I
didn't work with them but one of
the kids I worked with was his
best friend and Omari was kicked
to death by his mother at the
age of nine.
We're talking about yeah.
Having class can you imagine
what it's like with like.
So what we're going to send him
home because.
It is wrong to do so.
We spent a lot of time talking
about lawsuit.
We're not worried about what
will.
We can get food we're not
worried about.
What.
Here when we send them home.
What.
To me that a child act up and
what we do we send them home.
Does that teach them if I I
don't have to go to school for
more recent school was a
lifeline screen with where he
had friends school was working
with thank.
And we're trying to take that
away from here.
And I've also heard Mr speaker
and gentleman about parent
involvement we need parents
involved what we would love that
but when they are working.
Eighteen hours a day to keep
food on the table while they're
sleeping on someone's couch.
They don't have.
They don't have.
They don't have the.
I don't even know the word force
just how stressed you would be
today if you didn't know where
you were sleeping if you didn't
know if you were going to each
you know your kid had a term to
thank and you don't have
insurance but every time those
measures come up some people say
we can't pay more in the minimum
wage we can't get people
healthcare we can't we can't
help people they need to pull
them up for their problems those
up by their bootstraps they need
to be responsible for their own
lives and for the kids life.
And we are kicking them down
every chance we get it this is
just this is just wrong.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
terms of homelessness
homelessness doesn't mean
necessarily that you're sleeping
under a bridge it can mean
you're sleeping in your car it
can mean you're sleeping on
someone else's culture on the
floor in someone else's house or
could mean that you ride the bus
all day we from the bus and then
stay awake all night.
The the people who are having an
issue with this don't understand
what these kids are listening to
what they have lived through.
Earlier well when they should be
good.
Not all off which you're going
to counsel for two sessions or
five sessions are expected
camping can be years and years
so setting that the council okay
they're good to go back Mr
speaker and gentleman I thank
you so much for bringing this
bill and if we don't pass that
**** on us thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
The the thank you Mr speaker up
thank you for for for the debate
I I enjoyed answering the
questions I think this is
something that's very
educational to many of us and Mr
speaker I would just like to
state that maybe during the
interim I would really like for
the PED and and and the folks
who work with our homeless youth
and families isn't during the
interim in in in is so to inform
us as a body as to what happens
and how this the system works so
with that Mr speaker I do here I
do ask for a.
I do passed on house bill ninety
three FY cemented.
We're on final passage of house
bill twenty three sponsored
house bill ninety three as twice
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The electronic questions close
the clerk to call the remaining
members Representative Anderson.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes.
Representative edita.
Yes Representative votes yes.
Representative Lewis.
What is now closed by a vote of
fifty four in the affirmative
and twelve the negative house
bill ninety three is twice
amended has duly passed to this
house.
And I will add we will miss the
doing all right.
Item number four on the agenda
house bill one of seven.
Representative Thompson are you
ready on that item yes Mr
speaker can you get me to that
point the record reflect that
all action necessary for placing
House Bill one of seven as
amended on final passage is been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to expand
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker although it is that.
I'm it is a fairly simple bill.
And it is I'm it is and let me
explain to the to the body both
of you who haven't been around
insurance law and in things like
that there are many different
sections of it that all have to
be amended so what's the health
care purchasing Act The New
Mexico insurance co the health
maintenance organization law the
nonprofit health care plan on
the pharmacy benefits manager so
you will read the same thing
over and over and over and Mr
speaker the the the point of
this bill is to tell insurers
that if a local pharmacy can
fill a prescription at the same
rate at eight and eight mail
order pharmacy that the patient
is allow the choice and the
reason I'm bringing this Mr
speaker it is that we well we've
all seen what can happen with
the mail recently
A male has slowed down and
people are not taking their
medications in time and for
those of you to say that never
happens that people who are
forced to go go to mail order I
got a letter from my insurance
company in November saying you
can no longer use your local
pharmacy you have to go you have
to have it mailed to you so a
lot of the there's a lot of
things that happen to mail
there's point pirates we've all
heard reports prior to think if
you're sitting there waiting for
your mail that keeps you healthy
that your medication that keeps
you healthy and you get home and
that someone has taken it their
medications that are very
temperature sensitive insulin
comes to mind if if the post
office delivers your insulin at
nine o'clock on the morning in
July and you don't get home
until eight o'clock that evening
your insulin is growing and and
your insurance company will not
pay for another prescription for
what you're going to do and Mr
speaker there are medications
work if you miss one does you
have to start over and some of
those medications are incredibly
expensive medications for
hepatitis the come to mind
It cost about sixty thousand
dollars for treatment so you
could have been doing really
well and something happens with
the mail and you don't get your
medication you start all over
and that sixty thousand dollars
that was spent half to be
repeated homelessness that we
talked about in the last bill if
you don't have a home or you
don't have a place where you can
be regularly where they gonna
mail your prescriptions Mr
speaker even more important I
think is that particularly in
rural areas and small towns
pharmacists may be the only
health care there is and
probably all of us have heard
stories from our parents or
grandparents about you know that
that the local druggist to do
you know who helped out with
this are helped out with that
are when your kids got sick and
you weren't sure what to do when
you have money to go to the
doctor you can go to the
pharmacist and they could they
could help you out actually we
had a member in this body not
that long ago he was quite
elderly and he became pretty ill
and what had happened was he was
getting medications from
different places that it was his
local pharmacist you said wait a
minute wait a minute you can't
be taking these medications
together and I believe the
pharmacist thing then in person
seeing what was happening with
them actually stated to white so
Mister speaker with that I will
stand for questions.
See no debate the gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I'm sorry hang on
gently.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
fly you can hear really nice and
clear out of this one.
So Mister speaker the first
question I have on this there's.
I'm sorry
kind gentle lady we yield the
floor I would yield Mister
speaker thank you.
Mr speaker is the first question
I have on here is when I look at
the F. I. R. there's a
tremendous amount of cost can
you explain that.
Mr speaker and gentleman and a
gentle lady I'm sorry.
We we have gone round and round
with the FIR I'm the.
When something equivalent when
you're gonna get your mail order
prescription for thirty dollars
for ninety days supply are you
get it from your local pharmacy
at thirty dollars for a ninety
day supply I don't know how that
can add costs because the bills
that you have to pay the same
amount so honestly I don't know
where those numbers are coming
from.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative yeah because
when this went to the committee
there was quite a bit of
questioning on the cost of that
so is this going to be for state
contracts only years is going to
be for personal insurance as
well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
was the first part I talked
about so it's the health care
purchasing at the New Mexico
insurance code the health
maintenance organization law the
nonprofit health care plan law
and the pharmacy benefit so it
is our with the exclusion of
Medicare which we can't that we
can't mess with show I state it
will include the other
insurances.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady hold on one second one get
to the second part of my notes
checks I did have some more
questions on this.
So with this
Lad is it more than just the
option because I'm trying to
figure out where the expenses
coming from is this going to be
something that is going to be
subsidized for the bulk buying
Mr speaker and Representative.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
will hear the insurance
companies that all my gosh oh my
gosh oh my gosh it's going to
break that and I believe that's
where those numbers came from
but as I said that part of the
local pharmacy has to offer the
prescription at exactly the same
price so there is no difference
in in anything in I mean if your
co pay is thirty dollars for
mail order your copay will be
thirty dollars for your local
pharmacy.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative so if I'm clear
on this.
The pharmacy then because this
is what the state program they
have the option to or they are
forced to try to match that
price Mr speaker and gentle lady
they have the option which is my
argument if you are getting such
great prices that the mail order
that that we've heard all we
can't you know then then the
local pharmacies won't be able
to meet those prices but we
won't know until we give it a
shot I I.
I'll just leave that.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative hold on for one
second while I formulate my last
question here.
Mr speaker and representative of
I think one of my main problems
was I understand the option
where I get worried about when
we start running into there's
pages and pages of financial
costs on here I start to worry
about this being passed on to
somebody like myself who has a
private insurance because
whenever we try to lower cost on
something that always is going
to raise it somewhere else so
when we have this in the
committee before that was one of
my questions on here when I look
at the financial report we have
the lowest solvency impact of
five hundred thirty two thousand
and then the high solvency
impact of one million six
hundred sixty two so I get
really concerned over this Mr
speaker madam chair that yes
we're seeing that we're giving
them an option but when I look
at the financial implications of
this there seems to be a
tremendous amount of money so do
you know why on the phone
financial implications they have
this lowest.
Solvency impact and then the
highest solvency impact on this
finance report Mr speaker gentle
lady I can only guess and I'm
guessing that somehow it has
been determined that the
insurance companies will lose
money or I I I honestly don't
know I don't know how if you go
to Smith and you buy a six pack
of coke for two ninety nine are
you go to Iowa state first point
that's a flashback to Albertsons
and buy a six pack of coke for
two ninety nine there is not
going to be in the increased
cost so I I honestly don't know
where those numbers are coming
from.
There is further debate the
gentleman from we Representative
caliber did I lose the floor
sorry thought I still was able
to ask another question
traditionally at that you said
that was your last question it
was but then another one popped
in my head can ask another
question please the question I'm
sorry I thought you were
finished no that's okay thank
you okay so I guess I'm just
gonna finish with this and thank
you Mr speaker and and
Representative
my concern is I see what you're
saying but I start looking for
all these reports and that
there's a lot of money that's
being thrown around and multiple
different fires and that was one
of the reasons that I voted no
for it because.
If it is just the fact that
somebody can go in and have that
option yeah I could agree to
that but what I'm seeing and
this is what I always see from
being in the insurance field for
ever insurance companies
whenever they try to match other
prices they take it out on me
the taken on the consumer and
the end of raising our prices
and right now my husband has a
great plan we pay zero copay we
get our stuff to the mail I
don't want that to be messed
around with so I'll just close
with them for the same reason I
voted no that'll be voting on
this bill as well thank you all
right there is for the debate
the gentleman from Lee
Representative kind of.
Thank you Mr speaker does
gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker I clap the yield.
Thank you
So I just spoke with my local
pharmacist in Lee County to see
where they stood on this bill
and I just want to.
Grab some clarification to make
sure the.
Nothing has changed with respect
to this the pharmacist as I
understand it gentle lady Mr
speaker it does not have to
match the price but has the
option.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct if they cannot meet the
price then they can't
participate.
Thank you very much that was the
the key question hello I will
tell you that
Our our local pharmacist
concerns have been of late with.
Information going out to to
their their clientele almost
forcing them for mail order.
Yeah there's just as that
information is placed in such a
way that.
An elderly person would would
almost would would read it to to
say that in such a way that they
felt like they had no choice but
to use mail order Mr speaker and
gentleman that is the case
that's what I'm trying to
prevent that's what I said
that's what happened to me I've
been working on this bill for
several years but it really came
home in November when I got a
letter from my insurance company
that state you will use mail
order period hard stop what this
bill does is that if my local
pharmacy can meet the same price
I have the option of using my
local pharmacy that my insurance
company can not forced me into
using mail order if the if my
local pharmacy can beat the
price.
Thank you very much for your
responses and I wish you the
best looking you continue on I
yield back to you the Mr speaker
is further debate the gentleman
the other gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott
Representative Scott hello
you're on.
Representative Scott you're
walking the wrong way.
You are the hour is late.
You'll need to be at your chair.
So Mister speaker are the third
one.
The speaker will the journalist
William you.
Mr speaker I yield.
I'm looking at this farm also.
With some concern.
Is there more than one.
Costs associated with having a
prescriptions filled.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
course there's more than one
cost you have to get the
prescription from a physician or
someone else so in terms in
terms of this bill Mister
speaker the cost that the person
pays for the medication is the
cost that we're discussing.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
for the appropriate portion of
the costs only is that correct
actually I missed Mr speaker and
gentleman I misspoke it as I
said before if ever let's say
it's our it's something a high
blood pressure medicine I I need
that if if my insurance
companies that okay your copay
we are or what the amount that
this will cost the insurance
company is ninety dollars for a
thirty day supply and and my it
doesn't matter what my copay is
that that that the copay if what
the copay is but the bottom line
is that the insurance company
will pay the same amount to the
local pharmacy as they pay to
the mail order pharmacy.
Including the copay so if it's a
ninety dollar prescription and I
have a thirty dollar copay I
have to pay the thirty dollar
copay to the mail order and I
have to pay a thirty dollar
copay to the to the pharmacist
though there is no difference in
the amount that the insurance
company is paying for the a
copay that the that the patient
is paid.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in
would be completely up to the
local pharmacist to match in
total.
The bill going to the century
which company along with an
identical coping.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady these
these FIR still seem to indicate
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
understand that and I don't know
where those numbers come from
that LCS and it had been a
little unclear I think before it
heads that column and and that
was an issue with some folks and
and I agreed that it was so it
is equal to the pet the cost
must be equal from either the
mail order or that the local
pharmacy and as I said before I
don't know how that can increase
the cost when you have equal.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
be possible.
That the insurance company with
a with a large staff of people
trying to negotiate these prices
down for so
there really and.
Agreeing to balk price purchase
agreements with these various
large pharmaceutical suppliers
is it just possible those prices
would be very much higher.
Coming from a local pharmacy
without the benefit of all
purchase agreements in place.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
said if the local pharmacy can
not match the total price the
the insurer does not have to
allow the patient to go there it
has to be equal.
The speaker gentle lady of
course tools confused will flow
with the numbers being presented
and they have file.
And also have to think about
that some more thank you very
much Jim lady from her church
there is further debate the
gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo please you.
Mr speaker I DO.
Thank you gentle lady.
From the COVID in the FIR that
confuses me a little bit it says
insured patients would have the
option to fill the prescriptions
at any participating community
pharmacy but the option to fill
them out of participating mail
order pharmacy has been removed.
Can you help me understand what
what exactly does that mean as
senator Neville Mr speaker and
gentleman.
We know.
What this bill is trying to do
Mr speaker is to give patients a
choice of a local pharmacy or
mail order pharmacy and also to
help protect our local pharmacy
so and the insurance companies
were worried that if we have any
participating pharmacy that
there would be that would kind
of.
I'm.
Water down their ability to to
negotiate so we want this to be
focused on New Mexico pharmacies
pharmacies so that's why we took
out the mail order pharmacy
because Mr speaker and gentleman
we do not really have any any.
Mail order pharmacies in New
Mexico of course there are small
local pharmacies that do mail
and CVS and Walgreens do have
mail programs but the part part
of the.
This bill has to two goals one
is to allow patients to choose
their pharmacy and the other one
is to try and do something to
help protect our local pharmacy
because they're disappearing.
And by opening it up to other
large national corporations that
would not make the second part
of that what I'm trying to do.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker so as I understand
that if I choose to go ahead and
use my local pharmacy and I can
I I have forfeited the ability
to change my mind later and go
back to mail order is that what
this is saying gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman no you can
you it's it's it's patient
choice I'm in and that's up to
your insurance company and
making that your insurance
company will only allow you to
switch where you're getting your
your regular medications bills
but that now this doesn't think
that you can't go to a mail
order pharmacy if you choose the
image that works great for some
people but it doesn't work great
for others and I personally
don't feel like my insurance
companies to tell me where I
have to get my prescription
bill.
Thank you don't really I I think
I understand you to say that I
maintain the option to go to one
and if I have an opportunity to
go back to the mail order I can
do that but I can move back and
forth between them is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
that a lot of that has to do
with your insurance company but
that has nothing to do with this
law.
Thank you John we appreciate
that very much the second
question I have has to do with
the
if they have a thirty dollar
copay at mail order and I also
have a thirty dollar copay at
the local pharmacy they have to
be exactly the same is that
correct all of that is correct
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker July it is
my understanding that I do mail
order I can get ninety pills of
the time if I go to local after
by thirty is that accurate
Mister speaker July Mr speaker
and gentleman the again that's
up to your your insurance
company.
Thank you gentle lady I it would
seem to me that if my insurance
company says.
It's thirty dollars for thirty
bills or thirty dollars for
ninety pills.
And I can see where my copays
are going to be out of whack.
Or
Because the prices have to be
equal a thirty day supply have
to cost the same through through
your mail order as a thirty day
supply through a local pharmacy
and ninety days the drugs supply
through mail order has to cost
the same as a ninety day supply
it's not the number of days it's
that equal prize take equal
medication.
Thank you John lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker so I'm
assuming the same price includes
the copay in that price is that
correct gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman yes.
Thank you John we appreciate it
very much I just need a little
clarification thank you Mr
speaker I yield back my time is
further debate the gentleman
from created Baca Guadalupe big
Roosevelt and San Miguel
representatives are more.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
of.
I want you know to that.
Gentleman Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I'm I'm all for
supporting the local pharmacy
and keeping them.
in business if if I was to go to
my local pharmacy and and the
price was higher could I make up
the difference or will this bill
allow that.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
between you and your insurance
company.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
so I take it that that you're
telling me that in the bill we
can negotiate that with the with
the insurance company or the
local pharmacy.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
have my doubts that you can do
much negotiating with your
insurance company I haven't ever
found that that's a very useful
the point of this bill is that
for a thirty day supply or a
ninety day supply the mail order
price passed the if the local
pharmacy wants to participate in
the insurance program they have
to offer the same amount of
medication for the same price.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
so you you talked about your
your order that you placed and
then that your insurance company
said that you're gonna have to
to a mail order instead of
buying it from your pharmacy
because of the price can you go
into a little more detail about
that and what kind of medication
it was.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
not I wasn't about the price I
got a letter in the mail that
said beginning January first
twenty twenty one these
medications that were listed out
must be purchased mail order
from this pharmacy period end of
story.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
so if we go to our pharmacist
and he had a price on his meds
that you were going to purchase
and he had to lower those budget
to be able to make the sale.
Do you think that would hurt the
pharmacy in anyway.
Mr speaker and gentleman no one
has to lower their prices and
and these are prices that are
negotiated with insurance
companies this is not you coming
off the street saying well my
insurance company says I can
spend thirty dollars on
penicillin this month so so what
can you do for me this is this
is about insurance negotiating a
price with the mail order
pharmacy if your local pharmacy
can meet that same price for the
same amount of medication this
bill says that the insurance
company has to allow you to get
your medication at your local
pharmacy if and only if it
matches the price.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's exactly what I was
referring to is if we make the
local pharmacy lowered their
price well then I think we're
we're we're making them.
Question I'm hard to make a sale
and afraid that's going to hurt
the local pharmacy do you agree
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman we are not forcing
them to meet the price it is an
option if they can not do it and
make money then they will not do
it if they can do it and make
money then I want them to have
that option there is no forcing
any local pharmacy if they can
meet the price based I this bill
says that they will be allowed
to make that sale if they can't
meet the price they lose out on
the state all and I I that's
that has nothing to do with this
bill.
Thank you gentle lady for
helping me understand your bill
better and thank you Mr speaker.
Next generation captions the
core of the lens you.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally yield.
I will the you don't to my
fellow Health committee member
Mr speaker thank you madam Mr
speaker and kind lady
alternately this bill is saying
that the insurance agencies
insurance cannot mandate a mail
order only it's giving local
options.
To the local pharmacy if they
can meet the price since the
option
I voted against the bill in
committee because I felt like.
There's really no way on a
little home grown pharmacy can
meet the price on as a male in
but ultimately what this is
doing is saying you cannot
mandate that it has to be mail
order you have the option and so
I just wanted to explain that
thank you madam chair Mr speaker
in Canadian singer for the
debate gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one oh seven as amended do
now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one oh seven is amended the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Ten seconds to close.
Representative close by a vote
of sixty one in the affirmative
I'm sorry the clerk to call
those without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Representative ada.
Representative Lewis.
It was closer to sixty money
affirmative for the negative
house bill one of seven as
amended has duly passed the
house next what item number
eight gentleman from civil and
McKinley are you ready on that
item.
Thank you Mr speaker I sure am
ready when you get yes we do
that point throughout all action
necessary for placing House
joint resolution three on final
passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the
resolution.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the house house joint resolution
is a bill
For the Military and Veterans
Affairs Committee this is a
joint resolution resolution
million sleepy
The constitution to increase in
property tax exemption or
honorably discharged members of
the armed forces and their
widows and widowers from four
thousand dollars student
thousand dollars with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions.
Gentlelady from Montero
Representative black.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Milan yield.
Thank you Mister speaker gentle
lady from on that I will the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so just a few
questions I know I heard this a.
This resolution in Committee.
So I guess my first one my first
question would be and I don't
know if anyone asked you this
before but do we know when the
original four thousand dollar
cap was actually put in place Mr
speaker John.
Speaker of the speaker and
gentle lady from the federal the
last time it was changed because
the two thousand six.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
And do we do now Mr chairman
what.
The equivalent would be for the
ten thousand dollar exemption as
as far as how it affects the
property taxes.
Speaker and gentle lady is the
is really awesome that
Those tires that was provided in
the FY are and in those county
by county unit down to pretty
basically how much the the
change would be from all on in
each county asked for the amount
of veterans for county and
there's thirty two counties I
don't think you want me to go
through all of all.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman there's actually
thirty three County sorry yes I
do see both especially because
you will encounter with Mister
speaker and gentle lady Cibola
County was that there is the
thirty third staff.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman so
I'm not sure I don't have the
fire in for me so I don't know
what that ten thousand a quite
to roughly in my County the four
thousand dollar exemption right
now actually exams a hundred
dollars off of the veterans
Assessment so it's it's a cost
savings about a hundred dollars
a year in my County so I I do
believe that
I I voted for this in committee
and I kind of four here on the
floor I support this I think
it's important that we at.
Take care of our veterans it
does transfer the tax burden to
other taxpayers but I believe it
is something that needs to be
done and and it will go to the
voters so at thank you for
bringing us.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker I yield
more straight from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from cyclicality
yield.
Mr speaker I will gladly ill to
the gentleman from Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the.
Question that.
Or the.
I really wish that we if we were
updating the constitution to to
address us and increasing the
amounts I wish that subsection
a.
At the bottom of page one would
have been increased as well to
bring head of household
exemption more in line with the
current economics as well I'm
mentioned to the to the you in
committee of that fact and the I
wish I wish that we were dealing
with both of the same time but
we're not but I would like to
see.
Both the veterans exemption then
the head of household exemption
of bills with at the same time
and maybe as if this gets over
to the US Senate you might
consider doing that thank you Mr
speaker thank you John.
Thank you to the gentleman from
curry Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman please yield.
Mr speaker I will carry.
Thank you Mr speaker I I just
want to rise and and
Let the body know that I would
profit from this and and
therefore Mr speaker I would
request that I be excused from
this vote.
Don't think that you can
certainly be excused thank you
Mr speaker nope no questions
just want to be excused thank
you.
Next year the gentleman from
Bernalillo civil of McKinley
Sikora San Juan and fluency.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from civil and again
appreciate it.
Mr speaker I will gladly yield
to the gentleman the gentleman
the other gentleman from Samoa.
Thank you Mr speaker not provide
and gentleman how many veterans
we have in the state of New
Mexico
When you.
This is.
This this this millions of Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Receive is still under the
covers the.
The pharmacist rated people that
are from the military.
So I do have the stats on the on
the veterans are the state you
live.
For sure you.
Thank you Mr speaker on think
just about a hundred forty two
thousand veterans in the state
of New Mexico right now should I
and
what question
Representative Mr gentleman from
civil Kelly Mr speaker.
Is the National Guard included
in this.
this.
Yes they are.
As long as they're on really
discharged.
Thank.
It was the only question I had
you know support for bill and
let you brought it up because
you know.
Of all our visitors are need to
help and you know all after all
we deserve for our country and
it just a feedback tools poll I
really appreciate that Mr
speaker for an engine are you
back.
Next.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm going
to ask to be excused from the
vote as well I'm not because I'm
a veteran that because my
husband is and I believe it
would be self serving for me to
to vote on this bill thank you.
C. will be excuse seeing no
further debate.
Gems thank you Mr speaker with
that that I move the house joint
resolution passes house so we
can send it to the voters and
ask them to vote for it.
We are on final passage of house
joint resolution three the vote
is now open.
One minute to close.
Thirty seconds to close.
Is the the clerk to call those
without a recorded vote.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Lewis.
Representative closed
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
He was closer to sixty four in
the affirmative zero negative
house joint resolution threes
duly passed the house.
Next we have item number thirty
two general from Bernalillo
Representative Chrissy are you
ready on that item.
Mr speaker
Can you get me to the power
point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
forty six as amended with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken gentleman
to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker of the some
gentleman of the house house
bill forty six is an
appropriation bill making
appropriation from the consumer
settlement fund.
To to the university medical
open up the social sciences for
demonstration project to assess
the feasibility and
accessibility.
Of an injectable opioid
treatment program.
They're at the university
estimates speaker.
And is the most Baker this is a
very creative program that we're
undertaking not without bill
forty six.
And
I'd like to share in terms of
these injectable opioid
treatment program.
Will be in a clinical setting.
naturally the prototype will be
developed at UNM health sciences
center and
It'll be the first of its kind
in the United States.
Currently it's being undertaken
in seven countries Mr speaker.
And and that's we we know the
opioids are very harmful and
addictive drugs heroin.
Oxycontin fentanyl is the most
Baker and
Then we kind of share with you
briefly is the most beaker the
some of the positive results of
implementing injectable opioid
treatment program.
I first got wind of this idea in
our health and social sciences
interim committee in twenty
sixteen when a group of
professionals from Vancouver
Canada share with us their model
program and it was in nineteen
and in a very hopeful process
that we could implement here in
our state as the more speaker
some of the positive results of
having an injectable opioid
treatment program in our state
is that one.
It basically eliminates the
chaos of our substance.
substance users kind of
stabilizes their lifestyle.
It also provides
because this is a eight program
in a clinical setting.
Where the subs and user goes in
and is injected into the nope Mr
Michael Moore for.
And in that clinical setting
there have wraparound services
such as housing so just also
services signing up individual
for Medicaid and most important
is the most beaker is that it
removes the subject user from
street life.
And estimates speaker
It also reduces the substance
use or from engaging in criminal
activity.
and it also kind of takes away
that quote unquote caring adult
of the individual and that quote
unquote caring adult of a
certain user is the drug Peter.
Basically there is no need for
this individual and this program
to basically solicit the needs.
And services of a drug Peter.
Because basically the life of a
substance abuser is one of
engaging in criminal activity.
In order to get his fix in order
to come up with enough money to
get his fix for the day is the
most this is also a positive
results of this program in that
it curves public safety prices
as in our communities such as
the disposing of syringes
throughout the community in our
public parks in our little
league fields in our businesses
in the parking lots of our
businesses is the most.
Mainly because there is no
needle to be this post up
because the individual is being
injected with an opulent Act the
clinic in the hands of a
licensed physician is the most
because and also it also reduces
the risk of overdose is because
they're at the clinic you have
markup you have a clinical team
that'll keep tabs of the
substance use are that is
engaging in this service in the
mosque another positive result
of this program is that it
strengthens social relations
with family and community of the
substance users we know that
because the subject user of this
is a life of chaos there's this
disconnect and this program
provides the availability of the
subs and user defined work.
Because he's no longer worried
about hitting the street
stealing whatever in order to
get cash to get a fix for the
eight and also it strengthens
family bonds the mosque it also
allows user to go back to
school.
To engage in the in the
productive educational learning
and engage in need even leisure
activities.
As the more speaker and also a
really important factor was
similar section users is that it
allows them to seek.
To win back their children.
From CYFD custody.
Miss madam speaker and
I want to give me a story I'm
not sure start.
Generally have no debate would
you like to get the stories your
closing statement.
Is the most beaker.
on the my past the the story but
I'll conclude with this that
this program.
Is.
Basically is the most bigger.
An initiative that will be
funded entirely.
By the.
consumer settlement fund of the
attorney general's office and
this fund is comprised of
settlements that are to
generalizations with these
opioid manufacturers in terms of
their over prescription.
Of oxycontin that has that has
basically created mass overdoses
throughout our country.
And recently the AG wanted to
million dollar settlement from a
small fish.
From a consultant for.
Six hundred million Madam forty
nine eighties nationwide R. AG
got two million and the agent
tells me that this is just the
tip of the iceberg.
So once we do the study which I
think eight months that's what
we have emergency funds it'll be
done in November the AG has
committed to funding this
program statewide once we have
the prototype developed at UNM
it's the most be and with that
is the most because that.
Representative Germany close.
And as the must be with that I
do now move that house bill
forty six to pass we are on
final passage of house bill
forty six as amended with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those that are
recorded.
Representative Baldonado.
Hello yes Representative
Baldonado votes yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lewis.
Whether sixty two in the
affirmative for the negative
house bill forty six as amended
with an emergency clause has
duly passed the house.
I'm sorry gentle lady we just
called the vote.
I'm twenty seven.
Generally the Senate only ready
on that item.
Let the record reflect election
necessary for placing House Bill
two seven five on final passage
has been taken.
Gentlelady to explain the bill
miss getting to that point.
The gentle lady I just I just
you just do it and I did too
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I have a substitute bill for
a house bill two seventy five.
Mr speaker.
Gently wanted to get past that
will scan it will come right
back to you okay that's fine
thank you all right we'll go to
item number fifteen gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Trujillo are you ready on house
bill ninety one.
Yes Sir I am ready let the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
ninety one is amended on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the.
Yes Mr speaker I bring to you
house bill.
Ninety one and I it is a bill
that simply increases.
The metro court fees.
For.
Four excuse me I'm trying to
surprise.
Rep bill ninety one minutes but
District Court fees and costs
increases the maximum need
mediation.
Our new market at work and
assesses and collects for the
docking of small claims and
criminal actions specified by
the court rule from five dollars
to fifteen dollars for the
docking of small claims and
original actions that I stand
for questions.
This debate the gentleman from
curry Representative Crowder.
Mr speaker gentle lady please
yep yes file yield to the
gentleman very thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady in your
opening remarks I heard you
mention magistrate courts as
well but the paperwork that I
have in front of me says metro
court so does this cover both
course records.
Actually covers
work.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sorry
I didn't hear that I said metro
court Mr chairman and gentleman
from curry I misspoke.
Thank you very much just needed
a clarification thank you Mr
speaker thank you seeing a
further debate gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I now move that house
bill ninety one do now pass.
Your final passage of house bill
ninety one is amended the vote
is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Is now closed Senator sixty four
the formative for the negative
house bill ninety one as amended
has duly passed the house.
I will go back and twenty seven
generally for Santa thank you Mr
speaker gentlelady to move that
the record reflect election
necessary for placing House with
two seventy five on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to move and explain
her house floor substitute.
Mr speaker the
amended bill number point two
two zero one three three point
two.
Mr speaker this is a very simple
bill all we're asking is to give
the department transportation.
The permission to support.
The installation for fallen
officers signage on all roadways
this under the supervision of
the department of
transportation.
Scene of the is there a debate
on the floor substitute which I
presume it is friendly this is
generally is offered is there
objection to it.
Hearing none house for
substitute for house bill two
seventy five is adopted.
See no debate gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I now move that
Floors for House Bill to
seventeen I do now pass.
We are final passage of house or
substitute for house bill two
seventy five the vote is now
open.
Anyone.
The clerk to call the the member
with that recorded the.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo votes
yes Representative close by a
vote of sixty eight in the
affirmative zero negative house
for substitute for house bill
two seventy five has duly passed
the house.
And I think I thought I'd just
give the order for the remaining
bills and I average height of
seventeen and twenty.
Twenty six thirty thirty one.
Seventeen twenty twenty six
thirty thirty one that's the
order that was sent out earlier
this evening.
generally from Bernalillo
Representative bash are you
ready item seventeen.
Yes I am but the record reflect
election necessary for placing
health and Human Services
substitute for house bill one
forty seven our final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you.
This is the this is the health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for the nutrition and
dietetics practice act this act
was originally passed in
nineteen eighty nine and was
only amended in nineteen ninety
six to.
Decrease the board from seven
members to five members and it
hasn't been touch since and so
what this does is of it expands
the scope of practice a
nutritionists and dietitians and
provides for licensing and
For licensing.
And I will stand for questions.
Seeing gentle lady to close.
Do now ask that we pass house
bill one seventy one forty seven
the committee substitute we are
on final passage of health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill one
forty seven the vote is now
open.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded vote
Representative ended up yes
Representative both yes.
Whether sixty eight in the
affirmative zero the negative
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one forty seven has duly
passed the house.
Next we have the gentleman from
Rio Arriba Santa Fe.
San Miguel.
Colfax.
The gentleman Colfax more Rio
Arriba and Sandoval
Representative Montoya.
I am twenty.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that place.
To that point.
Gentleman I I just think that
the record reflect less
necessary for the house the one
eighty three on final passage
has been taken gentleman to
explain.
Mr speaker thank you I am ready
to present to this body house
bill one eighty three.
Relating to children eliminating
certain fines and fees are
related to crimes committed by
juveniles.
I spent thirty years advocating
ferociously for the protection
of young people.
It has been a great honor I've
done that work through public
education after care programs.
The the first ever a homeless
shelter in our region and of
course programs that deal with
recovery.
I've used the arts.
To move children from trauma to
trust.
House bill one eighty three is
an extension of that work and my
commitment to protecting
children.
Well the Mexico race to the
bottom the most indicators for
childhood well being The New
Mexico children's code leads the
way in supporting children and
families in so many ways.
Developed in unanimously
supported by the New Mexico's
sentencing commission.
House bill one eighty three is
another way for New Mexico
lawmakers to lead by eliminating
destructive fines and fees from
our children's code.
If I may read just a little bit.
About this.
The general purpose of the
children's coats and gentleman
that house rules the don't allow
reading of statements during
debate for that I'm ready for
questions.
The general there is no debate
so the gentleman to close.
I move that house bill one
eighty three of moves to do pass
we are on final passage of house
bill one eighty three the vote
is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Brown.
Representative Rod Montoya.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty six me Fuhrman is here
the negative house bill one
eighty three has duly passed the
house.
And I'm gonna take the chairs
private for members to offer
around of laws for the
gentleman's the for the passage
of the gentleman's first bill.
News.
Regulations Representative.
Next to that item twenty six
house bill two thirty nine the
gentle lady.
From caption Sikora influencia
Representative Armstrong are you
ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point.
Let the record reflect all
action necessary replacing Bill
to thirty nine on final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm gonna
explain the bill and then I do
have a quick list of the bill is
creating a position for the W.
mine inspector and prescribing
duties in the event that the
mine inspector position is
vacant house bill two thirty
nine allows the president of New
Mexico tech to temporarily
assigned the duty of mine
inspector and all the attendant
duties this does not
Make any additions doesn't cost
any additional funding and
There is an associate mine
inspector at New Mexico tech
that would take the position.
And with that Mr speaker I would
like to offer an amendment.
Is it generally two to zero one
ninety seven point one yes Sir
it is has been passed out of the
in total this on the website.
gentlelady are we I see would
say from the minute.
Yes Mr speaker inside taking a
few items that were presented in
the last committee and adding
those.
And in those and taking striking
a shall making it a may and
making some other clerical.
Is there actions okay is there
debate on the amendment.
Generally I'll ask you a
question again private of the
chair might you consider
Committee amendment instead of
having a W. my dispatcher having
minor money inspection.
I think I'll stick to the W. one
inspectors thank you Mr speaker.
I'm glad this few people in the
chamber right now to ground
is objections the amendment.
Not every thank you for always
laughing at the jokes created
is there objections the minute
hearing on it House were member
number one to house bill two
thirty nine is adopted.
That the debate on the bill of
which there is none gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and house
are now move.
The passage of house bill two
thirty nine as amended you're on
final passage of house bill two
thirty nine as amended the vote
is now open.
Representative closed by a vote
of sixty six in the affirmative
I'm sorry we have members at a
recorded vote the clerk to call
those numbers Representative
Harry Garcia.
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Lujan votes yes.
There is a close by a vote of.
Sixty seven in the affirmative
zero negative house bill two
thirty nine as amended has duly
passed the house thanks to the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative
Lundstrom are you ready on item
number thirty.
You Mr speaker if you could give
me to that point place but the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
six on final passage has been
taken gentlelady to explain it
all thank you Mr speaker and
good evening everyone this is it
is a bill in regard to the state
equalization guarantee
distribution house bill six
removes the seventy five percent
impacted local half mill levy
and federal forest reserve
credit from the public school
funding formula I require
schools to budget the newly
accredited revenue for capital
outlay capital improvements.
Community schools in and the
implementation of the Indian
Education Act and with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions
seeing no debate gentle lady to
close thank you Mr speaker I now
move house bill six do now pass
we're on final passage of house
bill six the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty seven in the
affirmative one of the negative
house bill six is duly passed
the house.
Last one gentlelady from
Bernalillo let the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House Bill forty three
is amended on final passage is
been taken gentlelady to explain
the bill Mr speaker members of
the house house bill forty three
creates within the public
Education Department critical
mechanisms to address
educational disparities that
exist for blacks students
current national research has
recently released a
congressional mandated annual
report the addition of education
twenty twenty that painted a
very something national picture
of the state of education for
black students poverty is the
highest for black students
lack of internet access brought
students attend high poverty
schools achievement gap has not
closed school drop out rate is
high and graduation and college
enrollment rates a little Mr
speaker I now stand for
questions see no debate gentle
lady to close Mr speaker I now
will that house bill forty three
do now pass we are on final
passage of house bill forty
three is amended the vote is now
open.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded vote
Representative Rod Montoya.
In the affirmative zero negative
house bill forty three is
amended has duly passed the
house.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objections so
ordered.
Thank you okay members so
we're going to do two things
here we have a number of
memorials on the third reading
calendar item number of
memorials that are on the
speakers table we're talking
about having a consent calendar
for these memorials in order to
clean up the third reading
calendar the speakers table
other to move everything onto
consent calendars that we were
going to vote on it right now
we're just moving it's that the
floor leaders can discuss it I
want to do it in two batches.
The first one is items thirty
four thirty five thirty six
thirty seven thirty eight thirty
nine forty that's how strong
Morial to.
House memorial one House
memorial for House memorial
seven House memorial one House
memorial to in house memorial
three as amended again these are
items thirty four to forty are
native to the consent calendar
hearing objection it is so
ordered.
Next the memorials on the
speakers table items one.
Through.
Twelve on the speakers table.
S. R. one through eleven.
When through eleven of the
speakers table item one through
eleven on the speakers table
those are house memorial is five
six and eight.
Nine eleven.
House joint memorial for in that
house memorial is twelve
fourteen fifteen sixteen and
seventeen are removed from the
speakers table and placed on the
consent calendar hearing no
objection it is so ordered.
Are there answers the generation
ninety Cadena Representative
Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker just I
wanted to make a brief
announcement that house
transportation will be meeting
tomorrow morning at eight
thirty.
Members take note annexes
Jennifer Leo representative
Garcia.
Yes this is the most speaker is
the most beaker the tall dark
and handsome and lovely and who.
Local government land grants to
affairs committee will be
meeting promptly.
At nine AM tomorrow morning not
one minute before not one minute
after so members and presenters
be there or be square and Bob
square pants.
Members take note next we have
the gentleman from Cibola and
we can only Representative
Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker here labor
veterans and military affairs
committee will be promptly
promptly at two o'clock tomorrow
afternoon thank you Mr speaker.
I think in the capitol
animosity.
Mr speaker I'm staying home.
He is being charged.
Members take Mexico gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker
consumer public affairs
committee will meet at twelve
thirty instead of one thirty so
hopefully we can get through our
agenda so please folks please
notice it's twelve thirty thank
you Mr speaker.
There is an answer the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker at gaping
members HSC will meet tomorrow
at one thirty thank you.
Whether anyone else since.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
