Mr chairman Alcon.
Here and we do have corms are.
Mr
chair representative here in
the.
It is very important.
She's on her right now.
Your muted Representative
Garrett.
I'm she is coming up here right
now.
And so I will probably just have
her use my
my computer.
So you can never one minute I'm
just off of the I'm right on the
second floor.
There was
little rollover.
This is the way
It's.
In the hall and and flagged.
Yes.
Hall I don't know which elevator
should come on session pretty
long blonde hair okay.
I think you're already.
Well.
Mr Chairman do you want me to
start while we wait.
Your muted Sir Mr chair.
I hear myself.
Hi
Hansi Representative Garrett and
you can start by telling us
about the bill.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
on Senate bill fifty one relates
to providing an enrollment
preference for students whose
parents are employees of a
charter school
I'm what this means is.
Way I think there's about ninety
charter schools about a third of
them have a waiting list what
what it means is if you're
implied and there is a waiting
list that requires the a lot of
books here she.
Right.
Representative Garrett said so
you've got to start from where
she left off.
All.
Thank.
Your.
Okay let me get.
Situated here thank you so much
Representative okay good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
I appreciate having the
opportunity to introduced Senate
bill fifty one this afternoon it
provides and Roman preference
for students.
parents are employees of charter
schools and I believe my expert
witnesses are here today Casey
Bennett Peter Matthew call and
Todd now.
And this enrollment preference
is already provided in
traditional district schools
it's a family friendly work
policy that provides
Parents the ability to better
balance family and work
obligations so the current
enrollment preferences include
returning students who are
already enrolled at the school
and samplings of enrolled
students and this is the best
practice and the rationale
behind that is because it helps
to keep families together so
again it's the family
family friendly work policies
that helps facilitate family
life and then students whose
names are drawn from the lottery
scholarship so with that Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I hope that you'll
support the enrollment
preference bill especially right
now since employees of schools
across our state have really
struggled this last year during
the pandemic and this is a way
that we can promote family
friendly work environment
centered schools just like they
provide an traditional district
schools and Mr chairman I'd like
to turn it over to Casey Bennett
beat us if he's available.
Let me interrupt Senator can you
tell me the name of your third
expert witness wasn't Chantelle.
I don't have Schardin on my list
I have Casey benedi does math
Paul and Ted renounce madam
chair.
Yes.
Would you like to add to what
Senator said.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Casey but
this first of all I'd like to
say thank you for allowing me to
testify today I I was able to
log on a little bit early in its
out coming from us then because
it's a welcoming to hear Spanish
going back and forth and in the
conversation so I'm the director
of the and I was international
school in Albuquerque
and I was in the door language
charter school and we have a Max
capacity of four hundred twenty
four students every year we host
a lottery which is primarily for
New agencies that are are in
kindergarten and we have usually
about three hundred lottery
applicants and with only limited
spaces available we have less
than ten percent of the
applicants get admitted to the
school.
So currently right now state law
provides for two exemptions so
students who are already
students here or what we've
already gone through the lottery
process are naturally admitted
in so from third to fourth grade
let's say they're already able
to go to the next grade without
having to go through the lottery
again and siblings of students
that are already here are exempt
from having to go through the
lottery as well so those two
those two students are both to
preferences are already there
Senate bill fifty one will
assist in number one recruiting
high quality teachers which is
oftentimes difficult being that
we're in the state that we
suffer from teacher shortages
I've come to I experienced where
teachers don't take a position
because we can't accept their
students in our school they
would rather work somewhere in
their home area where this is
not required.
The second and perhaps more
important is with teacher
retention
if teachers are not provided
exemptions for their own their
own children these students
often go on a waiting list at a
highly competitive charter
school with only a few spots
available this could mean
staying on a waiting list for
the entire year and being that
we are we zero out the waiting
list at the end of every year
they have to re apply for the
next year sometimes teachers get
frustrated with the process and
take jobs closer to where their
students are able to attend so
losing a teacher at the school
of special ed school XML is
where we we specialize in dual
language instruction losing a
teacher would affect the whole
entire class and it it brings
not only the teacher but the
school to an undue burden that
we have to be trained this tier
all over again and this of
course takes time and school
resources so I would like to
point out that this is
especially important for my
score noted as well that we have
for staff members that are
hoping that Senate bill fifty
one passes to allow for their
students to be able to come to
school next year I honestly I've
had a couple that are
determining whether they're
gonna stay or not just depending
on this bill I have a
kindergarten teacher who had to
wait for three years for her
student to get into the school
so as I mentioned before being
that New Mexico suffers from
future shortages we specialize
in Spanish speaking teachers are
we oftentimes recruit exchange
teachers from Mexico or Spain so
right now I have I teachers that
are either from Mexico or Spain
in a few of them have students
that they've had to put clear
across the cross town because we
can't take them into they they
weren't successful in the
lottery.
so distant and and wrapping this
up if this bill is considered
it's not going to require any
funding it'll put us at a parity
with what other public schools
commonly do right now with in
Albuquerque if you earn if you
choose to work outlook web ID
number across town you are
automatically as a teacher you
can take your students over
there without having you know
without having to file that
Interzone transfer me quest so I
hope this gives you a little
insight on how this exemption
would help charter schools
charter schools across the state
and thank you for your
consideration.
Senator anybody else you want to
have justify of the bill.
I have Matt Paul.
Hello do you have anything to
add.
Mr chair just two quick items
one is that this bill was
endorsed by the L. E. S. C. over
the intro and secondly just some
clarification about creating
budget this is for employees and
not for contractors that
increasingly both the and any
public school whether their
district or charter are
increasingly using contract
services for special education
things of that nature and they
would not be included in this
bill is really just for that
school community and for the
school community members to have
this budget so that's all and we
just think the sponsor for
caring to build and job for
Representative years help as
well thank you.
It.
Okay that does matters of
Senator a.
You have percent in your
building will would you like for
me to go to the audience and see
if there's anybody was to speak
along.
Chairman that would be fine
thank you.
Okay
I will go to the audience and I
see one hand up in is users so
Mister chair user introduce
yourself you have a minute to.
Speak up.
Chairman and members of the
committee this is Richard role
metal I'm a registered lobbyist
representing twenty four charter
schools here in New Mexico and
my a school that I work with
fully endorsed this bill thank
you.
Do that and Senator Steinborn
Gerald.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Serra for sterling senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
chamber strongly supports this
bill and we're glad to be
speaking in support at its last
committee hearing as you may
know charter schools often
operate on different schedules
and traditional public schools
do whether it's school years a
start earlier different holidays
longer school days and I can
make things logistically
challenging for charter school
teachers but school age
students.
Fifty one leisure fairness for
all of our school employees will
help our charters recruit and
retain talent that fuels their
unique traditions and will offer
important support our educators
and school staff so here's the
committee to pass this bill
thank you thank you I have
Ashley Wagner.
Do you want me to self.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
actually Wagner director public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
this bill because it is a family
friendly policy that will help
better balance family and
workplace obligations and will
help recruit and retain teachers
in a state where we have a
teacher shortage thank you so
much.
In the next I have Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico kids can an education
advocacy organization we stand
in support of this bill because
our educators are tireless
champions for students and we
should be doing our best to
treat them as such especially
our charter school teachers who
educate a more diverse student
population by allowing the
students of charter school
educators to attend the schools
they teach at we will be
reducing a point of stress for
our charter educators in the
same way we have done for
traditional district educators I
thank you for your consideration
on this proposal and we
encourage our strong support
thank you.
Thank you.
We will go back to the
committee.
And do I have any questions from
the members of the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
Yes the mother chairman.
And
Welcome Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill I hear that
this is your first bill.
Chairman and representative it
is one of my first bills yes and
it's I'm multi tasking right now
I'm I'm on the floor of the
Senate as well so I'm kind of
paying attention or we have
about coming up so I apologize
for being I I guess we're all
kind of multi tasking the
session so it's been an
interesting time to get
acquainted with the legislative
process thank you Mr chairman
thank you answer my question the
other question I had
Just to do with the
the Education Committee.
this legislation.
as well.
And what was the nature of
the opposition to the bill.
It seems pretty clear cut to me
what you're trying to do but
what what was the nature of the
opposition in the Education
Committee.
Mr chair and representative some
of the opposition included
concerns that it would take away
an available slot
and provide that to the an
educator or charter school
employees child.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I say so takeaway is locked from
the regular rotation in terms of
how students are selected
estimates chairman how are we
defining employee in terms of
time full time after time.
Order time how are we defining
employee in terms of time.
Chairman I will have Matt Paul
answer that question my expert
witness thank you.
Thank you so much German.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia in the bill as as
presently written employee is
the is the only limitation so
there is no there is there
aren't any parameters around how
long how many hours they serve
in the position what it be just
them being an employee at and
that just differs from being a
contractor so yeah no I don't
no our requirement there.
Okay thank you for that Mr
Chairman
And and I guess that question
also I mean that answer probably
also answers the other question
that I had in terms of
staff.
so if I take it to mean that
employee is not limited in terms
of time thank full time part
time quarter time so then
employee is not limited just to
teachers it's it could be a
cafeteria workers be the janitor
the the secretary
so so that answers that
and
And Senator Hemphill you know
here in the house we we have a a
tradition it's kind of under
scrutiny right now.
The.
That the a rookie's first bill
requires the sponsor the rookie
to sing a song in order to move
the bill along.
we've never tested on the
Senator before but I want to see
if you'd be willing to step up.
And be the Guinea pig.
Of a following with our
tradition in terms of of being
the first Senator because you're
not going to be on the floor
to be present this your house
sponsor is going to be on the
floor so we're not going to see
on the floor so and so are you
gonna take me up on that offer
now.
doing a song right here live
labor committee of the house.
Mr Chairman representative one
of the I am a school
psychologist this is my twenty
six year in education and I.
One of my favorite things to do
is to dress up as a butterfly
and go into different classrooms
and teach a butterfly breeding
and other self regulation
strategies and so one of my
favorite songs to sing when I go
into the classroom is we are a
school family and so also I I
don't have the best singing
voice that really helps to have
children who helped to drown out
my horrible voice but I will
definitely share the words with
you and and we could sing
together when it when it's not
being recorded.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Sir I have represented
the last US.
You Mr chairman.
The US Mister chairman Senator.
Thank you for bringing this
legislation
To to the legislature I think
it's it's I think it's only
right for teachers and.
Senator school to have that
opportunity to bring the
children there
And so I understood those forty
six at least this is what I
heard was a forty six charter
schools throughout the state.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for your question there's
actually there's ninety five
charter schools and there are
fifty two state charter.
You muted ma'am.
First time that's happened Mr
Chairman representative I am on
join its computer so I'm getting
used to this when they're
actually ninety five charter
schools there are fifty two
state charter schools and forty
three local charter schools.
Mr Chairman Senator if you were
to be able to I don't know if
you have this number if this was
enacted today how many students
will faculty and staff I'm gonna
say that would would take
advantage of this.
This legislation.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that question that's a
good question
when looking at the students who
are currently on the waiting
list we expect that there would
be approximately seventy to a
hundred and twenty students that
could be impacted if this bill
were were passed.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman Senator I did hear
that and I agree with that you
guys sometimes.
Don't take this the wrong ways
are in different on a different
schedule I guess solvency be two
different route but I meant like
in in US scheduling setting and
so forth if a faculty and staff
I would imagine weren't able to
take advantage of this
legislation and and this then
that would mean that they would
probably have to
maybe it's spring break in their
spring break though do not align
maybe
I think everybody's Christmas
lines but I mean maybe the days
on and off and stuff like that
is would would you agree with
that.
Mr Chairman representative
that's a good point that you
bring up
I've worked in both charter
schools and the traditional
public schools that's that
kindergarten teacher going back
to nineteen ninety four and
currently at the school
psychologist and there are times
where I worked in the same
school as my children in times
where we worked in separate I
worked in a separate school that
they attended and when vacations
don't align it definitely
negatively impacts the teacher
are your the employee the whole
family at it negatively affects
the whole family and what we
really want to
be aware of is that when we take
care of employees and schools
and we can reduce their stress
the stress level of the adults
is what dictates the the brain
state of that child so we have
employees who are stressed out.
Not able to balance out work and
family
life then they're not able
they're not as efficient they're
not as present with the students
that they're interacting with so
when we take measures to
implement family friendly
policies and we can reduce use
the stress level of employees
that are schools that positive
have a positive impact on not
just their family not just their
children not just themselves but
all of the students that they
interact with and that's why
family friendly policies are so
important especially in our
schools when we really want to
be setting the example I Pat I
have four children and I've my
two younger children were born
when I was a school psychologist
and we didn't we don't have
things like maternity leave and
I have to take unpaid leave with
both of my younger two children
and so those are you know.
Thank you we really need to
address then as schools that we
should be prioritizing the
mental health of our teachers of
our employees and our children
and and this is one thing that
we can do to to address that
thank you Mr chairman.
Mister chairman Senator I just a
you know I I think that's good
because that could definitely I
don't have a.
The kids technology but I didn't
have a degree of that but I deal
with everyday of my business but
that could devastate someone Mr
chair Senator if your spring
break doesn't aligning your kids
want to go to Disneyland that
could be devastating to some
kids so I'm just you know one of
the things that I do appreciate
about
some of the members is there
humor and and I really do
appreciate most up.
Representative Garcia.
Get me laughing at the guy thank
god does that as we left on the
floor has left the and and we
need that sometimes this is too
serious sometimes I really
appreciate that and so I just
want to thank you again I think
I think.
I think teachers are are taking
care of our of our children and
if no one understands it I have
kids so I understand it you
definitely understand under
COVID and you understand what we
help all of us parents have to
step up to the plate three to
pick up we're we're you guys
left off and and so Mister
chairman Senator I definitely
going to support your your your
bills and and and I I thank you
for bringing that up because I
think all teachers should be.
Hell to the same standards and
have the same things we do want
to retain our teachers and I'm a
big supporter of that
application thank you so much I
do have one more comment.
The only when we asked you what
is of that the the the the the.
What was the the what was the
problem with less this
legislation the only thing that
came to my mind is if I was a
kid and first or second grader
or kindergarten and the the
teacher was a.
Was I don't know Johnny's mom
and Johnny gets.
An extra snack that I didn't get
that might cause some problems
but outside of that I think this
is a great bill.
Just having a little fun god
bless you.
Representative this.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
quick comment but Senator
Hemphill I I do appreciate you
bringing this bill Mr chairman I
would actually like to move for
it to pass.
A second that.
Sir you're muted.
Sh.
Okay so they're wasting all
those weird for not and I have
the proper first improper second
all I have any further
discussion on the bill.
Yes not I'll see the other hands
I just have.
Sir.
Chair thank you I was waving my
hands okay thank you madam vice
chair thank.
I just wanted to step up and I
was one of those that oppose the
bill and voted no on it and it
education I asked a series of
questions Mr chair and Senator
thank you for for being here and
they
and I'm listening I'm I'm and
she is and navigating through my
bill and the Senate floor right
now trying to listen to the
debate so I know you need to get
back Senator so Mr chair that
that the questions weren't
answered I I know I have quite a
bit of knowledge of charter
schools and how they've operated
and I've kept a good handle on
that in my concern Mr chair
members of the committee is that
charter schools do have waiting
lists there's no denying that I
think they they know and they
acknowledge that there were lady
waiting lasts for every position
and I mentioned that my calling
them slots for every student on
we do not pull into the waiting
list it just increases that
waiting list even more and the
idea behind charter schools is
that we wanted to four were on
students that perhaps we're
looking for were in a position
that wanted to speak on a
specialized learning for
specific learning on in feels
that the public schools aren't
able or weren't able or just the
choice of the parent in the
public school arena that charter
schools would for those and
that's why we've made a lot of
effort throughout the years
misters.
Mr chair and committee members
to make sure that charter
schools public charter schools
continue to it here to open
enrollment criteria to those low
income many are low income
neighborhood on students that
otherwise would not be able to
be afforded these type of
specialized fields of of
Education that charter school so
admirably deliver which is why
we have public charter schools
there's no criticism of the the
need or the M. ability or the
track record any of that on my
concern is that I understand the
public schools allow this the
public schools are greater and
grander on scaled and charter
schools charter schools
throughout the last few years
have struggled with adequate
facilities and other reasons why
there are rating yes there are
reasons why there's waiting
lists and most of the time and I
think the question was posed Mr
chair that had to do with you
know things like facilities and
the growth and expansion
limitations when you're
struggling as a public charter
school understand all those
assets that still did not answer
the question as to what I
believe are the equity and
fairness questions when it comes
to providing public education
across the board whether it is
in our public traditional public
institutions schools whether it
is our public charter schools
and today I was listening I have
my head in but hearing hearing
bill and I still did not get the
satisfaction of of the responses
and so Senator I I still
remained not a strong supporter
nor will I vote on this bill.
Hi I have a lot of hesitation
I've you know many of you know
that and I'll declared here many
of you know that my husband was
a PCA commissioner
commissioner for district one
and he and I Internap Internap
quite a bit we're connected at
the hip when it comes to our our
public service work and I know
that there were many questions
throughout his top term of
service that he raised these
concerns and really wanted to Mr
chair elevate our public school
charter schools to the point
where they wouldn't have to
grapple with waiting lists and
facility concerns and growth and
expansion constant all of those
issues that would continue to
open charter schools to our
otherwise our students who would
not otherwise not have the
opportunity so I feel that I
have a it's a I'm very in tune
with teachers and their needs
and staff in their needs across
the board public schools all
together but we have a greater
obligation I think when it comes
to public charter schools and
helping to elevate and give
those up those same
Educational opportunities to
those students are waiting on
the list and the other thing is
I have a real issue with using
the the language we use
preferences I know that that's
the best language that we can
use for the purposes of what
we're doing but you know that
the other major issue Mr chair
that I had was the issue of the
siblings because already in
public charter school siblings
are given preference siblings to
another another sibling that's
in the school is already given
preference so we're already
eliminating one position because
we're giving a sibling the
preference on as an employee
Madam the employee's child or
children move into that spectrum
of sibling preference and so
It just means that we have a
longer waiting period that we
have a bigger rules are
enrollment crisis continues to
escalate and we end up in a
cycle of not being able to on
me.
The intent and purposes of why
we have a public charter schools
to begin with so Mister chair
and members of the committee and
senator respectfully I'll be
another will no vote on this
committee thank you.
Okay thank you again I don't see
any other hands ideas this one
question Senator so in order for
this child of this student who
into this us to.
Follow the bearing to different
of course has to work at that
school.
And.
Does not allow.
My understanding is that there
are school districts that
basically
The warning is that that maybe
give them and give permission
for the charter school do it say
this.
This allows somebody that works
for the school district to have
their child
Get into the charter schools.
Mr chairman that's a great
question and I do see my expert
witness about called nodding his
head so I'll let him speak to
that.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
while school districts to
authorize charter schools that's
that kind of management role
that they have they do not
provide employees for the school
the charter school gets to hire
and manage their plea their
employees in the way that they
wish so what would only pertain
to the employees of the charter
school itself and not to the
larger district.
So it.
Chairs whose or something that
the that have not existed to.
Well my children going to school
all this kind of good stuff
right now so I mean the best we
had was private school and if
you are or or a.
Or a Catholic school was
something that was available but
not charter schools and my
understanding is that thanks
charter school has their own
basically school board and
everything else that a regular
school district would have.
And
I guess basically just the
charter school would be one high
school.
With everything else that whole
school district would have is
that correct.
Mr Chairman that is correct
charter schools do have their
own board and they do find
everything but eighty
traditional district school
would provide and I guess I'll
just add to that
when I started teaching it back
in nineteen ninety four and
I was a kindergarten teacher in
the San Carlos reservation and
the following year my son was
born with a rare genetic
syndrome and I had to quit
teaching and we were living on
I'm just my husband's salary and
he was a high school English
teacher and we were just below
the poverty level so my son
qualified for Medicaid he was
part of a rare genetic syndrome
and diagnosed with bone cancer
and so that.
You know just to me highlights
that educators and school
employees are.
Often low income and struggling
to and so I just wanted to add
that to and I'm gonna see if my
expert witness happy Paul wants
to add anything more to that
thank you Mr chairman.
So it.
And that so my question is of
course mostly all charter
schools specialize in one area
or another is that correct.
Mr Chairman they are
the commission is how I
understand it.
Basically I was just looking for
so the child to for example my
oldest son would.
The being able to attend the
charter a charter school the.
And my second son.
What does be in the same
category as my first son.
He would not be allowed to go to
that charter schools that
correct.
Mr Chairman in their siblings
there isn't enrollment
preference if you have a sibling
are who is already attending
that school.
But seeing this question is I
mean the mission okay whatever
to mention this okay.
Of my first child fits into that
mission but my second does not.
How does that allow that second
child to go in if he's not going
to fit into whatever that
charter schools supposed to be
doing.
Mr chairman I see witnessed
Casey Benavidez I'm gonna let
him answer that thank you Mr
chairman.
With the news you get is.
When I started this in your yes
what employment and less.
I'm the only one who's doing
some just getting.
You're testing out Mr
Representative so in our school
with the dual language school
and we start for example in
first in kindergarten teaching
ninety percent Spanish ten
percent English and our goal at
the end of eighth graders to
have a fully bilingual so just a
quick answer to your question is
if we get your first student in
kindergarten and your second
students again at kindergarten
once a couple years asked by
their automatically eligible
we're just like any.
Cool we would teach them just
the same going forward it's not
whether they fit in or not we
would teach them according to
what our mission is.
Thank you.
Thank you he is one of the
things I think I did have a a
granddaughter who is now will
but does she agree to a twenty
three years old that that's how
old I am.
she went to a charter school in
Utah.
She has a younger brother my
grandson who's two years younger
than him and I asked her.
Why.
Is your brother in the state to
school if you're in.
And her and to us they would not
let him in because he did not
have the grade reads in G. B. A.
that I had and that's why they
would not let him into this
charter school that she
attended.
So in all fairness I mean.
Sometimes.
Honestly
problem with charter schools
okay and I don't have a problem
that you're trying to do my
probably is charter schools.
After listening to my
granddaughter.
Is that charter schools were and
and the cherry bit.
Thanks to the best of the best
and and therefore they are of
course the best in the system.
With this kids with the best
children with the best to be a
attending your school of course
you're going to be the best
schools in the district.
So.
The problem with the and I'll
leave that that that's my first
real thing okay.
The thing is I do understand the
idea of having your child the
same school and you're teaching
them I mean one time I had four
children and we love them and
treating and I use so much that
they're willing to have my mask
the principle of the on payroll
and he said no he said I'd
rather pay you my lease because
you travel so much that makes a
lot more getting paid by the
mile for every trip you made to
the school so yes think about
that I do understand how how
this would work.
But honestly I still don't.
I'm still not happy with the way
the charter school system works
in the state of New Mexico so
that madam secretary since of
the last ones.
Representative bash has or had
that reaction to that would you
like to follow really.
Should
got a lot of our discussion
following the.
Our motion to patented for do
pass but
How many students are in chart
enrolled in charter schools
across New Mexico.
Transcoding and
question.
I'm voting on the floor so okay
I'm sorry Mr chairman.
Do we know how many students are
enrolled in charter schools
across the state.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
going to but I expert witness
Matthew Paul answer that thank
you.
Mr Chairman representative bash
this fall there about twenty
nine thousand students enrolled
in public charter schools.
So we're talking about a hundred
and seventy students out of how
many twenty nine thousand.
So that's not a great number
that's not a great percentage of
students.
Okay I was just curious thank
you and.
That's all thank you Mr chair
thank you okay I'll go back to
the secretary if you would call
of the of of the when the bill
we have proper motion and
improper second so yes Sir
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative black.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Senator so yes Representative
Terrazas.
Yes Representative stables on
both now.
Thank you.
Adam vice chair combat Roybal
Caballero now.
Mr chairman Alcon in the.
The remote yes Sir okay Mister.
I will yes.
We have.
Seven in the affirmative and to
in the negative do pass.
Thank you senator you're on your
way to the floor I understand.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee I appreciate your
support.
Thank you members will be back
Tuesday right early in the
afternoon.
So CNN.
Mr chairman are you changing the
time.
Since we want.
Yes
Thank you I will be at eleven
thirty.
The new schedule that that that
we're gonna have next week.
The morning committees will meet
at eight o'clock in the
afternoon committees will meet
at eleven thirty.
Mr chair yes Sir is that give
you time for your CS stop no.
Yeah we're
Representative netball.
Hi guys god bless you madam do
later.
