notes real fast. Uh yesterday on
your desk, you should have
received, um, do you have, you
just,
you should have received this.
It's the land grants, uh,
requests and what they're
looking at by land grant. It's a
pretty useful document. So I
just wanted to, uh, show that to
everybody. We also have, uh,
burritos, red and green chili
burritos, in honor of the bill
today, um, from NMSU uh during
Dona Ana Week, so very excited
to have all those pieces. I also
did receive a note from a, uh,
on one of our previous bills,
and I just wanted to make sure
that I gave
A moment to, to read it real
fast because they want to make
sure we do. Um, actually, you
know, just while it pulls up, I
think I'm just gonna go ahead
and get to the bill if that's
right, because I want to make
sure that people are moving
around a lot this morning. So I
want to make sure the folks that
are here right now are able to
hear the bill. And then
afterwards, we're gonna have a
presentation from the auditor's
office. So first up, uh,
Representative Dao, wonderful to
have you. Uh, let's start with
HB 172, Mexico red and green
chili Month.
Uh, Representative Dao, uh, good
to introduce your expert and let
us know uh when you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
this is Travis Day. He is with
the New Mexico Chili Growers
Association, and before you
today, we have a bill to
recognize uh red and green chili
as uh the month of August as red
and green chili month, and we're
really excited about this
because it'll provide us the
opportunity, all four corners of
the state, all 33 counties to
celebrate Chile and New Mexico,
all New Mexico, true.
And so, um, we're, we're
thinking like a true aorism, uh,
agriculture, tourism and how we
can work with New Mexico Tru to
create tours across the state,
whether it's a famous red and
green uh green chili burrito, or
whether it's a winery or a
brewery in your community, we
all have something to celebrate
in regards to chili. So we
really really have an
opportunity to elevate awareness
and celebrate our producers and
what's unique to our state. Do
you want to give a little
statistics?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. So I just want
to give you kind of just a
synopsis of the chili industry
from an economic standpoint. So
New Mexico does lead the nation
in chili production. Um, we do
rank number one.
Um, in 2023, there was 8800
acres of chili harvested in New
Mexico. That equates to about
$41.5 million of chili value for
for New Mexico. The vast
majority of our Chile is
harvested as green. We do get
some, um some acreage is red
that's harvested, but really
Mexico does dominate the red
chili market, so I think as a
state we need to take advantage
of every opportunity to promote
and advocate for our New Mexico
chili product because we are a
declining crop, unfortunately,
and we want to do.
we can to help build that
industry back up, and I'll be
happy to answer any questions.
Great, thank you. Um, are there
folks, let's go and have folks
raise their hand on the zoom.
If you were in favor of this
bill, please raise your hand.
Let's go to have Lisa, uh, with
a hatch library.
Lisa, if you go ahead and
unmute, we're, we're ready for
you.
Can you hear me now? Yes.
OK, good. You know, it's
interesting. I just got back
from the chili conference. It's
at the Farm and Ranch Museum,
and I wanted more people to um
attend this meeting, but of
course they're at the chili
conference, but what I wanna
tell you is that um I'm a
lifelong member of Hatch. Uh, my
family has played an integral
role in the chili production
here in the valley. I serve on
the chamber of Commerce as well
as the chili festival, and I'm
very proud of the fact.
I think the Hatch Valley Chili
Festival has really promoted
chili and especially New Mexico,
Chile. I think this um bill
would be a wonderful thing for
New Mexico, um.
We've already got our license
plates. We already have our
billboards and chili is um an
important industry to New
Mexico, to every New Mexican,
and anywhere you go, I'm sure
you guys know anywhere you go in
the world, uh, when you say you
are from New Mexico and
especially if you're from Hatch,
they're like, oh, Hatch, hatch
chili. So, um, I think this is
important. I hope that you guys
pass this, um,
The chili festival and anything
that pertains to chili is one of
the greatest economic impacts
for the Hatch Valley. Hatch is a
small town of 1600, but during
this, during the chilly season,
during that month of August, we
are making the most money during
that time.
Thank you so much. Uh, next up
is uh Joe Welborn, and I
apologize if I miss say your
name. It's like an eye test.
It's kind of very small. Joe,
uh, you're up.
Thank you, can you hear me?
Oh, can you hear me?
Uh oh.
Hello, can you hear me? Yeah, we
can hear you, Joe.
Oh great. OK. Uh, so I'm uh on
the board of directors for the
New Mexico Chile Association.
Um, I know a few other board
members wanted to join us, but
they're attending the chili
conference and in Las Cruces, so
they, I don't know if they're on
the call, but perhaps they are.
In any case, I just wanted to uh
say I think this bill was a a
great idea. Um, everyone knows
the importance of Chile to our
state, both economically and
culturally and I think it would
just be great to promote uh
chili for the.
The entire month of August. I
think that
uh, even attract them, you know,
more business with raising
awareness, perhaps people come
from out of state, um, so I
think it's a great idea and I
would just will encourage you to
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Are there, are there
any, uh, let's go to the room.
Are there is anyone in support
of the bill in the room.
Great.
Take the microphone over there.
Uh, good morning, members of the
committee, Madam Chairwoman, uh,
Clayton Abbey when the Mexico
State University. Obviously, we
have uh deep involvement in all
things agricultural, all things
r, all things chilly, uh,
including the chili pepper
Institute in New Mexico State
University, Fabian Garcia, uh,
the namesake for our egg Science
Center in Las Cruces, uh,
Representative Micaela Lara
Cadena's district, um, he is
sort of the first to experiment,
I believe, with, you know, the
breeding.
of Chile, so, um, I will say
from my own personal experience,
living outside the state for
years.
There's one thing you always
dream of, uh, being away, it's
chilly. And so, uh, I stand in
full support of this bill, the
university stands full support
of this bill. We think our
sponsor, uh, uh, Representative
Dell and uh a shout out to
Travis Day and the work that
he's doing also to promote this
important crop. Uh, thank you.
Uh, is there any comment against
this bill or anyone from
Colorado.
So to see.
All right, seeing none, I'm
gonna come over to the
committee, uh, Representative
Mason
Like
Just a couple of questions. I'm
having trouble getting my
favorite green chili, Big Jim's,
it was.
The uh New Mexico State.
Is who developed that right and
now they say they have a new
one, but it ain't as good.
I want Big Jim's back.
So you don't fix it
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Point
taken, we'll make sure you get
some big gym. Today, we got to
thank Bruno for giving us some
red and green chili roasted
salsa, and for that great
Christmas. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for the Christmas
burritos. We got you.
Got you. You're late, um, but
note taken.
Thank you. I thought you were a
little tougher than that. That's
a pretty mild chili. I know, OK,
I'm a pretty mild guy.
But uh my, my real question,
Madam Chair and representative,
you, you mentioned that the
chili production was on a
decline. What?
We attribute the decline water
or what?
Madam Chair Representative
Mason, um, it's a number of
different things. It's very
similar to a lot of situations
where it's not one issue, um,
but if I had to point to kind of
the largest of the multiple
issues, it is labor. Um, our
guys heavily rely on H-2A
workers, which is the Federal
migrant worker program, and, and
that is a very cumbersome
program, very expensive program,
so for a lot of our smaller
producers, it's just not
feasible for them to utilize
that program, um, so we see a
lot of our producers, smaller
producers, you know, the maybe
the limitar Chimao areas that
are going out of business.
just because they can't find the
labor where a lot of our guys
down Hatch are able to utilize
those programs um to continue to
be sustainable.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'll just add a little bit to
that, you know, I just finished
knocking a whole lot of doors
and I have that valley from the
city limits of Socorro all the
way through, uh, Highway 70 that
goes to Alamogordo. And a lot of
folks, I did not know this, that
the H2A labor wage is based on
Western states. So we're paying
the same for labor wages as
California is because federally
determined. And, um, our, our um
H2A workers make like 450 more
an hour than uh.
Naturalized citizens or, uh, you
know, a lot of us worked in, in
agriculture growing up in high
school, you know, so that is a
problem. But also, this is red
and green chili month so that
every producer across the state
can be celebrated. Hatch has a
zip code that it's a, it's a
demographical area, the hatch
brand and its trademark. Those
folks are surviving. The other
thing that I heard is that I was
actually standing in um River
Chile, River Chili.
Chili River Chili River
processing plant. When 3
truckloads of onion that was
getting ready to go out. The
order was canceled because they
were undercut across the border.
And our regulatory environment
is making it very difficult.
That's why we're acutely aware
of anything that adds a cost,
you know, without, they, they
have to be so competitive with
um Mexico and so.
I didn't know this either. Onion
and chili is hand in hand, and
if they can't produce their
onion crop because they're
completely undercut, they
probably won't have a chili
crop.
Thank you
And, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, that pretty much
that, you know, I'm totally full
support of this bill.
And uh
With
Just, uh, the reason for my
question if there's something
that
What we need to do to ensure the
the future of this market, of
course I love onions as much as
I do.
It's uh
All of our agriculture, you
know, with uh.
Has has taken a hit, you know,
all our costs keep rising and
rising and.
Competitive nature of any.
Business, you know, it makes it
makes it hard for our producers.
Make a living
Thank you, Representative.
Full support of your bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much,
Representative Mason. uh,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
no, just, just a couple of
notes, um.
You, uh, Representative Mason
already asked what my first
question, but, um, secondly,
just, just wanting to express
support uh specifically for the
Chili Institute, we do a lot of
work. They do a lot of uh um
really exciting if, if that's
your, that's your jam, good,
good scientific research out
there with breeding of chili and
whatnot. And um I think it's a
Very valuable um contribution to
our state, um, and I will have
an official month where we can
have our own family chili party,
which means basically a whole
day of peeling, chopping,
bagging, all of the above, uh,
but now I can say it's an
official recognized uh chili
party, but other than that uh
full support. Thanks. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. If anybody
hasn't signed on to the bill,
it's not my bill, it's our bill.
So I hope every member of the
house will sign on.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative, uh,
Representative Lord, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, thank you,
Representative, and since you
called me out for being late, I
will now ask you 3 hours of
questions
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Lord. I've never had an
opportunity to make it to CPAC.
I've never experienced this.
I'm being bribed by burritos
right now, so.
Doesn't matter, no, I, there's
no problem with this bill and
this is great because it, it
saves me a lot of hours from
having to stay home and read
bills for hours on end. Um, it's
interesting that it's never been
brought forward before. Um, and
Chap representative. Well, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Lord. You know, we are trying to
build an agricultural tourism
industry in New Mexico. And this
has to be part of it. And so,
um, whether it's that a tour
through New Mexico to our world
famous green chili burritos or
burgers, or if it's
uh, trying a brewery or a winery
with that has a red and green
chili infusion. I mean, we've
got everything in Clovis and in
the Lee County area, the chili
that's processed is used in
makeup. And so we literally are
everywhere, Taco Bell, Sonic,
um, Buffalo Wild Wings. And, and
especially in the trademarked
area of Hatch, the niche has
become, you know, it's in Trader
Joe's, it's in most grocery
stores now, and we, we really
need to save this and it's red
and green chili so everyone can
celebrate. We didn't leave out
jalapenos.
We didn't leave out habaneros.
We're going to celebrate it all.
I
think my representative. Uh, is
there a tagline like uh we're
the best Colorado sucks or
anything.
Madam Chair, I mean, I'll take a
motion if that's a friendly
amendment,
I tease on that cause the
Colorado's constantly trying to
haunt us man and, uh, that's all
sports we all sign on to it when
it gets there. So thank you,
thank you.
Representative Cohen, thank you
and of course uh supportive of
that, and I am originally from
Colorado, so, um, and I have
friends that live in Pueblo.
Yeah.
However, I,
I went to support this and
actually I um growing up in
Colorado, I did not know that
Pablo was growing chili. We
didn't have until I moved here.
I was introduced to the green
chili, and now we're addicted.
So, um, absolutely support this,
but yeah, don't, yeah, don't
look down on me for Colorado.
Thank you.
Well, thank you for bringing
this forward, um, you know, uh,
I really appreciate the comments
that you made, especially my
first experience in New Mexico
was going to uh Chimayo farm
where that red chili strain had
been produced for generations,
56 generations. And it was
interesting, uh, when your
expert mentioned the fact that,
you know, the labor aspect of it
is reducing the production of
that. Um, you know, red chili is
very, you know, uh, normal in
the north, it's, it's our
tradition up here in the South.
You all have the green. I love
it how we mix it together. Um,
so, you know, I want to see
however we can as a committee,
help those traditions flourish
and however we can do this. Um,
uh, so, and also last thing I
want to mention was I I love
that you made it August. Is
there a particular reason why
you made it August
representative?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
the reason for the month of
August is that's typically when,
you know, your southern areas
harvest typically beginning of
July, middle of July, and then
as you move up north, it really
does hit the end of August, so
it is kind of the happy middle
of the southern and northern
harvest times, um, but to your
point on labor, I do, I don't
want to leave it as a negative,
you know, that we just, we
continue to face these labor
issues and there's nothing the
industry is doing about it. So I
just want to follow up with, you
know, we are working very
closely with New Mexico State
University. There was actually a
recent variety developed that's
called New Mex
Odyssey. I mean, it's actually a
chili that was developed, um,
for mechanized harvest. And so
red chili has historically been
able to be harvested by machine
green chili hasn't where we've
actually now been able to
develop um both a machine and um
a variety that we're able to
harvest with a mechanically and
and that's our way of kind of
offsetting some of that those
labor issues that we've seen
historically.
Thank you for that information.
That's really how we can help,
you know, there is, we, how we
can bring together technology to
promote our traditions here, and
we don't want to see the erasure
of that. So however, we can help
with that as a committee, I
think many of us are committed
to that. So I'll take a motion
from the committee.
Representative, I move for.
There's a motion for a do pass
on House Bill 172, seconded by
uh motion by Representative
Mason, seconded by
Representative Lord. Uh, can we
do a, a vocal or a Yes.
Yes. Yes.
Representative. Yes.
conscious
Unanimous support, you have a
due pass on House Bill 172.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee. Thank you. Uh,
next up we have a presentation
from our auditor's office. Um,
there, you should have all
received this handout on your
desks. Uh, let me know if you
did not. We can get those out to
everybody.
one
Uh, and up with us is David
Craig, uh, with the auditor's
office. So David, uh, when
you're ready, good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, it's been about 8
years since I testified in front
of a legislative committee. Um,
we looked a little different. We
didn't have quite the
accouterment you guys have, so
it's the next level. I, um, I
wanna say thank you for the
opportunity to present, um,
brushed up on my masons. My name
is David Craig. I've been 20
years with the state of New
Mexico, uh, for 1621 in state
government.
Uh, worked for the LFC LESC, P E
D E C E C D and now the Office
of the State Auditor. For the
last year and a half, um,
We want to extend our thank you
for being able to present to you
today this awesome program we've
been working on. This program's
deeply personal to the state
auditor, uh, the state auditor
is a land grant heir for the
Santa Clara, uh, land grant. He
also has water rights on the
Herrera ditch. I think the
Lomito aseia, if I remember
correctly. So, um, when we talk
about these things, uh, it is
with a level of personal
affiliation that the state
auditor has, um, which
really brings it home for us as
staff, um, one of the things I
want to get started. I don't
know if you guys have the
handout. Uh, whenever I give a
talk, I'm old school, so I also
give you paper because I want
you to feel like you walk out of
here with something tangible
that you can sink your teeth
into, even if you just give it
to somebody else, probably the
most important piece of paper I
gave you is that little business
card on top.
That is our person who runs this
program that we give money to
rural small local public bodies.
And if you missing it and it
fell off, don't stress it. We
brought some more and brought
them over on the table, um, but
man well, I'm here as his spirit
animal. He is the largely the
person that we put in charge of
this program that does outreach
through the land grant
Associations, does outreach with
all of our communities is the
one managing this program, this
non-recurring funding source
that we've been blessed by the
legislature to be and the
governor to be able to
represent, um, and if you have
any questions on detail, that's
your fella.
OK? So I'm gonna go through my
PowerPoint slide. I want to be
respectful of the committee's
time, but it's gonna be about a
10 minute presentation if you
guys will bear with me, I'll try
and keep it real general and
keep it real simple. Uh, and if
you guys want to go deeper, we
can, um, so why did we do this?
So small local public bodies
across the state were having
issues accessing the direct
legislative appropriations,
mostly at the Department of
Finance and Administration.
But there's requirements that
are similar to MFA or at the
office of the State Engineer's
office to have up to-date,
basically what our audits. We
called them agreed upon
procedures using our terms of
art in the audit community, but
what they are are smaller
versions of audits.
In order to get that funding,
you have to show that you've
been a good steward of taxpayer
dollars and have an agreed upon
procedure as is required under
the Audit Act.
And folks in some of these rural
communities often are parts of
seass or land grant
associations, they don't have
the same familiarity with state
government requirements that
maybe other large players like
state agencies do. Um, so they,
they would get to these, they
would get direct legislative
appropriations either to help
clean up the ditch or do some
sort of laying of water in rural
areas, and they would have no
monies to be able to go get an
audit or maybe they have monies,
but they don't know where to
start.
And so there was no homes
budsman at the state level.
There's nobody to reach out to
them and say, hey, here's how
you guys get an agreed upon
procedure. Here's how you step
forward and do that in a very
formal manner before this.
Basically, for those folks
needed help and the auditor
said, well, what do we have for
them? And so if you go on to the
next page, I think I've got my
timeline of the program history,
the earliest written record, if
you ever see a tilda with data
analyst, it means we have
something in writing to prove
it's from 2019.
We, it probably means that there
was something earlier than that.
I'm on slide.
For now, uh, but we know that.
Starting in 2019, we had about
$200 or $30,000 we pulled out of
our budget that we would send
out the office staff to go help
people, and it was a first come,
first serve basis based upon a
grant application. Again, that
has some of the kind of barriers
to entry that I just talked
about, where you have to know
enough to to know that that
program's out there, you have to
fill out an application. You
have to know the law and the
Audit Act and so.
Just generally also from our
perspective of the office of the
state auditor, $20,000 a year
wasn't enough to do the backlog
that we're seeing. Um, we
believe, and I'm gonna get to
why this is kind of a soft
number. We think that the at the
time in 2003 when we did our
analysis, there was about 1700
people that were out there that
hadn't filled filed, agreed upon
procedures or audits with our
office.
Um, that's multiple years for
some one entity, um, the problem
with this is, is, and I'll just
do it now, is there's no one
person in state government that
has an all-encompassing view of
how many land grants aseki is
mutual domestics and everything
we have out there. We have our
list, DFA's capital project
management system has their
list, and we've been trying to
get in touch with the Secretary
of State to try and figure out
what they have too. But
Even consolidating those lists,
which is an activity we're on
right now is difficult because
sometimes you got to figure a
lot of the asseas and the land
grants will have similar names.
Um, so you got to kind of figure
out, are we talking about the
same person, so it's a lot of
labor intensive stuff, but we've
got the best data that we have
available at the time. Uh, so
anyhow, you guys gave us
$500,000 to scale up in 2023 for
FY FY 24, and we've given you an
annual report, which is one of
the packets.
That you guys have to show you
how we spent that money to show
that we were good stewards of
it. Um, we had to push to get
that up off the ground. Uh, that
required us making some changes
to our database, which really
probably needs a whole scale
upgrade, but for the office of
the state auditor, so, um, and
then we, we also had an issue
with um trying to identify a
staff member to do that. And so
we got Manuel hired on to do
this. Um, I kind of mentored him
because he was a newer staff
member.
But, yeah, and, and for this
year we're scaled up to a
million dollars.
Uh, one of the things that we're
seeing is that it's a, and I'll
get to this when we talk about
not challenges but opportunities
for our program because if
anybody says there's not
opportunities for improvement on
their program, they probably
need to dig deeper. Uh, one of
the things we're seeing is that
folks will have
They'll have everything together
to get their agreed upon
procedures to then get their
capital outlay to then improve
the ditch, but they won't have
it in the order that an auditor
needs to look at it. Oftentimes,
I remember one of the first
things I did when I came to the
LFC is we went to Dolce's mutual
domestic and they brought out a
shoebox or receipts from 5
years, right? And that that's
the level of stuff that, that's
not really what auditors can do
to help them. And so what we're
going to try and do is expand it
to do audit prep, to try and
help people get their stuff
ready.
to go. Um, OK, I'll move over to
slide 5. This is us bragging.
Um, we've brought 154 into
compliance. We released $3.1
million in capital outlay to
rural and um communities, uh,
and 464 certifications, how if
you brought 150/40 of 464 audits
caught up, Dave. Well, 154 of
those people had that many
backlogged audits. Um, so the,
it's important to understand
that the number of audits and
the and the entities run
separate.
because they'll have multiple
years that they're that they're
out of compliance. This year to
date, um, we've brought out, uh,
we've given 52 grants to folks
to go and get an IPA to help
them get their audits up to
date, um, we've got about 103
different financial
certifications we're about
halfway through, um, it picks up
faster in the last half, because
they had to still set up the
contracts and stuff for the
first half of the year, so we
expect that number to grow up.
If, if we, if we get everybody
to
drawdown, because that's the
thing is that we get them
cleaned up, but then they have
to take themselves to the DFA
and or the Office of the State
Engineer, and, and then if we
can do that, we think we
released about 3.9 or 5.2
million across the whole
program. Um, so, um, I, I just
will brag a little bit because
that's, that's remarkable for
non-recurring program that's
only been in effect for 2 years.
Um, I've been in government,
like I said, for 16 years, I
haven't seen a program scale
that fast.
Which I think just goes to the
need. Um, folks are really
needing this stuff. Uh, I kind
of gave you some information on
what we're talking about when we
say agreed upon procedures and
what does that even mean on on
number 6 on slide 6. It's the
one with the orange tears on it.
Basically, however much money
you receive, either in federal
grants or direct legislative
appropriations or revenue, um,
because some of the mutual
domestics and some of those guys
taking fees, right? Um, puts you
in a level of review.
you
Called an agreed upon procedure,
and some of it's just I certify
I have this much money at the
lowest tier, right? Some of it
is, no, it's good, and as you go
up the tiers to tier 6, you're
getting closer and closer to a
full financial audit. Why do you
need an agreed upon procedures.
That's you're agreeing with the
auditor that you don't need the
full audit. What you can do is
do a limited scope, all right?
Um, it's outdated. It dates from
probably Domingo Chavez's time
as state auditor, um, it's
linked to kind of thresholds
based upon capital outlay of the
time, Madam Chair and members of
the community, um, in the top
end of when you trigger a
financial audit was linked to
the federal cutoff for single
audit at that time, um, right
now that federal cutoff um
starting September 30th, any
fiscal year ending September
30th, 2025, or after, it's going
to be a million dollars.
You may see the office of the
state auditor either put
something forward this session
or next session to kind of look
at these. We think that you
don't need 6.
We think it's probably better to
just simplify it and have one at
the top end, the middle one, and
the bottom one. We think if you
raise the threshold by which
people could self-certify to
$100,000 it had cut down on some
of this backlog and people could
just access it, so we're we're
that's something we're exploring
and we would want to.
Put forward. I was hopeful to
have a bill number, but it's not
jacketed yet and so we're still
internally discussing how to go
forward on that, but you may see
something, and if you guys need
to talk about that after the
fact, please feel free to grab
my card off the table and we can
talk about it.
Um, I'll talk about challenges.
Um, we're very open about things
that we that we struggle with in
programs in the office of the
state auditor because we don't
believe that you can, you can
meet um challenges if you're not
honest about them, uh, like I
talked about the universe of the
small local public bodies is
unknown. We've got our known
knowns, our known unknowns, and
our unknown unknowns. That's to,
to, to quote a famous saying. I,
but, but I believe the unknown
unknowns are shrinking. As we
get out there and we work.
with the associations,
particularly land grants
associations, particularly like
uh the Asseia Association. They
have their lists, and they know,
but basically people only come
forward to us when they get a
direct legislative
appropriation, and they need
funding. And so if they don't
need the funding, then they
don't come in, and that's how
they end up with backlogged
years, is that a mutual domestic
will have many fees and revenues
that they've collected, but they
never they never knew that they
were supposed to file and agreed
upon procedure with.
our office, right? And so we, we
reach out to them, we say, oh,
by the way, if you want to get
this a million dollars that Cher
Serato or whoever gave you, you
need to, you need to get on file
with us, um.
One of the things you'll hear
every member of the office of
the state auditor say to you is
that there is a mass shortage of
accountants in the state of New
Mexico. And when we look outside
of New Mexico, it's everywhere
in the country. Um, what we have
is some generational stuff
happening where most of the CPAs
in the country are retiring. Uh,
we don't see a lot of people
going into accounting, um, I
don't know why, it's thrilling
work, but uh I would say that we
also have some issues with
folks, um,
They're small local businesses,
particularly outside of urban
areas, uh, folks that have been
doing that for 20 or 30 years or
just selling their business to
medium sized areas, um, so we
have some issues there, uh, we
also just see generally a hard,
it's a hard ask to get auditors
that either want to work in
government or audit government
to go into that line of work
versus some other areas of work
that accountants can get into
that are more profitable, mainly
the tax side. Um, so there's
some issues.
with trying to get folks to go
out there. Like I said, this is
challenging audit work. It's not
quite as easy to audit as
financial statements that are
deposited out of share. Um,
sometimes you have to do a lot
of work in a technical
assistance, and so that cuts
down on billable hours um that
that are profitable. Um, so
we're trying to work through
that. There's a lot of, hey,
please, pretty please, can you
please help this mutual domestic
and and outreach from Manuel.
Um, once we have a small local
public compliant. Say we get
them all cleaned up and they get
access to their capital outlay.
They're like, great, see you. I
don't want to deal with the
government ever again. And what
happens is then they get another
appropriation, and they're not
compliant again. And so what
we're trying to do is figure out
a way to carve off some monies
to kind of do ongoing outreach
with them to continue to work
with IPAs to keep them
compliant, all right?
And last, I know you guys aren't
the appropriation committee, but
you do have a vote. So on 8, I
would like to highlight what
we're asking for in 26, which is
that we're asking for continued,
continued support for this
program. Um, 500,000 for
continued support that we're
doing to get them financial
compliance, 500,000 to maintain
the financial compliance, and we
think that this return on
investment is really great, um,
we are not sacrificing any sort
of opener.
transparency or compliance-based
issues with any of our entities,
yet we're still getting them
access to funding. Um, I tried
to keep it quick.
Hopefully it was clean and not
dirty, but if you have any
questions, madam Chair, members
of the community, I'm happy to
go into the depth, OK.
That same questions. Thank you,
Mr. Craig. We're going to turn
it over to the committee, uh,
Representative Ward.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you expert. Thank you for that
quick.
An easy presentation. Um, I do
have some questions and some
concerns because the biggest
issue that I have is sometimes I
get the land grants who are not
compliant. They, they, they're
having audit issues and then
especially when we get a new
president, you know, and that
happens. So is there an
educational process for people,
you have something and go watch
videos, um, so that they can
understand and is there anybody?
That follows up because I know
we now have a rural ombudsman in
my area.
Um, that will be helpful and
have you reached out to him or
is he reached out to you because
what I'm seeing is
There's some, a little bit of
disconnect, right? Like you
said, there's always challenges
and challenges are to help us be
better and grow, right?
So how can, what are we doing
right now on the educational
process and what can we do to
make it better. Thank you.
Madam Chair, ranking member,
Lord, thank you for that
question because I get to brag a
little bit more. Uh, we do a lot
of outreach with the technical
assistance. Um, one of the
things that I think I want to
directly answer your question.
We have not worked directly with
Rural Ombudsman, to my
knowledge. I'll double check
with Manuel and make a formal
correction if, if needed, but
we've not worked with that
program, ranking member Lord,
our madam chair and Rey member
Lord, I believe that what we
have worked with is uh DFA's
local government division and
Wesley Billingsley and his
group, um, um, we've worked in
depth with them. I've personally
presented at their budget
conference. Um, I know that
Manuel works with them to get
updated information out of the
Capitol project management
system to determine those
numbers that we give you of how
much project monies that we've
released, we're working with
them to identify folks when they
come forward to them, they send
them to us to have help with the
AUPs if they can't meet those
requirements. We're doing now,
as far as outreach, we've done
11.
trainings across the state this
year so far. Um, we basically
walk them through how you get
into OSA and submit those tier
certifications, those AUPs, um,
and say take them step by step
through the screens and say,
here's where you'll do this.
Here, if you struggle with this
screen, please contact Manuel.
Um, we have conversations where
we tell them how to contract
with the IPAs. We walked them
through what an example contract
would look like, um, what they
should be doing.
For tier certifications. Uh, we
work extensively with, like I
said, DFA, but we've also worked
with the Office of the State
Engineer, the Environment
department because they have a
pools of monies that they get
and nerd um has a pools of money
that they also distribute on the
Department of Agriculture is
actually somebody who also
requires that for part of their
grants, um, the Department of
Justice, we worked up deeply
with the Department of Justice
actually because they get a lot
of outreach asking them for help
for through their land grants
division.
Um, and then, uh, the land grant
council, the New Mexicoseia
Association, rural Community
Assistance, uh, corporation and
There's one I'm forgetting.
Rural Water Authority.
We also have done outreach
through those those entities. So
we're working with people and
we're talking to people, and
we're trying to get more people
to talk to. I'll take the rural
homes budsman back to Manuel to
have a conversation with him,
Madam Chair, and ranking member
Lord.
Thank you, Me and expert. Yeah,
because that's the biggest issue
I see is a lot of people just
don't know what's out there,
what's available. Like I said,
the land grant, often they'll
get a new president who started
from scratch. Like it just
doesn't get passed on all the
time, um.
I think that was, uh, and of
course nobody wants to do much
of anything because you can be a
TikTok influencer and make 3000
to $130,000 a month now, so,
yeah, people will dance around
in TikTok before they become a
CPA.
Sorry, you have tough
competition. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I
try and make spreadsheets
You start making TikToks that
may help attract more CP.
Thank you ranking member for all
the ideas how we can improve
this program in case, you know,
the the appropriations doesn't
work out.
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I, he had one question, um, the
documents that were given to us.
Um
This, and I'm just reading off
the header. These are the
non-compliant lists, meaning
these are the ones that are
mainly have not completed the
audit to pass, is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
Gonzalez, yes, I probably was a
little nervous since it's been 8
years. I should have introduced
the packet all the way. You'll
have the annual report from the
FY 24 program. In there you'll
have two other information
items, uh, one is the list of
noncompliant. I'm working with
Manuel to talk about if we can
reframe that to something a
little less harsh that says,
You know, opportunities for
people to have outreach or
something, but, but again, I
think it's, I do think to to
unpack that a little bit and
then all seriousness folks that
are noncompliant with our audit
act generally are noncompliant
through
Lack of awareness that the
requirements out there, not
through willful, um,
insubordination with the law or
something, you know. So this is
an education opportunity. Um,
but we were asked the folks um
on HAFC, uh, um, it may or may
not been a representative that
was just presenting uh to
provide that list, and we felt
that if we were gonna give it to
HAFC that we would want you all
to have it too as the land grant
council. What you'll also see on
there is the folks we've helped
out on another packet of
information.
Um, the folks that I pulled this
information from were very
worried that you were going to
target these people and go after
them about policy issues, so
they put big red disclaimers all
over it, just understand that
this information is changing
almost on a daily basis where
identifying new people to help,
um, on a daily basis. People are
coming off the noncompliance
list. They're going back on it
when they go noncompliant. So
this is point in time to give
you guys an idea of about how
many people we still have
identified.
Representative or Madam Chair
and Representative Gonzalez,
it's not like, you know, all
inclusive or set in stone, but
that's what we wanted to do. Um,
the auditor is very.
As impressed upon his staff the
importance of providing
information if we have it in an
open and transparent way, Madam
Chair. Um, thank you for that,
Madam Chair. Um, the other piece
of information I just will kind
of second representative Lord,
um, I myself, having gone
through the audit process for
for localists I, I will say your
staff is extremely helpful, um,
and the associations do refer to
your office and um Manuel Manuel
worked with me to get everything
through, but I will echo the
need, just working through that
myself, considering myself, you
know, somewhat text.
savvy, somewhat knowing where to
go, um, some, you know,
suggestions for checklists,
maybe for video trainings, um,
just knowing again, going in
there, even for a basic tier
one, how you need your EIA not
notary, you know, you need, you
need certain things just to even
be in a tier one. It's not, and
I fully agree that this is not
probably not out of alice or,
you know, intention that you're
noncompliant. I think it is
often a misunderstanding of what
paperwork needs to happen and
considering if you're not taking
in revenue that you still need
to be in compliance with the
state.
auditor, so I will echo that
suggestion for um training
materials that can be accessed
just online and that can be
easily distributed and and the
Oseki Association and anything
else that's out there.
Madame Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Gonzalez, I think one of the
budgetary items we have for the
FY 25 appropriation is to work
with CLA to develop a tool kit
with training materials that we
can pass out to to different
entities that may need
assistance after we provide our
in-person training, so.
Thank you so much for that
presentation. I think that's it
for questions today. Uh, please
refer back to Mr. Craig, or I'm
sorry, Manuel, if uh there are
additional questions, um, and
especially I, I know that a lot
of these are volunteer
organizations that are running
this, and we're a volunteer
body, you know, we all
understand the amount of
pressures there is. So, um,
please look to us as, as
resources if you can't get a
hold of this one land ground or
something, you know, we, we hope
we can help with that as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I've
left Mael's cards, so you can
take them and pass them out to
whomever you.
want to over on the side over
here, and if worst comes to
worst, I've left my cards if you
need me. Um, I stand, uh, the
auditor, thanks for the
opportunity to present, Madam
Chair, and just thank you all
for the work you do for the
state of New Mexico.
So much with that, that
concludes our meeting today. Our
next one is on Thursday. We have
4 bills up, uh, and then on
Tuesday we have 3, so we're kind
of getting into our bulky part
of the year. Um, please grab a
burrito on the way out. And
actually, I'm sorry, before we
go, I did want to uh read this
note. So on each bills if you
remember the first meeting we
had with Bills, we had a lot of
tech problems and someone was
trying to comment, we didn't
catch them. And uh they wanted
to mention that um this is
Norbert Garcia. Uh, he is the
president of the uh Juan
Bautista Baldez land grant out
of.
Cangones, and he, uh, tried on,
on, but he was muted, of course,
cause all the tech stuff was a
mess. And he wanted to mention
that he did, he does support HB
21 and 24, who wants to ensure
that the distribution of funding
and the changes to the fund is
equal for all land grants on
Bautista Baldez land grant has
been denied 2 years in a row.
Please consider our request.
Thank you in advance. So I just
want to make sure his voice was
heard in these conversations as
we move forward. Uh, thank you,
everybody. We'll see you
Thursday. Have a great day.
