Um, the program is overscribed.
Every year the prescribed
projects than we have funding
for, but it's a good start.
Madam Chair, uh,
So is this an increase from
prior to the, for the projects?
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, as I understand it,
uh, a couple of years ago, we
got about 10 million from ARPA
funding to go to the river
stewardship program, and that
money was sent out. You have
before you um some projects,
list of projects, um,
And Katie can speak to this,
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews.
Madam Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Matthew is the,
um, New Mexico Environment
Department received the um
American Rescue Plan Act funds
appropriations from the
legislature in 2022, um, from
the 2021 special second special
session and those funds were
appropriated in 22. A lot of
those projects are, are in
construction um at this time and
most of all of the funding has
been allocated to projects um
for, for work on the ground.
They um projects will be wrapped
up.
are wrapping up this year and
some will be completed next year
before the funding expires, um.
So that, that funding has been
fully encumbered and, and works
in process of expense.
Madam Chair, presenter, so the,
so the money is being used,
which is great to hear. Uh, my,
uh, my other question is who
decides on what projects.
Um
are approved and and get money.
enemy does. OK, the enemy and
New Mexico Environment
Department.
Thank you. I, my only other
comment would be I wish now that
we have.
a little bit of extra money.
Um, it seems to me
a lot.
Don't get
Don't get done low hanging
fruit, but they're as a strange
comment, but um anyway, I, I
just wish we would, um, thank
you.
Thank you, ranking member
Zamora.
Madam Chair, I move with do
pass.
We have a couple, we, we'll have
a motion here for Du pass from
Representative Zamora, but we
have a couple of other speakers
that are already on their
roster.
Um, did you have any other
questions? No? OK.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you.
Madam co-chair and thank you,
Madam Chair, for the
legislation. I have some very
specific questions.
Um
How are we notified as a water
stream in my area could apply
for.
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair and
representative Pettigrew, um,
the, um,
The department issues a request
for proposals for the funding
each time the, the funding
becomes available, the next um
proposed RFP timeline for this
funding would be in March, um,
after session to figure out how
much we're going to be putting
out for projects, um, the, the
that process takes
Um, anywhere between 6 months
and a year, um, because the
funding is out for 2 months for
it to allow for people to have
the time to put together
fantastic proposals for those
projects that are well thought
out and um likely to be
successful and garner support
from stakeholders and
landowners, um, federal land
managers and um then those those
projects are then reviewed by
the New Mexico Environment
Department, uh, put together an
evaluation committee for that
proposals, those proposals and
projects are selected.
Um, as far as notification of
legislatures, uh, when the
program has received funding
through the capital outlay
process, um, there is a, the
Projects, uh, we do submit a
letter to the state Board of
Finance, um, those because they
come with bond um conditions if
if issued through the severance
tax bond process through capital
outlay funds, um, those, the
river stewardship program
appropriation does have um bond
or conditions that we must be
met in one of those conditions
is approval of the state Board
of Finance of projects that are
funded by the River Stewardship
program.
Thank you for that answer, but
that did not answer my question.
Very specifically how our state
legislators notified of the RFP
process.
For our conservation districts
and streams to
Remind them that hey, by the
way, there's a grant. I signed
up for the New Mexican mails
like.
All the time. They like
literally flood my inbox. So
that's how I find out about all
the grant programs and all the
rulemaking and all that stuff.
So I think
Adam, co-chair, Madam Chair, I
appreciate that answer.
Uh, to be clear, I'm running a
piece of legislation this year
that requires every state agency
to notify.
Every state legislator of every
RFQ every RFP, every grant, you
name it.
All the way through because
it's.
Getting to a point, Madam
co-chair, Madam Chair, that,
that, uh
Um
We're not. We're appropriating a
whole bunch of, of money out of
the state. I would venture to
guess if this piece of
legislation passes, it will be a
non-reoccurring and it will not
be in capital outlay from a bond
standpoint.
And, and so that concerns me
that, that we have that and, and
look at your list.
I'm co-chair chair, um,
I'm not seeing anything in
southeast New Mexico, so we're
in southern New Mexico on the
Pecos, on the Bonita, the Rio
Riosa, the lower Rio Grande.
Any of any of those I do see
some spread out along the north.
side of the state and what looks
to be a long Bear Creek on the
Gila River, um, and so that is
concerning for me. I am curious,
did we receive any grants in
the, in the ARPA funds from any
of the conservation districts
surrounding any of those four
rivers I just talked about.
Madam co-chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, the,
um,
From the funding there has been
projects in Southern New Mexico.
There's been projects in
Riidoso, um, to complete it and
and the Rio Riodoso, uh, there
has, there's been an older
project completed on the Pecos,
but closer to Santa Rosa, not
quite southeast New Mexico, um,
and then there's several
projects in the Gila area and
then Southern Rio Grande as
well. So the the the program
does look to expand our presence
in the Southeast New Mexico, um,
part of the state, and we
actually are hiring
uh somebody for our Riodoso
office, which has not been
staffed by our section before,
um, to help, help try to expand
that capacity. Madam Chair,
co-chair, I, I hear your answer.
Um, none of those are listed on
here, so they would have been
like you said, uh, presenter,
uh, older projects.
I don't think an additional
staff person is necessary when
you have 47 conservation
districts.
That that if we knew about, I
could go talk to each and every
one in my area.
I can go talk to the Pecos River
Valley Authority, I can go talk
to certain people if I even knew
that this was happening.
And so while I understand.
That it's
From a 100,000 ft level, there's
a grant.
Opportunity for $10 million you
can apply for a grant, but I
don't have any of the details,
madam co-chair of when I should
be talking to people about
looking for this and that
concerns me, so I'm gonna move
on, madam co-chair, um.
One of the comments that was
made was
Uh, some projects that we're
working on cleaning up the
invasive species of the salt
cedar that was planted by the
BLM in the 40s.
So how are we moving along with
that process and why does it
have to come out of a grant from
us when Madam Chair, Madam
co-chair, um.
We didn't create the problem.
BLM did
Representative, we're we're
trying to stick with the bill
and not on the projects update,
but I do appreciate you wanting
an update on that, um, it's just
that for the bill for the
purpose of the bill, it's not
project updates.
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair,
when they're listed on here.
Madam co-chair.
And they're listed on here and
they're brought up by the
speakers, by the presenters,
that opened the door for it, and
I am allowed to ask questions
very specific to how this
legislation and how this money
gets spent, and I will.
So, um,
I'm, I'm curious about that. I'd
love for you guys to bring me
some information on that and how
the BLM is addressing us, so
we're not using state general
fund money to fix a problem that
was created by the federal.
Um,
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair.
Um
The enemy decides how the grants
are issued.
Can you please talk to me about
who's on that grant acceptance
board and what their
qualifications are.
Madam co-chair, Representative
Pettigre, the um evaluation
committee is typically made up
of 5 members, um, 3 to 4 of
those members are environment
department staff in the surface
Water Quality Bureau, typically,
um, who are familiar with, um,
operating and running these
projects and managing these
projects from a grant
perspective and technical
support capacity, um, to help
ensure those projects are
successful and that they're all
of the considerations have been.
Made to for that funding, for
example, permitting and design
in on the ground construction
because we want to see success
in the program. Um, the other
two members of the committee are
typically um 1 to 2 members I
should say, are external
members, um, and those may be
Department of Game and Fish has
participated most recently, um,
US Forest Service is
participated in the past, um,
all committee members, um, have
typically degrees in water
resources, natural resources and
And um have some varying
different levels of experience
in performing restoration
themselves, um, and providing
technical expertise in
restoration, um, of rivers and
streams and particularly from a
water quality. Thank you, madam
co-chair. Um, 2 more questions.
Uh, with respect to that.
In the testimony that was
originally given, uh, we talked
about.
Putting an RFP out and then we
give them 2 months to put
together.
Well thought out, well designed.
Project for them to put in.
Madam Chair, Madam, co-chair,
that means that
Those conservation districts or
water authorities.
After already I co-chair.
Have funding for somebody to
help them through a process
project in such a way, your
gurus.
I think that the project's
worthwhile.
Would that be a fair statement
or question?
Thank you for the question, um,
Representative Vice Chair, I
think in many cases our soil and
water districts, uh, other
entities that do this work, do
have staff and capacity that are
always kind of thinking ahead to
the next project, right? So
you're, you're on the ground,
you're implementing, you're
spending the money you have, but
you're also looking forward and
thinking about what comes next,
like, what are those resource
needs on the ground in your
community, in your soil and
water conservation district. So
I think in many cases that
capacity does exist.
I think as you know, some of our
districts have more capacity
than others and those that have
more capacity for the simple
reason, maybe they have a mill
levy and another district
doesn't, they probably are going
to be going after, you know,
more funding, whether it's state
funding, federal money and our
funding and bringing that money,
you know, to the ground in their
district, but typically what we
see across the board in the
restoration spaces while work is
happening, the next round of
projects are, are being
implemented and folks are
looking for, for where that
money comes from.
And I'm co-chair, uh,
presenters, thank you for that
answer and that brings me to the
concern. We've listened to water
conservation districts
throughout.
Um, well,
Cole, a week or so, so go in
here and then we've also an
appropriations listen to.
Our conservation districts.
That don't have the middle
levies, don't have the
personnel.
Don't have the capacity.
But, um,
What you just described to me is
an inequity that we have within
our system.
So if somebody has money, they
have the ability to go after it
if somebody doesn't have money,
they don't have the projects in
hand, and um so they get treated
differently.
And we changed that with the
Yasi Martinez in schools.
We changed that in so many other
areas, equity is important to us
as a state or to people in the
state. But yeah, we're bringing
enemyD uh and is bringing
something to us that says no, we
don't really care about equity.
And that is a that creates a
concern for me.
In in those areas.
So
I think I've given a couple of
points on, on why this
legislation needs some more
help. My last question, how many
different grants are out there
for 18 different departments,
10 or 18 different department
secretaries, 189 directors, um,
What, similar to like the
natural resource board, uh trust
trustee board, how many
different grant programs do we
have out there?
They have similar
to this.
Have money similar to this to
allow us to work on river beds
and streams and clean up things.
Thank you, Madam co-chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Pettigrew, this is the only
program that focuses on river
restoration, riparian
restoration stream.
And wetland restoration.
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair, I
would disagree with you on that.
I just listened to the natural
resource trustee board where
when there's an issue in an area
and they look at reparations and
they look at stuff, then they
start pulling out money for
cleaning up riverbeds because
that's what the community wants.
There, there are other programs
out there, so, so that's what
I'm curious about. And, and
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair, we
have, uh, as noted in here, we
have 1.2 million from the legacy
fund that can be applied toward
this as well. I'd like to have a
detailed list, not right now,
later, from all the different
processes and procedures, the
monies that we have going out to
do some of our things.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you for your presentation.
Thank you, Representative
Herrera.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, sponsor, and uh just
a footnote for you, uh,
representative Pettigrew. I
I all people from rural district
share your concern, you know,
how we're gonna get to that was
my first question when I came to
the legislature, we worked very
hard to put money in the cogs of
council of governments, and that
money is to help real community
or any community really provide
the grant writing expertise for
an agency, a government agency,
so I'll inform you about that
later. Uh, and we'll put
probably 2 million more into it
today. Hopefully it
appropriation. So I'll go
offline with you. I had some
real concerns about that. So
sponsor. Sorry, Madam Chair, I
hope that was OK. Uh, sponsor, I
just wanna, uh, commend you on
this legislation. It's, it's,
uh,
It's needed desperately, uh,
especially in times of, um,
climate change and drought, uh.
In the North, in the Chamma
River, I think most people know
we saw that river go off course,
Of course in the matter of 8
hours. One night a rain came
down. They had 8 inches of
bread, and it was incredible,
the whole river went off course.
I know you're involved in that
and I, I just want you to talk
just for the record about how
you conserve and protect uh the,
the, the surface waters we have,
which are very fragile. If you
could just go.
chairman and vice chairs
representative, thanks for the
question. You know, I think the
work, the work that
organizations in this room are
doing to protect them those
water resources is incredibly
important. You know, you gave
the example of the Chama we're
seeing more and more extreme
weather events and we're seeing
those events affect not just our
environment, our ecosystems, but
our communities and our
landowners and very real ways,
um, you know, a lot of the work
that's being done is, is what we
call headwaters restoration. So
it's work we can do higher in
the watershed that reduces
is, uh, flooding impacts
downstream, right? Um, that
helps water, it restores
watershed functions. So we, we
can build some resilience into
the system. And, and we're not
going to build resilience into
the system at a statewide level.
If we invest, you know, a half a
million here, 2 million here,
which historically has been what
this program's done. If we can
start spending $10 million
annually and leveraging federal
and private money and bringing
that to the table too and really
building up more of a, a
restoration workforce.
and economy in this state, uh,
we can do a lot of good over the
years and and mitigate some of
those, uh, you know, the severe
weather events and other things
that we're already seeing and
and we can expect we'll see more
of in the future.
Thank you so much and I, I think
when
You know, we see this climate
change happening, and I think
when people ask us, what did you
do?
If, if we can say we helped
restore rivers, we help restore,
protect the, the little water
that we had, we had a plan with
going forward and we're looking
at the
Technology that we can to
conserve whatever water we have.
I think that's what we have to
say as a legislative body. So I
really think this.
Right, there's no other
committee questions, we have a
motion on the table, uh,
Representative Herrera.
OK.
Um, this is to pass HB 92 with
the representative Herrera.
Yes
Representative Laura Kadena.
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Moya.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Ranking members of Mara? Yes.
Madam-based Cherokee? Yes.
Yes
Thank you.
OK,
the motion passes, A in favor,
when opposed.
Represented a pedigree you'd
like to explain your vote?
Thank you, madam co-chair, while
I agree with the legislation.
I'm not too sure I'm in
agreement or no, I'm not in
agreement with the
implementation. I'd like to have
further conversations before
this gets to the house floor, so
we, I can limit conversation and
I can be comfortable with where
this goes. Thank you.
Hey, good morning again. uh
Representative Cates, um.
You can go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you committee. I won't do
a full presentation because we
did present on this bill, but we
have today in your binders, the
committee substitute. Thank you
very much for helping us make
this bill better. We've taken a
lot of suggestions from our
public comment and from also the
committee. Um, I am here today
with you please read out the 202
number. Of course. I'm sorry, it
is for HP 28 202 number is.
0.230155.1.
Representative Rubio, Madam
Chair, I move seconded by uh
Representative Herrera.
Go ahead thank you Madam Chair.
So today I've brought two
subject experts on uh one on
water and one on agricultural,
just in case we have any uh
questions for those who were not
here when I first presented this
just a quick synopsis is this is
to um address is allowed that if
you have an agricultural land
that you can prove that was
agricultural land uh the year
previously, and there is a lack
of water due
To an infrastructure failure,
you are able to get a letter
from your water who, whatever
agency is the water deliverer.
To your land.
To give you a water, uh, a
letter for your tax assessor
that maintains your agricultural
status even if your yield is low
or unable to grow because of the
lack of, of delivery and we call
for questions.
Thank you so much, uh,
Representative Kates. We have
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
In response to this and even the
amendment.
We received an email.
The committee did from Edward
Alona on the twenty-ninth.
Of January
Which is from the uh
Which is the chief assessment
officer in Sandoval County and
strict opposition against this
legislation.
I'm just gonna read a few clips
from his email.
It appears in many cases
property owners either find it
inconvenient or simply do not
want to comply with the
requirements to qualify and
maintain an agricultural.
Pardon me, agricultural status,
adding to that as properties are
selling in excess of $250,000
per acre in an area where where
as irrigated cropland is valued
at $650 per acre, which is a
significant reduction in their
tax liability.
There are other aspects of this
that basically tell you that,
uh, well, don't basically very
specifically.
Uh, under significant issues,
Mr. Elona said what expertise do
any of the new proposed
entities.
Have in determining drought
versus.
Climate change.
Who has the controlling opinion
for the assessor to follow.
How many years can a property be
rusted for drought determined by
a new proposed entity as opposed
to the specific guidance.
When the USDA is utilized.
Annually, the New Mexico
property tax division is to
determine and adjust carrying
capacities for livestock, which
accounts for drought conditions.
And gives conservancy overrule.
Or conservancy overrule the
orders of the NMPTD.
I can continue to read on that.
There's a multitude of
different.
Uh, analysis in here that says
that this is already in law.
This can already be done and the
problem, Madam Chair, Madam
co-chair with this bill.
I
The decision making was inside
the legislation provides no
timeline, no justification, no.
No requirement to how long it
can stay and not be repaired,
and what can be done and the
concern overall concern.
is within this legislation from
my standpoint, very clearly.
In fact, number one,
Legislation already exists, the
study need to be written twice.
Number 2, there's no definition
in here. If, if this is to be
enacted that says, OK, the land
use cannot change.
So just say you have 20 acres,
you get it.
Get this legislation passed that
stays in the AG exemption in the
landowner goes and sells out 1
acre parcels, subdivides it and
sells out 1 acre parcels.
1.5 acre parcels which still fit
within an aggregate exemption.
Total land use has changed.
And there's nothing in this
legislation that stops.
So,
madam chair, madam co-chair, I
Just think that this has not
been well addressed and does
not.
Uh, take care, well, the issue
already exists, so thank you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you. I have a couple of
quick questions, um, um, this
is, I have to say this is much
better than the last one, so I,
I do like that, but there's just
a couple of uh things that I
that I have concerns about. Now,
uh, you said the, so this um it
should be done this
certification or whatever from
the from the current uh water
authority is done in writing.
Yes. It's the Yeah.
And then, um, and then does it
have um uh Madam Chair and, and
Representative, well, this, do
you know, will it have a
timeline on it, like, uh, like,
like let's say if, if they think
it's gonna take 2 years to, to
repair like in your case in
Sandoval County, the siphon if
they think it's going to take 2
years or whatever. Well,
there'll be a, a time that for
this period of time, you can
still keep that that ag
exemption instead of giving it
like an indefinite.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. Um, on the
second page, what it is is
during the tax year and so they
would require a letter per tax
year every year and if
infrastructure takes, as we
know, some water delivery
infrastructure is pretty vast
and so it may take multiple
years, but, um, but they must
provide a letter every tax year.
Perfect. Thank you. uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um,
And then those were most of
cause uh mister uh
Representative Pettigrew added,
um, asked one of my other
questions. So I think I'm good.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and.
Vice chair for presenting this
bill.
So
I have never been under the
impression or understood that
land that is
qualifies as ag land.
That if you don't water it.
Kicks it out of
Egg
And my understanding, Madam
Chair and Madam Vice Chairs.
What you're, what you're telling
us here.
Is that
People are afraid.
That their land is gonna be
kicked out of egg.
That is
Because it didn't get watered.
Am I correct?
Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you uh ranking members
and more. What it is is you can
lose your ag status due to a
lack of revenue generated
through agricultural means in
for your land when you only have
an acre and a half and you have
lack of water to that acre and a
half, you do, uh, reduce.
Um, your ability to generate
funds. I will defer to my expert
witness here.
share.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gillian
Joyce. I am government relations
for Rocky Mountain Farmers
Union. I'm also the executive
director of Allianza Agricultura
de Taos, which many of you may
be familiar with because uh as
Madam Chair, you know better
than I do, we've been involved
in agricultural evaluation
issues for 10 years.
Uh, in this building.
Um, so, uh,
Representative Samora, Madam
Chair, thank you so much for
your question. Uh, yes, you can
lose your agricultural valuation
due to irrigation depending on,
uh, what agricultural evaluation
you have on that land, and what
crop you're growing on it. If
you are growing a, for example,
an annual crop that requires
irrigation, and you are not able
to irrigate that particular
crop, then you can lose your
agricultural valuation. If you
have, say, a perennial crop like
alfalfa, uh, and you get
Limited production, but maintain
a crop to some extent, as long
as there is evidence that you
are working that land, caring
for your offenses, etc. It is
likely that your assessor will,
um, support the continuation of
your agricultural evaluation.
So, Madam chair and, and, uh
Presenters, so then.
Why couldn't it be uh dry land.
arm.
Or why can't it be considered
ranchland.
Why can't it be? There's,
there's other.
Uh
Other
Categories for farmland other
than irrigated.
Farmland.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I do agree, but for an acre
and a half farm or 5 acre farm.
Um, you may have more limited
options 1st. 2nd thing is you
may have an infrastructure
failure in the middle of the
season. You don't get to um
choose for a different path for
agricultural.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
Madam Vice.
So
Some of the other information
that we got and it's somewhere
in this paperwork.
I
That there was an optional way
of irrigating this land and it
was refused.
That there was the siphon that
you're, you're having some
issues with the siphon.
And there was, there was an
optional way to
To take water out of the river,
and it was refused. It was, it
wasn't accepted.
Uh
What, what can you put on the
table about that matter buster.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, um, representative,
uh, a couple things. One is I
will defer to my other expert
witness who will introduce
himself, but I, I'm not familiar
with this, and I will say that
the bill in front of you is to
protect all of our agricultural
throughout the state, not just
this one particular incident
within the Sandoval tax
assessors uh authority, but um,
but I will defer to um my expert
witness.
Good good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be here this
morning. My name is Mike
Hammond.
Uh, I've served in, uh, public,
uh, water administration and
development for 40 years and,
and I also served as a state
engineer for 2.5 years, uh,
recently retired in that in that
role. Um, I also
Uh, full disclosure, I, uh, I
farm in Corrales, um, and have
uh personal experience uh with
this matter as well. Uh, but,
uh, to answer the question, uh,
Representative Zamora, uh, that
particular issue, uh, had, was
an operational uh problem uh
associated with the, the pumping
station that MRGCD put in place
to to temporarily replace uh the
the.
the lost water from the from the
broken siphon situation until
they can uh complete their
negotiations on an easement
issue with uh San Di Pueblo, uh,
and move forward with, uh, a lot
of trust port funding that they
received to replace the sipho,
uh, that's, that's in flux right
now for maybe uh another season
or two. But in the meantime,
while the river's high enough,
the pump system that they put in
place does deliver water to the
Corralis area.
But when the river drops lower,
uh, we, we fall into what they
call the PNP pri Paramount.
Uh, Pueblo operations and they
received the majority of that
water and there the river
dropped so low, uh, in that area
that, that there's not enough
head on the on the intake of the
pump system. So during that
period of time, which we are
seeing more of with the, the,
the drought, the lack of
snowpack this winter, um, a lot
of factors and climate change
is, is, is adding to it, um, we
think, uh, a number of long-term
solutions need to be addressed,
but
Um
I'm, I'm really concerned for
myself and my neighbors that if
this is prolonged, uh, and, and,
and basically the, the assessors
uh email to you guys indicates
that they, they see this
differential between residential
property values and farm values
as a tax loss. We see it as a
preservation of agriculture in
the Corrales area to be able to
maintain that agricultural
exemption in order.
For us to weather the storm of
of drought and, and, and um
infrastructure insecurity right
now. So, so we, but if, but if
they lose that exemption, they
just push them into having to
sell the property or something.
So, so it's a, it, it's a
decline in in the overall
agricultural uh status of the
Corralis area in particular and
it could go into other, other uh
parts of uh Sandoval County and,
and maybe other parts of the
Middle Rio Grande as well.
And Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair.
You made the statement that this
is to protect all the farmers in
the state of New Mexico.
And I see that
The other side of the coin on
that.
I see that you're gonna hurt.
All the other farmers in the
state of New Mexico.
And, and
Because, because
You're gonna make him
vulnerable.
To be switching this land.
The text
face on this land.
And how is that not gonna affect
The price of the land.
And all the other mechanisms
that take place with changing.
The tax on land.
To me, their systems in place
already.
That I think your boyfriend's
calling you
Matthews, please.
Uh.
I'm just kidding, you know that.
We just
We're we're trying
OK, let, let, let me, let me
change it. Let me, let me ask
this question, Madam Chair. How
many, how many farmers and how
many acres is, is this problem
with this siphon affecting
And why we're trying to change
the tax code or
How, how many, what kind of area
are we talking about? How many,
how many farmers, how many
acres?
So I'm, I'm terribly sorry, I
don't have that acres and number
of farmers. What I will say is
that it's not just affecting
Sandoval County. It's also
affecting Valencia County.
There's some issues there as
well, uh, pertaining to uh our
agriculture of our farmers
losing ag status, um, because of
they they have more minor uh
infrastructure failure, but it
does affect some farms there
right now. And so it is
currently.
you're absolutely right for
years, this tax code was not
interpret this way.
It is now being interpreted as
land becomes more valuable.
And we do not want to lose our
agricultural culture.
That is one of the things that
makes us special here and so we
want to clarify what is already
in the tax code so that it
cannot be misinterpreted. I will
yield to my expert witness who
is enthusiast would like to
respond.
Madam Chair, Representative
Zamora, uh, this legislation,
uh, has the potential to impact
any agricultural community, uh,
where surface water is what is
relied on, where we are relying
on surface water infrastructure
that may, for whatever reason,
have a failure within a season.
So, uh, you know, there's
certainly areas of the state
where this would not be
relevant, but there are many,
many areas from Lincoln County
through to Mora and uh many
places in between where this
would be very
relevant.
Thank you, thank you for that,
Madam Chair, and, and, uh
Mike, uh,
So, so can you give us an
example of, of how much land you
own and and how much.
The variances in the taxes, if,
if this goes through or doesn't
go through, or if they tax you
for if they take it out of non
agriculture.
Compared to agriculture, what,
what the difference is in
I, I will,
thank you, Madam Chair. I will
allow the expert witness to
answer, but I will say that I, I
have a constituent if you want a
personal story, I have a
constituent right now who has an
acre and a half. All he grows is
tomatoes because of a lack of
water is enough tomatoes for
some of the farmers' markets and
for personal consumption, it is
not, this has been a
generational farm for him, and
he is not able.
To um to meet that, uh, income
that is required to keep his
status, but I will yield to um.
Like
Mm
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Zamora,
uh, just from my personal
knowledge of, of, of my
situation, I have, I have, uh,
you know, residential acre, and
then I have about a 2.5 acre
piece of that I'm in
agriculture. So my, my tax bill
for the residential piece of my
land is close to 4000 a year.
My, uh, tax bill for my
agricultural piece is about 300,
so that's gives you some idea of
the differential there.
uh, if someone were to lose
their exemption.
Um,
there's a raw land value.
Component that I'm not
completely familiar with, with
the assessors evaluations. It's
different than the residential
uh resident on a, an acre, but
it would go up significantly
because of the rapid increase in
land prices that have occurred
all over the Rio Grande Valley,
but particularly in Corrales. So
there would be a significant
increase in an individual's tax
bill that could put him in
financial hardship.
Um, and under circumstances and,
and not being able to, you know,
produce enough uh agriculture to
uh co-exist as they have been
for many decades in some cases,
uh, within the community that uh
farmers that I know, uh, would
be, uh, uh, a shame because of
uh uh condition that they have
no control over themselves.
And, and Madam Chair, and
presenters and it's sad that our
taxes are so high, uh.
Because we spend money like
crazy here in the state of New
Mexico and
And uh
We have, we have income coming
from other sources that
Yeah
You, you always wonder why.
Why we have to pay so much in
taxes, but.
The flip side of that coin is,
That
If it's a residential home and,
and it turns to residential and
with that acreage that you have
and stuff, it is worth a lot of
money.
Uh
I, I don't wanna.
I've always supported Ag. I, I
was born on a farm delivered by
a midwife and been on ranches
and farms.
My whole life till the past 3
years I've
Retired from my agricultural
life and
I'm doing this political job and
Raising grandkids, but
This is a tough one, and, and
then, and then we're also
hearing.
That Madam Chair, that, that the
siphons.
Having a hard time replacing the
siphon, but then we're hearing
that there is a way that some of
these lands are getting watered.
So what, what's really going on
here?
And I just
I just don't feel comfortable
changing the tax.
Oh
Across the board for farmers
across the state.
But, but another issue, Madam
Chair, is
Some of these rules are made
within the county, right?
So
So some of these egg rolls.
As to qualification for farmland
and stuff.
Do they differ from county to
county or, or they, they all the
same across the board and is it
a federal rule or is it a state
rule?
Madam Chair Representative
Samoa, uh, this is, uh, in, uh,
state level rule. Uh, there is a
lot of interpretation to be done
at the county level, um, which I
personally find unfortunate
because we do not have a level
playing field for our
agricultural communities
throughout the state. So, but
yes, the rule is set at the
state level, not the federal
level, and then is interpreted
at the county level by our
county assessors' offices.
So, so, madam chair, so some,
some of the rules.
are set by the county is the
rule affecting you?
On this land in the status.
That we're talking about, is it
set at the county level, are we
fighting something that's going
on within the county.
It, it seems to me like we are,
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, I'm uh I
apologize for my lack of
clarity. Um, it is the state
rule across the entire state. It
is being interpreted by the
Sandoval County assessors and by
the Valencia County Assessors,
and I am concerned about other a
few other assessors and it's an
interpretation of the existing
state law. I would also like to
clarify another statement of
yours.
We had an infrastructure failure
of the siphon, which was
resolved with a pumping station,
first the diesel and then an
electric.
It has been able to deliver
water during these years of
infrastructure failure, they
built other infrastructure, the
pump, but as Mr. Hammond
explained, when the river is
low, that pump just sucks mud
and rock. It doesn't get any
water because the water needs to
fulfill its obligations to the
public on the other side of the
river.
So it is not that they have an
alternative source of water that
they have refused. They want
all.
Alternative sources of water. It
is, there are circumstances that
the current infrastructure
cannot meet their water needs.
Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair.
I've pumped a lot of water in my
life.
I've pumped it from ditches,
I've pumped it from lagoons, the
most challenging is pumping it
out of a
Wastewater lagoon from the dairy
and, and bringing it back up and
running it irrigation systems.
They make screens that you can
put in the river that that
filter the water.
Before you ever suck it in the
pump. They're not that
expensive.
I, I'm, I'm hearing the stories,
and I'm thinking in my mind,
what's going on here?
There there are screens that you
can pump that would keep the
rocks from going up in the pumps
and stuff.
Whether, whether you have enough
water in the river to pump and
what the rules are and regs.
I'm sure Mike knows knows all
those regs and rules about.
Enough water in the, in the
stream and who gets the water?
But as far as pumping water out
of the river.
And, and that was one of my big
concerns whenever we debated.
Uh, the water that's going into
Arizona from the Gila River.
They're saying we can't pump the
water out of the river and I was
thinking, why in the world not?
And if we turn it over to the
right people, we can pump water
out of the rivers. We can run
them dry. We, and we've proven
that before. So, so, Madam
Chair, and, and I don't mean to
keep on going down that road,
uh, Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, I, I would like, I would
like something.
Uh
To ask something of you, uh,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
before we go on this bill goes
onto the floor and, and I really
hope it doesn't pass this
committee because I'm not gonna
support it.
And, and
Sometimes you feel bad about not
supporting the bill, but
You have to do what's, what's in
here, and, and what, and from
the knowledge that you gather
over over your lifetime, what we
read in these bills and stuff
is, is we have to make a
decision with, with our
Knowledge from that we have in
the past, not from what we
gather right here.
Uh
I would like to see.
Where the law states that you
have to produce X amount of
dollars.
Of
A certain amount of land for it
to qualify as agland.
As far as, as I know and
understand the law.
It's, it's the amount of
acreage.
And what you're doing with it.
It's not how much how much we
produce off the land. There's
If, if that was the case.
If that's the case today, how
Do we insure our crops.
And then not get a production,
well then it would kick it out
of a status and, and we couldn't
insure the land and stuff, so
there's.
I'd I'd like to see that.
I, I don't think, I don't think
that that's the case. I don't, I
don't understand it that way. I
haven't learned it that way. I,
I don't know it that way.
And, and I'd like to see that
proof of, of production.
He can
Land out of Ag status.
Uh
Madam Chair, with that.
Uh, I end my discussion, and I
moved to table.
There is a tabling motion on the
floor, however, there is more
discussion, so I'm gonna go to
discussion.
Represent a lot of.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um,
This week seems to remind me
that I may be rare in this
legislative body that I like
this. I like that we come back
and have conversation and have
more dialogue as we learn and
figure out together what New
Mexico needs.
I am not a legislator that
believes the bill has to be
ready for prime time. I actually
think this is a really important
part of the process with public
in the room, with the cameras
on, with recording happening. I
don't like making backroom
deals. I like for us to come
here and figure this out
together. So, Madam Chair, I
wanna really appreciate that it
seems like you've addressed most
of the concerns that I and
others raised last time, and
last time I was approaching this
from different ways, but also
raising my concern about the
checkerboard of of.
implementation had we gone to
the many, many, many districts
to come up with this on their
own.
So I appreciate that. And now I
have a whole lot of new
questions based on this
committee sub, so Madam Chair,
I'll try to go through those
with some clarity. Um, before I
get into the bill, just to
clarify, we've had emails
referenced, we've heard about
different um assessors in
different counties.
Taking and making different
interpretations of the state law
and rule.
Are you aware, has the New
Mexico Counties Association of
Counties, their assessor
affiliate.
Issued an official opinion on
this, whether they support it,
don't support it, neutral, have
they in a formal way weighed in.
On HB 28, Madam Chair.
You, Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative, uh, no, they
have not.
OK
Madam Chair and Representative,
anybody from the counties or
assessors are listening and have
other information, please get it
to us, but yeah, it's it's also
made sense that as of yet they
have not formally weighed in,
um, if y'all aren't aware, the
New Mexico counties have
affiliate groups of.
Uh, representation from every
single one of the 33 counties
working across the issue, so I
work closely with the local DWI
affiliates. There's an assessor
affiliate that does something
similar. They're very well
organized and clear about.
How they feel on our
legislation.
Um, moving to the committee,
said, Madam Chair.
I also um share a representative
on what's confusion and maybe
concern about um these examples
that are coming up with this
bill, like the tomato farm, how
the, the water situation didn't
allow them to meet the, the
price point for their county. I
happen to have a little bit of
land, only 3 acres in Donana
County, so all of the
constituents I represent were um
users of Elephant View
Irrigation District, if we have
water rights.
Um, but as far as I understand
it, while, um, the federal
government and the state
government receives information
about my farm proceeds.
The county does not. So they're
making those valuations and
assessments on a different set
of information. This makes me
curious about what they're
using, but in no way does the
county come and ask me to
document or produce evidence of
the, the value of my ag products
for any given tax year. That,
that's just not how it goes, so
I also am having some questions
or concerns, if that's happening
different county by county, I'd
be curious to learn about that
more, um, and potentially
We, what we don't have is the
rules in front of us that the
departments are using to direct
the TRD Tax and Rev department
would be using to direct
counties to implement this, but
certainly I don't see that in
this law or the existing
language that that you're
attempting to amend. Um, so for
me also that's, that's not my
understanding of how the
valuation uh how the evaluation
on A lens works today.
Um
Other members have raised my
questions about like how
overwhelmingly, we're hearing
from Corrales constituents, and
I appreciate that they're on the
land, they want to work the
land, they have a commitment to,
to keeping A in their community,
but I'm not hearing about it
from other parts of the state.
So I am um trying to flush
through this and, and ask myself
like where the applicability
lands for the rest of us outside
of these two particular
counties.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to go
to the bill now on page 3.
Where it looks like you have the
impetus of your bill, the new
language here on page 3, line
10.
As we get into section E. I'm
with you for the first couple of
lines. So your new language
reads.
That, um, right, the intro to
this resting of land to maintain
its capacity to produce
agricultural products and then
to eat resting of land as the
direct result of an insufficient
volume of water necessary to
produce the continual and
historic yield of agricultural
products being provided, all
that, I'm like, it sounds good,
it sounds good, but then we get
to this piece, due to an
infrastructure failure of a
political subdivision's public
wide.
Then I wonder, well, my users.
May have insufficient volume for
other reasons.
Including
The fight between Texas and New
Mexico that's still in front of
us at the Supreme Court. Like,
how does that leave other water
users that haven't and won't
have an insufficient volume to
farm as we have for decades and
for a long, long time. Um, when
I read some of the examples and
including this email we're all
referencing out of, out of the
Sandoval assessor's office, they
talk, Madam Chair about how
their users still got 9 waters.
9
Allocations a season.
Something like that hasn't
happened in my irrigation
district.
In decades
In decades. So yes, our rights
allow for different uses, so we
basically all have wells like
Representative Zamora, I wonder
like, well.
Do their rights not allow for
them to drill, cause we have to
buy expensive wells and go deep
and get water from other sources
because by the time the river
and the surface water gets to
us, there's none left. Like
there's been seasons where we
get 22, not 2 a month, not like
2 from April to October. So,
When I again appreciate the
intentions of addressing other
issues, but now when I look
closer at this definition, I
wonder what um inequities are we
setting up that we say some
folks can hold on to value of
land if they're insufficient
water comes from an
infrastructure failure.
Because at least in my district.
We're good at figuring out our
own infrastructure, but
We have other reasons to have
insufficient volumes of water.
Um, so, uh, moving to
Line or going back a page, Madam
Chair.
To page 2. This again, I, I
think I've mostly addressed
this, but here's where I see at
least what we're, what we've
compelled TRD to do is say that
page 2 line 2, evidence of the
bona fide primary agricultural
use of land for the tax year
preceding the year for which
determination is made of
eligibility for the land to be
valued under this section
creates a presumption that the
land is used primarily for ag
purposes during the tax year. So
when I go back to that, my big
question is, what, what do they
mean by evidence? So in this,
In this um committee sub.
I have big questions about
again, like what what evidence
means, what the assessors are
using county by county, and
then, of course, I just have the
equity question about how some
people would be allowed the
resting of land and others, um,
any, any, um, response or
comments. I know I don't have a
direct question yet before I
wrap up.
Uh, thank you very much. I would
like both my uh subject experts
to make a brief statement. I
will say that the evidence for
the taxes I'm aware aware of
it's um is your tax records.
Is the evidence that they're
asking for.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, in, in
About all of my experience with
agricultural evaluation uh in
the state. Our assessors are
relying entirely on uh visual
evidence of agriculture
happening on the land. They're
looking for fences to be in good
condition. They're looking for
dishes to be cleaned. They are
looking for, uh, evidence that
the land is being tilled, um, or
turned in some way, and they're
looking for evidence of a crop.
Um, it is my understanding, uh,
though I.
I'm not 100% on this, that an
assessor can, if they are not
finding the evidence they need,
looking on the ground that they
can request some sort of record,
uh, to prove that agricultural
has been happening on that land.
I personally have never met a
producer who has been asked, uh,
for those records, uh, that
Doesn't mean it doesn't happen.
Thank you do what you like to
comment?
Certainly, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Cardena.
Um, excellent points on the
On the uh water situation uh
currently in the Mid Ri Gran
system. It's strictly run of the
river, um, and there are, there
are some groundwater uh
supplemental groundwater wells,
uh, but not nothing like down in
the lower Rio Grande, um, is the
basin was declared in 1956
during the 50s drought, and then
every well from that point
forward had to be permitted with
an and typically with an offset
or
or uh inclusion of a circus
water, right, to allow for that
supplemental uh groundwater
pumping. So there's far less
opportunities and far less
groundwater usage uh associated
with agriculture in the middle.
Thank you. I appreciate the
cities and confirmation, um, and
certainly for those listening in
for EBID, it is a it is an
offset, so you have your water
right, you have your allocation,
you either get it from the
river, from the surface supply,
or then you're allowed not to
exceed or overdo.
That same allocation, but to
pull from the well and at least
in my part of New Mexico, people
wish they had river water and
the, the, the water in, in and
of itself, the essence of the
water is different, whether
you're pumping it up as, um, but
I appreciate that and also,
that's my understanding, like,
in the part of New Mexico I
represent, we're mostly in
pecans now, there's some real
crops left, but assessors are
out, and, and they, I think
these days they mostly use
Google Maps and and other ways
to visually confirm that we
still have orchards, we still
have ditches, we still have
crops.
That are uh being grown in other
ways, so I appreciated that
clarity. It's, it's the sense I
have that we're not actually.
I've never heard of anyone
compelled to provide um a
financial record that shows that
they produced and sold at ag
crop.
Um, so,
As, as I get to wrap up, um,
again, back to this email that
seems
To, to be in the heart of what
happened in Corrales, at least
this assessor for Sandoval
County said that it was the
policy of their office to, to
make sure that landowners and ag
users or producers in their
county could obtain a letter
from the mid-rio Grand
Conservancy District that said
they were that the that the
district was unable to provide
the irrigation in order to
Uh, sufficiently grow crops.
Why was that not enough like
how, how does that not address
what seems to be an issue that's
thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
question. That's a very good
question. Um, we did approach
the tax assessor. She wants um
very detailed in that letter.
She needs to know how much
opportunity, how many gallons of
water per a certain time period
on a specific piece of land, and
then that means that that needs
to be created for every
individual farmer. We're trying
to um address the
situation
and the fact when there's an
infrastructure, it's not a
specific farm, it's an
infrastructure and a delivery, a
water delivery, which is where
they're charged that that is
what they're required to do, and
there's a failure that they can
have as the water.
It's not a water authority, but
as the authority of the water
delivering system would have the
ability to say we had
infrastructure failure and there
is not a lack of water and not
have to create the detailed
letter for each individual farm,
which is what the assessor is
asking for.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I don't know if you can feel
comfortable speaking to the
willingness like has the mid Rio
Grande weighed in. Did they say
they don't have the capacity to
write that letter for every
farmer that requested, like, is
there an issue getting those
detailed letters produced.
For those that have been
singled out or or or.
And actually, Madam Chair, let
me let me amend my own question.
I'm confused about how this is
happening because again, I
understand as one of the expert
does that we've not actually
been compelled to produce.
Records of our of the financial
value of our ag products ever,
so I am just really confused
about like what's happening? Are
they looking at the land and it
it appears even your example
that people are still attempting
to grow.
So
It sounds to me like there's a
little bit of a dilemma in this
county in particular, with this
assessor and growers in
particular that were attempting
to address in a statewide way
and, and I'm still feeling
confused about that, but yes,
even in in this example.
Like I don't understand why the
mid Rio Grande can't write this
detailed letter and get it to
the assessor, if some, if
they're actually being singled
out for
Potential loss of their
valuation.
Madam Chair, if you have an
answer to that, otherwise it's
just expressing my confusion
about this dilemma.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. I would be
uncomfortable speaking for the
midre Madam Chair, then my final
question, and then I'll make a
comment about tax.
I don't remember now at this
point, has the mid Rio Grande
Conservancy District weighed in.
On this bill.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that they, they, they have
expressed to me they support
this bill, yes.
Madam Chair Representative, have
they expressed that to the
committee? I can't remember if
they were here, Rose made
comments, does anyone remember
if the mid Rio Grande yes.
You represent MRGCD.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK.
OK.
And lastly then, no, no, no.
Lastly, um, as I said before, if
this bill moves forward, I'm
still not sure how I feel about
it for those questions. I like
that you address some new ones
came forward. If this goes
forward, like this has to get
referred to tax. This is a tax
bill. This is clearly, we're in
a tax conversation that none of
us quite understand. We need to
hear from TRD. We need to hear
from other entities and I'd want
to hear from the assessors about
potentially why different
different local entities are
interpreted.
this potentially with concern,
so I'm not sure how I feel about
it today, but if it proceeds,
I'd like to see it referred to
tax and more of this expertise
to be in play. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews. You have a question.
We can keep it brief.
Uh, well, I'm just reading the
FIR and I had written as I.
About the because they were
talking about the tax
implication. This does seem like
a tax bill more than a water
bill.
And I also had written down tax
commission.
Representative Zamora.
For the 2nd time.
So, so, so I want, Madam Chair,
I want some clarity,
you, you already have a tabling
motion.
Do you want some clarity on on
some of the discussion, Madam
Chair.
OK, let's let's make it quick
because we have to be down at
the floor pretty soon and I want
to have Representative Chatfield
present his bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I need some clarity as to
If, if there's a, if there's
somebody that comes in and buys
Agland and Corrales.
And they develop it if we pass
this law like it is right now.
And they develop it, it'll still
be taxed.
As Agland
Because, because there's no, no.
Sunset, no limit to it.
Know anything to it. It says
that.
that even the land is not in
production for egg.
We're gonna change, we're gonna
keep the, the ag status on it.
Ma chair Representative, I, I
disagree with that. It, it
required and it also requires
the previous year be verifiable
with evidence that it was used
for. And, and, and one more
thing, Madam Chair, and, and
vice chair if the assessor.
In Sandoval County, Sandoval
County, right?
I
Forcing people to use water
where they
could use less water.
I think the state of New Mexico
needs to address that too,
because we're trying to conserve
water throughout the state.
As a state engineer.
Has done in the past before he
retired everywhere we can
conserve water. We've been
trying to conserve water. And if
there's people that have.
Ag status because of the acreage
they have.
In this county, and they're
trying the, the assessors trying
to force them to use water.
I think we ought to be
addressing the assessor in, in,
in Sandoval County.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you.
Thank you. There is a tabling
motion. I just want to remind
the the committee members that
if you're speaking on the bill
and you're asking questions, you
typically don't make a tabling
motion. So just for
Time, but I'm gonna allow the
tabling motion representative
Zamora.
Um
So we're gonna go to that. This
is there's a motion on the floor
to table.
House Aga is and water resources
committee substitute for House
Bill 28.
Please call the rule.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Representative Matthews, not the
table.
Representative Moya.
Yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes
Representative Rubio. Yes.
Ranking members Amora.
Yes the table.
Madam Vice Chairates.
Not a table.
Madam Chair Ortiz.
No to table and I want to
explain my vote.
Uh, you're the tabling motion
has passed. Uh your bill has
been tabled. I'd like to explain
my vote. Um, I think that we
need a comprehensive uh
conversation and a real look at
uh the special method evaluation
for ag and what happens, uh, in
times of drought, infrastructure
failure, all of that, um, it's
something that is very dear to
my heart, uh, and I think we
need to have real conversation
with the experts on the tax
committee and uh folks on the
ground from all parts of the
state.
Thank you.
Um, all right, Representative
Chatfield, stand up for a
second.
Are you ready?
Yes
Madam, how are you?
