Remembers last call. Please come
to the chambers. We are about to
begin.
Sergeant, Can you check What's
in that bag, please?
Members. Please come to the
chambers. We will begin shortly
Representative rooms got a bunch
of bills on the calendar.
I think I'm just a bill.
Hello. Hello.
Hello. Hello. This mic is
supposed to be our friend.
It's working.
Push to talk 1 to 12 microphone
is supposed to be our
Society.
Remember. This is a two minute
warning will begin in two
minutes.
Mm.
Alright members. Let's get this
show back on the road.
Believe everybody's back Most
everybody is back.
And ready to roll.
A little housekeeping on
messages and committee reports,
and then we're gonna go back to
third reading, and especially
for the rookies. You're gonna
start seeing some supplemental
calendars and concurrence
calendars on your desks.
Which reflect bills that either
have come back from the Senate
for concurrence or bills that
have moved out of judiciary or
attacks. Those two committees
that met today and they're going
to be considered for floor third
reading if you have any
questions reach out to any
member of the leadership teams,
they can walk you through it.
Generated from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move we
go to that order business
messages. Objection. It is
ordered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in a gross copies of House Bill
28 as amended. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 41.
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill 196 have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in Open session
returned same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House Bill 91 as amended
by the House House Bill 232 as
amended by the House and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House appropriations and
finance committees. Substitute
for House Bill five, as amended
by the House and returned same
here with respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the house
that the duly enrolled in
engrossed copy of Senate Bill
176, as amended, has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in Open
session in return and request
the signatures of the officers.
The House respectfully
submitted. Sherry, D. Wuhan,
Senate chief clerk will be
entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
center Field Bus Senator Bill
five, as amended, has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate in Open
session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the House Respect with submitted
Sherry Dilute Johnson, chief
clerk.
Measure be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house Bill 195 and return
Same here with respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk will be
entered message from the Senate.
Mr Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the house that the Senate
has passed House Bill seven, as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate.
House. Agriculture is sick isn't
Water Resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 211 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate and
requests the concurrence of the
house to the Senate amendments.
Respectfully submit Sherry D.
Luhansk, chief clerk.
Message will be reluctantly
entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr
Speaker, I am directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed how straight resolution
11 and return same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan. Senate clerk entered
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate Bill
152, as amended with the
emergency clause has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate and open
session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the House respectfully
submitted. Sheri Dillon Johnson
and chief clerk will be entered.
A lot of birthday messages from
the clerk.
Lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move.
We go to that order of business
committee reports. Objection. It
is so ordered.
Mr Speaker. Your Taxation and
Revenue committee has been
referred. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 246 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Derek
Linda chair.
Move adoption
We are an adoption of Federal
committee report on Senate
Finance Committee 70% Bill 246
all those in favor say Aye.
I was supposed name? Yes report
adopted a Mr Speaker, your tax,
Taxation and Revenue Committee
to him has been referred. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 275, as amended has
had it under consideration
reports with recommendations
that do pass respectfully
submitted Derek Lin, the chair
moving option.
Adoption.
Adoption of favorite committee
report. Senate Finance
committees substitute for
Sanibel to center five as
amended all those in favor say
if I was, you know,
Suppose Nate
The committee adopted Mr
Speaker you're enrolling in and
grossing committee tomb has been
referred. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute substitute
for house Bill 239.
Has had it under consideration
and reports that same has been
duly enrolled in a girls'
preparatory designing by the
officers of the House.
Respectfully submitted Eleanor
Chavez chair move adoption
adoption of my favorite
Favorable committee report and
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee.
Substitute for house Bill 239.
All those in favor say tonight.
I suppose, nay.
Productive directors like that
duly enrolled and grows. Copies
of House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 239.
Was signed by officers of the
House in Open session.
I got that one without reading
it. Thank you guys.
Finally
Wow can leave from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move we
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Members and announcements before
we
Continual third reading
calendar.
Okay, Just to be clear. Third
reading calendar. We're going to
move between that and
supplemental calendars that are
being passed out.
For bills. I got out of
committee today, including three
on supplemental calendar, one
out of judiciary, as well as the
ones coming out of tax
committee, which were just ready
now.
And then we've got concurrence
flying back and forth, so we'll
consider that is it?
Is it comes along.
Um so for all ready to go.
Gentle lady announcement
generated from Luna Algo and UN
Yana representative Jones.
Yes, Thank you. Mr Speaker is
still Valentine's Day and I want
to say happy birthday to madam
Chief Clerk and you're in good
company. Today is a really
special day in my family because
I was blessed to have two of my
seven Children on Valentine's
Day. Yeah, So my daughter Grace
is turning 31 today and my
daughter Olivia is turning 23
and I just like to wish them a
happy birthday.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, A
Gentleman is singing.
General lady to sing.
No, Mr Speaker. I don't know
that my daughter's really
appreciate that. So I appreciate
the offer, but and the
opportunity, But I'll pass and
just say Happy birthday, Grace
and Olivia Happy Birthday, Grace
and Olivia.
Your mom will sing to you in
private.
General lady from Bernie Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business. Third
reading of legislation ordered
Is the gentle person from that
county. Ready on item number 22.
Not sure who that's going to be.
Any takers item 22.
Cruz, where you running away?
From Valeo and Item 22 Senate
Joint Resolution 16.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Would you
give me that point, please
record reflect that election,
replacing Senate joint
resolution 16 and final passage
has been taken. It is not
subject to debate amendment of
substitution gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This
would
Essentially allow county
commissioners to establish those
salaries right now.
Because everyone knows it's
established by the Legislature
when the Legislature gets around
to it.
Speaker. I would also like to
have represent Duncan speak as
well, if that's okay from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
You know, as a former county
commissioner.
And someone who knows what those
salaries should be within their
own county And with what money
they have to work with. I think
this is a great bill and you
know, we always went out and
found out what the salaries were
supposed to be. As as county
commissioners. We did not do
that and when they came back and
told us what they should be, and
could be then you know, I think
this is a great bill.
There is debate Your lady from
Eddie and leave Senator Brown.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman please yield? Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
general lady.
Thank you so much. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. So could you tell the
body, please? Um, how long? Uh,
in in contrast to state
employees have been receiving
some consecutive raises. How
long have county officials not
had basically permission from
the Legislature to do the same
type of treatment for them, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady since 2018
Right. And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, I know we all value
our county elected officials.
They have each of them a big job
to do, And I remember
cosponsoring some legislation
with represented pedigree with
the gentleman from Lee.
Um and we were very disappointed
when that was not approved by
the Legislature, So I really
appreciate this bill, and I hope
we will. We will pass it. So
thank you very much, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
Thank you. Generally, Mr
Speaker, General Lady
representative Pedigree has been
very, very interested in this
particular bill. Mr Speaker, if
we would have the representative
also speak out greatly
Appreciate that, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you to my colleague from Berna,
Leo.
This is something that's been a
passion of mine for several
years. We've continued to push
through AM so glad to see that
that s Jr from the Senate side
made it through at the end of
the day. It's not about who
carries the bill. It's about
what it does. And I'm thankful
for it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
appreciate the gentleman's from
Lee's comments because I know he
has been passionate about this.
He has spoken to me about this
for quite some time Speaker
Seen over debate. Gentlemen,
close
Thank you, Speaker. I move to do
pass.
We are a final passage of Senate
Joint Resolution 16. The vote is
now open.
Thank you.
We'll keep the vote open. Don't
worry. We'll keep the vote open.
Press your button.
Okay. Let's reopen the vote
members who couldn't, uh, were
unable to get to the button. Go
ahead.
Everybody get a chance to vote.
What is not closed by one of 64
in the affirmative zero in the
negative Senator resolution 16
as well as his house.
This is a reminder, folks run at
32nd vote clock. And if you
don't press it with enough time
sometimes he doesn't register.
Um, we're making accommodations
for people who have a hard time
getting back and forth.
But if you're if you're nearby
police try to get your butt in
ahead of time. That way, you
don't
Have the problem. Um
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from Catrin Valencia and Sierra
Representative Armstrong on your
radio. An item 41. Yes, Mr.
Speaker. Would you get me to
that point the record reflect
that election is served,
replacing Senate Tax, Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for 7151 as amended,
Her final passage has been
taken, and it is not subject to
debate amendment of substitution
generated explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
Senate Bill 151 is going to help
our E M s to be funded hasn't
been changed since the nineties.
And with that, Mr Speaker, I
stand for questions. Debate
generated close. I now move that
Senate tax.
Oh, my gosh.
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute
Ah for Senate Bill 151 do now
pass. We are on final passage of
Senate transportation business
and for Senate tax.
Senate committees.
We're on final passage of
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee.
Substitute percent about 151 as
The votes about to close.
The board is not closed by a
vote of 65 in the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate Bill
1/5 Senate.
Tax, Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 151 as amended.
Has really passed this house.
Right members. We are actively
looking for sponsors for some of
the bills on the supplemental
calendar. So if a member of the
staff comes and ask you please
volunteer would be greatly
appreciated. There are three
Senate bills on the supplemental
calendar that would like to get
across in the meantime, I'm
going to go to item number 43.
Is a gentleman from Burnley
possible McKinley's and once a
quarter Valencia already on that
item.
Thank you, sir. Mr. Speaker.
Give me that point that the
record reflected election
necessary for placing instead of
l 165 as amended on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, gentlemen to
explain his bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Uh, Standard Bill 165,
as amended relating to
legislative retirement, changing
the calculation of the amount of
pension pursuit.
State legislative member
coverage and plan number two. Mr
Speaker, Senate Bill Sit 165 is
a technical fix to the building
was passed in 2022. The county
was supposed to be for 60 Days
and 30 days.
For a total of 9030 days was
dropped. This bill just makes a
correction. Mr Speaker North
Sanford Questions debate.
Gentlemen, close.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I moved
that Senate Bill 165 as amended
do pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 165 as amended. The
vote is now open.
The world is about to close. The
vote is now closed by a vote of
46 in the affirmative 18 in the
negative Senate, Bill 165, as
amended, has duly passed this
house.
Gentle lady from Catrin Sierra
Sakura. Valencia. Are you ready
and item? 42? Yes, Mr. Speaker,
Would you get me to that point
The record reflect that election
is a surfer placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Centerville 161 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 161 provides funding for up
to the
For the next two years for our
smallest rural independent
hospitals, and also provided
provide care to engineer
Internet patients. Long term
funding solution was passed
yesterday and sent a bill 17.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Seeing no debate. Gentle little
clothes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I now move that Senate Bill.
Actually Senate finance
committees substitute for Senate
Bill 161 as twice amended do now
pass
We are on final passage of
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Centerville 161
is twice amended. The vote is
now open.
It is now closed by one of 66
and affirmative zero in the
negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for September 161 as
twice amended has duly passed
this house.
Is there a senator on the floor
of the house?
Senator Gonzalez. Welcome to
Your real chamber. This is this
is your chamber here.
Good to see you.
Members. I will direct your
attention to supplemental
Remember Supplemental calendar
number one item number one.
Senate Bill 96.
Here's a gentle lady from Ben
Ali. You're ready on that item.
Mr Speaker. I'm ready.
Let the record reflect that all
actions are replacing
Centerville 96 on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Mr Speaker members.
Before I explain Senate Bill 96.
I would like to introduce my
guest Is Senator moment asked us
and we are trying to find him a
chair so he will be
Helping me with this bill. Um,
Mr Speaker members. This is the
homicide statute and act
relating to criminal sentencing,
increasing the penalty for
attempted murder. The second
degree, increasing the penalty
for second degree murder to 18
years and Mr Speaker and
members. The key is 18 years.
Um, so the bill essentially
changes the, um
Felony secondary degree felony
to 18 years from 15 years, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, but that
I would stand for questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Burnaby, your
representative Chase E. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Will the lady
healed?
Well, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Mr Speaker and Lady from Berna,
Leo.
Can you tell me if there is a
different penalty for attempt
First degree murder and
attempted second degree murder.
Um, Mr Speaker and General Lady.
It does it.
Excuse me.
Hmm. Folks behind me, Um, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, eight
General lady. It goes from three
years to nine years for
attempted murder. I understand,
Mr Speaker and Lady from
Burnley. Oh, that's that would
be the new penalty of this is
signed into law. But isn't it
the same for attempted first
degree murder?
Mr Speaker in General Lady? Yes.
Mr Speaker and Lady from Bern,
Leo.
Um, is this
Um
Is this intended to deter crime?
Mr Speaker, General lady, Um
most of these types of crimes
are committed during the time of
severe passion.
Um, but what this does is, it
sends a message to new Mexicans
that we are serious about
addressing crime.
Mr Speaker and Lady from Bern.
Leo. I worry about spending that
kind of money to send a message.
But what I wanted to point out
Is that a first degree murder
involves planning
Foresight.
We're second degree murder is,
as you described.
Where it's conducted. I mean,
it's carried out in the heat of
passion, so the problem that I
have and I'll let you
Respond if you want, but what I
don't like about it is that the
attempt
For first degree and the attempt
for second degree are penalized
exactly the same.
And if this measure is signed
into law
Thank you for your comments, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker. I think the ball's
in your court.
It's very big generated from
China's career was over, Senator
Rabe.
Thank you. Mr Speaker, will the
General Julio yield
Mr Speaker? No, The names are
too close. I'm sorry. She's
going to speak. Now Feel like we
have that problem in judiciary
three times a week. Monday,
Wednesday Friday at one o'clock
or 15 minutes after the floor.
I did say for the record gentle
lady from Chavez Correa
Roosevelt, representative
Reber. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
thought I heard my county's
well. The general lady yield
I will to the general lady from
all those counties that I can't
see.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, Could you please explain
to the body of the two things
that this bill does
Mr Speaker and General Lady,
Basically, what we're doing is
there's uh, on on Page two. If
you look at line number five and
line number nine, it changes to
nine years online number nine
and then on Page three, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, if you
look at line number 10 and 11
It basically changes from 15
years to 18 news imprisonment.
All right. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Generally, let's first
talk about the what people are
describing as an increased
penalty for the second degree
murder. Can you explain the
difference of so it brings it
from 15 to 18 years? Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Gentlelady,
Mr Speaker and General Lady
Maximum penalty? Yes.
So it's actually discretionary,
Mr Speaker and gentle lady by
the judges on a mandatory
sentence. Mr Speaker and General
Lady. Yes, Mr Speaker in General
Lady, Can you explain the
thinking behind? You know the
body doesn't like increased
penalties, but the thinking
behind the the raising the years
in this part of the bill.
Mr Speaker Generating. There's
actually kind of two reasons,
Usually, when these go before
the judge, they these, um these,
um, sentences are pledged down,
General Lady and Mr Speaker and
so first degree could be pled
down to a second degree.
And the other thing is and I
have a little chart that I could
actually referred to. But if you
look at our surrounding states
in the Southwest, um and I have
I have a chart if I can pull it
up really quick. Um it shows
that
Let me see if I have it here.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, That's what I was
going to try to get you to go to
the surrounding states and what
their second degree Yeah, Mr.
Speaker in generating so second
degree penalty in Arizona is 10
to 25 California's 15 to life.
Colorado is 16 to 48 Oklahoma
tend to life.
And Utah 15 to life and we tried
to stay in the Southwest so that
we could have a good compare
comparable.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Ladies, So actually, the state
of New Mexico is a discretionary
up to 15, which is actually the
very, very low end of all our
all of our surrounding states.
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Correct 0 to 15.
And Mr Speaker generally
understand this amendment or
this change in the bill because
In my background is very hard to
describe to a victim when their
loved one is murdered.
Which Mr Speaker generally most
of the time. It is a second
degree murder when we're talking
about homicide, and then to tell
them that their loved one's life
is only worth up to 15 years,
and it's discretionary with the
judge, is that one of the
reasons Mr Speaker generated
that you're bringing forth this
change in the bill.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, um
One of the main reasons that it
really shocks the conscience of
the
Affected family and Mr Speaker,
and generally I appreciate that,
because it it does shock their
conscious whenever I would tell
them that that is all they can
get if they're convicted of
second degree murder, and even
if they are convicted of it, the
judge still has discretion up to
15 years, So it's not even a
mandatory sentence. Is that
accurate? Mr. Speaker?
Generally, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, yes.
So I think that this isn't very
much This isn't really an
increased penalty. Mr Speaker.
Generally, I see it more as more
of a punishment for the crime,
Then, uh, increased penalty.
Just that we're trying to do
something. Mr Speaker, General
Lady that is more
Just and and also
Putting the proper way in of the
punishment to the person that
committed the crime and not not
an increased penalty, but more
of it. Let's let's hold these
people accountable when you take
the life of another human being.
We're not gonna put this out
there to the public that it's
only worth up to 15 years. Is
that the idea behind this
change? Mr Speaker generally.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Um,
murder is probably the worst
crime that can be committed.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, is it
not true that you can be
convicted of trafficking a
controlled substance? Second
offense, and it's a mandatory 18
years in prison yet you can kill
somebody, and it's only up to 15
years. Mr. Chair, Mr Speaker,
Gentle lady, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Um, that is correct. Um,
the actual, um, crime for
possession of drugs and
conviction.
Um, is up to 15 years and I'm
sorry, 18 years and the murder
The The sentencing for a murder
is 15 years so also for
kidnapping. Yes, Mr Speaker
generated first degree
kidnapping, um, in certain
certain circumstances is also a
mandatory 18 years in prison. No
discretion by the judge. Is that
true? Mr Speaker generally.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
So, Mr Speaker generally, I
don't think it's a huge leap
here that we are making it a
discretionary 18 years.
Where the judge decides the
sentence when you actually take
the life of a human being so, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, I think
this is actually a good,
reasonable fix. I would
obviously like to see it be
higher, But we are at a Let me
just ask you this Mr Speaker
generated what is a sentence for
a first degree murder. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
Um, I'm being told that it's 30
years.
Four and no good time.
All right, So we go from first
degree murder, which is
premeditated or felony murder,
And then we go down to second
degree murder and under the
current law drops down 15 years
from what the first degree first
degree murder is, Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
Speaker and General Lady, yes,
and that 30 years is mandatory.
Right, Mr Speaker. Generally,
That's why I don't think 18
years is it's actually very
conservative. Considering that
we're taking the life of a human
being. And we have other crimes
in the book that are a mandatory
18 years that don't involve
Killing somebody or murdering
somebody. Would you agree? Mr
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
All right. So let's talk about
the second change in the bill on
page to the attempted murder.
Can you explain a little bit
what you're trying to accomplish
with that part of the bill, Mr
Speaker, General Lady and
members. The current law is
three years and we are changing.
We are proposing to change that
to nine years, All right, And so
can you explain what the issue
is with the attempted second
degree murder and how that gets
confusing and difficult to
charge?
And and correlate that to the
penalty, please.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, could you repeat your
question? Can you explain kind
of the difficulty with attempted
second degree murder and what
the correlating penalties and
why that's kind of a difficult
crime to actually charge.
Okay. Um, my, um
My guest is telling me that, uh
Second degree drops two drops it
An attempted
Crime drops to three years,
right So in and just looking at,
Um sorry. I'm sorry. I thought
you were finished. Go ahead
generally.
So an attempted
Third degree murder drops to
three years.
Alright, So if you attempt to
commit a murder, but you're not
successful at it.
You basically can be punished by
up to three years because you
did not successfully complete
the murder.
That's correct, Mr Speaker and
General lady. So, Mr Speaker
generally when you amend this
part of the statute, making it a
basic sentence of imprisonment
is nine years Is that
discretionary or was that
mandatory, Mr Speaker and
Channel Lady? It's
discretionary 0 to 9.
Alright, So, Mr Speaker, General
lady, So all you're doing
basically with this is I think
in my line of work, this is
something I would generally
charges aggravated battery,
which would be a third degree
felony because it's a lot easier
to prove.
Because you don't have to prove
the intent to kill. So actually,
if you prove an intent to kill
with us attempted second degree
murder.
Part of the bill, you could get
this higher possible penalty of
nine years. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? General Lady Mountains.
I'm sorry, Mr Speaker and
General Lady. Yes. Alright. So,
Mr Speaker generally, It's not
something that's just going to
be
Used just randomly. It would,
You would have to actually prove
an intent to kill and then they
were not successful in the
completion of that that felony,
which was the murder?
Mr Speaker, General lady? Yes.
So, Mr Speaker. Generally that
makes a lot of sense to me
because I don't believe just
because you don't complete the
murder and maybe you stab
somebody a bunch of times, but
they don't die that you should
get a third degree felony and
only be punished up to three
years. I like that. The fact
that this is now up to nine
years in this bill, which gives
the judge
A chance to look at the facts of
the crime and decide the
punishment should actually be
higher. Mr Speaker in general,
ladies, So I like what that part
of the bill does also, so I
would just say.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady and
to the body that will this may
seem like it might be increased
penalties. It's actually just
being more equitable and looking
at balancing punishment with
with what actually is just and
we have to look at the fact that
we're talking about second
degree murder in this this bill,
Mr Speaker, General lady and
there are mandatory sentences
for
For trafficking and kidnapping
that are mandatory 18 years, But
you can murder somebody in the
state of New Mexico and get up
to 15 years. You could get five
years. Mr Speaker, General Lady,
you could get two years you
could get 15 years Is that
correct? Mr Speaker Gentlelady,
Mr. Speaker Generally the yes
and the second part of the bill.
That's just making an increased
penalty for
Attempted murder is just
acknowledging Mr Speaker,
General lady that there are
certain facts where you're
intending to kill and that
doesn't occur And now the judge
is going to have an option of up
to nine years for someone who
doesn't successfully complete
the murder. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Generally? Yes, Mr
Speaker and generally General
Ladies 0 to 9.
Thank you. And I appreciate you
going through that with me. I
know. We just heard this bill
this morning and judiciary so I
wanted to take a little bit of
time to go through it. I like
this bill. I think it's heard
It's been brought before and had
a lot of support, and I would
encourage the body to vote for
this because this is something
new Mexico needs. It is a slap
in the face to victims when you
tell them that their loved ones
murder is only worth up to 15
years.
And we're adding three years to
this, which is not extreme
considering first degree murder
is a 30 year sentence. And Mr
Speaker and generally when you
compare it to all of our
surrounding states, Mr Speaker
generally, I think we should be
a little concerned that we are
on the very, very low end of how
we're handling people who are
killed in the crime of second
degree murder. So I thank you,
Mr Speaker, General Lady and I
will yield there is for debate.
Let's go to the gentlemen from
Burnley your represented
Remember?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and will
the general lady from Bernie Leo
Yield
I will do yield to my neighbor
from Bruno, Leo. Thank you, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, the
General lady read did ask most
of the questions that I was
going to cover, but I wanted to
cover one more, um, and what it
is, if you'll act the senator
there.
The first degree and second
degree. They are both murders
that were planned. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Um,
they are both intentional
murders.
Hmm. And Mr Speaker, General
Lady and the body. It's
important to understand that
these are planned murders.
These weren't just all of a
sudden bar fight something like
that.
Ah, Mr Speaker and General Lady,
Um, would you ask the senator if
most
First degree murders.
Don't result in a, uh either
guilty or a finding of second
degree murder.
Speaker Um and gentlemen, What
I've been told is most of these
first degree murders are pled
down to second degree murders
and the reason for that is that
they are very hard to prove.
Mr Speaker and General lady, and
that's the point for the body
that they are very difficult to
prove.
And therefore most murderers
become second degree murders.
Actually had we caught the West
Mesa murderer who murdered the
women.
And and, uh, buried him in the
West Mesa. Those most likely
would have been second degree
murders. And it's important to
understand even though it was
somewhat of planning, they would
just have been second degree
murders. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, Thank you and again, like
Ah, the other representative.
Our urge everyone to vote. Yes,
on it. I think the penalty still
even with this bill is too soft.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that. You reminded us
of those murders on the
Southwest Mesa.
And they were all women.
There is for debate. Julie from
Dona Ana, representative
Ferrari. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the General lady from our
burn Leo yield.
Mr Speaker, I yield to the Lady
from Dona Ana County.
Thank you, General Lady. Mr.
Speaker. Um, this is really, um,
tough because what you're doing
is abolishing any distinction in
punishment between the attempted
first degree murder and
attempted second degree birder
Is that correct? General lady?
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker and General Lady in
terms of the maximum penalty 0
to 9, but but this is really
based on the facts.
Um
But doesn't the courts generally
recognize distinction in the
middle states and therefore the
moral culpability of these
crimes, noting that the
important distinction is between
the classes of 2nd and 1st
degree murders?
Mr Speaker in General Lady, the
judge does have discretion
Discretion between 0 to 9. And
the answer to your question is
yes.
Mr Speaker, General lady. Um it
seems like what we're trying to
do is if they can't get a first
degree murder attempt first
degree murder conviction, then
they'll go down to the second
degree murder conviction and
because you aren't having the
penalties, either, uh, being the
same or compressed to being the
same
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
you are making it so that, um
The prosecution doesn't have to
worry about it.
Um, proving the first degree
attempt.
Attempted first degree murder.
That they can just go ahead and
assume that they're going to get
the same amount of punishment at
the second degree.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Could you ask the question
because that was a little
confusing.
The prosecution as in the case
that representative rain was
talking about, Um, Mr Speaker,
General lady if they are
If they think it's a first
degree, attempted first degree
murder.
But because the punishment is
the same with this bill passed
if this bill passes
That it will be the same
punishment as a second degree
attempted murder, so they don't
have to worry about trying to
get the higher conviction at the
Mr Speaker General 80. Once
again, it's 0 to 9 based on the
facts.
Um, Mr Speaker and General
General Lady, um, the
prosecution and and probably
what you said is correct, but I
think the devil is in the
detail. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, um, that's quite a big
detail, not having to prove that
First degree attempted murder.
Um, which is supposed to be
reserved for more heinous crimes
rather than at the second, um
Degree murder attempt, and then
you are increasing to 18 years.
The penalty.
Not just the nine
Mr Speaker, General Lady if
someone dies in someone is
murdered, it's 18 years. If it's
an attempt, then it's 0 to 9.
Okay, so, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady, um
If they are
There is a success in murdering
someone and you have the same
penalty.
Um
At the first degree.
As well as the second degree of
18. There's no differentiation.
Mr Speaker generated this. That
is not this bill. Um first
degree is up is 30 years
maximum.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
What are you changing on Page
three line 11.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, we are
changing 15 to 18 years maximum.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady on
the first degree felony.
It is.
18 years. The same is that
correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, all
first degree murders. Hmm.
Sorry. Let me correct that.
All first degree felonies are 18
years mandatory.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
they are the same, then the
first degree in the second
degree.
Okay. The answer to that is no.
Um, the first degree felony is
18 years.
Mandatory. The second degree is
9029 years eight.
I'm sorry 0 to 18.
Under this bill.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
then we are back to
Mandatory 18. But then, for the
second degree up to 18 so they
can be found.
Instead of having to prove first
degree. You can assume that
going to a second degree murder
that it will be just as
It will be equal to a heinous
crime that should have been at
the first degree.
First degree murder is 30. Under
this bill, it's 0 to 18 2nd
degree is 0 to 18.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. Um I don't
see the deterrence that this
would have for anyone. Um, and
because, as you said, would be a
Crime of passion, most likely
and also Mr Speaker, General
Lady, Do you know how much more
this is going to cost for these
higher incarceration?
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
think the the intent of this
bill is for murder.
And the, um
The onus of taking someone's
life.
Is really the cost.
Of this
If we don't do something
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
think to abolish any distinction
between the punishments of first
degree and second degree. Um,
isn't right if you were to raise
both. Maybe, um, but I'm sorry.
I can't support your bill.
Thank you, gentle lady. There is
for the debate, Gentlemen, from
Burnley you representative the
La Cruz.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does
generally really yield
I yield to my colleague from
Berkeley County, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I want
to first thank you for bringing
this. Feel this bill to the
house floor. I want to thank
senator my estas for his work as
well.
The speaker. It's It's time that
we start to put some teeth into
our laws.
It's time for people to
understand that when you commit
a crime as
As heavy and as heinous a crime
as attempted murder murder that
there are serious consequences
are associated with that, Mr
Speaker, and so I absolutely
support this, and I urge the
body to support as well.
Um
You know, I I speaker. I come
from the South Valley of
Albuquerque, and we used to joke
around that he walked through
the South Valley. I shall fear
no evil, but the reality is that
there is evil amongst us.
And it's it's It's not only this
slaughter day, but it was that
we need to enact to show them
seriousness of what we are
trying to do to keep our
communities safe. Mr. Speaker.
Thank you.
See no further debate generated
close. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
will just remind the body Mr
Speaker that this bill has been
passed by the house in 2022 is
House Bill 79 House, Bill 112
and 2018. And just to clarify
again, we are changing this from
from murder.
For years for first degree to 30
years, maximum.
0 to 18 for second degree
murder, attempted murder 0 to 9.
0 to 9.
We are on final passage of
Centerville 96 your support.
With the urge of support from
the gentle lady now move that
Senate Bill.
96 to now pass your final
The boat's about to close.
The borders are closed by water
49 in the affirmative 18 in the
negative Senate, Bill 96 has the
lead past his house members
Continue on supplemental
calendar number one. We will go
to item number three.
Gentle lady from Brunelli. Your
representative Dixon, Are you
ready on that item? Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will you get me to
that point the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placed in Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for sent a
bill to 71 on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution. The generator to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Senate Bill 271 deals
with the procedure for holding
defendants who are charged with
another felony crime.
While they're already awaiting
trial for a felony offense.
See there is a great lady from
Chavez. Korean Roosevelt,
representative Reed
Mm hmm.
Thank you, Mr Speaker will the
generator yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to the gentle lady
from
Curry.
Can you explain what? Um
Crime. Mr Speaker, General Lady
This would actually affect the
underlying crime or the one
they're out on conditions of
release on or the new one. Mr.
Speaker generally.
Um, thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady. This bill
ensures that both judges, um,
look at the violation of the
conditions of release.
All right, Mr Speaker. Generally
just so I'm understanding
because I think we heard this
this morning. Also, I don't have
the bill in front of me. But
If you are arrested, let's say
for a burglary on a charge Mr
Speaker, General Lady, you'll be
let out because it's not a
violent crime under the new bond
roles are our new new rules,
basically, and so you'll be on
conditions of release. Is that
correct, Mr Speaker? Generally,
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
And one of those conditions of
release are that you do not
violate the laws that correct,
Mr. Speaker. Generally, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes.
All right, So let's say that
individual who is out on
conditions of release for
burglary, let's say commits
another burglary. What will
happen under this bill to the
bond on that case?
My sincere apologies. Mr Speaker
Generating. Could you repeat the
question? I had a little bit of
background noise, Mr. Speaker
generally. So if the person who
is out on bond for burglary
commits a new crime, which is a
violation of their conditions of
release, and that new crime
comes forth to the court or the
judge. What will happen like
what will happen under your bill
in the process.
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Both judges will hear and
consider whether they should be
released.
All right, and so
The but the new crime, Mr
Speaker, General Lady will will
be released on correct because
that's a nonviolent offense.
Let's say the second burglary.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. They
are held pending the hearing.
All right, But so what?
Generally What happens? Mr
Speaker generally is when
somebody is out on bond, and
they get arrested on a new
crime. Mr. Speaker generally,
let's say it's not a violent
crime they get automatically
released pretty much once they
go into jail. That's what we've
been calling the revolving door.
Is that true, Mr Speaker?
Generally, Mr Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, All right. And so the
body understands what this bill
does, it will focus on the
underlying crime where they
violated their conditions of
release. Um
So basically where you would
file a motion to review
conditions of release as a
prosecutor or a court basically,
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. Yes, it
would be looking at the
violation of the conditions of
release from the first crime.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady. Yes
from the first crime and so just
to be clear, Mr Speaker
generated that first crime
doesn't have the constitutional
requirements of the new rules
that we've come under. Now it's
just a violation of conditions
of release. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Gentlelady, Mr.
Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes, that
is correct.
And so this will have the court.
notify. Um I'm not exactly sure
who but there will be a process
in place where they will notify
the underlying judge from the
first case that they hate. This
person has been arrested now on
a new crime. Therefore, you
judge on the first case need to
take a look at this case and see
if this is somebody that needs
to be released or to be held,
and they'll be on a no bond
until the judge
Actually reviews the conditions
of release on the first case, Mr
Speaker. Generally, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. That is correct.
Thank you.
And I actually really like this
bill because I think it's it's
getting where we talked about
this in C. C. J earlier during
the intern, and, um, we had. I
think it was just as bacon in
there and we're talking about
the issue would not dealing with
the bond on the underlying first
charge, the very first charged
for violating conditions of
release, and so if we the
problem that I always found when
I was dealing with these repeat
offenders, let's say, Mr Speaker
generally on repeat burglaries,
maybe, you know, 15 burglaries
as you couldn't get into the
court fast enough.
By the time they set the
hearing, Mr Speaker generality
and so there's a time limit if
you're in custody of up to five
days to have a hearing. Is that
correct? Mr. Speaker,
Gentlelady, Mr. Speaker. Gentle
lady. Yes. Five days and if
you're out of jail what I would
find when I filed a motion to
review conditions of release
that I could never gotten in
front of the judge before they
had gotten out already and
committed a new crime.
Is that kind of the problem with
this revolving door, Mr Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. Yes.
That is part of the problem. And
so under this bill, we're just
basically putting a process in
place where the first judge will
review the conditions of release
because they have violated their
conditions of release by picking
up a new crime, which is clearly
something you're not allowed to
do when you're released.
You know, on on bond or released
just out on your own
recognizance. You have to follow
the law. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker? Gentle lady, Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady. That is
correct. I couldn't have said it
better myself.
Well, Mr Speaker. Generally. I
really like this bill because
this is something the problem I
just had was we could never get
into the court fast enough
before they got out and
committed another crime. So what
I like about this pills? It puts
that hold on them for up to five
days and reasonably, I think we
can pretty much be safe that a
judge is going to have these
hearings within a couple of
days, at least in my experience
when they're in custody.
But then he can, at least by the
desk. Look at the conditions of
release in the new charge and
see if there's an issue that he
needs to have a hearing and hold
the defendant or not. Hold the
defendant, Mr Speaker generally
so it still gives discretion to
the first judge. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker? Gentle
lady. That is correct. Yes,
alright. I just see this as a
bill that could really help fix.
This repeat offender revolving
door issue that we're constantly
hearing about on these
nonviolent offenses because you
really, you know, can't keep
getting out and committing
burglary after burglary and when
you can't get into the court and
one of the things we talked
about an interim is we probably
need to change that rule to
where when you're out of
custody, the court has to have a
hearing up to five days instead
of a reasonable time.
Which Mr Speaker generated, then
when actually be able to get you
in front of a court fast enough
before they get out and commit
another crime and keep
committing and committing, and
they just get into more trouble,
So it kind of helps.
The speaker went out kinda helps
everybody by doing this process,
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, um I
wholeheartedly agree.
I don't think this is a very
simple fix to what is a huge,
huge problem that we're seeing
on the news every single day. I
actually love this idea. I love
this bill. I 100% support it,
and I would encourage the body
to support it. Thank you See, no
further debate generated a
close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um I
moved that. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 271 do now pass. We are a
vital passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 271. The vote is
now
What about the clothes?
Get re opened up.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative 10 in
the negative.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 271
has duly passed his house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fairy
Ready and Item number two on
Supplemental calendar number
one. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will
you get me to that point at the
record reflect that all the
action is replacing Sanibel to
30 asked twice amended on final
passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Genitally gentle lady to explain
the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
will help you. And, um, um, do
better health research by
allowing them to access older
data. And with that I stand for
questions later. Close. Thank
you. Mr Speaker Right now move
that Senate Bill 230 is twice
amended. Do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Centerville to 30th twice
amended. The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The borders are closed by would
have 62 in the affirmative.
Three in the negative Senate,
Members. I'm going to direct
your attention to supplemental
calendar Number two is a
gentleman from Rio Arriba
sandals and Juan
Hmm. Ready on item number one
supplemental Calendar number
two.
I'm so ready, Mr Speaker. Thanks
getting to that point.
The record reflect that
elections are for placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 246 with an
emergency class has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
Gentlemen to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 246 reauthorizes
253 capital projects authorized
in previous years for from
various funds.
Estimated balance on these
projects include the bill.
As of January is $137 million,
and with that standard questions
Senior to be gentlemen, closed.
Mr Speaker, and I move that
Senate Bill 246 do not pass with
emergency clause. We are on
final passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for
Centerville 246 with an
emergency class.
The vote.
What is not closed, but I would
have 66 in the affirmative zero
in the negative.
Senate bill. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 246 with an emergency class
has really proud of his house.
Is that same gentleman ready
with item number two on the
supplemental calendar.
Yes, Mr Speaker, would you
please come into that point that
the record reflect that all
action necessary, placing Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 275, as amended with
an emergency class has been
taken, and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Senate Bill 275
appropriate $932.2 million in
General fund.
$73.5 million in other state
funds and $350 million in short
term seven tax bonds to more
than 1400 Capital projects
statewide. And with that, I
stand for questions.
There is a bait generating from
Brunelli, your representative
Dixon. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the gentleman yield Mr
Speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Braulio. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Um
Gentlemen, there's been a lot of
discussion of late about a
certain certain water project
and whether or not it would be
included in this bill. And so
I'm wondering, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, is their funding in
this bill for the governor's
strategic water supply.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. No,
there is not
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, how
much has the governor been
asking for for the strategic
water supply?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. The
total requested was $250
million.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, gentlemen. Um
You know, I think Capital outlay
is a very important part of what
the Legislature does in terms of
supporting our communities.
As we've discussed many times
this session.
Um, one of the concerns I have
is the impending reduction in
revenue that we're looking at
from oil and gas. And Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
I am disappointed that the
governor's initiative to
Support long term water.
Supply in this state and
diversify the economy through
water technologies is not
something that this Legislature
was able to support. Um I will
support the capital Outlay bill,
but I just would like to note
that I think it's unfortunate
that we were unable to do that.
Thank you very much, You know
for the debate.
The gentleman who closed Mr
Speaker and I move that Senate
Bill 275 do not pass.
Sort of. We're on final passage
of Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Centerville to 75
as amended.
With an emergency class.
The vote.
Is now.
Open.
What about the clothes?
Vote. Does that mean you don't
get your capital loudly? Can t v
it up?
What is not closed by a vote of
62 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 275, as amended with an
emergency class has duly passed
his house.
Alright members. I will direct
your attention.
To item number 26 on the regular
third reading calendar.
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo.
Are you ready on that point?
Yes, I am. Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
Director Deflect that election
is served, replacing Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Centerville 14 on
final passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is
essentially just continuing what
we did in in 23 with the
Healthcare Authority Department
Act, and with that I will stand
for questions to be delivered
Close. Mr Speaker. I move that
Senate Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 14 do
now pass. We're on final passage
of Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee substitute for
Well, it's about to close.
Was closed by a vote of 42 in
the affirmative 21 in the
negative.
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee substitute for
Centerville 14 has really passed
his house
lady from Dona Ana, Sierra and
Coral represented how to meet
you. Are you ready and item 33.
Mr Speaker, would you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
actions surfer place in
Centerville 175, as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
generated to explain the bill.
Mr Speaker. SB 175 Law
Enforcement fund distribution.
This bill will just distribute
35 million to state and local
law enforcement officers,
correctional officers and
probation and parole officer
Recruitment. Investing in
recruitment is an important
component of protecting and
improving public safety across
New Mexico, and I'm confident
that this bill will also improve
vacancy rates.
For that. I stand for questions,
seeing no debate generating
close.
Mr Speaker. I moved it. Senate
Bill.
175 do now pass. We are on final
passage of Senate Bill 175 as
What about the clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative.
One in the negative.
Senate Bill 175 as amended as
duly passed this house.
is that a senator I see over
there?
Um, my guy.
Members. I I will
Direct your attention.
Two concurrence Calendar number
two
We've got two items on that
calendar will first go to number
one.
Lady from Santa Fe are already
on that item.
Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker. I, uh I moved the
house concert. I move that the
house concur with the Senate
Amendments to House Bill seven
is twice amended.
Later explained the amendments.
Mr Speaker and body. The Senate
amendments to House Bill seven,
simply adjusted the date to
ensure that there would be no
fiscal impact in FY 25.
We have a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House Bill
seven is twice amended.
All those in favor of the motion
signify by saying I was supposed
to say.
The eyes have it. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill seven is twice
amended.
The Lady from Rio Arriba.
Sunday. 12,000 Santa Fe
represent a Beretta Are you
ready on concurrence? Calendar
number two. Item number two.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I move that the house concur.
Ah, with Senate Amendment to, um
Ah House Bill 211 as amended.
Did your lady to explain the
amendments? The amendment merely
took out a
Our one year pause in the
legislative approval for all
water project funds.
We have a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to house
Agriculture Cicadas. Water
Committee Substantive for House
Bill 211 is twice amended.
All those in favor to concur
signify by saying, Aye.
All supposed name.
The eyes have it. The households
concurred with house
agricultural sectors and water
resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 211 is twice
amended.
Young lady.
Since Jena leader from
Katherine's Valencia, Armstrong.
Are you ready? And item number
44 on the third reading
calendar.
We can come back to you. It's
okay.
60 plan.
Do you want from San Juan?
Already on that item? Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Give me to that
point.
At the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Centerville 169 as well as
amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. So sensible 169 revives
the Land and Water conservation
fund by expanding the
eligibility groups like
municipalities and so in water
conservation districts and
prioritizes
The federal natural is local
entities. And with that
assessment, any questions
Saying no debate.
Germany Close Mr Speaker. I
moved that Senate Bill 169 is
twice the men do now pass.
We are a final passage of Senate
Bill 169 is twice amended. The
The borders are closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate, Bill 169 is
twice amended as duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Burnley orbs of
Thompson.
Concurrence. Calendar number one
members. Item number one. Are
you ready on that item? Mr
Speaker? Mr. Speaker, I move
that the house can occur in
Senate amendments to house Bill.
Um 151 as amended.
The gentleman urged the body to
vote. Okay, um so it simplifies
the language. It applies to all
postsecondary institutions.
Policies shall reference an
affirmative consent standard
removes any implications of the
criminal legal system leaves the
evidence standard to Title nine
requires training programs for
employees.
Removes requirement for MOU
agreements partnerships with on
campus and community based
organizations.
Um, that universities now need
to implement an awareness
prevention programs and removes
definitions with references to
criminal statutes. Debate on the
motion to concur, Gentle lady
from Britain. Leon Torrance,
representative Lord Thank you,
Mr Speaker, Will the generality
from Berlin County, please
Yield. Mr Speaker. I yield
Okay, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
it looks like they completely
gutted the bill over there in
the Senate side.
So I do have some questions
because right off the bat
On page the first page because I
have amendments in context. I
know that's hard, but they took
out
Most of the wording
And then they basically struck
the entire bill.
And then rewrote it. So my
questions are
Have to go back to a whole new
section. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Okay and hold on Mr Speaker
Deli. There's a lot that's been
changed, so I have to
Get back to where we were to
where we're going. Okay, so it
looks like
In the original bill.
There was a long paragraph but a
postsecondary education
institution that receives state
funds for student financial
assistance. She'll adopt trauma,
informed policies and trauma,
informed responses from the
investigation. Allegations of
sexual assault.
Domestic violence, etcetera.
And that has now been changed to
A post secretary. Education
institutions shall dot
Policies and procedures. Why was
that? Do you know why that was
shut closed? What that was
reduced. So drastically. Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady it just
to simplify it.
Speaking generally, how do you
mean by simplify it? And in what
way? Was it simplified, Mr
Speaker? Generally, there's a
lot of changes in there that I'd
like to know about.
Mr Speaker and General Lady. It
just took out words that they
determined were not necessary.
Okay, Mr Springer, gentle lady,
So we have words like
Because I think you're incorrect
on that Mr Speaker generally
because it's it's a post
secondary education to shin that
receives state funds for student
financial assistant was that
moved into a different area. Mr
Speaker and General Lady Mr
Speaker in general Lady. As I
said in my, um
In my opening. It just now
applies to all post secondary
institutions.
Okay. Mr Speaker and generated
does define it later on, but
we'll get to that in just a
second. So Mr Speaker and Young
lady apologized to clear my
throat. I just had that
delicious salad.
Um, Mr Speaker Gentlelady, it
says in reference to affirmative
consent Standard.
In the determination whether
consent was given at all.
By all parties of sexual
activity.
So now we're talking about in
here. Consent.
And his consent the same as it
was before Mr Speaker didn't
later. How do you define this
consent, Mr Speaker, and
generally it's the same.
Mr Speaker, General. Ladies. So
now you're saying it's the same
as the person has to say yes.
And Mr Speaker promised I would
go gentle on this.
Starting from Ken. I hold your
hand. That's what we had before.
So that's the same, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen. Lady. Yes.
I was gentle.
Mr Speaker, Mr Regional lady
because it's a sensitive topic
and
And the last time I brought it
up, it was all the way through
any processes of that activity.
You're saying Yes. So last time
I had asked, and that's also in
a relationship. Correct. So if
I'm going out with somebody we
go out there on the 10th date. I
still have to ask him. Can I
hold your hand? Is that correct?
Mr Speaker Down, Lady?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
General Lady Yes.
Mr Speaker down, lady if they're
both in the college, and they're
both married. Does that mean
that every single time they hold
hands? Same thing applies for
marriage. They have to ask for
affirmative consent that can I
hold your hand.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Yes, Mr Speaker and young lady.
What? I'm sorry. I thought it
was. I can't see you. So I
thought you were doing something
to me, Mr sipping her gentle
lady. And if you don't say yes.
What does that mean?
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. It
doesn't mean yes.
And Mr Speaker generally. So
what are the repercussions if
You don't ask your married
partner to hold their hand. What
are the repercussions of not
saying yesterday? Mr Speaker?
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. As I said, In my
opening, there's nothing about
criminal. That's between the two
of you.
Hold on Mr Speaker. I'm wrapping
my head around that
Okay?
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
So
When we have these training
classes experience explain to me
how the training class looks
like. Is there some things in
here to agree with? If you're
passed out in your drunk
incapacitated? You can't say
yes, that's obviously we should
not be doing that, and I don't
have a problem with that.
But what are we teaching in the
class? Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
If
When we're teaching it.
The person's teaching the class
and they're saying, Okay, you
must ask for consent every time
you reach over and touched your
partner, even if you're married.
And if you don't do that,
That means X. What is X? Mr
Speaker and General Lady. As I
said, in my opening, it still
requires training programs for
weight. I'm sorry. It's the, um
Mr Speaker, and generally I'm
going to turn it over to my co
sponsor, representative, Um,
floor leader, Chasity.
Baker Lady from Bernie Leo, the
content of the training is not
included in this bill. So Mr
Speaker and young lady
I guess what? I'm trying to find
out and I didn't hear because
somebody was asking me a
question.
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, if
somebody's doing the training,
and they say, okay, I mean,
there's an obvious right. We all
agree. I don't think there's
anybody in this room. There's
nobody in this room that's going
to say you should not touch
somebody. When they're
incapacitated. We would all
agree that we should train
people to say you should protect
that person, not harm them.
But what are we saying? In the
training when we say to a
married couple that's going to
college?
Mr Speaker, Dear Lady.
You need to ask to hold their
hand or touch them or snuggle
them in bed or any of that
stuff. And if you don't it means
Mr Speaker and Lady from Berna.
Leo. What I said was, and it's
the same answer the content of
the training.
The answers and the teachings
are not in this bill.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady.
This is what the bill is about.
And this is what I'm trying to
get at. You want us to vote for
a bill that says if you're a
married couple, and you're in
bed
And you get up in the morning.
And I was just heard. You have
to ask to touch them again.
Well, hold on a second. I think
that we are on a concurrence
vote.
And the Senate amendments and we
don't need to go back and
revisit the bill. Over doing is
Debating whether or not to
concur with the Senate
amendments, Mr Speaker and then
later when I'm trying to get at
is they gutted the entire bill
and put a whole new bill in
there. It's everything is brand
new in here, so I just want to
know what is that training look
like Mr Speaker Generally. What?
What? What are we telling
somebody who's a college
student? If you touch somebody
without their consent?
That means
Mr Speaker and Lady from Berna.
Leo. I'm going to say the same
answer again.
The original bill, and this and
the amended bill do neither of
them contain information about
the training content.
And Mr Speaker down, Lady. I
won't belabor that anymore. But
there's the problem for me. I
don't know what we're telling
people because
I agree.
On the components.
That are in here where it says
that if somebody is doing
something they shouldn't you
should be protecting and not
harming.
But I'm looking what the word
I'm looking for. Mr Speaker.
General Lady is Are we telling
these people
That it is rape.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. The
standard is affirmative consent.
Mr Speaker. Generally, I can't
get an answer to that, and
that's problematic.
Because I'm trying to and
lasting missing this. Mr.
Speaker is that if you're laying
in bed with your partner and you
wake up in the morning and
you're snuggled together, I
don't know when to ask them for
a yes. So that's the big problem
with that, so
Okay?
Sorry, Mr Spirit interrupted, so
we go down here, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I agree. 1000% on the
part that is still in there
rewarded little different.
And that if somebody is asleep,
unconscious, incapacitated.
And under drugs, alcohol,
etcetera. I agree with that that
we should be teaching that
And we still have that Porsche
in there and furred silence once
again goes back to you have to
say yes. Even if you're married
every single time I've been
married for 10 years. You have
to ask that person Can I touch
you?
Revoked anytime I understand
that because rape does happen in
marriage. I understand that part
But with the problem is, where
is is there anything in here in
this new portion that talks
about?
Intent. Meaning if you're
American couple, let's just be
reasonable for one second, Mr.
Speaker Jelly if you're
reasonable.
You're married to somebody.
Okay. You're in bed with them.
What? Where does the intent come
into Where you're snuggling.
And they have to say yes,
because
That touch has bad intentions.
We are way off the Senate
amendments to house Bill 151 I I
appreciate the hypothetical but
we are way off the Senate
amendments. Okay, Mr Speaker
generally, but again, I don't
see any intention here now we
did do some changes because
there was a hot there. Mr
Speaker. There's a whole bunch
of changes on this porch.
On this portion.
Where it talked about before we
had
This group of individuals. I
don't see that anymore, but I
see
Um
Hold on one second.
Okay, right here.
Policy shall include appropriate
protections in any investigation
of offending conduct of the
parties and witnesses involved,
including confidentially. I need
clarification on that. What do
you mean by that? And by whom?
Who is? Is there? Somebody still
doing an investigation like
before or what do you mean in
this portion where it says
ticket investigation of
offending conduct, Mr Speaker
and General Lady.
Um, it leaves the evidence
standard to title nine.
Okay, so, Mr Speaker, jealous so
it keeps going backwards. Very
fresh with the title nine.
So someone is doing
investigation which I'm not
going to get an answer to and by
whom? And what That leads to
because if I think if I remember
correctly previously it was up
to the school to decide what
they were going to do. So we're
still at that point Is that
correct? Is that the same? And
this Mr Speaker and gentle lady,
Mr Speaker and General Lady it
it all goes back to Title nine.
And Mr Speaker, Dental lady that
goes back to my problem again
because of a school decides or
tunnel line says.
If a married couple
They touch each other, and that
was inappropriate. I would hate
for that to be in the rules of
that school to say, Well, the
punishment for that is we're
going to kick you out of school.
So I mean this
Mr Speaker, gentle lady, Um
So when it says in here with a
new wording that all parties to
participate and complain to
witness into Invesco, that was
the same, so that's exactly the
same. Is that correct? Where
If they say we saw that they're
not punished. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, General Lady if
there is some if they were
breaking some rules around,
drink, underage drinking,
etcetera that that will not be
that they can feel confident
reporting without getting in
trouble.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady that
that doesn't exclude because I
didn't see that so it doesn't
include somebody who is
Participating.
Or encouraging. It's just if
they happen to see it, because
if they're encouraging, wouldn't
they be part of the problem? Mr
Speaker Down, Lady?
Mr Speaker and Lady from
Virgilio. Um, Pardon us for
trading off here. But, um
This.
Allows the school to develop its
policy.
So that both the victim and the
respondent are the what about
the purported offending party
and the victim are protected.
Okay, Mr Speaker. Gentle lady.
So again, I have to assume,
since I'm going to get a vague
answer If I asked us that I
don't think that's a vague
answer. That's a various
straightforward answer. Based on
the Senate amendments to this
bill, Mr Speaker generated by
the part that's not mentioned.
Is there somebody if they were
encouraging what was happening
again if they witness, but
they're encouraging. That's a
whole different can of worms.
So, Mr Speaker, gentle lady, um,
when we talk about the
requirements for this training
program
Involved in investigation
allegations. So that is new
because we took out anybody
investigating but is gonna get
the same answer. That's going to
be title nine. And this And what
do you mean by reporting to law
enforcement? What are you trying
to train people And that portion
Can you please give a page
number and the line number? I'm
looking in amendments in
context, So it's on Page nine.
It's number three.
So, Mr Speaker and Lady from
Burnley. Oh, this is telling the
post secondary schools that they
must have a training program
further, um employees or
contractors who are involved in
investigating allegations of
offending conduct.
For counseling, healthcare and
reporting to law enforcement.
Okay, Give me one second. Mr
Speaker. I reread this.
Okay, Ms and ms Rigor. That's an
honest question because I
thought we had taken out people
that investigate.
But we still have people that
will be investigating these
things and then referring them
or training them how to report
or how to referral or explain
briefly explain to me what this
section means. What the section
means, Mr Speaker.
Different personally out is the
policies that it will be
necessary on the previous page
on eight B tell us what the
policies include. And
It includes that there be
requirements for this training
program. What we discussed in
the original debate.
Was about the fact that the
there's no party that can insist
that Vic, an alleged victim has
to go to the police. And that
was one that we learned from,
um, just our general criminal
laws, too, although this is not
about criminal law at all.
Right, Mr Speaker generally, so
if I understand correctly, the
choir mints of the training is
that you're going to train all
of those things.
And the part where it says on
reporting to law enforcement. So
then in that portion, you would
say to the students when they're
training that you don't have to
go to law enforcement. That part
of what? I'm understanding Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr
Speaker and Lady from Burnley l.
This is training for employees
and contractors, and they need
to learn about how to counsel
and advise regarding reporting
to law enforcement.
Okay, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady. So on I'm still on Page
nine.
So I I agree with the awareness
prevention programs.
I think that's hugely important
Bystander information, hugely
important risk reduction.
Uh, when you talk about on a
include a range of preventative
strategies, including
empowerment programs does that
include any kind of self
defense? Mr Speaker? Gentle
lady, Mr Speaker, Lady from
Wheel again.
This doesn't not tell us what
the training is. Your questions
continue to ask about what the
training is.
Well, Mr Speaker daily. I'm
trying to decide on what I want
to do with this bill. So that's
why it would Mr Speaker and
hypothetical line. It would be
great. If you said yes, it means
this. It means this, But you
keep saying title line, which
does Mr Speaker I'm trying to
keep to the occurred the
amendments to the bill, and I
think what that would mean is,
each institution will probably
have a different variation of
empowerment programming. So some
institutions may
Um
May do self defense. Others
might do something different. It
really depends on the
institution. I think it's a very
simple answer. Okay. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. And I completely I
like your answer. Thank you.
I was trying to get to Mr
Speaker down, Lady. It's the
frustrating thing with all this
bill has always been referred to
Title nine, and it would have
been so awesome if we had title
nine Page three, Section five.
Um
So on page 10.
We have When you talk about the
trauma and forced policy, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, it
means a system that considers a
widespread impact of trauma
because we changed the wording
on this.
So now we're talking about
trauma as all types of trauma is
that correct with physical and
psychological trauma, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady. We didn't
change that.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker Delaney. Okay, so
we're talking about trauma.
And re victimization.
When we go down, So is Section
five, exactly the same as it was
worded before on the new on the
new information opposed to what
we had before.
Mr Speaker, and generally
they're the same.
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
Um my vote again is going to be
knowing this because
I absolutely agree. We should
teach people do not touch people
when they're incapacitated. This
is what rape looks like. Don't
abuse people. Here's what
happens if you're involved in
domestic violence that part
I agree with
On Mr Speaker. Did I need to ask
for a roll call vote. Can I do
that now? Somebody just threw
that do we need to do a roll
call vote for this.
If you really want to.
Yes, Mr Speaker.
Hold on race 1234 missing some
people here.
Okay. You got real coke. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
So that I agree with having been
the victim of domestic violence.
I agree you should be teaching
young men and young women.
That this is what domestic
violence looks like. This is
what it does to you how to get
out of those situations,
training everybody and what to
look like what it looks like for
domestic violence.
Where you lose me, and I
understand you're trying to say
yes means yes, but the problem
is is we act for me personally,
It goes too far off in the weeds
when you're telling a married
couple that every single time
they touch each other.
They and you're shaking your
head, But you just said every
time they touch each other, they
have to have consent. So for me,
this is a very strong No. Had
you worded it differently. It's
just gonna be about training,
but I cannot agree to a married
couple that has to say yes,
every time but I can't get an
answer What That means, And I
would hate to have somebody
thrown out of school simply
because they got into an
argument in a relationship with
a married couple. They go
through divorce and say they
didn't give me consent, And that
means they get tossed a school
based on how the school does our
ruling.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. We are
on a motion by the gentle lady
from earlier two concurrent
Senate amendments to House Bill
151 as amended.
We have roll call vote. A vote
of yes, and the house would have
concurred with Senate amendments
would have known
In the house would not have 32nd
vote clock.
Was about to close.
What is that close by would have
38 in the affirmative 22 in the
negative. The House has
concurred.
With Senate amendments who has
been 151 as amended.
Members. I'm going to direct
your attention back to the
regular third reading calendar.
Here's the gentleman from Berna,
Leo, the best dressed man in the
Legislature. Is he ready for
item number? 37. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. That would be
representative Elaine.
I beg to differ. Go ahead,
gentlemen. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Would you get me to
that point, please record
effect That election has served,
replacing Senate Bill One way as
amended in front of pastors has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate of memory substitution.
I wish you would have said I was
the best recommend, but it's
okay. I guess gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. You're
the second best trust.
Yeah, Mr Speaker.
SB 108 establishes a fund in the
in the Department of Finance
Authority for the benefit of
elections and the secretary of
state's office.
Um
By doing this, it will no longer
the fund will no longer reside
within the secretary secretary
of state's office, as it does
now.
And it will create a more
realistic way of conducting
elections without having to come
to the Legislature every time
there is an over cost on the
elections because they almost
always cost more than
anticipated, So it requires a
secretary of state to come the
Legislature every time there is
a general election or major
elections. Sorry.
And with that, Mr Speaker, we
stand for questions.
See no debate, Gentlemen. Close.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I move
that SB 108 as amended. Now be
Now do pass.
We are a vital passage of
Centerville one away. It has
amended. The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 59 the affirmative five in
the negative Senate, Bill 108,
Lady.
From
Burn, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I knew if we go to
that order business messages,
Objection. It is order.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 239 has been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate and Open session
in return. Same here with
respectfully submitted. Sheri
Dillon, Senate chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 182 without emergency
clause in return, Same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Gentlemen from Do you worry, Bas
Sandoval.
Son. Juan. Are you ready on
item?
Number 46.
Yes, I'm ready. Mr. Speaker,
Please give me to that point.
With the record reflect that all
actions deserve replacing
Centerville to 17, as amended on
final passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate.
a member of substitution
gentlemen to explain the bill.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 217 makes an annual
transfer from the severance tax
bonding fund to the severance
tax permanent fund with that
stand for any questions.
See no debate. Gentlemen, Close
Mr Speaker and now move that
Senate Bill 217 do not pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 217 as amended.
The vote.
Is now open.
What about the clothes?
Enclosed by one of 62 and the
affirmative zero in the
negative, sent a bill to 17 as
Is a gentleman from
Brennan Leo McKinley,
She will on Socorro and
Valencia. Ready on item number
28.
Thank you, Mr Speaker him to
that point.
Are you sure can
But the record reflect that all
action necessary, replacing
Senate Bill 106, as twice
amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is
related to cultural affairs
creating its semi Queen
Centennial Commission to plan
promote and implement
celebrations.
Commemorating the 250
anniversary of the Declaration
of Independence and the finding
of the founding of the United
States of America.
Without L sample question, Mr
Speaker.
See no debate. Gentlemen, close
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that house Bill 106 as amended,
Do not pass.
No. Six s twice amended.
What is not closed by would have
61 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate, Bill 106 is
General lady from Santa Fairy
Ready and Item 34.
Regular calendar.
Yes, Mr Speaker. Would you get
me to that point reflect that
all action as a server places
Annabelle 241 with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken.
It is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generated to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
seeks to give the aging and long
term services Department the
authority to conduct background
checks on staff, potential staff
and volunteers that have access
to vulnerable adults and their
personal information.
The bill is also using FBI
compliant definitions to ensure
that the aging department can
conduct these background checks
With that I stand for questions,
debate generated a close
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I now
move that Senate Bill 241 with
the emergency clause do now
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 241 with an
emergency clause. The vote is
now open.
What about the clothes?
The board is now closed by a
vote of
63 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Centerville to 41
with an emergency class has to
be passed this house.
From San Juan. Are you ready on
item? 32, Mr. Speaker. Give me
to that point that the record
reflect that election has
served, replacing Senate Finance
Committee substitute for
Centerville. 148 on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate Amendment
of substitution. The general
meant to explain the bill. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. So Senate Bill
148 phases out of 3% fee that is
currently assessed on local
governments for collection.
And distribution of gross
receipts and compensating taxes
and allows those to remain our
local communities. And with
that, I stand for any questions.
Is there any weight?
See, there is a way gentlemen
from Chavez represented Hamburg.
So you know the big gentlemen
close.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I felt
introduce my expert who didn't
quite make it down. Mr. Tom
Haran was trying to get down the
stairs but appreciated. That's
wait.
So, Mr Mr Speaker. I move to do
pass the Senate Finance
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 148 Passage of Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 148.
The vote.
Is now.
Open.
What's about to close.
The votes are closed by what a
59 and the affirmative one in
the negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Centerville. 148
has duly passed this house.
Gentlemen, from Burnley or
preserve Romero. Are you ready?
An item 36 on the regular
calendar. Mr. Speaker, Can you
get me to that point record
reflect that election is surfer
places. Annabelle 76 on final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Senate Bill 76 would
correct an error from last
year's public school Capital
Outlay Bill.
This would allow for a few
school districts to qualify for
their local waiver. Local match
waiver without having to raise
property taxes with that, Mr
Speaker, I stand for questions.
Signal debate, Gentlemen close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
that Senate Bill 76 do now pass.
We are a vital passage of Senate
What about the clothes?
What is enclosed by what have 61
in the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate. Bill 76 has
really passed this house.
Gentlemen from going, Yana.
Are you ready? An item number
40. Mr. Speaker, Could you give
me to that point, please? Sure
can
That's a record reflect that all
actions served replacing Senate
floors, substitute for Senate
Tax, Business and Transportation
Committee substitute.
For Senate Bill 146, as amended
has been taken.
And it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
Gentlemen to explain the bill,
Mr Speaker, Senate Bill 146
annex in new section of the
Hospital Funding Act to provide
affordable placement pans
payment plans to patients under
certain circumstances With that,
I stand for questions.
See no debate, Gentlemen,
closed. Mr Speaker. I moved that
Senate tax Business
Transportation Committee
substitute for
Senate or Senate for substitute
for Senate tax business in Tax
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 146 as amended. Do now
pass We are on final passage of
Senate floor substitute for
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 146.
As amended.
The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative 24 in
the negative Senate floor
substitute for Senate tax
Business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 146 as amended
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. Are you
ready and item? 18? Yes, Mr.
Speaker. Will you get me to that
point that the record reflect
that election is served
replacing House, rural
development, Land grants and
cultural affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 251
and final pastors has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate Amendment of
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
I am bringing Smokey Bear again.
Um as a license plate, not a
sticker.
And I would stand for questions.
There is a big gentlemen from
Lincoln and representative
Vincent
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield
Yes, sir. I'll I'll yield to my
friend and co sponsor. Thank
you, Mr Speaker and gentlemen.
I wasn't going to vote for this
bill.
And because it was Smokey Bear's
80th birthday this year.
And I'm not going to call him
out by name, but I have
A request that there is an
individual here.
That does not like those license
plates. But
Smokey Bear was on specialist
sign Mint, and he was unable to
be here to ask for himself. So
I'm asking for
Everybody to vote for this bill.
It's a good license plate. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Time.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is for debate The
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe, Representative
McQueen. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. This
German yield
Mr Speaker. Do I have to?
Technically, no. Did you Mr
Speaker, all yield yield.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, you know,
it's got nothing to do with you,
and it's got nothing to do with
Smokey Bear.
Love, Smokey Bear. We just We
need a process and Mr Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I don't
make deals for votes. I want you
to know that
But but I'll tell you this
I'm gonna vote for your bill,
okay?
And I hope we all in a 60 Day
session.
Look at the way we do license
plates and just adopt some
standards and some policies and
some, you know some procedures,
so it's there.
Standardized, you know, so it's
not just
Random stuff here and there, So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Did you say you
were going to support the bill?
It that might have slipped out,
Mr Speaker.
The body is not closed. Wait a
minute. Wait, wait. We are final
path. Wait a minute, Back to the
gentleman too close. I'm I'm
really just shocked winds. Mr.
Speaker. I don't even have
words. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
With that. I move that house,
Rural Development, Land Grants
and cultural affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 251 do
now pass on final passage of
House Rule Development, Land
Grounds and Cultural Affairs
Committee. Substitute for House
Bill 251. The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of wait for it.
62 in the affirmative.
Zero when they're negative.
Man.
Hello. Plus for that one.
How's rural Development
Languages and cultural affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 251 has duly passed this
house. Where does that mean?
It's Marty Moose or Marty? The
Moose?
It's Marty. The moves for that
one. Good. It's out that the
jury is out on that one.
Does your leader from Berlioz's
bringing a bill?
To create a Marty the moose
license plate.
I've got generic bills. You want
one? We can run it real quick.
We've got time.
The Lady from Sun Devil Burn.
Leo, are you ready on item
number?
45
I am. Mr. Speaker. Could you get
me to that point at the record
reflect that all action is a
surfer place in Centerville to
16, as amended on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members of the body. This is
Senate Bill 216. It means the
New Mexico Finance Authority Act
by making housing and eligible
public project.
And making a profit. Nonprofit
housing developer qualified
entity, allowing the local
government planning fund to be
used for affordable housing
plans.
And the amendment of SB 216
amends in Section two of the
bill, the local government
planning fun to allow funds to
be used to pay for flood
inundation maps and obtain
archaeological clearance, which
soil and water conservation
districts need to maintain
compliance with the office of
the state engineers for Dry
Dams.
And my expert witness here is
Marcato Russell from the New
Mexico Finance Authority. And I
stand for questions. Mr Speaker
Debate generator Close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
But
Yeah. Let em sorry. Wasn't ready
for that. That's never happened
before. Um
I now move the Senate Bill 216
as amended to pass
We are on final passage. Passage
of Centerville to 16 as amended.
The vote.
Was about to close.
The vote is not closed by vote
of 54 in the affirmative.
Seven in the negative, sent a
bill to 16 as amended has duly
passed this house.
Gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan. Are you
ready on item?
31
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Would you
get me to that point The record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing Senate
Bill 142 on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Mr Speaker,
Members of the House bill one
for creates a notice I'm gonna
have you borrow your neighbors
microphone because it is really
choppy.
Apologies for that. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Members of the House Senate Bill
142 creates a notification
requirement for behavioral
health facilities.
The legislation, addresses
increasing issues and missing
native Americans near the
Arizona border.
Mr Speaker. I stand for
questions. Debate generated a
close. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
move Senate Bill 14 to do now
pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
What about the clothes?
The board is not closed by a
vote of 61 and the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate.
Gentlemen from Berlioz's Ebola
McKinley's San Juan's According
Valencia, You ready on item 27.
Mr Speaker were given to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for places
Senate
Tax, Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute percentage
Bill 88 on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker Credentials in acting at
the electronic conventional,
Zach to allow the Taxation
Revenue Department to issue
electronic credentials for
driver's license and
identification.
Mr Speaker. MBD will develop in
a secure and cost free mobile
driver's license for New
Mexico's who make sure drivers
who have a license.
This will not be violated.
Voluntary, Mr. Speaker tamper
questions.
Saying no debate.
The gentleman to close
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Move
Senate bill Business and
Transportation Committee
Substitute for ability do now
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate.
Tax, Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 88 vote
Is now.
Open.
But but close the vote is now
the vote is no close by would
observe
53 in the affirmative aid in the
negative Senate.
Tax, Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 88 has duly passed this
house.
Gentlemen from Berna, Leo.
Are you ready? An item 38.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Is that a senator next to you?
It is Mr Speaker, Senator
Padilla. We don't allow senators
who in third reading
On the last day of session.
Except for him. He's all right.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 128 aligns all safety
retirement plans it similarly
identically and it is supported
by para, and it can be absorbed
into the fund at 128%. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I stand for
questions that point first.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can you
give me that point election
necessary for police in
Centerville 128 is amended. The
final message has been taken. It
is not subject to debate.
Remember substitution?
The gentleman already explained
the bill is their debate.
It's got to be some questions on
this one. Are there questions
for the Senate sponsor?
You know, Debate jump into
close. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
SB 128 now do pass.
We're on final passage of
Centerville 128 is amended.
The vote is now open.
I was about to close.
The voters are closed by word of
61 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate Bill 128 as
amended.
Has duly passed this house.
Supposed to be off.
That Rod Montoya.
Context. Right members. We're
gonna go back. Well, we are
already there.
But we took a break.
Back to third reading we're
going to go to and we're almost
done. By the way. We're just
running all over this agenda.
The Lady from Bern, Elio
representative figures.
Are you ready on Item number?
39? Yes, Mr. Speaker, Would you
get me to that point the record
This bill amends the Cyber
Security Act.
To provide minimal standards of
cybersecurity allow the office
to do security assessments for
executive agencies.
And to develop cyber security
awareness and training
standards. With that, I stand
for questions.
See no debate later, too close.
Mr Speaker. I move. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 129 as amended, Do now pass
We have final passage of Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate health.
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 129
as amended. The vote is now
open.
But close what is not closed,
but vote of 58 in the
affirmative zero in the
negative.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health
Public Affairs Committee sub
Super Centerville 129 as
amended, easily passed his
house by Senator No more bills
for you.
You're welcome. Yes, I know.
I've heard.
Lady from Bergamelli, your
representative Casey.
Are you ready? An item number
35.
Mr Speaker. I am. Um, this is
Senate Joint Resolution one.
That the record reflect that
election is served, replacing
Senate Rules Committee
substitute percentage to Dish
Senate Rules Committee something
Super Senate Joint Resolution
one as amended has been taken
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
ladies and gentlemen of the
house. We This is something we
have discussed in courts,
corrections and justice for so
many years. Um, what this would
do is change the allow the
voters to change the
Constitution.
To enable the dean of New Mexico
School of Law to appoint a
designee to chair the judicial
nominating commission on on
occasion.
Stand for questions signal
debate later close. Mr Speaker.
I move that Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Joint resolution. One is
amended. Do now pass.
We are a final passage of Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Joint Resolution one as
amended
The vote is now open.
Was not closed by a vote of 55
in the affirmative six in the
negative. Senate Rules Committee
Substitute for Senate for Senate
Joint Resolution One as amended
has duly passed this house
Deleted from Dona Ana, already
an item 30.
Hmm. Hmm. I am. Mr Speaker.
Could you get me to that point
that election is a service,
replacing Centerville 127 as
amended on final passage has
been taken.
And it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
generator to explain the bill,
Mr Speaker, prescribing
psychologists have been treating
patients since 2004, but they've
never been able to prescribe
medications that treat side
effects for the drugs. They
prescribe. This bill enables
them to do that. And with that,
Mr Speaker, I stand for
questions.
See no debate related to close
Mr Speaker. I asked that, uh,
Senate Bill 127 do not pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 127 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Is not closed, not yet was about
to close.
The vote is now close by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, four
and the negative Senate Bill
127, as amended, has duly passed
his house.
Remembers. We just went through
the entire list of bills.
Can you can clamp Well, then
Good job. Good job to all of
you.
Gentle lady from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker Now being 1159 am I
hope we adjourn until 1201 PM
will come to order Mr Speaker. I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended. The journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session of
disordered Mr Speaker. I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and
approval.
Of the rules in order of
business committee. Objection.
It is ordered.
Generated from early. Oh,
Do we have speaker? I move. We
go to that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is so
ordered.
Announcements.
General Lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Your
House Judiciary Committee will
not be meeting anymore until the
end of session.
Hmm.
The session is young still have
12 hours to go.
Just saying
Member saying note Any other
announcements. Gentlemen from
Dona Ana, Mr Speaker. As of now
your house Appropriations and
finance committee is not
scheduled to meet
Thank you, Mr Speaker, but that
could change in the next 12
hours. It could Mr Speaker
Let's hope it doesn't
Member said No general man from
their river Santo Santo violence
and Juan
Good night, Mr Speaker.
Members take note.
Anyone else mints?
Right?
I need a new mike.
Come on, Ramiro.
Lady from her, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I moved the house
down in recess until 830
tomorrow morning. February 15th
2024, Mr Speaker.
We want to replay 830 Come on.
You don't get a shop at 10
anyway, so
