Give us a minute here to
So, Madam Chair, members to my
left is Secretary Chardon Clark,
the uh secretary of Texan
Revenue.
As I was saying, it is critical
for our assessors and we have
some assessors here this morning
that can also speak as well. Uh,
I think we're ready to move this
bill forward if the committee
pleases because of the
constitutional amendment.
We are ready for questions, but
I'm sure.
Madam Chair, I believe there is
a committee substitute that was
provided to the committee within
the time limit, so I would move
that committee substitute for
discussion and I believe we need
photocopies of it.
Madam
I'm sure we also have a
substitute of.
I'm
Madam Floor leader has moved,
uh, for
Discussion on committee
substitute for House Bill 47.
Would you, uh, please read the
202 number and begin.
Thank you, I'm sure I'm gonna
have the secretary.
Good morning, members of the
committee and Madam Chair, it's
nice to be here with you. Uh,
the
Committee substitute for House
Bill 47 should be 229957.1.
Madam Chair, if it's the
pleasure of the committee, I can
talk a little bit about what
this substitute does? OK. Um,
this actually is a Texan Rev
agency bill. This, uh, committee
substitute simplifies versus
what was in the originally
pre-filed bill, and basically it
takes this bill down to just
implementing the two
constitutional amendments and as
a reminder of what those were um
in the 2023 legislature, there
were two House joint
resolutions, resolutions 5 and 6
that passed the legislature and
we're um overwhelmingly
approved.
By the electorate at the general
election in November 2024, and
they expanded property tax
relief for veterans. The first
one is fairly simple. There's
been an existing veterans
property tax exemption for any
veteran or their surviving
spouse at $4000 per veteran, and
that is being increased from
$4000 to $10,000 and that can be
seen as an inflation adjustment,
as it hasn't, it wasn't, um, it
didn't adjust for inflation for
many years. The constitutional
amendment also provides for that
10.
00 $0 to be adjusted for
inflation going forward, so it
will keep its purchasing power.
That's the first, the 2nd
Amendment has to do with
disabled veterans, uh,
previously, the Constitution
provided a 100% exemption for
100% service disabled veterans,
but if you were less than 100%
disabled as a veteran, you
received no relief under that.
The new constitutional amendment
provides a prorated property tax
exemption. So if you're a 10%
disabled veteran, you'll receive
a 10% exemption and, and so on.
And so basically the
Constitution has been amended,
and now we
just need to make the state
statutes conform with the new
language.
Thank you. Now, let's go.
To the audience.
Uh, please raise your hand in
the audience if you um are in
support of this.
OK.
So please, let's uh do quickly
one minute and let's begin with
the side of the room, sand and
state your name.
Carry and I'm here as a
representative. I'm here as a
representative for VFW American
Legion military Officers
Association, the Veterans
Center, and the Vietnam Veterans
of America, which we stand in
strong support of this bill, um.
For a couple of reasons, um, I
understand the offset of
exemption concerns by the
public, um, and I'm hoping that
tax and rev will be able to um
do the calculations for that
because I have not seen the
calculations on the offsets yet.
Uh, the second thing is, uh,
this makes the state more
veteran ready. We often hear
being in the state as veteran
friendly, however, veteran ready
is a much more appropriate term.
Say, we are ready to receive
veterans from around the country
to settle here in New Mexico.
I'm one of those veterans I
moved here 3 years ago and I
moved here specifically because
of the goals. Uh, the last thing
is um
There is some concern amongst
the veteran groups with regard
to overlapping of the old HJR 5
and HGR 6 and that needs to be
clarified. It's not clarified in
the bill, but I'm hoping it gets
clarified in the rules
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee.
Hi, good morning. I'm uh
Secretary James Sannoetta. I'm
the uh secretary of Veteran
Services, and we stand in
overwhelming support of this as
a indicated by our our fellow
citizens voting overwhelmingly
for this to be passed.
Madam Chairman, but the
committee, my name is Damian
Lara. I'm the chair for the
assessors affiliate legislative
Committee with me today is the
chair, assessor Romero as well,
and his, uh, assistor Joaquin
from uh Ri River County. Um, the
affiliate is in support of the
substitute, so we would do ask
that you do it, do not pass on
the bill, but I do pass on the
committee substitute uh has been
previously mentioned, um, the
assessors affiliates does
understand that this is a uh
streamlined bill that leaves
Any questions unanswered, um,
which we will need to have
answered as the session moves
forward, but in to ensure that
timely notice of values are
mailed out and that we have a
clear implementation date both
for the 10,000 as well as the
percentage of disability, we
would ask that the committee
move this bill forward and that
we take up those questions on an
under under another bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name's Joyce Sparson. I'm the
executive director for Nexo
Counties, um, based on the
recommendations of the
affiliate, we expect a support
official position when our
executive committee meets
tomorrow. I did want to commend
TRD property Tax LFC, um, we
have had a lot of people at the
table discussing how to navigate
this in order to meet the goals
that were passed by the voters,
and it is complex. We found
some.
unintended things that were
working through, but with that
we're delighted to be at this
point with the substitute. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Alan
Martinez, one of the co-sponsors
of this bill, uh, but also the
former deputy secretary of
Veteran Services on behalf of
the 140,000 men and women who
protected our freedom.
This is something that needs to
be done.
Um, it's long overdue.
Like the secretary said, it has
not been adjusted in probably 20
years.
Um, and this is a small way.
That the state and the counties
can say thank you for those that
stood in the gap and protected
us. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Joaquin Valdez. I'm the Revaca
assessor, and I stand in support
of this substitute bill. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Sherman McCorkle. I'm
here on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
This is a very important bill
for the state of New Mexico. It
brings to life two voter
approved constitutional
amendments. These amendments
provide property tax relief for
all veterans and special relief
for those who served at least 6
continuous years were honorably
discharged because of her
service-related energy.
We commend the sponsor, and we
note that every, that this bill
enjoys broad bipartisan support,
the greater Albuquerque chamber
