Thank you thank you very.
Background noise and
I am having as I hearing
impaired and having a lot of
difficulty hearing anything at
all and then I think that
there's too much back.
So yeah we can't hear you that
well.
And and there's a lot of
background noise.
Those are you are not speaking
in New it'll make life a lot
easier.
Okay cool.
Madam.
Okay Representative Baca.
Representative bash
Representative black.
Thank you for your.
Okay by Representative bunga.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Rubio.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Patricia Roybal.
Representative but the family by
W..
I'm sorry
chair.
They're all gone.
A non zero.
Okay so I think we can establish
the fact that we do have a
quorum well not like to do real
quick give everybody a couple of
minutes to introduce themselves
and I'll go ahead and start with
the way they're listed here on
my a participant list of my
panelists this so we'll start
Representative Miguel Garcia do
introduce yourself for the
membership.
We went to the US the the US
just the model chairman.
And the last three.
Committee members
you get our see our.
Can you so if you're can you
mute yourself there's a lot of
background information coming.
From you.
Yes Representative house
district fourteen.
I'm in my.
Twenty six year.
We are not as a state
representative.
I
I served on this committee as
chairman.
From two thousand five to
Two thousand and fifteen.
Which was
The year that our Republican
colleagues took control of the
house.
And
you know and I asked to be put
on this committee.
every time.
my district is house district
fourteen.
Redistricting I include all of
the south Broadway community.
in that within the the sale but
that can also a the old but it
lasts community.
Also within the city of Boca and
I crossed the Rio Grande and and
all that the school which is an
unincorporated area of Orange
County.
And which was established
for settlements in the sixteen
forties by my great grandpa to
the north power.
The attorney Chavis and
reestablished as a Spanish
language after the pueblo revolt
of sixteen eighty.
in sixteen ninety two was
established as a Spanish land
grant by my great grandpa to the
thank our.
for non attorney Thomas in my
district that extends all the
way out to the west central
precincts and of a blue collar
Chicano neighborhood in the
Alamosa area and then I have
further west these are precincts
within the city of uppercut Care
and further west in the Stinson
tower area I have kind of a
fairly new subdivisions gated
communities.
Dominantly middle class the
native Chicanos and also first
generation Mexican Americans and
You know my district the the cop
to.
zip codes.
For coronavirus infections are
in my district eight seven one
two one and eight seven one oh
five but we're lucky that
Things are moving in a positive
direction and it's always an
honor estimates chairman to
serve on this committee and
participate in terms of a
experience and knowledge that I
have with labor and and working
class issues.
Yes the miniature.
Thank you representative will I
wonder because thank you Mr
chairman.
Let me see I will go down to
Representative a black.
Thank you Mr and it's a pleasure
to be here today and to be on
the lovely labor committee once
again
I am in my.
This is my fourth year I guess.
I'm still a sophomore I'm I'm
Representative racial black I
represent district fifty one
which is grow and Otero County
I have a military base just
right outside my back door
commented for spaces that
Large printer we're or people in
my area the majority of of.
Jobs in a terror canyon provided
by homeowners were spaced I'm in
the civilian sector so I'm very
proud to have that in my
neighborhood
and I guess.
I'm looking forward to getting
through these bills today some
of them look really good and I
think we've talked about these.
In the interim so I'm looking
for this thank you.
I forget to on mute I'm
Representative I knew member of
Kate one PL and please correct
me if I didn't pronounce that
right.
Thank you Mr chairman that's an
honor to serve with you and the
committee member's name name and
Representative table and go here
really quick and I was newly
appointed if you think I was so
I am really excited to be with
you are having gotten to
redistricting and now you're at
thirty thank I represent house
district nineteen and which is
inclusive of the international
district spans across southeast
Albuquerque and with the excited
said to be here and right thank
you.
Thank you madam Representative
and welcome to the burden
veterans
New C. at the the only that if
they have is a madam vice chair.
Excuse me and good afternoon to
you and to members of the
committee and the public are my
name is but but if you have a
bunch of A. L. and I am happy to
serve once again of the vice
chair of this committee and I
have a little history maybe not
so much with the committee are
in the house but with certainly
with Mr chair and I have been on
together as chair and vice chair
in the other during the pre I
guess premium I I I don't know
where but since I got elected
the consumer public affairs
committee so we both serve
together on that committee for
about six years and
member currently serving
together and then I have a long
history in labor the labor
organizer over fifty years
probably now and and also I am
the proud daughter of eight
three one of that right
World War to Normandy
eighty second airborne father
Karia war prisoner of war
And purple heart recipient and
took to our duty of green beret
special forces
in Vietnam and so I come with
Heart and soul into rules
committee and I look forward to
a story a lot of work to get
them and involve thank you Mr
chairman welcome to all the
committee members I knew
committee members welcome to you
as well and just remember that
that we are currently are you
can call upon us at anytime and
in any way to help guide
and particularly my role is to
help guide us through and make
sure that everything runs on.
Yes yes possible together with
the staff hello to all the staff
to welcome back to those of you
familiar faces thank you so
much.
Thank you madam vice chair and I
see that the our other new
representative Representative
brand black guys doing that
would you list Representative
back I introduce yourself.
Representative back are you
there.
Yes good afternoon
I am Representative Brian Baca
I'm from Valencia County
district eight.
I too have a come from military
falls a family and so I am
honored to be here and work with
you guys.
That I I am here with the.
Representative the least that
also this and the his ruling is
not working I do want to point
you sitting here with me in the
in the conference room committee
room so we're trying to get him
set up as well.
Did I miss you buddy thank you a
representative to back up.
Am I missing anybody.
Okay what is that let's start
with the Michelle Lujan shot
wanted to introduce yourself and
tell the folks with your job
this.
Hi everybody and welcome to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee on
your committee analyst I've been
working here with chairman I'll
call on and vice chair Patricia
Roybal Caballero now for five
years on this committee and we
do some really good work for
both of the labor secretary and
the veterans and military
secretary and I'm very excited
about the group and have been
since they joined the the
veterans and and the labor
committees together because I
feel like we're all working
people and we all deserve a
voice and so I appreciate being
here and I appreciate working
with all of you so thank you.
K. Jennifer Jennifer I thought
beyond.
Hi everyone I'm Jennifer I in I
am an economist with the LFC I
committed the FIR for this for
one of the bills we're hearing
today so is standing by if you
have any questions I'm happy to
help thank you for having me
thank you Kathleen Kathleen G.
G..
Good afternoon chairman and and
Committee members I'm pleased to
be back again for the six year
with ocean for Committee and its
various incarnations good to see
you again I live in Albuquerque
and am a resident of district
nineteen with my neighbor and
honored to be serving with my
new Representative broke on this
committee and welcome her.
And let's see so I work between
the session I've been doing
primarily strategy and policy
consulting and community
engagement program evaluation
both independently and with the
U. N. M. design planning
assistance centers so I've had
actually been able to follow
some of the things that come out
of this committee in the
legislature which is.
It's a good thing I think so
anyway thank you.
Thank you okay miss anybody.
You better speak up work because
the.
I'd rather a.
As forgiveness that in the be
found guilty.
I'll okay with that in mind
Mr.
Would you introduce yourself Hey
good afternoon chairman I'm
Clinton Turner on the fiscal
analyst for the Legislative
Council Service and as always
not here to oppose are
supporting legislation but as
Jennifer your staff to help
answer any questions and so the
civically on house bill forty
eight Representative Brown has
asked me to be here and help
support anything I can for you
this afternoon thank you and
madam secretary my right hand us
the would you introduce
yourself.
Hello my name is yes starts and
I have been with this committee
for I think six sessions already
I was in here last year I enjoy
this committee a lot and
I am a retired teacher.
I.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you madam Terry
I know a any time you see that
by punctuation that being
corrected you don't lie I.
J. again I don't think I've
missed anybody I am a
representative of the many say
only a long I refers to the
district six with this by to see
what admittedly County I guess
somehow or another I in the
labor and veterans because I
have a hi both sides have made
them I am a previous member of a
well as OC a W. two dash seven
oh eight which is the uranium
miners in grand New Mexico and
just a thirty year over thirty
year old they out.
The advanced we do to be a you
stored I had no idea I was going
to do that they drafted me they
just sit your **** and do it
that's all there is to it so I
became a union steward for a
section thirty and did that tell
the the day that they send us
phone with our our with our
severance checks that any wiring
but a severance check and then
again I am the old Vietnam
veteran.
that getting older I served in
Vietnam again I got drafted I
did not join the military I'll
never judge of very they came
for review they sent me a letter
of president Richard Nixon
signed that invited me to served
three years and
I ended up should we expect the
nineteen months and one day in
the military.
And the today that is probably
the best investment the time
that I ever made in my life and
there's the benefits are really
good not I'm no man so that they
are welcoming everybody to
committee I want you to know
that my door is always open I if
you have a problem you have a
question holler at me don't be
scared I mean the worst I can do
is say no your course throughout
my we all know that the we
accept a lot of nose in our
lifetime.
The more knows that yes is
sometimes so wide open door
don't forget that you have any
questions you have any problems
somehow another you think that
you did something wrong let me
know sometimes I think I'm
always right.
So with that that madam
secretary I think we can get the
work in the we got there.
Brought the yellow here you go.
The two of us us thank you for
coming of the lord are you Mr
chair I I think there's two
Brian Bacchus no way I can make
some some some probably whenever
I vote if it doesn't simple
parable it'll be on Mr Bacchus.
Well voting record.
Can I just wanted to to say how
are you Representative and and
chairman you doing okay is K.
nice to see everybody at United
you're supposed to smile we're
starting out already it's our
first.
Good anyway if you read my my
deal is as Representative Brian
Baca because he shared his own
somehow I couldn't it wasn't
coming up on my computer so I'm
sure we can fix that
and you just assessors ourselves
up for everybody else that that
you know doesn't know or hasn't
met me from from district thirty
nine currently.
Grant.
Sierra you know that would
through did redistricting and
changed a little bit I'll be
grants to rural and catching
County but the I'm gonna enjoy
being on the I I enjoy this this
committee a lot and I love
working with all the people here
so look forward to being a
positive part of wonderful
committee thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative you
like I said earlier I do not
stay in state thank you for
signing away to join us what do
we mean just so with that you
get from work and I think that
we have a house bill fifty and I
believe was the Representative
Brown.
Is all zoom is a panelist and
Is there anybody else with you
Representative you brown I will
turn the floor over to you
hello said the hot seat is yours
are.
Are you here Representative
route yes Mr chairman I I I am
here and I have house bill forty
eight.
is that something you want to
start with yes ma'am.
What you have right that's the
one.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee so
we are honored to be the first
bill have the first bill being
heard in the committee and we
look forward to having our co
sponsors say a few words in a
few minutes I I believe Mr chair
that many if not all of them are
on siblings and other committees
so I hope we can at page them
and when the time is right.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill forty eight
are proposes to exempt social
security retirement income from
the New Mexico personal income
tax.
others and I have co sponsored
this bill in previous years
our goal has always been to
achieve tax relief for retirees
and so a lot of what you hear
today we're going to abbreviate
it because we've had this
discussion on several occasions
in the past through several
sessions.
but I did want to start off by
talking about what has changed
since we last have those
discussions well one and maybe
two other states have now left
the list of states that tax
social security income.
I know that Nebraska announced
in September that it was doing
so and I I think I heard through
the grapevine that another state
is moving in that direction so I
believe that we're down to only
eleven states that tax SSI.
The other thing that has changed
is that governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham has expressed her
support recently for repealing
the social security tax.
And so what this has done is
heightened anticipation that
this is the year that this bill
will pass and that we can
provide immediate tax relief for
all retirees.
we've we've also noted in the
past and I'll just start by
getting this out there Mr chair
that low income retirees New
Mexico currently are exempt from
having to pay tax on social
security they have twenty five
thousand dollars a lap or less
in income they do not pay any of
this tax.
House bill forty eight would
provide a modicum of tax relief
retire retirees mostly in the
middle bracket and we think
that's a meritorious goal.
Especially because Mr chairman
we all know it if you go to the
grocery store like I do or you
fill up your car with fuel you
know that inflation has really
been eating away at the value of
the dollar so it's not just
groceries and fuel but just
about everything seems to have
gone up in price and this is
especially felt in rural parts
of the state and also felt
especially for those who live on
a fixed income.
we know that.
the Social Security
Administration has provided at a
cost of living adjustment of
just under six percent but
already that amount has been
eroded by inflation so we're
we're still just barely treading
water I think.
So Mister chairman house bill
forty eight would provide some
much needed relief and I think
that in terms of tax policy and
how we do things in New Mexico
ideally everyone should enjoy
some benefits when we we have
our tax structure in place.
it has been estimated that the
average tax relief amount would
be four hundred and seventy two
dollars a year and again that's
an average of would be somewhat
lesser somewhat more depending
on the income level of the
retiree.
So the figure I kind of want to
start with Mr chair is fifty
thousand a year in in retirement
income and quite frankly that is
not a lot to live on anymore
whatever retirees pay rent a lot
of them do not own their own
home yet all right so they have
rent or mortgage many of them
have car payments
they need food and clothing and
medical care and all those
things and so fifty thousand
dollars doesn't go very far the
estimated
amount of money they would still
they would have in their pocket
would be just over seven hundred
dollars at that income range if
this bill were to pass and be
enacted into law.
Sh so as I mentioned earlier
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
is supporting this legislation
this year and I think that has
it really given us all hope that
this will be the year that that
we get this done.
The downside of for going the
tax revenue would be in the
order of around a hundred and
eighty two million dollars
according to the fiscal impact
report on this bill so there is
a downside but there's also an
upside and that upside is
something that the fiscal impact
report does not quantify and
that is there are benefits that
would be felt from repealing the
tax.
In New Mexico we don't do
dynamic scoring so we really
kind of just look at the
negative side of the of revenue
collection but failed to figure
in or calculate the fact that if
retirees have more money they're
going to spend more and these
extra dollars would circulate to
the New Mexico economy.
So we can expound on those those
ideas if you'd like but right
now Mr chairman and members I'd
like to see if any of our co
sponsors are
with us at this time and they
are Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Representative Pettigrew
Representative Sweetser and
Representative Dow and Mr chair
I'm not sure if any of those are
with this screen okay Mr chair
My office mate Representative
Gail Armstrong is here I'm gonna
let her have the camera.
Thank you Mr chairman although I
believe the we do legally
allowed for you to share
Cameron's.
You.
Go ahead I just wanted to to be
sure that you'll be safe okay
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for having the honor of
being the first bill heard in
your committee I would just like
to reiterate what representative
Catherine brown and has said in
the past and
and reiterate some of the emails
that I've received saying.
Since this legislation has been
introduced to the governor has
been in favor of it this year
people are willing to possibly
stay in New Mexico retire here
when they were thinking about
leaving.
So I too I'm a big proponent of
repealing this tax I know there
is a cost to it and I I realize
that but I think in a time of a
pandemic and the issues that are
facing work with issues we're
facing with inflation but now is
the time and the year that we
have a plethora of money our
this May be possibly the year
that we can get this done thank
you Mr chairman for allowing me
to speak.
Thank you.
Representative rent.
Yes Mr chairman I again I don't
know who else might be on that
list if they don't speak up.
again Representative Sweetser
Pettigrew and down and if
they're not where we can see
them then perhaps we could just
of the questions.
Checks.
Thank you what I will allow it
this time is I will go to the
attendees added there's anybody
wishes to speak I want to raise
your hand raise your hand raised
their hand of the people that
was to speak up please the
while.
I shouldn't say that but I think
thank you and I'm not getting.
I just.
As you speak please remember us
limit the two but the minutes
please try not to repeat put
everybody else it gets boring
after awhile do hear everybody
saying the same thing over and
over again so with that in mind
I will go to the that the list
Liz and all star with the tree
a.
If you are you there.
We.
Your mute button maybe we can
hear you.
Okay.
We we roster let's go to Mr date
that impregnate that.
Are you there.
Your honor.
Can you hear me now I can hear
you now
thank you and I'm the executive
director of think to Mexico
which is a public policy think
tank serving New Mexicans and we
support all I bills that have
been introduced so far to repeal
the tax on social security
income we came to this issue
when we stumbled across the fact
in twenty twenty that sixty two
percent of New Mexico adults
have ten thousand dollars or
less saved for their retirement
that means they're going to try
to make it pretty much on social
security alone but as you
probably know social security
was designed by President
Roosevelt in the Congress as the
supplement not as your sole
source of income in retirement
so we put out a report called
solving the hitting Crisis
and it's about achieving
retirement security for all New
Mexicans and one of the
recommendations in that report
was that we repeal this tax
because it's really
counterproductive for so many
New Mexicans to have to pay this
tax when they don't have enough
saved for their retirement.
and so we want to also thank
these sponsors who have been
caring this bill since this
report came out I believe this
is the third year in a row and
kudos as well to our governor
for supporting it this year so
three quick points that I want
to make I just mentioned were
one of only twelve states of
North Dakota Representative
Brown is the most recent state
in the last year that repeal
this tax.
And it's also considered the
second harshest of those twelve
states because it kicks in at
such a low amount twenty eight
thousand five hundred so people
making twenty nine thousand
thirty thousand thirty five
forty thousand are paying this
tax and I don't think they're
living especially large right
now.
The second point is we don't
taxes any other public benefits
like Medicare Medicaid Tanith
food stamps those are not
subject to tax so not be subject
to tax either similarly with
four oh one K. plans and
individual retirement accounts
individuals are tax just once
either one the person puts the
money in Michael Roth IRA or
when they take it out like a
traditional IRA or four oh one
K. not both here with social
security tax they're being taxed
when they put it in and when
they yes I think about and thank
you Mr chairman for allowing me
to testify today I'd really
appreciate it.
Thank you Mr dates and I will go
to allow.
Please forgive me if I missed
this one up of I'm here with me.
Hello can you hear me.
We can hear you yes
Representative correct the way I
ask your name no worries to Mr
chair see but let me I'm the
associate state director for
advocacy for A. A. R. P. New
Mexico thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf
of A. R. P. New Mexico's two
hundred fifty two thousand
members statewide.
Meeting the tax on social
security benefits is one of A.
A. R. P. stop priorities in New
Mexico in most recent week we
got the opportunity to conduct a
survey of New Mexico voters age
fifty and over to gauge their
opinions on state taxation of
social security benefits and the
results were overwhelmingly in
support of eliminating this tax
burden entirely.
Now this will help lower and
middle income New Mexicans who
face increased health care and
utility costs as well as rises
in the cost of necessities like
groceries and medication in
addition it will help retirees
who have limited options for
rejoining the work force and
little time to increase their
income and their savings we
believe in a complete exemption
of the tax like twenty nine
other states around the country
doing this would immediately
help preserve the financial
security of middle class
retirees and their families
especially retirees who tell us
that they are using their social
security to help care for their
own parents their spouses and
more often grandparents are
taking on the financial
challenge of raising or helping
take care of their
grandchildren.
House bill forty eight protects
the financial security of all
the New Mexicans helping them
keep the benefits they worked so
hard to earn over their
lifetimes and that's why A. A.
R. P. New Mexico strongly
supports this bill thank you.
Thank you Sir this will they be
able to.
Thank you.
Oops.
I'm ready to go okay.
Chairman outcome can you hear
me.
We can hear you I thank you very
much sorry for the confusion
thank you chairman I'll come
members of the committee
particularly the new members of
the committee it's nice to see
you my name is JD Bullington and
I'm a lobbyist representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce and we support house
bill forty eight only a dozen
states taxable social security
income and our tax on social
security is one of the most
onerous of those twelve people
here pay income taxes on the
money they put into social
security and then they get taxed
again is budget so far most of
the rest of the nation has
realize this doesn't make much
sense and New Mexico should
follow suit New Mexico can and
should strive to be one of the
best places in America to retire
and policies like taxing social
security benefits run counter to
that goal thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Evelyn Evelyn the
number out of.
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak my name is
Evelyn been a grotto I represent
the GPN and rural caucus
statewide and speak in strong
favor of this bill as you of
course know the demographics of
rural New Mexico lean heavily
toward a senior population many
on fixed incomes who would
benefit directly from repealing
the social security tax thank
you for your support of HB forty
eight.
Go back to the.
Carlos Carlos on thank.
Are are you there.
Absolutely Mr chair this is Leri
Sonntag of course the had to
step into another committee
hearing but that that you would
allow it I would.
What like to go to the state
this is not that go ahead Sir
I'm representing the New Mexico
business coalition on behalf of
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans we
fully support house bill forty
eight and thank the sponsor and
those who spoke in the forming
of a covered quite a few of the
positive points I won't repeat
those I just want to say that
our military retirees have
proven their value to our state
and nation by their service and
the fact is retirees usually it
and how almost all cases become
very productive members of any
community in which they choose
to leave hello we fully support
the incentivizing that in fact
New Mexico business coalition
thanks that our state should
join a number of other states
that the lemonade all income tax
this would be a great start
honoring and incentivizing our
veterans to stay in retiring New
Mexico with fully support HB
forty eight encouraging you to
do the same thank you I think
you've got the wrong guy let's
see the.
Okay we'll go to Mr Jordan Bill
Jordan.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children
we really appreciate what the
sponsors of this bill and the
other bills like it are trying
to do I think you all know we've
been champions of trying to help
those in need of for several
decades.
Unfortunately it's pretty clear
from the fiscal impact report
that these proposals do not help
those who need the most in fact
it would make our tax system
more regressive and give yet
another tax break to meet you
don't need it.
The fiscal impact report
confirms and this is a quote the
aging and long term services
department points out that
seniors with adjusted gross
income two to three times the
poverty level do not pay taxes
and will see no impact from this
bill two to three times the
poverty level they get nothing.
We believe they're just much
better ways to help those
seniors who really need our
help.
New Mexico clearly have a high
rate of poverty and a lot of
needs we just don't believe that
we need to spend a hundred
twenty million a year up to a
hundred forty million a year and
a couple years or another tax
break that will provide no
relief at all for seniors who
needed the most they're left out
of all these bills they get not
one dollar nothing nada zip.
I would add that the newest
report of the national movers
study.
Shows that people are moving to
New Mexico at a higher rate than
Arizona Colorado or Texas more
retirees are moving to New
Mexico then are leaving to
Mexico.
I know all of this sounds
counterintuitive.
And it maybe it doesn't make
sense that we're to a lot of.
Losing this legislation because
we know what's well intended but
we respectively respectfully
urge your opposition because of
the high cost and the fact that
it really does not achieve the
goals of helping those who need
it the most thank you.
Thank you Sir Mister Mason.
Richard are you there.
Richard Mason.
Yes madam chair members the
committee my name is Dick Mason
and I'm chair the action
committee of the league of women
voters of New Mexico and you
know I'm here to speak in
opposition to H. H. B. forty
eight.
The system to about positions
and eight believes that attack
our tax system should be
progressive in citrus is flat
across the board debt relief and
we think it actually makes a tax
system more regressive I'm any
all they also believe that tax
system should generate revenues
enough adequate defines
essentials of government and in
in this exemption as a.
Pointed out is state is going to
cost about a hundred twenty
million
and just a low income senior
myself who does not rate
you know taxes on social
security and benefits a lot from
state it Services
I think this is a long term
would affect seniors like maybe
so I do are do you have to give
in I do not pass on eight
hundred HP forty eight thank
you.
Thank you Sir well equipped to
treat not trouble opens.
I thank you Mr chair can you
hear me.
Thank you hear you a great so hi
my name is Katrina how term
Lopez in the cabinet secretary
for aging and long term services
thank you for allowing me to
speak in favor of this bill so
New Mexicans especially our
seniors they it is true many of
them are low income and it is
true that some will not receive
benefits from this however many
will and many of our seniors we
had forums over the last week
and a half with seniors and with
legislators talking about what
their needs and what their wants
are.
There there.
Top three things that they want
within the top three is the the
relief from taxes from their
social security that's one thing
that we've all heard loud and
clear I urge you to support this
bill our seniors expressly those
who live in rural areas and on
the front tier areas aren't
getting the type of services
that they need they need that
money in their pocket and many
of them are raising their
grandchildren I need support and
help in doing that so please
with the if the interest rates
going up I urge you to support
this and anyone who doesn't need
you know that that the the tax
reduction such as Mr Jordan we
encouraging me you can go online
and you can give us your your
your your income tax so we
appreciate your support on this
bill and thank you for allowing
me to speak.
Mr Lyndsay live in Senate
Cutler.
Good afternoon we Mr chairman
and members the committee my
name is Lindsay Cutler and I'm
an attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
We we echo the comments of our
colleagues at the New Mexico
voices for children we do oppose
this legislation is it doesn't
target low income seniors as as
others have stated a large
pursue social security income is
is for low income seniors
already exempted and we believe
that tax really should be
narrowly targeted to the seniors
who need the most and and and
then in their early target
exemption is necessary to pants
equity and fairness in our state
policy also in our state tax
policy so for those reasons Mr
chairman and members of the
committee we we oppose this
legislation ask ask for do not
pass.
Thank you
Well I think I've seen everybody
so I will go back to the
committee of back to
Representative Brown.
Do you have anything to add
before I go to the committee.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity I am I would like to
make a closing statement instead
and I just start with questions
from the committee thank you.
Yes you want to go to the to the
committee first okay your grace
let's see hadn't raced here.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Anderson you're not on the
committee that we are.
well it's because I'm dyslexic.
Anyway may I make a comment
please yes you got the minutes
thank you I'll be able thank you
Mr chairman and I apologize for
the confusion I'm John Anderson
and I Representative New Mexico
bankers association on I in
particular talking on behalf of
our trust committee.
We believe and I'm gonna take a
slightly different approach on
this we believe that that one of
the reasons states do not tax so
security.
Is that basically to.
As a tax development who will.
we think that there's a
incredible opportunity here to
recruit seniors to our state.
To basically are become very
active in buying real estate.
And having their trust for
example are set up here in New
Mexico utilizing legal and
dressed Services CPA services
and what not just becoming very
very important services to the
state as we've seen in Arizona
Florida Alabama Georgia and
other states that don't tax
social security I think in many
respects I just what was
listening to a a RP
Representative a minute ago and
for those of us that.
Do in fact as described to the a
a RP magazine.
There's constantly a reminder
that regal okay seniors to mild
climate tax friendly states and
it seems to me that it's very
unusual for New Mexico we are
one of those states that surely
say recommended by A. R. P.
magazine or for many of us we
read that age age and is in a
very important document.
finally I do not know but
of seniors main to the state of
New Mexico in terms of their
economy but I think it's huge I
was recently reading an article
House seniors in Arizona are
enrolling in their universities
mentoring students buying
property near the universities
and just acting as volunteers
for all sorts purposes around
and about the university
settings.
Us there's no reason that this
can't be happening here in New
Mexico as something that we
would certainly encourage cell
we think that clearly there's
some loss of revenue to the
general fund.
But I think that overall there's
going to be a huge an influx of
seniors who are going to be
participating in the economy in
New Mexico we shouldn't overlook
that thank you so much Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir and now I'll go to
the committee I believe I have
and raise the Representative
Rachel black.
You Mr chairman and
Representative Brown to bring
this legislation I think it's a
very important piece of
legislation as I believe in
interim committee over the
summer and and their recess
statistic that was thrown around
about the population of New
Mexico how.
Everyone is aging we're in our
we're population is growing more
and more in the upper over sixty
sixty five classified area so I
think this is a really important
piece of legislation I realize
that you know we will it will
cost the general fund one point
two million but.
That's that can be offset it and
so I just wanted to to voice my
support for this bill and thank
you for bringing it thank you Mr
chairman.
I have anybody else who wishes
to comment on the legislation.
The only ones going twice Madam
vice chair are you you don't.
Mr chairman I believe
Representative Baca has his
handout it's.
Thank you thank you sorry that's
okay I know for sure that you
forwarded my his presume to me.
Representative us us are you
thank you Mr chair I just want
to thank our Representative
Brown for their continued
efforts I know that we all feel.
Those people here for and
against it but.
I think it is a something that
we have to do is it in New
Mexico all together to keep up
with the other I don't know
whatever it is a thirty eight
states that already have done
this I can't remember was twelve
that haven't and I think you
just it's it's like when you're
going to store you have a what
is called a loss leader and you
go to the back to the store to
get your milk and you know what
on the way to pick up some
groceries along the way.
I believe that there's going to
be in some of those people that
that we're just that we're
talking about that will move to
New Mexico will come for that
reason the state are.
they consider New Mexico are.
A place to retire because of the
tax bracket or the tax.
Implications of pecan on
possibly.
Have to pay and so the the
problem is.
That it just goes up.
In the face of gives a bad in in
several on going to pay tax on
my screen security so I just I
think it's a way I'm struggling
with my mask sorry Mr chair
What we're what we're trying to
do is make New Mexico a place
that people when they come
welcoming and retire and and
know that they don't have to pay
those taxes and test was gonna
help for those people that have
a tax bracket above that but
those people that are below that
I think it's twenty five
thousand dollar mark regain
their standard deduction they're
already not paying taxes so yes
it won't benefit them directly
but if we think about it if
these people from are moving
here Mr chair.
To New Mexico for the purpose of
retirement and purchased a home
in the start spending some of
their money through of gross
receipts and other other methods
of scope of expenditures
it will offset itself I believe
we're gonna have some so more
revenue coming from that and it
just it makes New Mexico look
that much better as not just for
its beauty and its and its
landscapes but.
And the weather that we have
that we're blessed with no
tornadoes or hail storms
increasing just like that it's
just one more thing that we can.
Make New Mexico just that much
more attractive so we appreciate
that and and those people have
worked hard for their there are
for the retirement and it's.
Maybe they have some additional
income and so well what's wrong
with that and so I I I'm in very
much in.
In support of this and I'm glad
that Representative brown and
and other sponsors have taken
the initiative to continue the
fight in in making New Mexico
equal to other states that have
done this thank you so much Mr.
Thank you Representative
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for committee members who
came out in support of this and
those who also did not
For me I'm looking at some of
the demographic numbers and
correct me if I'm wrong that and
seeing that thirty nine percent
of our population change in New
Mexico by age group in the last
ten years was with a sixty five
and older population whereas.
In those under eighteen Shushi
creates eighteen turned twenty
four and negative four percent
increase in population change
over the ten years and just a
very minor increase in twenty
five of forty four year olds in
New Mexico so for any wind
sympathetic and I'd like to see
this for our seniors in general
for it to not be targeted for
our low income seniors sorry not
be paying taxes on social
security and this for me as a
question around equity and who
needs to resources and most I I
would love to see it that money
played into
those who are are younger and
busy.
Have more resources for our
families who are currently
working so for me well again I
appreciate everybody's comments
and for the sponsors of the
spell I just wanted to reiterate
that I'm looking at this too and
equity land so.
Mr Chairman.
Okay Representative the black
guy are you I see your hand
raised.
Is that you are Representative
us of Mr Chairman this is Brian
Baca and thank you for allowing
me to speak on the self
About this legislation.
As a legislator I think we have
the responsibility to take care
of those folks in the health of
those folks in greatest need
that's a job that we all take
very seriously I take very
service my responsibility
understanding that it may not
there may be some people that
may not affect some people may
not be the help but as we sit
here we make resolutions I
definitely believe that this
bill will help.
Individuals across the state
that are dependent upon social
security for their.
For there is far as for the
live meeting for just the cost
of living so I do Senate support
of this bill.
Thank you Mr.
Would you like to have a second
shot at this.
Hi Mr chairman I just want to I
would like to make a most wanted
to appropriate okay thank you I
will go back to you.
Madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chair and I I am
I'm having difficulty all on and
off but it keeps getting dropped
off but anyway thank you Mr
chair I I wanted.
Okay we lost you.
I'm trying to bring up I'm sorry
and I'm telling you my film and
having a lot of problem with
that right now I'm not the one
moving the buttons I don't know
why but anyway I'm putting up
the FIR right now and I wanted
to ask Representative
Walk.
Question before you get there
I you know I am I am
In strong alliances with some of
the statements that were made
on in opposition and the reason
I am is I'm I sat on tax and
revenue for many many years for
many years and one of the key
questions that we always
entertaining on taxed ram had to
do with the close association
between tax cuts and revenue
generation and if you're gonna
go along the path of tax cuts
then there's got to be a plan in
place for how you're going to
generate the lost revenue.
And
I heard Mr chair someone on
mention that
there was not a plan and it
might have been on
Representative Brown I'm not
sure to generate on the lost the
the great amount it's a large
amount of
Loss of revenue and I also noted
in some of the.
Presentations that
For those that.
The money that the spirit of why
we do what we do especially in
the area of trying to balance
the tax and revenue.
Balance
is that.
We want to be able to help those
that
are not are those that are low
income bottom line in our state
is primarily working poor and
low income we don't have
we don't have the revenue base
we don't have the income based
on and we're just now getting in
the position of being able to
Look at viable long term revenue
generation so my question is and
I'm looking in the
Thank you
Substantive issues are
significant issues.
And I'm curious on to notes
Representative Brown is you know
we we set in motion the need to
be able to make sure legislation
that would be our.
The measure of whether it needs
legislative tax fairness and
equity standards because
whenever we want to act we want
to make sure that we're
addressing on equity and
fairness and that we do it
across the board especially when
we're looking at tax cuts can
you tell me how this bill meet
those standards Representative.
Mr Chairman representative
remote career I really do
appreciate that question I think
if we were to ask retirees what
they think about the equity of
being taxed on income
on the front end of when they
had to put the the the payroll
deduction and and then getting
taxed again at the end they
would say that is not equitable
so they're actually being taxed
twice.
And you know that's a fairness
issue I think and I think that's
kind of the the bottom line when
we talk to retirees and ask you
know what what would help them
the most this is one of the
things that does come up and
this notion there was a poll
recently and they they cite this
as something that that really
matters to them so you know Mr
Chairman representative you know
states are free to decide their
tax policy but as a person who
also sat on the tax revenue
committee in the house.
And as someone who served on the
board of directors of New Mexico
southern New Mexico legal
services and later New Mexico
legal aid for twenty seven years
I am most sympathetic to those
who are poor.
What we do things for the poor
more than we do for anybody else
so they only you're not only do
they not get taxed on their
social security income beyond
that that are beyond that
certain level with their other
programs that are in existence
to benefit them so the question
is you know we're doing a lot
for the poor and that's a good
thing but what about everybody
else why shouldn't our tax
policy include everyone else's
well and that's to me and equity
in a fairness issue as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and that really
draws our our lines along on our
ideological friends of course
because we all know and it's
well substantiated in our state
that we are the poorest state
it's not it's not one of the two
our state and nation on so our
hired we have the highest
poverty rates we have the
poorest educational right we
have
as was mentioned earlier large
number of retirees that are on
fixed social security which
places them on of poverty or
below have already level so the
vast majority of our populations
need to benefit from Mr chair
ways in which we can generate
quality of living and ways in
which we can generate our
programs and policies that will.
Those that are living in poverty
and and working poor environment
and not our focus on using the
generic or general term of
retirees in order to be able to
that place Mr chair on everyone
else under that
of that standards
hello in my book Mr chair of the
standard number is you know on
how it relates to the overall
demographics and of our state
and are we actually benefiting
the largest sector of retirees
that have the benefit of living
on
four oh one K. retirement plans
or other types of plans best
men's and drawing on social
security and I would answer Mr
chair and representative that
that's what we're doing with
with this the language in this
bill and the F. I. R. is is just
loaded with
data and statistics to
substantiate why is that we we
should not
going that position at this
especially at this time and so
Mister chair and and
Representative I think also I
saw somewhere
that.
If we don't address
Balancing our.
Revenues in order to be able to
address
times a period when we don't
have
when we don't have the benefit
of having to hi Revenue and then
we don't balance it with wives
tax policy
Then it will have some residual
effects because we do know that
we have retirees that are are
poor on fixed income many of
them just primarily on social
security and we don't want to
have any adverse effects on our.
tax cuts.
In a virtually affecting things
like.
Increase sales tax or other ways
to buffer or are set offset so I
think there are a lot of reasons
that were substantiated
not only by those that spoken in
opposition but also in the
analysis and I would State.
Mr Chairman representative that
this is a good example of this
bill is a very good example of
having the ultimate benefit of
benefiting those who have and
those that have not do not have
so that's all Mr chair I don't
have any further questions I
just wanted to
reiterate my strong position in
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair I the
list that Representative black
guy has the stand up again not
to one another shot at this.
Mr chair.
This is representative of the
process.
One or sorry we're sure that
seems only I just want to real
quickly and I thank you all the
the representative putting on
the wrong road how it'll for her
comments it reminded me and
that's I'm glad you brought it
up because I want to remind the
committee why we started from.
Taxable security was in the
early nineties I believe it is
nineteen ninety.
In New Mexico decided that they
wanted to the actual security
to balance the budget.
It was supposed to be just that
one time we're we're just gonna
take the that we're just gonna
taxed this justice time to
balance the budget and after
that.
Will a quit doing that and here
we are thirty two what is it
thirty two years later.
We're still taxing that it's
hard when what I guess when you
say you're gonna do something
and then you get used to that
income but it's time to make
that promise a whole it was
supposed to be that one here now
we're thirty two years behind
and so hopefully today our
committee will will not support
Representative Brown Mr chair in
the in in in making that promise
whole thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative I guess
that leads me last.
I'm just a couple.
A couple ideas that I have back
to our representative do we just
spoke about.
It was really the federal
government who did the.
That that some social security
in nineteen ninety.
And forces stated New Mexico
follows whatever British federal
government does and allows those
exemptions and those taxes
follow through on our state
taxes this game because of an
accident on by federal law by
federal statute of federal law.
Number two is.
I am I go through the numbers
and I you know the last the last
the last year.
We did a real big actually for
moms.
Our our Majority Leader led the.
The battle on this one and not a
lot of people that's a I mean it
will it was thanks awesome thank
you important for the people of
the state of New Mexico the
state the people of the state of
New Mexico a lot of money.
And because of that action that
we did last year.
We're looking at you know I keep
on hearing again and again the
eggs bothers me when I look at
the newspapers and I hear does
they are.
People should not they taxes on
social security.
People do not think that is
under social security.
That's all there is to it if you
look at the text tables a single
person single person in the
state of New Mexico at sixty
five years and older well it's
not the taxes until they have a
taxable income of over twenty
four thousand seven hundred
fifty dollars for the state of
New Mexico to prove you're sixty
five years or older and your
social security check and
everything else that you may not
go over well but me four
thousand seven hundred fifty
dollars you pay zero dollars in
New Mexico taxes.
So this.
What bothers me is that we're
we're thank you for this month
this idea of tax of not taxing
social security.
And we're helping you.
The.
Privilege people listed in New
Mexico what did not we're doing
is helping those that have the
money.
That middle class group and
above.
That do pay taxes on their
social security because they
have a retirement likely selves
you're you're totally self so
honestly this bill would help me
as I pay the state income tax
because of my retirement and the
the fact that I have social
security so it takes me about
that twenty four thousand seven
hundred and fifty dollar your
bracket.
So it would help me a lot but
what will do for the rest of the
million people to New Mexico
we're looking at a hit.
In the looking at the if I if I
are in.
In fiscal year twenty three were
looking at a hundred and
eighteen million dollars hundred
eighty million dollars a hit to
to to the coffers of the state
in New Mexico.
What we were to take a hundred
ninety million dollars and find
a way to rebate that money all
those people are making under
twenty four thousand seven
hundred and fifty dollars a year
what would that do would be fun
to be.
Did you know that those people
that are low income.
They're not going to put it in
the bank you're going to spend
it you know what happens when
people spend money money makes
money.
That's all there is to it what
would you put it in the bank.
To make money yes the vapors.
So.
That's it you know I I heard the
public that the.
The people.
We'll get the break the because
they don't have any money saved.
Well the only ones that are
going to get the break of the
ones that do have money say.
The people that have but that
don't have money saved are the
people that need help that need
help.
With the people that have money
saved we're not trying to find a
way to.
Get more money so they can save
some more money so the banks
could make more money.
And that's where I have my but
in my heart we're going to build
right at the next to allocate
personally you know how we.
R. the state of New Mexico at
the will get hurt.
And honestly we should be ready
in a way to get this money back
to the people of the state of
New Mexico that.
We need to help that they can
get out there and make their
lives better but with that in
mind the Representative Brown
I'll go back to you for your
call to the state.
Yes thank you very much Mr
chairman and I do appreciate of
the committees questions and
comments but I would just like
to close by saying that we need
to remember who made who worked
many years to put money aside
for retirement in the social
security system.
It's their money.
And
you know they've been already
taxed once and the other being
taxed twice and that again is
the fundamental unfairness.
If someone's making to twenty
five thousand dollars a year
plus a dollar.
There it it just it I would like
the committee to consider Sir
people who.
Are below the poverty level and
again we've all agreed they
don't pay any social security
tax.
But we have to remember there
are many people from there
heading up towards the middle.
It's not the state's money it's
it's the money that they
you know the state earned
through the years and so it is
important that we give them the
benefit of their years of work
without having it be eroded.
So I believe that there are many
of budget to getting New Mexico
off the list of states that tax
social security retirement
income.
It is a disincentive for people
to stay in New Mexico or to move
here for retirement.
And we have to you know just
pick up our cell phone and do an
internet search for best states
to retire or we're states to
retire and almost
to a survey it is it is
are indicated that this is a
black mark on the state of New
Mexico that we get tax SSI.
So we can get off that list and
I believe that we do more
retirees to come to our state
and this is another reason for
them to come if this bill were
to pass so Mr chairman and
members there is truly a ground
swell of support for house bill
forty eight.
And with the governor's
endorsement which she gave
during her state of the state
address a few days ago it is
most certainly within reach that
we would do something for
all of our retirees without
discrimination at all based on
their on their means so this is
a fairness issue and I am.
Thankful for everyone who has
emailed me message me or phone
me to say how much they
appreciate the effort on this
bill and I think also the co
sponsors to.
stayed with it as well so Mister
chairman I would ask for the
committee please to support
house bill forty eight and let
us move to the next committee
for some further discussion
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
did not but now back to our
representative but.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
like to recommend you passed.
Second the.
Okay I have a proper motion for
a do pass in the second.
At this time I would like to ask
Miss madam secretary would you
take the role.
Memsic very.
Madam secretary are you still
there.
Sir just her microphone seems to
have come off again.
So she's trying to resolve that.
No.
C. in the early days of my great
great program called it never
had this problem.
It just marked it down in the
piece of paper and plastic paper
background and.
Mr chair good so we are use a
Michelle says green to call the
roll.
Are you are you sit next to each
other close to each other.
Michelle Lujan so yes.
So yes would you know my
computer now those what we're
suggesting.
For that Mr chairman of the
other Canadian assistance was
bringing her
and.
Okay can you hear me.
Yes.
Representative Baca.
Representative bash.
Representative black yes.
Representative manga.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Rubio.
Representative Terrazas.
Yes this one.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
and and Mr chair I did not hear
any of those votes that were
cast prior to this I hope you
should be aware of your okay our
our.
Health.
Representative in chair Akan.
No.
Okay thanks.
Mr chair real quick before if I
heard only on is we have to I
I'm not sure if I'm looking for
REC we do we have.
Representative now we only have
a.
Yes.
B. as a member okay thank you I
I I answered my own question.
Okay so the motives for for.
Use.
Just one excuse.
It was.
Representative can you hear me
I guess I can hear you okay let
me let's go through this for top
bottom started off you said
we've got forty four did you
have Representative did you get
Representative Rubio I noticed
you came on.
Yes I did.
Let can I go over those again.
Representative can I go over the
votes again yes please okay
Representative Baca.
I will yes Representative bash
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative okay now.
Representative to make up Arsia
yes.
Representative Rubio.
Representative you.
Representative order us tennis
Terrazas.
Sorry throughout the yes.
Okay Representative Patricia
Roybal Caballero.
All.
Representative a chairman I'll
call on no.
Okay so the motives for for.
We have basic the hi so to speak
to the committee and
At
the Mr chair.
Chair good Representative you
guys yes Mr chair
entered in a prize of the bill
does not move forward but I'd
like to propose another motion.
I like to propose Mr chair they
do best with the without a
recommendation.
I have a proper motion to have
staff.
I can't.
second Representative black.
Madam secretary would you think
the vote on this motion.
Madam secretary.
Well yes.
Black.
Yes.
Okay.
Yes.
You should give them secretary.
Yes.
I'm not hearing anything Mr
chair yeah.
No nothing's coming through and
I think she missed me.
Representative Rubio.
Yes so we're I think we're just
I don't think we're hearing you
completely
Yes.
We're.
Yes I can hear you now my vote
is no.
Representative
yes your.
Representative.
No.
More.
You know.
Chairman still or two four.
Yet again we have a table so
again.
Was on the table.
The bill can be brought up by
the proper motion at a later
time.
But at this time the bills for
floor so.
Let's see what the future holds
Representative ground thank you
thank you Mr chair.
Okay at this time we're ready to
proceed with the house bill
seventy six.
Mr chairman if I may.
Representative Garcia.
today I'll Representative
analysis computers dollars we
sharing with me and my rule so
Mister Representative Anderson
will be presented the bill and
will follow up on that Mr
Chairman is that right that is
good.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman of.
Representative Garcia.
We're able to work together in
the Appropriations Committee and
talk about the importance.
Matters that we thought could do
the most good in helping New
Mexico forward I was pleased
that Representative Garcia asked
me to sponsor with him house
bill seventy six.
As you can see house bill
seventy six is a short bill
relates to taxation
specifically and income tax
exemption.
For military retirement pay with
a thirty thousand dollar cap.
Mr chairman I'll be shorten the
point because I think the they
are.
Evidence is clear New Mexico is
one of only eight states that
does not exempt military
retirement.
income from.
Income tax.
Thank you it's a little
confusing because.
Some people think New Mexico may
have a partial.
Exemption for anybody over the
age of sixty five but today
we're not here for that because
age is actually not a factor in
our bill.
Mr Chairman than the last New
Mexico census our state was
stagnant.
And stagnant creates many issues
going forward a staff to
population we must grow in
population and representative
Garcia and I both feel that.
One of the best ways to attract
growth is to be more attractive
as a.
Retirement destination for
veterans.
All right joining us as you know
in our in our sponsorship is
Representative lane
Representative Garrett and
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
That makes our bill of
nonpartisan were passed
bipartisan we've got we've got
all the independence we've got
Democrats and Republicans Mr
chairman we are pleased to
present this bill is you know
all military retirees him to.
The younger so when we attract.
Retirees to New Mexico.
Many if not all will seek a
second career and join our work
force our work force is
sufficient.
Efficient not invalid.
What we don't have enough
workers in New Mexico today.
So it helps across the board the
fiscal impact this year the
report that they if that's in
front of you shows nineteen
million four hundred thousand
dollars.
Of fiscal impact.
All I'll tell you about that is
that is.
Income that is lost to the
general fund from the exemption
what that does count is the
income to be gained by.
Three veterans in their
retirement to New Mexico to pay
our gross receipts taxes our
income taxes are up property
taxes.
And contribute to the growth of
New Mexico so Mr chairman of
that includes my brief
introduction to house bill
seventy six Representative
Garcia would you care to add in.
You Mr waste.
Mr Chairman.
thanks for here just in.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee if we hearing today.
There is Mexico right now there
is about twenty thousand nine
hundred and forty eight.
And there's twenty seven
thousand surviving retirees that
are booked up to this.
My take on this Mr chairman is.
There will be no medical dental
vision or not last of the
retirees for their recovered
that with the with the
government.
Our undivided old these people
to retire.
V. teachers medical staff bill
contractor workers labor and the
people of new business this will
bring revenue into the state of
New Mexico.
And if you go around anywhere in
any town in the city or regret
in the New Mexico.
You see help wanted signs
everywhere.
These people are committed to
New Mexico can build a lot of
those jobs you know one thing
like on teachers were shortage.
The retirees a lot of our
teachers.
A lot of our doctors a lot of
our barn contractors and you
know at the end of the day Mr
speaker.
The Miss Mister chairman I'm
sorry.
these will be a big benefit to
our state of New Mexico and with
that the distraction is what
will stand for questions Mr
chairman.
And if we get to a new drive
drive myself all the time member
what I've always said the other
reason I thought myself because
I'm probably the only one who
can understand me.
I will go to the attendees at
this time.
And again I have said before
everybody was just really that
you have a three minutes.
And the Is Your ready on the
agenda right now you have a we
don't Jordan on the top of the
list you're not.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members committee on bill.
The voices for children.
Once again and we really
appreciate what the sponsors of
this bill and the bills like it
are trying to do.
I would like to point out that
you currently have proposals to
exempt income from social
security military veterans and
last year we saw all of bills to
yeah.
Better retirement benefits.
And.
These passes
the legislation to exempt public
employees retirement benefits
we already don't tax almost half
of the income from investments
with our capital gains
deduction.
Each one of these proposals eats
away.
The
only progressive source of
revenue that we have our income
tax our income tax system is
where we should be getting most
of our and we keep eating away
at it by up with proposals to
exempt more and more income.
It's just not good tax policy to
provide an exemption based on
the source of the income whether
social security military
retirement federal retirement or
payroll.
So we respectfully oppose this
legislation and do not to pass
it on thank you.
Thank you Sir Mister Mason.
Yes.
Members agree my name is Dick
Mason I'm sure the action
committee related to others.
Mexico first of all
Representative I have to
deceased brother it's going to
served in Vietnam and marines
and when we served a great would
love to see your background so
I'm but I am here to speak in
opposition to HB seventy six
I'm.
Same reason so they proposes the
exemption
It was activations
do they raise that tax system
should be progressive and this
is a flat exemption so it is not
progressive internally the
legalese that our tax system to
generate revenues adequate to
finance essentials of government
in this exemption H. away at
that that revenue so for those
reasons of the rural voters does
assist in just a do not pass.
The.
Thank you Sir.
With some that are a.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
it's Leri Sonntag again and this
time of on the right bill house
bill seventy six we fully
support this bill and thank the
sponsors they did a great job of
articulating why this is the
right time and the right thing
to do for our military retirees
New Mexico business coalition
police reports house bill
seventy six thank you.
Sure.
I heard that one wise right.
Yes.
Okay now Mr on the.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
or the committee Tianbao the
associate state director for
AARP New Mexico advocacy we
stand in support of this this
particular bill house bill
seventy six as we are interested
in and supporting our military
retirees and veterans in this
bill certainly helps them so we
ask that you pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr willing to.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me.
Yes Sir thank you Sir thanks
members of the committees this
is JD Bullington speaking on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
supports house bill seventy six
with our collection military
bases and amenities.
And the wonderful quality of
life our state has to offer.
The chamber believes we should
do everything in our power to
make New Mexico the ideal place
for military retirees to live.
These retirees tend to be highly
productive people who tribute a
great deal to our economy and
local communities their service
minded briefly give their time
and their talents they often
start a career fairs are open
businesses generating additional
revenue productivity for our
state there's no downside to
making New Mexico a haven for
military retiree and we have to
remember that they're generally
less tied down to a place that
most people they're used to
moving around so they're looking
for places where it makes
financial sense for them to put
down roots we can get more
retirees to come to New Mexico
if we choose not to tax their
retirement benefits house bill
seventy six makes good sense our
state if growth is our goal
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr Sanchez and
groups on to this.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
We can hear you.
Okay thank you I am I understand
says and I am here on behalf of
the New Mexico National Guard
association.
I'm.
in the past two years the
National Guard activated over
eleven hundred gardening out of
our which is a greater than a
quarter four thousand in support
of a COVID and now we're going
to be moving into the classrooms
and a lot of the work that we do
is here in the state on military
orders
and we are very grateful that
currently are on military pay is
tax exempt and as it was.
Without that we
They were tired the retirement
pay more than ninety percent of
our National Guard then start or
are actively involved in a
second career which is currently
tax and all of our neighboring
states Texas Arizona Utah all
offer full exam on Mitchell
military retirement pay
Colorado is up to twenty four
thousand exemption and Oklahoma
Dr ten thousand exemption and we
lose a lot of our retirees or
neighboring states because of
that
So the National Guard
association fully supports house
bill seventy six.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir and Mr Williams
Jim Williams.
Thank you Mr chairman and
distinguished members of the
committee my name is Jim
Williams I'm a retired army
officer Santa Fe County resident
and native of New Mexico.
I'm here today representing
veterans and military families
caucus which supports this bill.
The proposed tax exemption for a
portion of military retired pay
and I would emphasize that it's
a portion it's not the entire
military retirement pay.
Will be particularly benefit to
junior enlisted active duty and
reserve retirees as well as
members of the National Guard is
small the previous.
This person said.
New Mexico is one of the few
states that tax military retired
pay and has been noted each year
more states pass legislation
with thing this tax burden for
veterans.
I agree with others that have
set passage of this bill will
make New Mexico a more
attractive place for veterans to
retire.
One of your representatives
noted that veterans possess a
lot of skills needed in New
Mexico at this time to just
teaching skills and health care
skills we also have a lot of
high tech skills which New
Mexico industry is in the also
at this time.
I have a number of friends who
have retired from the military.
And their contributions to their
communities have been
significant.
My first commander in the army
when he retired from the eighty
second airborne division he
opened his own business.
I have another college army
colleagues who became a girls
softball coach.
My daughter was in high school
geometry teacher was a retired
army officer.
Point of these adults to note
that retirement from the
military kind of I started a
second career not complete
retirement.
And these people make
contributions to their local
economies as well as promote the
general welfare of their adopted
communities.
Current assets in any community
and we help by passing this bill
committee will send a strong
message support and
encouragement to our New Mexico
veteran community thank you for
allowing me to speak in favor of
this bill.
Thank you I have Mary and Martin
guy a ghosts.
Can you hear me we can hear you
Sir okay thank you Mr chair
madam chair I the appreciate
this opportunity to testify
before the the committee and I'd
like to express my appreciation
to the sponsors of this bill to
you Harry Garcia agency
Representative Garcia and to the
rest of the board members I am
other legislative chair for the
military leadership's better the
military leadership veterans
council and we are
Representative representing
several yes does such as a
military officers association to
DFW the association of the Air
Force the navy league the marine
league order of the Purple
Heart.
The association of the United
States Army we listened
Association of the New Mexico
Army National Guard disabled
American veterans and the
American Legion of all of these
entities would like to express
their support for this bill
I had sent a
A fact sheet to all the members
of the committee and I'd like to
of legislative information
office fact sheet and the first
is that this legislation house
bill seventy six is an economic
development bill to retain and
attract retirees will provide
many benefits to the state of
New Mexico work skills employed
spouses homeownership economic
activities and community
leadership.
The military and veterans
leadership council analysis of
the DOT census data to the
following K. to the following
conclusion that the tax annual
tax loss for retiree as less
than seven hundred dollars well
the annual gain in taxes alone
is more than four thousand.
Plus.
A plus for the fifty thousand
and economic activity.
Now what that translates into is
I'm a veteran retires such as
myself I retired two years ago.
I have the ability to have
discretionary income based on
what my career is supported.
And that's what it translates
into when these military members
actually retire as some as a
reservist a reservist actually
your tires and twenty years but
they don't have the ability to
collect that retirement until
the age of sixty or sixty two.
But as an active duty soldier or
active duty member they retired
directly after that twenty year
mark if they choose to do so
once they choose to do so they
actually start to.
Receive that retirement income
but yet they go on to other
things such as other jobs they
go to they either start
businesses buy homes they
actually start they remain in
the community now when this
their income starts to get into
that tax such as the military
income they actually look for
other avenues and it is a fact
that New Mexico lost two point
eight percent of these retirees
to other states and that
included a loss of over twenty
four thousand dollars per family
household that left the state.
Now if we allow their income to
be exempted that actually
translates into an increase of
over sixty thousand dollars per
household income taxable income.
And that's with the exemption on
the military.
If the committee has any
questions of myself I'd be more
than happy to entertain any
questions.
Thank you Sir I have House
number W. one five.
I have raced out of the house
number three one five.
You.
Mr chair.
Yes.
It's done.
But members of the committee.
Can you hear me you hear you
okay my name is can more I am
retired lieutenant colonel from
the U. S. Air Force and I am
currently the superintendent of
schools and Alamogordo.
I'm originally from Ohio
there is soon as I could in
nineteen eighty one join the Air
Force and few years later in two
thousand four at the rate of old
age of forty one I retired from
the Air Force
along the way I learned the
associate's degree in logistics
bachelors to masters and most
recently a doctor of education
degree from university of
central Florida also thanks to
the Air Force and the doctor was
thanks to the VA.
I see these things not to toot
my own horn just to point out
that has has already been said
many military retired US
we're highly skilled highly
trained highly educated and
still young enough for a second
career and actively seeking a
second career I retired and for
and moved to Florida and went
into teaching a few years later
for two reasons one I always
wanted to teach and to I could
afford the pay cut because of my
military retirement in the fact
that supported didn't doesn't
have personal income tax and all
I moved here three and a half
years ago from Florida not for
the tax benefits but for one of
my waist now my wife is one
raised now order.
but yes you have heard we have a
teaching shortage so I'm I'm
advocating HB seventy six not
from a personal standpoint but
from a workforce standpoint and
from the viewpoint of the
superintendent of schools I
would like to be able to recruit
with soon to retire military
members from all an airforce
base it's tough to do hello in
many cases because of the tax on
military income.
See the
Yes HB seventy six complements
very well the other legislative
efforts that are trying to help
us recruit and retain great
teachers in New Mexico and move
our schools from the bottom of
the pack hi
I urge you to support HB seventy
six
thank you for your time speaking
to the.
Thank you Mr general Bob
Carroll.
yes Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Bob Carroll
I live in Albuquerque now I am
a marine corps veteran and
listed as soon as I turned
eighteen.
Was probably should be a non and
later was able to obtain my
college degree on the GI bill
I'm here today to speak in
support of house bill seventy
six I believe this bill will
primarily help enlist men and
women who serve your country for
twenty years and when they're
deciding to retire this
legislation will put New Mexico
among its competitors who have
similar statues for the many
reasons that have been cited we
want military retirees to retire
in New Mexico because they do
strengthen our communities
I won't go into this Mike my
reasons are the same as several
others in believing that that be
good for the state of New
Mexico.
I'll leave that I also like to
commend to the representatives
who introduced this bill in a
bipartisan basis I don't know
representative Garcia although I
see there's also a farmer former
marine.
I'm a Democrat in for many years
they didn't Ross long had duly
political science with my friend
and neighbor felt Sanders
is also sponsoring this bill.
nevertheless we worked on
community projects together I'm
please we can be on the same
side again on this veterans
issue I think everybody
political party not withstanding
should be able to get together
and
For the benefit of our vets
thank you very much.
I hope I have a list everybody
in our going through the list of
panelists and I don't see any
more hands raised the building
of a database so I am going to
the panelists and I'll go back
to a Representative Anderson
would you like to add anything
before I go to the committee.
Mr Chairman we are overwhelmed
with the support from so many
different
Areas of New Mexico including my
former neighbor and constituent.
We do have a home of a marine
so we're very affectionate to
the court thank you Mr chairman.
We were questions thank you Sir
Well good to Representative the.
Black.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you for drugs that have Garcia
and and and Representative
Anderson for rain this
legislation was this bill
endorsed by the interim Veterans
Committee.
Your muted.
Can you hear me now
Representative.
Yes thank you Representative
short answer is I don't know but
I don't think so.
Because Representative Garcia
and I were here a week ahead of
time working and we we really
nailed that it would be a
mistake for New Mexico to miss
this opportunity on this
exemptions so if it happened
Senator pope.
Carries a companion bill may
have presented to that committee
and I would know because I was
on.
Thank you for that
Representative Mr chairman I.
I thought I I believe that there
there was discussion of it
during the interim so that I was
just verifying that so
Representative Mr Chairman.
One thirty thousand.
Representative black after
considerable discussion
Representative Garcia and I.
Leave that last that the the
best way to secure passage of
this exemption was to put a cap
on the income and we did that
with reservation but it was
purely with the intent of
passing house bill seventy six.
Representative I I I tend to
agree with you on that I think
that that probably is the best
way to get it passed I do stand
in full support of this bill and
I think it is important as
everyone is talked about New
Mexico we're losing qualified
qualified working able bodied
people to to nearby states and
this would would help us retain
some of this so thank you for
bringing this legislation thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative.
Representative back up.
Mr chair.
In the last.
Okay okay.
State thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Anderson
Garcia for bringing this
legislation.
It was brought up in during the
intramuscular Representative
black.
Broad
said that earlier and I believe
it was endorsed.
And so you know I just want to
let you know that this is good
legislation again this is one of
those pieces of legislation that
would attract.
Skilled labor has it's been
repeated rather it to beat that
over and over but you know my
daughters in the Air Force.
Mr chair.
Representative and she she went
to the Air Force at age nineteen
eighteen she was a teenager just
turned eighteen so Senator
twenty years.
Mr chair representative to be
retiring at age thirty eight and
what does she do she works on to
so she makes dentures and and do
that so for for their force.
I think as we get we have many
many veterans people that are
worked in the in the military in
the summer situations that can
come back and and give back to
New Mexico and make it a reason
for them to be attracted to New
Mexico state in New Mexico it's
it's it's something that would
we we have talked about since
I've been on on on the labor or
excuse me in the veterans
Committee and I think it's
important to think up Mr chair I
remembered last year.
That you were.
Telling us that it's so
important to make it make New
Mexico a tractive place and so
I'm with you on Mr chair on that
and and Representative this year
and Anderson we really
appreciate that I just I see
someone that's already.
Going through there whether it's
Their studies or their whatever
their career is and they finish
it in the get to start a new
career and issues among other
another opportunity to to to
invest in New Mexico so we
appreciate the support I'm in
full support of this
legislation thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative.
Okay anybody else on the
committee one three I have my
hand up for question Mr chair.
Madam vice chair thank you
and thank you Mr chair and the
Sanchez I have a question I'm
trying to manage a couple of
committees right now to have
another bill and other committee
so I'm not quite sure I heard.
On if the the Representative
Anderson of that see I can
answer can you explain the the
thirty thousand threshold I I I
thought I heard something about
thirty thousand but I want to
make sure I understood it thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair if I could
the Representative Roybal
Caballero yes the military
retirement.
Personal income tax exemption is
capped at thirty thousand
dollars per year income.
So the for those who might enjoy
retirement income beyond that
that portion would fall under
the New Mexico personal income
tax code therefore be taxable I
think the way an account would
say thank you.
Thank you Mr chair that was my
one and only question it is
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
I used so now and that Britain
the ministry it can be for a con
man so Mr study approve or their
I'll give you a couple of
minutes.
Presidio.
Okay.
That building I'll go back to
the committee at this time.
Everybody else on the committee
that was common.
For I do.
Okay I just.
This will be the legislation on
like the social security bill.
That I find the.
Moro.
Thank you Mr more support
because it starts at the bottom.
This is not a tax rate for the
people that make big Bucks this
is a tax break for those who are
at the lower end.
The retirement group so those
people that are in the.
I have I have a helper here so
those people that are making six
thousand dollars or less on
retirement I mean you know that
forty two year old a fifteen
year old that retired doesn't
get retirement and social
security.
So I can see a way to attract
them and bring them to New
Mexico it did not get a people
have said earlier this does
bring in people that have
training in different fields.
And we can use him in New Mexico
so I.
M. supportive of this one where
should this one be ill so with
that what is the pleasure of the
committee.
I'd like to make a do pass
recommendation.
Like to make a motion for a new
password like this.
And okay have a proper motion in
a proper second.
You madam secretary are you
available to call the roll the.
Madam secretary.
Okay can you hear me yes okay.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Representative bash
Representative black.
Yes Representative long.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative nonsense.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Chair on one yes.
Yes.
Eight zero.
Again they will give eight zero
you have a do pass out of this
committee a gentleman good luck
in your next committee the
agents are to that's right they
think this.
If I like to thank all of
committee members and you Mr
chairman I really appreciate it
that's all good for veterans.
You
chairman have a good day thank
you Sir thank the gentleman.
With that.
Go back to the committee
we are done for the day and.
Are keeping and building.
And see what the future will
hold we got some stuff that we
the last I could have done in
earlier years for those of you
who are veterans with me are you
know they try to get through our
bills as fast as possible so
that with the end of the session
comes around you that that we
running around getting your own
bills passed so be patient with
me but we'll try to get
everything through as fast as we
can okay so we'll see you all
are Thursday thank you.
My.
Thank you thank you all thanks
bye everybody thank you.
Right yes.
Is.
Yes.
Risi for a bit more.
This is surely stressful.
Yeah work.
Those are fat.
As well.
Your words.
Those.
She she.
The.
Look at this.
Is.
I know.
Anymore.
Karen bash.
She can't miss anymore.
I don't know my goodness.
Sure it's just something come
up.
