We have a quorum.
For today's indication offered
to us by the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
In the name of the father and of
the son and of the Holy Spirit.
Our father in heaven.
We thank you for the state we
thank you for all the many
blessings that you give us each
day.
We thank you for peaceful
assembly.
We thank you for giving us
strong minds so that we can make
the best decisions for our
constituents.
We ask for continued blessings
and working together to
communicate collaborate and
cooperate in the spirit of team
work.
We just blessings upon our
families home we left behind to
do the work for our constituents
less the mall your phone with
good health happy spirit of
peace and safety.
We just blessings upon all of
our local national and global
leaders are law enforcement our
health care workers are men and
women in uniform so that we may
continue to live in peace and
harmony with your loving father
yes this lessons and then the of
our savior Jesus Christ amen.
Representative Armstrong please
leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
These are.
Yes.
And.
And the gentle lady from granted
Ofglen Sierra leisure and
saluting Mexico's flag.
This is well.
On the.
Members of the house Mr speaker
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
template.
Here.
It is so ordered.
Good morning everyone.
Mr speaker I can do a brief
announcement please.
Speaking.
from.
Bernalillo Sandoval incentive in
Fe and Santa Fe Representative
Lord thank you so much very
briefly I just want to remind
everyone that may as motorcycle
safety awareness month so just
be aware as the weather gets
warmer we will be out riding and
also I saw this Representative
all morning and didn't know it
was his birthday.
Representative office as a
birthday today.
We have a birthday in the
chamber.
Members of the house.
Happy birthday.
Representative Terrazas.
I'm.
May.
This
phone.
Many more.
generally from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
And this time Germany please
proceed.
Mr speaker thank you very much a
rise.
To make this very important
announcement.
The twenty fourth nineteen
ninety five.
The Johnson.
With one in as the fifth
District Court judge.
At the current as soon as
Mexico.
Chance.
As District Court.
Judge for the district of New
Mexico.
His first official.
Upon being sworn in.
Without giving Thomson Kevin the
state of New Mexico president.
As far as judge Johnson's first
official as.
To perform a wedding ceremony.
So Mister speaker members of the
has.
One of the glad.
My family my friends.
Has been.
Current during intense.
To.
And today is our twenty sixth
wedding anniversary.
Mr speaker I want to know
because this line.
I love the.
You are my rock and I look
forward to another.
Hello Benteen years thank you Mr
speaker.
Generating.
Representative Chasey.
The
committee.
That.
Judicial.
Our water session about fifteen
minutes after the bell.
I wanted to.
It will be.
Finally changed House Bill
twenty eight will be set the
agenda.
The minutes to accommodate
schedules of the interpreters so
that's why that is being changed
otherwise we're going to go
through it and try to do all of
the candidates thank you Mr
speaker and.
Members are there other
announcements.
Members are in the third meeting
we're in committee reports the
leader says if you committee
reports are coming out of a
committee and with that we just
do them all together later on.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This.
I'm.
The next order of business.
Legislation no objections so
ordered.
The gentle lady from McKinley in
San Juan.
Are you ready on house bill two.
Mr speaker
we could get to that point the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills to agree on final passage
has been taken the gentle lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
morning members of the house the
special privilege for me today
to present the twenty twenty one
session general appropriations
act like to start Mr speaker by
saying how very proud I am of
the work completed by the house
appropriations and finance
committee we could not have been
able to do this successful work
without the help of our staff
AJS State LFC and DFA staff
throughout the process I also
need to note Mr speaker it's
very important for all of us to
remember this is this is all
been done during a pandemic and
we can proudly say that we've
completed our constitutional
responsibility of preparing a
state budget during one of the
most trying times the state of
New Mexico has ever faced.
The pandemic as well as economic
volatility is the challenge for
any budget makers but we push
through and probably with the
anonymous vote coming out of the
committee.
Welcome HSC is like watching a
battleship we don't turn on a
dime but we are first versatile
enough to recognize immediate
needs I want to say maybe it
needs I'm referring to the
economic relief measures we
built into the framework which
includes things like Senate bill
one and house bill eleven.
As well as our supplemental
general appropriations act to
assist with targeted programs
also we did some things to help
stabilize the economy and
section five and six.
With additional money for
tourism Leda and roads as we
know construction is one of the
quickest economic stimulators
for both state and local roads.
The budget bill was a two
hundred twenty two page bill and
the quickest way to review it Mr
speaker is by looking at the
general fund financial summary.
I understand Mr speaker that
everyone should have a copy of
that but are we going to put
this the we need to go ahead and
put the
General fund financial summary
up we could Mr speaker.
The last three pages in our in
our presentation.
General.
Insurance claim that everyone
does have a copy of the document
the LFC website.
Okay what do that Mr Mr speaker
just quickly go through this as
I said the quickest way to
understand what we're doing with
this budget is the general fund
financial summary.
And at the top it'll say
February twenty twenty one
consensus revenue estimate and
HSC recommendations when you
look at that first page what's
important remembers the
appropriation account is
basically the state's checking
account and it's made up of both
reoccurring revenue and non
recurring revenue and the focus
is the estimate FY twenty two.
Chair Mister speaker of they
start February twenty twenty one
at day we received another
hundred and sixty nine million
dollars so the total percentage
change revenue changes four
point nine percent.
also like to mention that
When you look at the non
reoccurring pace we have the
expenditures listed on the third
page behind that thank you an
idea of what those expenditures
are made out of it is
The three pieces of are the four
pieces of legislation that I
talked about house bill eleven
Senate bill one and Senate bill
to the Senate bill three.
Mr speaker and members this
budget represents in FY twenty
twenty two general fund
recurring amount of seven point
three billion dollars.
As I say that's a four point six
percent increase with half of
that increase going back to fill
the swaps we had to we had to do
last special session.
We've got Public Education
increase of five point five
percent we're going to have one
of our other members talk about
that a little more detail we
also have an increase to the
Human Services budget.
And that was due to an enhanced
federal match one of the other
members will also be talking
about that would allow for one
point five percent increase in
compensation.
And Mister speaker what I'd like
to do is I'd like to yield my
time in this presentation to a
few of the other members that
are going to speak and I if I
could Mr speaker I'd like to
yield to Representative small
Representative Sweetser
Representative Allison and it
Representative Crowder in that
order so they can get into a
little more detail on some of
the components of the budget so
with that Mr speaker I'd like to
yield to Representative small.
Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady madam
chair Mr speaker gentle lady and
briefly go into a little bit
more detail on the public
schools support budget and the
five point five percent increase
you noted before that Mr speaker
and gentle lady I just want to
know and I think it's a point of
pride for the state that coming
into this as you mentioned after
an incredibly difficult through
a difficult process the
beginning top line number
recommendations from the three
four bodies from the
administration from the
legislative education study.
And from the legislative finance
committee made up of both house
and Senate members it all
started at the same place which
was really positive coming into
the session Mr speaker and
gentle lady we know that having
lost this last year of in person
learning time that making that
up is going to be key for New
Mexico's children our families
and our future that's why we
take really great pride madam
gentle lady Mr speaker in the
fact that there is a one hundred
and ten million dollar increase
for extended learning time and
for K. five plus that includes
Mr speaker and gentle lady
seventy million dollars swab
from the one time public
education reform Fund for
reoccurring so this is
reoccurring going into the face
that will make the extended
learning time that offers so
many important features for
students all across New Mexico
available to one hundred percent
again one hundred percent of New
Mexicos located twelve eligible
students and that is built into
the recurring budget similarly
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
are now at a recurring level to
support an estimated fifty nine
percent almost six out of ten K.
five plus kids in the recurring
budget with the remainder made
up through the public education
reform committee reform Fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
noted the salary increase the
one point five percent salary
increase across the board this
is another area where through
this collaboration our committee
and the budget before the body
today ultimately settled on a
slightly higher overall number
that was recommended through the
consensus process with members
from both the house and the
Senate of the legislative
education study committee that
one point five percent raise
across the board.
We're noting here some of these
recurring increases however
there are also some exciting
efforts from the public
education reform Fund made
possible by the inclusion of
general fund dollars for K. five
plus extended learning time
these include perhaps the
administration's signature
initiative that's the family
income index support that offers
in New they hope to be able to
focus in at a school level not
just at the district level the
better support kids families and
communities leading to better
outcomes for all New Mexicans
similarly there is inclusion of
twenty million dollars for
community schools and I will go
into it but there is significant
support for measures aimed
specifically in a tribal remedy
package that address the Yazzie
Martinez litigation.
We also Mr speaker and gentle
lady include credits for FY
twenty four impact aid that has
been a federal ruling when we
take this when we step back from
the specific initiatives and
look at this five point five
percent increase it is focused
on the things that we know make
the most difference that's the
K. five plus program the
extended learning time program
ensuring that all educators and
all parts of the education
system have that one point five
percent pay increase and at the
same time being innovative being
flexible and working in areas
like the family income support
index with community schools
including additional broadband
funds in order to make up not
only for this incredibly
difficult last year of in person
learning but also Mr speaker and
gentle lady to make sure the New
Mexico moves forward and in a
exciting innovative determined
way to serve all of our children
and families thank you very much
for this opportunity to go into
some of the details Mr speaker
and gentle lady and with that I
would conclude.
Gentleman originally from San
Juan to images like to yield
next.
So I would like to ask Miss
Representative Sweetser make
some comments also please
certainly generating they see
the gentle lady from.
Grant Hidalgo and Luna
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I appreciate the
opportunity to talk a little bit
about this portion of our in
general appropriations act it
was challenging to address the
many changing variables both
statewide and federally happy
ending in health and Human
Services areas in the midst of a
pandemic.
I'm confident this budget takes
into account the best
information we have about
statewide needs and federal
initiative as House Bill to
increases the general fund
appropriation for Medicaid by
sixty four million dollars which
supports a temporary increase in
enrollment of about ten percent
but the maintenance of effort
requirements and contains an
increase of twenty million
dollars to meet the anticipated
maybe but it also factors in
scale efficiencies and takes
into consideration to enhance
quarters of seventy five million
dollars per quarter of the
federal Medicaid assistance
percentages which you often hear
called F. ma'am.
Also this budget increases the
department of health budget by
three point four percent which
along with the enhanced Medicaid
match will allow for continued
expansion of the community
supports waiver for
developmentally disabled clients
and expanded funding for teen
suicide prevention anticipating
a budgeting for health and Human
Services needs is always a
balancing act but especially in
a pandemic when so many New
Mexicans are struggling and
suffering how to best meet the
needs of our residents was top
of mind in addressing funding
concerns and I feel this budget
reflects that so Mr speaker and
gentle lady I think we have done
the best possible job we could
with health and Human Services
taking into account all of the
changing and of course keeping
the residents of New Mexico top
of mind in the middle of this
pandemic and with that I would
feel that.
Thank you.
And next to the gentleman from
Kansas and wanted to do was to
yield Mister speaker I'd like to
be able to Representative
Anthony Allison.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Some insurers thank you madam
thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair and gentle lady.
I will be talking about the
probation for the tribes and
pueblos in the nation's.
Ways to tune for House Bill tune
appropriates thirteen point four
million from the general fund
for the purpose of addressing
the tribal remedy friend where
which includes.
Five point twenty five million
from the Indian education fund
for tribal departments of
education and libraries to
develop educational blueprints
and governance structures.
Five point one million from the
PC the special appropriation for
indigenous education initiatives
and.
Three million dollars from the
A. C. T. R. P. S. P.'s for.
To provide culturally and
linguistically relevant
programming for native American
students.
Madam chair and Mr speaker the
HSD substitute for House Bill to
also includes two hundred thirty
million.
To provide extended learning
time programs for all students
and the K. five plus extended
school year programs for all at
risk elementary students.
Sixty six million for impact aid
schools to meet the needs of
native American students and
implement provisions of the
Indian Education Act.
Two hundred ninety six million.
For at risk students through the
public school funding formula
and two million for.
To that that you see the scene
the for early childhood and
workforce expansion with a focus
on native American educators.
Mr speaker and.
Madam chair additionally the
supplemental GAAP includes nine
million from the public
education reform Fund for native
American curriculum development
and instructional programs and
the capital outlay framework
includes five million dollars
for.
Tribal broadband anest from has
STB appropriations.
On top of the state
appropriations for the.
For the tribal remedy framework
Congress is providing one
million dollars for tribal.
Broadband nationwide in New
Mexico schools will receive four
hundred and thirty nine million
in federal aid which can be used
to support at risk students
populations.
Madam chair.
Mr speaker is for these reasons
that I really support HB two
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlelady from
killing someone to whom you wish
next to yield thank you Mr
speaker I'd like to ask
Representative Crowder to please
make some comments.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair and thank you for
the opportunity to speak a
regarding the department of
public safety and corrections
department and in some of the.
Process we went through to fund
their desires are their top two
or three really needed
programs.
And you can follow along if you
want on the department of public
safety their primary budget is
on page one nineteen for
supplemental and and specials is
on page one ninety one.
But in the department of public
safety we're able to provide two
million six hundred nine
thousand one hundred dollars to
to shore up the retirement and
health care costs as well as the
cost of moving the motor
transfer officers interim hands
retirement program.
We were all able to do find a
way to.
Find three million dollars.
To provide the the purchase of
new vehicles and to get those
vehicles equipped with the right
to put on the on the roads.
Also provided a million four
hundred thousand of hazard and
if there's a lack of federal
funds that are available to
match that then there's
additional funds provided by the
state in total is just just over
seven million dollars that are
provided for special needs and
special items that they have
listed as their top priorities.
In the corrections department
their primary budget is on page
one fourteen.
Their specials and supplementals
on page one ninety.
And
In their special supplementals
there's three million nine
hundred and sixty one thousand.
For to increase their
compensation within the
department of corrections
there's also a million three
hundred forty nine thousand.
For a recidivism reduction.
And there's a million nine
hundred and thirteen thousand
eight hundred dollars to
increase the per diem and
private prisons along with seven
hundred thousand for their
highest rated in make
programming it's it's a new
programming system to help
manage the those are
incarcerated.
New Delhi that total for the
department of corrections is
just under eight million dollars
that we were able to find work
out for the corrections
department I I think that's a
good start.
For the proposed department of
public safety the department of
corrections to to get them back
whether solid in whole and in
the take care of our state.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity.
The June general.
Thank you so want to shield to
another member before we proceed
to debate on the bill.
Generally of of that and your
you are unfortunately muted okay
sorry Mr speaker I'm not used to
doing this for my office so I
apologize to the members but I
would like to to also note that
the estimate FY twenty two
reserve is is over twenty three
percent we had mentioned that in
the earlier comments I think
that's incredibly important
this is exactly what we use in
times of trouble when we talked
earlier Mr speaker about
economic volatility this is what
helps protect the investments of
the state in I'd like to say Mr
speaker that we have provided an
indexed to the membership along
with the bill and we stand for
questions at this time thank you
Mr speaker generating there is
for sure the gentleman from
Chavis eighty into terrible
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
general idea.
I would be happy to yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you
And
And I appreciate
The.
Level of effort in the tail.
Thanks to put this together I I
I really do.
No.
To tell you that I was
No one hundred percent of.
That I would up with that I
would completely.
Of.
Of the budget.
would not be factual and yes I
think there are some issues with
the.
But.
Meaning that.
I think it is appropriate that
of.
I average.
A couple of things that you have
successfully done.
according to the feedback that I
get from.
Members
Members that serve on.
It is this.
Thank you for can.
The whole.
Has been successful.
And
I think that that.
At least
Then look at the fact that I was
in the minority and efforts to
produce a budget
that represents the whole state
I.
Appreciative.
I would that
There is.
Workforce solutions.
That I a improbable with.
and I think Representative
Crowder we'll have to try to
address wells and I hope that
you
that the battery
can.
On short notice can go through
that and
And decide what's right for the
state.
I education budget and.
Included has about a five and a
half percent increase for.
very few of our children in
school.
That's probably a couple of
fronts.
Having.
All.
As you well know totally
supportive of adequate paying
for.
State employees and have spoken
out in favor of that on multiple
occasions.
At a time of fat
I think that was about sixty
three million dollars in the
budget that.
That I personally found
troubling.
But what I would mag the body to
think about.
Is that the same provision
within our.
Rules I think that if I can
correct me of Mr speaker and
gentle lady I think it's.
That way you present this budget
to the body on the thirty fifth
that you were close to that I
think today is the thirty six.
This is without a doubt the most
significant piece of
legislation.
appropriated spending that we
have in the house of
representatives.
To.
Of work.
Thank you guys the best
digitales on for.
not including the.
LFC time.
And this body has also three
hours to comprehend and vote on.
fifty.
Of the seventy members.
This is the first time missing
the budget.
So.
Is that they have but one choice
and that's the party line vote.
It's not necessarily always
works.
Formed governments in the state
of New Mexico.
So I would hope.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
They find a way to forget this
budget that.
Early.
So that the debate.
The budget.
Is in.
And causes greater understanding
through the hope that the worst
part is in the budget.
Specifically in.
About I think twenty three
percent so that reserves.
Do that adequate.
And we're comfortable with that.
To.
FY twenty last twenty three fat.
Budgeting processes.
This Mr speaker and gentleman I
do I do feel like that was
adequate when we came in it was
higher.
And
Appropriated the funds as we saw
it after hours and hours of
hearings as you may recall you
of course have served on this
committee in the past you know
what kind of work goes into this
we also felt very very
comfortable because of all the
work done in stress testing and
revenue estimates Mr speaker and
gentleman we know that when we
put the revenue estimate
together is done by a consensus
revenue team LFC DFA and and so
forth and we have the best
economists in the state working
on that.
We felt that because we've taken
our framework.
consensus revenue and looked at
different scenarios under stress
testing the amount of reserve is
exactly what we think we need to
be.
at least one line on the work
that I had done within my
department
The public school support.
Shows about a fab eight percent
increase over FY twenty on.
which is the line share of fact.
I graduated three point three
five billion dollars.
Can the body that the increase
in the time we have of very few
kids in class.
Sure.
Sure Mr Mr speaker and gentleman
without question increase to the
education budget is a budget is
about making sure that we are in
compliance with the various
court orders and the fact that
public education hasn't been
easy we've heard testimony
throughout the entire summer
about how difficult it is been
during the pandemic to deliver
education and it's been
difficult because everybody has
has noted the fact there's been
loss of learning time we've
tried to put into this budget
away to regain that to try to
catch up so to speak with the
our educational rollout we also
need to keep in mind we're
trying to comply with a court
order the us versus Martinez
court order so without question
this budget absolutely needed
the increase Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you.
J..
Mr speaker and this increase
will not bring us into
compliance completely will have
a number of the expenditures
required to meet that lawsuit.
and judge.
Requirement.
Mr speaker and gentleman I can't
can't guarantee that all I know
is that we're trying Mr speaker
and gentleman the related
measures that we put into this
budget two eight that lawsuit
requirement is what we think we
can do in collaboration with the
various school districts with
the superintendents and with all
the key stakeholders so we're
doing what we think we can do
and we think that we've taken
the appropriate path.
To resolve those issues.
And.
Exactly how much money did we
try to prevent education this
year to address that Yazzie
Martinez deficit.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm not
sure I understand what the
deficit of is is in in in
reference to I know that we have
built in budget increases for
extended learning time we have
looked at the whole issue around
impacting we have looked at
putting more money into
include increased salaries for
education education people and
we have we just built this out
based on the best practices and
hours and hours of testimony we
received during the inner and
and throughout the session.
That.
deficit.
It would but the Yazzie Martinez
I was that we had not spent.
adequate funds toward those
children.
And that we need to increase our
efforts and.
I guess my question is.
And budgeting process are in the
process of developing teams.
Educational programs to me the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit.
I think that we're ever going to
be able to say we now have done
that and the ratio for what
we're going to stand on going
forward.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
suspect that it is a work in
progress I don't think education
is solved in one budget year I
think it takes time and it takes
time to catch up.
So at this point I think we've
taken our best of step forward I
think that we have
Why did the tools for the
districts to try to meet the
needs that are identified in the
lawsuit but I'm not going to say
this morning Mr speaker and
gentleman that I think we're
there I think it takes time I
think it is something that we
measure over time working with
had helping with oversight in
making sure that for putting
money into the right costs.
I appreciate that and
I think it's going to be very
hard for this body to ever say.
That we have done enough.
And I think it will be hard
pressed to defend that we have
done enough.
And it will be very easy for
someone dollars accuse us that
we haven't done enough.
And so it's a slippery slope
that will there.
to another item of concern the
Environment Department I have
just as many bills have gone
through judicial management that
is.
A.
Environment Department.
Process.
The increase in.
In the.
the last one it just comes to
mind was I think it was solid
waste went from
twenty thousand dollars for.
To
under this is a hundred thousand
dollars.
went from five thousand to a
hundred thousand dollars.
The budget from seven point six
percent increase of the FY
twenty on.
And to decide.
That was that environment and
budget increase of significant
for.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for the question I
think it's important remember
this particular agent state is
primarily an enterprise agency
where you think about the
different funds that run through
it is generally tied to a
categorical expenditure.
And the General Fund pace is not
necessarily the page that grows
when when you look at a year
over year.
For the environment department
in general.
There was an increase for water
protection and increase for
Environmental protection in
general.
And then there were some
reductions also so I think in
general most of what we saw in
terms of the increase was under
the water protection please.
I appreciate that.
The that seven point six percent
increase in that line item seen
to to stick pretty strongly.
No.
Down to another department the
the secretary of state is a
fifty nine point one percent
increase over FY twenty one can
go into any detail on that.
account thank you Mr speaker
thank you general gentleman this
ties back to the new election
law yeah you might recall I
think that was done in our one
of our special sessions when we
had to prove that
and there's also the whole issue
around
a new possible congressional
race that may that may come up
thinking and congressional
district one.
So
in just looking quickly at the
secretary of state's high level
I mean it's all about the
increase that we created by the
passage of the new election law.
And
and Mr speaker was that of was
that H. B. for was that the.
Senator Ivey Soto because of.
Was that the bill that came in
just a couple years left with
that yet.
Mr speaker gentleman I I believe
that was the correct number I I
have to go back and look at
that.
But there is
major increases.
For this department tied to
legislation that we approved.
And it was my understanding when
I asked when I saw that earlier
that there were some duties that
had been.
Being processed at the county
level that would end up to the
secretary of state's level is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
No one can County clerk's budget
will see some savings.
Medicaid is the the other grow
land our budget can you talk a
little bit about amid Medicaid
budget and the impacts on.
I think it's.
Probably about a billion dollars
I don't know exactly.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman as Representative
Sweetser had highlighted
Medicaid is of course I would
fast growing
program and one that course we
embrace here in New Mexico.
What's happened with the
Medicaid budget there has been
grow because we have a number of
folks that are becoming eligible
for Medicaid so that helps grow
grow the budget but but
generally what's happened in
that budget is that we've been
allowed by the federal
government to accept two
additional quarters of funding
we hadn't originally
calculated on I think it's
quarters for seventy five
million dollars so when you see
the overall growth is tied to a
ten percent enrollment growth
but it's also tied to the fact
we received two additional
quarters of money that come into
our general fund and we're going
to be matching.
Thank you.
The I am a
I would be remiss.
I had
For that you know I didn't.
can you tell me how member ads
will be addressed in this year
cycle.
Mr speaker gentleman member us
are going to be addressed
through much of supplemental
general appropriations bill
tomorrow morning at eight
o'clock Bill B. two sub
committees set up under HSC or
training of all the members
Representative small would chair
the committee that deals with
districts one through thirty
five.
Senator Sweetser will chair the
districts that are thirty five
to seventy.
It training on how that gets
done so the member out there
basically Madam through the
supplemental general
appropriations act commonly
known as junior.
Thank you for that the gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
can of this.
Just be archived and what people
can watch and see how it
happened.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
course that will be that's going
to be an actual subcommittee of
HSC and as I say to member of
the house will be part of that
training I think it starts
tomorrow at eight o'clock not
sure I haven't seen the final
schedule and then there will be
hearings I believe that
scheduled for March six.
Generated for that in particular
I expand
Thank you I think it Rapp
transparency and and
Ethics for the two year process.
and I think
Now I just can't tell you how
much I appreciate that because I
think it makes this body
understand the process that goes
on but you do and how you do it
and I think that in an open and
transparent manner.
Is you should be congratulated
for and I did that thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you gentleman there's
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis Lee and regional
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Of.
I was sitting here this morning
listening to of debate all yield
Mister speaker all thank you
madam chairman.
in my second.
Debate on house bill two on the
floor I failed to ask for your.
recognition on that so madam
chairman if I could one of the
things that's important to New
Mexico of.
Funding of state government is
horrible and gas and don't want
to spend the morning talking
about the many contributions of
the industry but nonetheless we
always have a number that is
representative the protection in
FY twenty two of oil and gas
prices and I was wondering if
you had that number of that will
benchmark of the next budget.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I do and
I concur with you on now the
contributions of oil and gas and
so for the January twenty first
FY twenty two forecast this is
based on forty seven dollars a
barrel.
Thank you madam chairman
and I believe that's a little.
Little more than a year were and
now we're we saw crude oil
prices in the current year were
over halfway there on the
current year we see crude oil
prices right and
I suppose a historic high and
low if you consider negative
forty seven dollars that we
achieved momentarily in the
summer so
we with the current price of
sixty and sixty one
I think it's been a roller
coaster year and I hope that the
forty seven dollar benchmark is
is succeeded in
Volatility is always bad.
Thank you for that I did want to
ask in in there's no really
answered this but it's merely to
point out that production volume
is now very important because
over the last few years we've
seen crude oil.
Production sure ma'am thankfully
in New Mexico and recent federal
actions have because jeopardize
of those production volume
increases
so I I I suppose any comment
madam chairman on how the
budget.
Encompasses the idea of of next
year's production as you.
What it is or any comments you
have madam chairman on that
prediction.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you Representative
Anderson.
the December forecast expected
production declines in the
fourth quarter of twenty twenty.
As projected by most major
energy analytics firms however
daily oil production increased
in both October and November
rising to over one point one
million barrels per day and
nearing the peak reached in
March twenty twenty.
so yes I mean we we
We track this very carefully we
look at it very carefully in our
consensus revenue report.
we look I now I've just been
informed that we've got sixty
one rigs in in operation as
we're speaking and
It is just an incredibly
important piece as we're
building the framework for the
revenue projection for budget
building process.
Thank thank you madam chairman
and that is certainly reassuring
and I hope the the the sixty
today federal lease.
Moratorium isn't isn't it the
day phenomenon.
Moving on to the next debate I
hear madam chairman great deal
discussion about some stage
Representative offering federal
monetary assistance in re
opening their schools.
Madam chairman it's my
understanding of house bill two
that there is sufficient funding
in the house bill two to
accomplish the re opening of our
schools.
Could you comment on that please
certainly well thank you Mr
speaker thank thank you
gentlemen of this last year in
December schools through the
federal cares program the state
four hundred and thirty three
million dollars is anticipated
under the president Biden plan
that they'll be over a billion
dollars that'll be sent to the
state of New Mexico the public
education specifically.
So it would not be a surprise
that would see over a billion
dollars in additional resource
is going to the public
education.
Budget.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman I only mention this a
re opening because
in in the area I think of all of
New Mexico but speaking
specifically of districts sixty
six.
Opening of our schools is the
beginning of economic recovery
so we're anxious to see that see
our students return to school
madam chairman if I could I
wanted to ask a question on the
road project
that you mentioned in your
remarks and and to be for okay
all about it but I would H. your
comment or insurance that the
money that we have funded for
our roads will be a statewide
distribution do you have a
comment on that please enter
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen within the general
appropriations act we placed a
hundred and seventy million
dollars in this budget for
statewide rose and then a
hundred twenty five million for
local roads local roads program
goes to the local government
road program and then it goes to
the local government I believe
it's called the grant funded
program local governments can
apply for dollars the department
of transportation for the state
roads
we have identified.
Using half of those dollars
recognizing that the Senate
would identify projects with the
remaining half of that were
projects identified through the
state transportation department
And so what you'll see inside
the General Appropration staff
are identified projects projects
for each highway districts that
were identified as priorities by
the department of
transportation.
Thank you very much for that
Madam chairwoman it is.
Good to see those projects move
forward and see the state and of
financial status that allows
that funding to go forward
if I could madam chairman I
wanted to say that
earlier this session we saw an
effort to put new revenues into
the lottery scholarship fund and
unfortunately that effort was
derailed.
In a in in the process and will
not be coming forward this year
that really makes me concerned
that one of the New Mexico is
great successes in higher
education over the last.
You decades has been the lottery
scholarship
funding and I would
appreciate your thoughts on
whether or not
additional revenues were
required from the state general
fund to shore up any shortcoming
in lottery scholarships.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and inside this budget
we have five million dollars
more specifically for the
lottery program.
Thank thank you madam chairman
and the I think that is.
To money spent our in house bill
two and
leave that we must address
additional revenues into the
lottery scholarship fund because
another thing oil and gas prices
going up and down of the day may
come when when when the state
cannot afford to come forward
with additional funding so I
hope we will all go forward
thinking about do revenue
sources for lottery scholarship.
The last there is the
opportunity scholarship in the I
haven't heard any about yet
mentioned that Singh colluded in
house bill two for that.
New scholarship
opportunity for New Mexicans.
Question thank you Mr speaker
thank you inject the the
opportunity scholarship
continues at five million.
Thank you very much for that
because
the two together are doing a
great deal good for New Mexicans
madam chairman as I said earlier
this is my seventh.
Here on the appropriations and
finance the in house bill to
come together this year for FY
twenty two the seven point three
nine billion dollars is to
replace.
set out to do a lot of good but
when I get on this morning madam
chairman he is.
It is today when HB to needs
action and we need action
New Mexico's economy is.
This pandemic our schools are
closed got lost students that I
read about the paper I know
teachers are struggling under
very difficult circumstances
parents are desperate.
In my opinion the moonshot is
stall so this is not the way
forward for New Mexico and I
believe House Bill Page to
provide seeing critical step
forward forward to a fully
functioning state government
which is going to be part of
turning this economy around and
opening our schools so madam
chairman I appreciate the hard
work you've done know that there
are other.
Legislative matters headed to
your committee and Havel all the
confidence that you the
committee will continue their
good work Mr speaker that
concludes my remarks.
The gentleman from Clovis coming
hardened criminals you
Representative Chatfield.
As.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
all.
Mr speaker I'd be happy to
yield.
Very are.
There we stay here.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
it was an honor to serve you on
the work was done on this field.
And I would like to talk a
little bit about some things
especially that affect us in
rural areas.
The first thing the Nibert speak
about in rural.
This budget appropriates million
dollars will the largest.
More than ever appropriated to
roads.
The thing that I like about
appropriating roses it's
investment.
It's an investment in our state
it will be here for many years
to come.
Money invested the money in the
stock market may rise or fall
the road will be for the of the
road it's there forever needs
helps our commerce for people
yes sorry fully backing for the
grocery store to the hospitals
so it's a really invested in our
state.
Infrastructure.
we address the.
an increase of four point six
percent in our school.
Which is important to our
children at this time when our
schools are struggling to meet
needs a problem not only by
their normal baby.
Requirements but also by COVID.
so I think this is important
money that will help keep our
schools up and running.
For higher education R. N.
Science Center in our students
service budgets were held last.
These are the center of maximum
importance to us now your call
for community initiatives for
employment in the manner that
will allow them to continue
operations.
This bill.
On a statewide reconstruction.
Fifty percent of the house with
hopes that it will put in the
other half.
And we're we think this is
something that is essential for
the federal industry.
The operation.
this bill.
What we Fund.
a program to help establish
five emails within our state.
our state police.
But it was health last time we
were number two property crime
number two and while the prime
the United States of the very
important we funding I think
they did a good job in the we
want to give them the tools they
need to work.
we did all of the best.
And still left reserves in over
twenty three percent almost
twenty four percent of.
So.
I was just the.
Honored to be part of this hard
work that we've done I apologize
for holding my mask out of the.
Thank you very will with the
mother the before I thank you
all and and break for the hard
work the.
Chairman is put into this and
all.
I remember I yield my time.
And I'm sure the gentleman from
Santa Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
high gentle lady from McKinley
County ill I'm happy to yield
Mister speaker.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr.
All right.
I'm again this conversation with
you that we have every year
about this time I want to first
say
and you know and how much I
respect you and the work that
you do it the way you run your
committee.
not just here during the session
but also during intra.
The legislative finance
committee
It is really a challenging job
and
I really do respect the way that
you want to.
So
just just a few just a few
questions
Mr chair.
So
My my understanding is we're
looking at
right now our revenue forecast
for the next FY of an increase
of.
Four point nine percent.
And that this bill as a force
today.
Is a four point six percent
increase in appropriations that
I get that right speaker gentle
lady
Mr speaker and gentleman
yes if you look at the general
fund financial summary you'll
see the press percentage changes
reoccurring revenue it's at four
point nine percent but if I
could Mr speaker gentleman I I
also wanted to make now that
half of that is going back to
cover the swaps we've done.
Mr speaker delays thank you that
was actually my my next question
because we did during the
special session to a bunch of
swaps
and I believe you mentioned
Bernalillo half of this increase
was was back fill a tourist
walks.
which I've I'm also very pleased
to hear
the speaker and gentle lady
So.
I guess I want to commend you
for for a couple of reasons the
first is that we're.
not increasing our spending to
match exactly the projected
revenue increase.
I think that's commendable.
the second is your call over the
the last several years I've I've
mentioned
but the safe amount save
percentage.
To raise the state budget by is.
And the you're looking at the
last thirty years of state
appropriations Representative
Rabb in inflation rapid
population growth.
What is the state for not even
raise a by and not have to worry
about you know volatility in oil
and gas industry or taxes coming
in and having to do a
significant cut in the following
year.
The safe number is.
Three and a half four percent.
If we always raise our budget by
I you know roughly four percent
we never have to come in and and
do those painful cuts that.
You know I've seen it twice in
the time of in the legislature I
know you've been in much longer
than myself.
so so seamless four point six
percent number I I would again
commend you on on that I think
that is a.
something that.
Recurring budget was about that
amount to be in good shape.
So Mr Joyce.
Could you remind me though the
last two or three years.
The the budget increases that
we've had so I know we had a
really large one two years ago
but that was cut roughly in half
during a special session it is
for perspective.
What what is been the total
increase year over year that
we've seen these last two or
three years of the budget.
For calling in for trend
analysis now Mr speaker gel
that.
And here we have it right in
front of me
Mr speaker gentle then when we
started looking at.
FY seventeen it excuse me FY
eighteen it looked like it was
up to fifteen percent.
we have one that was seventeen
percent of I'm reading this
correctly of annual growth then
there was a dip obviously when
we have the declines and what
have you now we're in the
special that we had with our
was.
But it declined seven point
seven percent and now we're at
four percent.
Yes thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and what is pause
for a moment and say also thank
you to director Avid and his
incredible staff
We are very grateful for their
help.
With the.
I think Miss speaker annually
the.
I just want to raise a a point
of caution here that
you know even though this is a
a good four percent increase in
budget which is where it should
be.
The last couple years we're
we're much in excess of that
roughly four percent number.
And so I do still see
areas are in the future we could
potentially have some concern.
and as we have to come in and
make some deep cuts which is
painful.
we did so have some help from
the feds
the speaker generally you just
talk for more about that why
we're actually able to
Only spend half of this increase
in back filling
because of some of federal cares
money and apparently I was wrong
although happy to admit that we
were able to in fact use of that
money for for our general fund.
That's correct thank you Mr
speaker and and I thank you
Representative for that
admitting that it's as we talked
about that during the I think
it's one one of the special
sessions it is correct we have
been able to use those dollars
and they were I do and to
certain agencies so that is one
of the reasons why
we only have to come back and
bill swaps that and half that
amount because and I'm looking
again at the general fund
financial summary restaurant FY
twenty twenty wanting to see the
federal stimulus funds there is
seven hundred fifty million and
then in the November special we
were able to put that back into
the operating budgets of search
engines.
Thank you Mr speaker and really
from a family.
so that that was a wonderful
positive our current events that
to we don't have to back fill
all of that that revenue.
This and much better opposition
for the session.
So does the.
Maybe a couple other quick
questions and then a closing
comment
the speaker and gentle lady.
We
Our capital outlay funding comes
from.
service tax dollars they're
bonded.
but we made it a practice the
last few sessions to also
include some general fund money.
and when things got tough a
couple years ago the general
fund portion of our capital use
was vetoed and and although that
was painful and for manager for
all your who were part of that
so I think that was a wise move.
two are we
For the same practice this year
we using any general fund for
cap well we've.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John the of no and that is
you've seen and I've been in the
press quite often in November
December about the use of
general fund in our.
In our capital outlay budgets
we've got over a billion dollars
that is out there currently
forty seven percent of that is
general fund and cash as I've
said often in the press that
it's time that we not use
general fund for that purpose.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I think that that's a again
a fiscally prudent decision to
not use.
General fund for capital outlay
if it's it's not it's less fun
when you are able to help out
more projects in your district
but it's.
It is the prudent thing to do
so.
what was originally I heard our
reserves projected
with this current budget or
roughly you know a little more
than twenty three percent.
which
I believe is in a pretty good
place I think in order for its
you closer to thirty just with
the volatility but no more than
twenty percent is definitely in
a good place.
Mr jelly we passed a few bills
that have significant
appropriations in them
I'm specifically thinking about
the coronavirus a relief bills
which we all agree are important
and which could help more
folks then and probably are were
able with the money in hand Mr
really this this reserve number
does that include in dissipated
passing and signing of those
those bills.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen it does and I'll tell
you the bills that it does take
into account of not reoccurring
general fund health bill Levin
Senate bill one and Senate bill
two and Senate bill right.
And what we've done with this
reserve we've got our fingers
crossed and stay the twenty two
percent I mean that our planning
number.
Because we still allowed room
for tax bills
we've allowed some funding for
the tax bills we haven't seen in
the tax packages yet but we know
that they're coming and so we
have left some room within this
budget for the tax bills.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
really pleased to hear that
again commend you and your
committee in the staff.
And I'm also very grateful to
hear that we left a little bit
of room for some some positive
tax changes these last few years
we've a.
past several needed changes to
our tax code the revenue
generators.
needed to be done
but also needed to be done were
some changes that were Revenue
negative and when I put those
together in a package to the
plan was to have it be revenue
neutral some generators and some
requires and it would out of
troubling neutral as I would
have been a little dismayed the
last couple years
flooring that we might never get
to the other side of the coin
which is desperately needed so
I'm very grateful to hear that
and there is something has to do
some of these needed
are changes that will make our
tax code less weird and help our
employers to be more competitive
and to hire more New Mexicans
bring some good jobs for
families here.
so those are all my.
Questions speaker and gentle
lady is always a privilege of
speaking with you I wish I was
on the floor with you we can
talk together but it's.
To see you and thank you again
to you in your committee and
staff for the work you did are
you Mr speaker thank you
Representative.
Gentleman from the general fund
Representative Scott.
Mr speaker will the trickle lady
yield I will yield Mister
speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady is all of
through this budget.
On the spending side of the
ledger sheet.
Always store with elephants in
the room.
Which for New Mexico is public
schools support.
Medicaid.
And higher education and career
for our.
Our home is.
Expenditures I believe our soul.
Yes
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr
chair.
It.
There was a significant increase
of six and a half percent and I
believe it was represented.
Is a consequence of some
temporary situations could you
elaborate for me a bit
placement.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
experiencing a ten percent
enrollment growth with Medicaid.
And it was reported to us as
we're building the budget couple
weeks ago that New Mexico will
be in receipt of two additional
quarters of funding.
Those quarters are privileges
seventy five million dollars
each and once you
balance the enrollment growth
with the new quarters is going
to leave you with
the percentage increase that
you're just talking about.
But we also are responsible for
matching those dollars
so when you look at enrollment
growth.
And you look at what the feds
have decided to do in terms of
additional quarters that we'll
be able to use I think that
through twenty twenty three if I
remember correctly
That's what you're going to see
if the item is that that balance
number of of growth I think
wasn't six percent you'll have
to remind me Representative or
have that right in front of me.
It's Mr speaker and gentle lady
six point five percent okay
thank you.
Thank you.
Is there any concern of the
lady.
The term as as these temporary
programs to tend to work toward
permanency is there any concern
Mr speaker and gentle lady about
the recurring revenue to pay for
these going forward when they
temporary assistance is no
longer available.
No that's a good question Mr
speaker Representative about
having on going revenue I think
that.
Would apply to the entire budget
which is why our our Craig group
are consensus revenue group is
so incredibly important as they
monitor what our revenues will
be for the upcoming year we
don't spend beyond that
framework so at this point as
you you mentioned Medicaid in
particular we tried to make sure
that we we have the balance I
dont cutting provider rate and
by making sure that we may grow
for enrollment growth as well as
the new federal dollars I think
in general Mr speaker
Representative we want to
always make sure that we're on
top of our revenue projections
as well as all of our stress
testing.
Mr speaker and gentle lady do
you have with your experts for.
the percentage increase in our
Medicaid budget over the last
five years.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
believe that I've I've heard
this often are LFC meetings is
one of the fastest growing
budgets we have the whole
healthcare arena is is growing
it has been over the years and
you know only growth because
it's needed I mean we have
have the enhancement program
that was approved in the
previous administration and has
continued to this
administration.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady if I could turn to and this
is a forward to a representative
from Chavis ready Senator okay
these questions with respect to
our K. twelve this represents
sure.
Forty five percent.
Of the total budget
Representative Nibert looks like
K. five point eight percent
increase.
I want.
Our pupil spending and all of
the surrounding states and found
that we were higher in some
cases might try.
Four of four.
And on the street is Colorado we
were exactly at current.
And yet.
We hear Mr speaker gentle lady
the.
The performance of our public
schools is rated and near the
bottom and
A large number of categories our
students don't seem to be
kidding the plan for the book
and it does not appear that the
number of thanks is a
significant portion of the
problem which we.
Expenditures to our surrounding
neighbors could you address on.
We are insurance spending so
much money on education and yet
don't seem to be getting a lot
of the callers.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen couple of things I'd
like to stay in terms of public
schools or first of public
schools support is dictated by
state statute what we're looking
at funding formulas we often
talk about that being above the
line and those components of the
funding formula course we've
done
Do statute over the years I just
think it's important to remember
that we have a new deer
population of students some of
the surrounding states I think
that's that's important and also
this increase in public schools
support is to help with the
Yazidi Martinez lawsuit
so we're we're driven by our own
state statutes in terms of
funding formula.
We tend to have I need your
population and we're also trying
to respond to a lawsuit.
Mr speaker gentle lady with
respect to the house the lawsuit
do we know when we will have
spent enough.
No that's
a good that's a interesting
question Mr speaker and
gentleman it reminds me of some
of the lawsuits the state so the
state is that over the years and
served on probation for over
twenty years and there's couple
of on that are still on the
books we've often asked that
question about those other
lawsuits but you know I I think
when it comes to public
education and it comes to
educating our children it takes
time you know as I said in the
previous
discussion with another member I
think it takes time I don't
think that's something that is a
silver bullet approach and I
just think that I think we've
done the right thing when it
comes to supporting public
education.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let
me turn to for last question and
this is the with respect to the
eight hundred and some odd
million Corman to hire is.
Okay our research indicates
that's nine thousand three
hundred dollars per student
from six thousand dollars just.
Nine years ago this is almost
double the spending per student.
will serve with from afar States
touch New Mexico could you
address why your wish we seem to
be an out wire with respect to
dollars per student
expenditures or higher.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
part of this is also driven by a
higher ed funding formula is
performance based and when we do
have additional dollars the
formula works well in rewarding
those schools that are doing
well with their graduates.
You know this is a state that
has a major commitment to
education both of the
K. twelve level as well as
higher education we want to
educate our phones because we
think that helps drive the
economy and we've had good
discussion about why more money
needs to go into higher
education throughout the interim
process and we feel like that's
where it needs to go.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for the answers to my
questions thank you Sir.
Next area the gentle lady from
granted on go and this year
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker and madam
chairman for McKinley County if
you yell.
Eight year old and I like the
mask.
Thank you Mr speaker madam chair
of those the.
I thank you so much to you and
the members of the committee for
all their work on the budget
extremely complicated there's
one hundred provisions in there
that I realized.
and for time's sake of course.
It's we seem to focus on the
areas where we still have
questions and my questions are
in regards to the education
portion of the budget I'm.
And really the fact that this
budget.
Includes I I if I get this right
seven point two percent increase
in the SCG for school districts
Representative eight hundred
billion increase the SCG Mr
speaker and gentleman I and if
it's every student correct.
excuse me Mr speaker gentle lady
did you say seven point two
percent increase in HSD I'm
sorry I can't that we're getting
a little echo of here.
There's always.
Speaker gentle lady of what
we're looking at public schools
support here is six point one
percent and the percentage
change from the off budget for
state equalization guarantee
that increases six point one.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you and then is that correct
that is a one point five percent
increase for educators okay yes
Mr speaker yes gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady do we also
include the hold harmless
provision for districts there is
no way negatively impacted for
the students who had to see
educational health where they
will receive funding for those
students.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
we've done in in response to
that is where allowing the
formula to work within the
formula there is an enrollment
increase and decrease
component.
And we feel like because the
total in terms of hold harmless
at least from what we heard was
about six million dollars
between the formula working and
the increase of four hundred and
thirty three million in December
and one billion in the final
package we feel like these
districts would be in good
shape.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you madam chair I I agree with
that I definitely think that
that is true and I feel like
this body has a greatly
prioritize.
With the dollars that you
mentioned and I concur with that
we are the public schools
institutions systems and
institute parlous but I don't
know that what we stand for
public school students what we
what I do know we have that
we've come from in person
learning from almost ten months
we left at least four of our
students with no in person
learning option led by the
actions of our largest school
district.
We voted down House Bill to
thirteen that we've provided is
for special education families
to procure services that
districts have refused to
provide we aren't even going to
hear.
The bill that would provide
money to low income families to
offset the cost of their
students learning from home.
Yet LFC is telling us that
online learning as part.
And so I'm wondering I thought
in the in the into the it's more
of a lot of conversation and
there is consistency around
holding institutions harmless if
they were as one of the law
allows yet we're seeing
districts who are allowed to
vote.
The school board voted to remain
closed and I I understand your
districts so that different
because of the the and we can
see of COVID overall and what
was the thought process in
holding the future of harmless
without any condition of re
opening as long as Mexico law
allow.
you know that's a good
discussion Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I think part of the issue It Liz
from of the HSC perspective is
is that we've got eighty nine
school districts that have
eighty nine differences of
governance.
And so when you have these I
would call it separate
governance with the school
board.
How well we can say inside the
budget we have a.
recommendation the actual
implementation happens at their
level which in some ways for
many of us can be very
frustrating I know in the past
Mr speaker gentle lady will do
things like future increases of
four percent and then we find
out the following year that's
not what happens
so we can provide guidance we
can find direction
there's going to be independent
decision making by the school
districts we tried to capture
that Mr speaker gentle lady on
page one sixty eight of the
budget bill looking at line
eight through thirteen.
As a as a way to to try to
address your question
we're happy to continue the
conversation we know where
you're where you're getting I
think.
Thank you yeah thank you Mr
speaker and thank you to the
lady and I know you alone to
make decisions but I definitely
sense the frustration of the
interim finance committee
at as to why we are fully
funding school districts who
could not justify their
expenditures
they're not operating.
And so I do agree that we need
to invest in our poll but it
should I believe it should be
contingent upon providing those
options that were everyone
almost every state in the United
States of America has figured
out how to re open almost every
state has figured out how to
make sure that every family has
a in person option not just
because of that's for our
students but it's something
that's necessary for us to get
back to normal.
And so I.
I just think that the teacher
increases should have been made
available to districts that put
in the work to create and
implement safe return to school
plans.
And we I just saw an article
from clear to me that some
teachers in New Mexico are now
saying that they won't return to
school until the students are
vaccinated that's all of twenty
twenty two a year from now.
The part Madam Mr speaker and
madam chair that
We keep hearing is that the
Martinez lawsuit.
Requires us to do that without
question the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit I think those are smart
there's nothing.
That were identified populations
that were identified under
served under funded yes this
budget seems to raise the cost
nearly.
Miss at vice chair small said
that we are putting in
mandatory.
Participation in K. twelve and
extended learning and we're
finding a hundred percent of the
districts for this and the
language as I read it in the
budget requires that this
occurred Mr speaker chairman did
I misunderstand not.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I'd like to make a couple
comments on that is that
our budget as soon as schools
are all open in the fall as you
know because we kick in on July
one so fast with the budget
assumes because we don't we no
crystal ball there on what these
various districts are going to
do I also wanted to mention Mr
speaker gentle lady school
districts don't get the extra
extended learning dollars unless
there in person those additional
dollars a Representative small
had mentioned a lesser in person
they will receive that.
I think of some of your
questions are very much long
term policy questions
that wouldn't be addressed
necessarily in our budget
because we are assuming schools
open in the fall so it's
there's a lot of good discussion
there but I don't know that it
directly ties into much you've
got a line that we can talk
about and we can respond to that
be helpful Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you madam chair I am referring
to the the request of the
superintendents association of
school boards association NEA
AFT small schools large schools
rural schools metro schools for
flexibility with extended and
K. five plus and actually a
unanimous vote from the house
Education Committee and house
bill one eighty four that school
districts have less flexibility
in the way that they implement
K. five plus extended learning.
I have a line in front of me and
should part is selling which is
not present in the fact that you
have expert witness with you so
they probably know the rate I'm
referring to is the ability Mr
speaker gentle lady what they're
telling me is that there is that
this is not a requirement.
biz XP's extended learning days
that just been an informed
about.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair I do not agree
provided with the language says
but I guess we will trust and
for that is what we were told
when Senate bill four passed but
there is flexibility and I feel.
Have this on record and be able
to hold.
the school department.
Thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady with the
gentle lady from
And with family McKinley point
family please you I'm sorry Mr
speaker can.
Senator Baker.
I got the news that Marshall.
Mr speaker gentleman I sorry I
can't I can't hear you.
Was right here.
Okay can you hear me now thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady which with
gentle lady from McKinley County
please yield I would be happy to
yield thank you gentle lady
I want to do is go over a little
bit the stress test that you
mentioned earlier on only just
revenues and and that was a big
part of our budget around thirty
five percent and Representative
Anderson brought some just some
good questions on in that regard
I believe you mentioned that the
price tag for this budget year
is forty seven dollars a barrel
what is the what is the price
decker the estimated price for
natural gas.
So that that Mr speaker gentle.
Thank you gentlelady.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
asking for this period of the
price for natural gas excuse me.
I guess it's your budget
forecasts for natural gas prices
are ready for now I think I
think in in you might want to
correct me gentlelady
on the oil on the oil price deck
at I know you I think the
January snapshot was forty seven
dollars but I know that your
annual estimate.
is Mr speaker and gentleman it
is the we use forty seven
dollars a barrel in building
this budget and then for natural
gas it was two dollars and
seventy cents.
Two seventy okay thank you
gentle lady last year was a was
a rough year in all respects not
only with the with the COVID in
the in the government shutdown
end and the decline in oil and
gas prices due to the recession
last year was the low water mark
I think the price we received
in and the county was about
fourteen dollars a barrel and
thank goodness that was a that
was the bottom and is steadily
increasing as we speak
On the
Did they build in the budget
some some regulatory uncertainty
and and what I'm referring to
gentle lady Mr speaker is at the
by an administration is putting
a year pause on the leasing.
And sixty day delay on on
permits water ways
of pop on runways mainly and and
permissions real for sixty days.
They fact renters that that slow
down and how it will affect our
rig count in and future
production volume is that isn't
that is kind of an unknown.
That we have.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman one
way issued our general fund
consensus revenue estimate in
February.
what it says and I'll just I'll
just representation may not have
this right front of you but on
page three it says the revenue
estimate considers the impact of
these orders all these orders a
law are not expected to
considerably affect production
in the short term they create
considerable uncertainty within
the industry and risk the
forecast should be orders
extended or expanded to
recognizing the uncertainty the
consensus estimate holds the oil
and natural gas production
estimates flat for the forecast
period in other words it would
have been a higher number of
rent higher revenue estimate so
we did take that into
consideration Mr speaker and
gentleman and we actually had a
subcommittee of HFC that was led
by our vice chair looking in
into the us we had to reports
provided to the committee we
actually have one report that
was
with in conjunction with Senate
finance I can tell you your
budget makers are very well
aware of this kind of
volatility.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady you know
The the stress test and LFC is
is put together is really
important and I.
In the process and more with the
the lady jets ladies and
gentlemen of the house then that
was really game changer in my
humble opinion to really beacons
you know super safe on on a on
the price deck scenario
for oil and gas and also the
volumes because we've we've
we've had a volatility.
Really since two thousand two
thousand eight is that right
utility
Mr speaker.
Yes Sir absolutely Mr speaker
gentleman and I mean I that's
the reason we were into special
sessions.
In the Mr speaker and and gentle
lady
I don't know where I got this
number but I thought the the
initial price deck for oil for
this fiscal years was thirty
eight dollars which was at last
year's did I get that number
wrong on the.
Seems like I remember thirty
eight dollars.
All was very.
Okay looking at our our numbers
here Mister speaker gentleman
and yes for the forecast was
actually thirty eight that was
last year okay that was last
year okay now so so it's
improved dramatically this year
and I think and the reason for
that gentle lady and and Mr
speakers at you know as economy
opens up is is we open up our
businesses we're saying search
economic activity is we pull out
of this this recession so that's
that's a that's an option that's
that's it that's good news for
the state of New Mexico.
generally don't want to switch
gears with a little bit on the
unemployment insurance fund.
I know that I had hit rock
bottom you probably know a lot
more that than I do of we were
we were we've had a ball from
the federal government to keep
that trust fund.
alive and I I noticed that this
budget
Contributes or are funds three
hundred million dollars into
that unemployment insurance fund
can you can you give us a little
background on that and how this
is step in right direction I
sure well thank you Mr speaker
that's a great question and wait
we also see that as a.
Part of the economic stimulus is
to be able to help restore the
unemployment insurance fund
because I was necessary this
last year that the federal loan
be taken out to try to make that
whole so what we're trying to do
is to take on nonrecurring
dollars and put that back into
the fund to the G. A. A. R.
through the supplemental GA so.
The General Appropration Act
process we're looking at the and
FY twenty one providing a
hundred twenty five million in
FY twenty two providing two
hundred million.
So I'd be a total of three
hundred twenty five million.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
the was it.
The trust fund was it down to
zero is is that my understanding
is that maybe we just have to
in completely dry.
In and then we had to borrow
money from the federal
government like seven hundred
million dollars and.
Am I wrong in Mr speaker and
gentleman it was getting to be
bone dry almost that we did have
to take out the you know the the
loan and help from the federal
government I have to look at the
exact amount that was taken out
I'm not sure on that dollar
figure but will look it up for
you.
Thank you.
Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
I know this is a big deal and we
we've got a pay back to the
federal government I just I just
don't recall how much we had to
borrow from the federal
government and we do have a plan
to pay that back
a baby maybe you're experts can
can give us kind of a game plan
to to shore that up.
Mr speaker gentleman we did
provide the information here if
we don't start paying this back
by the end of the year we could
be up to five hundred million in
the whole so we need to we need
to start.
Thank we need to start filling
up on.
In a thank you Mr Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Is it is there anyway I know we
may be getting some additional
federal dollars
can we use some of those federal
dollars for for.
To replenishing the the
insurance fund are our state is
allowed.
Mr speaker Joan the staff is
telling me that it is a maybe
that we're hoping that's going
to be a live allowable under the
federal package with president
by.
Engine lady Mr speaker gentle
lady what is the ballpark figure
that this new stimulus package
is is
developing in in may come our
way.
I understand it might be as
much.
Point two billion dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman is one
point six billion dollars okay
I'm short okay.
As for yet R. I. generally thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady that that that
Representative sure that.
Further debate the gentleman
from curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will the.
Madam chair from McKinley County
please you I'd be happy to yield
Mister speaker.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair as I kind of went through
the process of of what what
would I say if I had an
opportunity to make remarks
I I went back to their very
first organizational meeting
that we have for we is like
double social distancing and
the.
And the main body room up there
with me.
And notice right quickly that we
have a lot of new members on
house appropriation committee
for this year for this process.
And now we all came from
different backgrounds different
locations.
And and I noticed that all of us
had different ideas about what
what we're going to try to
accomplish of their.
As I thought about it is is like
a.
Maybe I heard of high strung
horses.
there were bucking and snorting
and and
Career and up right you know we
are ready to go with you
personally handle the reins and
and
Firm grip on the reins you got
it is through a process that
Resulted in having a budget less
than five weeks.
And I thank you for your your
fair and even handed leadership
as we went through the process
I know that we have all the
knowledge through your
leadership and I just want to
thank you for that up front.
I do have a few questions about
the process.
that we went through to get here
and all of the items have
already been covered.
about two weeks ago.
We looked at our revenue
estimate we're we saw that there
will be a additional hundred
ninety two point one million
dollars available for the twenty
one budget.
Hundred sixty nine point six
million dollars available for
the twenty two budget.
And based on some comments that
we heard yesterday following
through the building.
I I thought it be appropriate to
ask how did we arrive at these
two numbers did the director of
LESC and his economists just
come up with these out of thin
air how did we get to these two
numbers gentle lady.
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman absolutely not this is
a very
wanted tentative process is done
by our chief economist the chief
economist from the LFC from DFA
department of transportation
these folks
are the best of the best and
they come together and they help
identify with that consensus
revenue will look like.
Thank you madam chair and and I
know there was a second major
component of the of the current
report that we received.
At the bottom of page two of the
report says the impact on
general fund revenues related to
oil and gas activity accounts
for about seventy five percent
of the increase expected in the
general fund revenues above the
December estimate.
And we talked at length about
the
Price per barrel this budget is
forty seven dollars no on the
credit report on page three it
says that.
Twenty one it was a forty three
fifty was the number that we use
in and twenty or this forty four
point oh one.
And it has the number of all the
oil volume in the natural gas
prices and natural gas volumes
it's it's a very informative
document.
The gentle lady I I just want to
make sure everyone understands
the
The director of LFC.
In is a column are not the
people that made the decision
for this that was the Craig
estimating group as you just
mentioned.
So I wanted to make sure that
the the body was informed of
that.
July I took the opportunity to
inquire of a couple of our
members of this body
regarding the
forty seven dollars a barrel
number we've got several members
in this body that are from the
oil and gas industry are very
knowledgeable in the field.
And the question I'm asking is
is this reasonable in your
professional opinion not as an
economist but as a as a member
of that industry is forty seven
dollars a reasonable number to
use for our budget for the
coming year.
The twenty two budget.
And in both of them said yes
that that is a reasonable number
it is not a bullet proof number
it is you know there could be
some volatility but it is a
reasonable number to start with.
And I very much appreciated no
comments
Confirming that the all the work
that we've done the experts we
had used did find something that
industry agreed was reasonable.
Gentlelady we have I've already
talked about the my thoughts
concerning the public safety and
corrections and and the
assistance we're able to provide
through the budget process this
year.
I do believe that this budget
It's not perfect it's a good
budget.
But it is based on performance
measures and outcomes.
And is based in that was built
primarily from the for the
purpose of governing.
I think that is something that
we overlook sometimes we get
accused of building.
But just the initiative based
we're trying to push this
initiative that initiative and I
don't think this budget does
that I think this is an as a
governing based budgets in and
I very much appreciate that.
You have all.
One issue with the budget that I
would I would like to address I
do have an amendment that I
would like to propose.
And it has to do with the
transfer of the one million
dollars from the workers comp
and ministration.
To the workforce solutions group
I've known about this transfer
for years even before I was a
lack of new about the transfer
by Senator Representative learn
Iago.
That I learned where the money
is being transferred to the was
going over to workforce
solutions.
That time is going the labor
relations board.
The this year they have
transferred into a different
location actually.
Transferring to the implement
insurance program and and
employment services program.
But I went back and looked at
the statute gentle lady and now
I guess I probably should Mr
speaker I move the amendment and
then discussed that.
go from there it has been passed
out I believe.
German more leading the pool to
number.
Yes Mr speaker the chill number
two to number is two two zero.
One five one point one on hang
on just a second we're going to
see if it's been posted we know
it's been passed out let's see
what's on the web.
All right it's been posted
gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker this is
this is just to transfer it's
been going on for years from the
work comp administration fund.
To workforce solutions and one
point I was told well there is a
significant Neff listening
because they both have the word
work and I'm so it's okay if we
do this.
But as I read the statute.
It appears to me that that is.
Not happening appropriately in
section five two dash I dash
nineteen there's a fee for
funding the workers compensation
administration fund.
And it's a vehicle to two
dollars and thirty cents.
Multiplied by the number of
employees and that's the
responsibility of the employer
and then each employee it is
phase two of fifty two dollars
which is deducted from his wages
each quarter.
And it says a.
Like I say in the title it says
it's for funding administration
of the workers compensation
administration fund that's where
the money is directed to go
Arizona carry out on the thirty
cents.
And says that it's provided in
an amount equal to thirty cents
per employee of the fee.
And shall be distributed from
the workers compensation
ministration Fund to the
uninsured employers Fund.
So the language is very clear
the statue just for the money
should go yet the transfers
taking place is going into
programs is not going into the
fund.
And that doesn't seem
appropriate I know when I had
the number of employees for many
many many years.
we always believed that the
money that we paid in quarterly
the two dollar fee would go
toward workers compensation.
And and so
Mr speaker and madam chair I
spoke about this.
The full six three years I've
been up here and and I just feel
like it's a fundamentally
inappropriate use of the funds
that have been paid in and I
thought I would bring it to the
public's attention and this is
the only way I could think of to
do so Mr speaker madam chair
Stand for questions on the
amendment find out if this is a
family member of the New Mexico
to sponsor generated this is a
friendly amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker this is
would not be a friendly
amendment.
Let's go to the body Is there
debate on the amendment.
See none the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
This.
I'm sorry Senator amendment yes
Mr speaker I couldn't figure out
how to attention.
And consume more to just wave at
the screen that's fine gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker
Three.
This particular fund
is it healthy enough.
First remove money from it.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you for the question Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan.
I'm not one hundred percent sure
of where it is but I do know
that four dollars of the four
dollars and thirty cents
monies.
It is to stay within the funding
can't be transferred to
implement some my opinion I
don't know the mathematical
ratio of how much is in there
and how much is been transferred
out and I know that thirty
sense of that four thirty can be
transferred within the it's very
clear them all and you
transferred to the make sure you
just read it correctly.
Can be distributed from the
workers compensation
ministration Fund to the
uninsured employers Fund.
In the languages within the bill
is is a little bit different
that allows the transfer into.
Two lives on.
It's being transferred.
Into the administration fund for
the employment services program
so it's not going into a fund is
going into a program.
Speaker and gentleman here in
your opinion and that that is
that is not a proper transfer.
in my opinion no it is very
clear in statute that it should
go to the unemployment fund
movie instead is being directed
to a program instead of a phone.
Thank you Mr speaker the reason
for your appropriating a lot of
money over seven.
Million dollars here and I'm not
sure.
Why we would need to if if that
needs to be funded are we doing
it in the through this
mechanism.
Mr speaker German the throughout
the years the fund has
accumulated some monies and it.
with with the fee was
established
Back in two thousand and four.
It generated more money than
anticipated record a bill about
two years ago to cut the amount
of money and have that an
employee pays in the employer
would continue to pay the full
amount the bills not successful
in passing.
I do know that there are a lot
of needs and the work comp
administration on repeatedly
through the years the thing they
need a few more judges they need
a few more folks on the street
to help administer their
programs.
And the I know the not this
administration department
administration I had it was very
tight with allowing them to
prepare their buildings and and
buy new vehicles and things of
that nature
and and so I believe that the
money could be put to use yes it
was allowed.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so
We know that the unemployment
insurance fund is is something
that employers are worried about
their worried about what's going
to happen I know we have some
money going to back fill I'm
just wondering why this was not
money used to to backfill.
That phone.
There again Mr speaker and
gentleman there there is a ratio
that has to be considered all it
can be transferred unemployment
is that thirty cents of the four
dollars and thirty cents four
dollars needs to stay in the
administration the workers comp
and ministration on.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I appreciate the.
Right is there further debate on
the amendment and all we let's
make sure is there for the
debate on the amendment not on
the bill.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
I'm.
Amendment all right the motion
on the table to get you on the
on the floor to table the
amendment vote of yes the
amendment is table and a vote of
no and we will go back to the
bill.
Is now open.
Thirty seconds.
Current electronic questions
close support to call the
remaining members.
Representative traded.
Representative.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Stansbury both
yes.
Forty four in the affirmative
and twenty four in the negative
the amendment has been tabled
moreover were turned out of the
bill gentleman is still on the
floor Representative Crowder.
Would you start attacking Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair I I appreciate the
opportunity to have that
considered
Not because of the COVID madam
chair the gentleman about thirty
or forty years ago use a good
friend of mine looking right now
and you told me said the.
He said you're about as close to
a pure pragmatist environment.
And I look back at him and I had
no idea what you just said I
don't know whether thank you or
what she meant or what to do
that I don't know what that
meant.
I found out very quickly it
means thanks for me have to be
reasonable and practical.
Logical.
And I believe that your bill
bill that came out of your
committee madam chair.
Is a bill that is logical and
reasonable and practical.
In a look forward to supporting
renewable madam chair thank you
Mr speaker thank you madam chair
thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr stern.
Share
I yield Mister speaker.
Thank you very much.
Approved thirty questions with
respect to the education piece
is the settlement terms.
With respect to.
The one and a half percent range
finance.
But the people in my district is
that.
R. this one Representative res
gonna be based off of an average
we're on our caller number.
Mr.
Your.
Mr speaker gentleman that would
be an average.
Madam speaker Mr speaker
As as talk to.
Difference.
One of one of my concerns
the unfunded mandates.
The
last twelve months.
Some of that screen.
These.
Reuters.
The schools are just.
A cell phones.
Four percent modems through
twenty twenty three.
One of the items seem to.
Be covered by anything.
Are you for this.
Your reserves so first is that
something is funded thanks.
The school district manager Mr
speaker.
I'm I'm sorry Mr speaker gentle
I heard I I didn't hear what you
asked it did it covers.
As as as our place in the budget
goes to each individual school
system school districts Madam
chair for the March thirteenth
voters from this point four.
I see I I use the air filters
you're asking me about Mr
speaker gentleman thank you what
what happens in this is that.
Each each school district
receives through the funding
formula.
An amount of funds that go to it
individually is distributed
by the school board in other
words they set the policy and
how we use things like air
filters in ventilation and
things like that.
I assume it's because of COVID
you're you're asking me and
It would be paid for generally
through mail laughing there's a
there's a there's a mill levy
available as well as is this new
federal money that's supposed to
be coming in.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally
that that's.
What does carries a part we they
in the in the area the no.
What I'm trying to figure out
this is and as this money was
put together and we actually
started funding.
Some of the different things
that we have the we are.
On.
It sounds like this is the
schools and I have to continue
to figure out what
thank you for your service.
Madam chair Mr speaker you know
Mister speaker gentleman
generally in our work in
discussions with the PED's
secretary.
they're they're directed to
based health committee
recommendations there's a
there's a state health committee
working with the governor that
provides direction to pass and
then paired provides the
direction to the school
district.
But that direction is based on
the federal funding that they'll
be receiving
I don't think that they're just
left out in the cold I don't
want to leave that impression at
all because there is federal
cares money coming into the
state we received four hundred
and thirty three million in
December.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair in the center of the
state earlier I'm just trying to
get clarification so.
Former school districts and so.
The state question on the
the point of this I'm still
learning.
RT at C..
The the one thousand forty hours
for the seven through twelve
more than nine hundred ninety
hours a for fun the C. those
The tender Department.
Learn.
I specifically on one school
system the seeds of ours in the
sense by more than three
hundred.
And and is that we and and.
This is the slogan here for.
Will they still receive funding
that goes along with that
Senator provides thank you Mr
speaker thank you madam chair.
Okay so I'm gonna restate
restate the question so I
understand what you're asking me
Mr speaker gentleman what you're
saying is that you have some
school districts within your
house district that exceeds
those extra day requirements
for the
Regular school year and you're
wondering whether or not they
would still be eligible to
receive those additional dollars
is that is that what you're
asking Mr speaker gentleman.
Sure yes okay creating that
that's exactly what I'm just.
yes that's a very good question
and.
The answer is they would as long
as they are in compliance there
would be no reason why they
wouldn't receive those
additional dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair will be happy to
hear the.
I did just get taxes another
question does school half term
for extended in learning to all
of their student population in
order to stay.
well Mr speaker and gentleman my
understanding on this is that it
has to be in person in order to
get that those additional
dollars and so yes I mean they.
But not all of them.
They might might might choose to
do different grades Department.
Okay.
Thank you thank you very much
the madam chair thank you
speaker I yield back my time.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from real reverse
Santa Fe and house
representative for a.
With the general I will the
gentle lady you know.
Be happy to yield.
At madam chair I would like to
commend the gentle lady this is
been mopping.
Second year on probation and I
have never been through this
process in the first part of the
legislative session and it was
it was really for those members
of the house you don't know it
was really quite an amazing a
process to go through every
single agency in state
government I have people who
have tracked is carefully report
back to the committee and then
for us to really examine how the
agency was working and how we
could better perform for the
people of New Mexico but I I
wanted to send a connectivity to
say that I was really truly
impressed by what the committee
did for for small businesses we
have we have worked throughout
this that Committee session to
see how we could help small
business is that we're really
struggling to this pandemic and
I I just want to comment on how
impressed I was with how we took
care of the unemployment
compensation and for the for
those of you that don't know I
had many many small businesses
we worried about the fact that
we would have to go back and
race and unemployment
compensation rates and that they
would be left holding the bag on
this pandemic and that that is a
critical issue for small
businesses and I just wanted to
again I know and I know another
holic has brought this up but I
just wanted to say how important
that was for small businesses in
the north holding on it just
trying to hold on to this and
they were just
it was just dreading at that
rate would go up so I just
wanted to compliment the chair
on thank you Matt thank you your
gentle lady.
All right there is further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley score
of San Juan and once you
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker
The madam chair from killing
someone coming up he's here.
Mr speaker I'd be happy to
yield.
Mr speaker madam young lady I've
heard insurers on the region's.
Since we get a deliberation on
this bill what what what is
assumed for to have somebody
give somebody a pay raise and
retain them when we place of.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman it's
a lot easier to go the cost of
living increase to try to
replace somebody is is much more
expensive.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker that that's one of
trying to get across to the body
because it is here to keep
somebody is already in place and
to replace a more of a reason
Madam chair Mister speaker.
chair Mister speaker you
consider than we did appear
rural across the board for all
departments on on this budget.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I do I believe that
we've had fair hearings it is
been very transparent hearing.
We when we had questions about
the differences on the different
sheet we have small committees
to get together bipartisan
committees and they come back
with a recommendation from the
whole.
thank you Mr speaker madam madam
chair members are brought that
up I want to committee to be
aware of all of the faucet we're
now also want to the general
public Moul all the Sanchez
works is we we don't send this
committee and pick and choose on
anybody it's a fair assumption
of possible correct.
Speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
madam chair Mister speaker.
On you know we are funded public
safety public schools higher
rated department of health and
full we're
would the department
transportation they got over a
billion dollars in your budget
Mr speaker madam chair.
Which is one of the biggest
economic drivers in our state
madam chair.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman it's
my opinion as a certified
economic developer that I
believe that construction
stimulate the economy in the one
of the quickest ways and those
construction projects our
districts are throughout the
state of New Mexico so those
local communities those local
governments it to participate in
that tax increase but I mean is
tax revenue coming into their
into their coffers.
madam chair Mister speaker that
would be a good assumption to
say the department of
transportation ranks pretty high
on this list.
Mr chairman excuse me Mr speaker
absolutely.
Thank you madam chair for that
just go on a few more questions
on the reserve madam chair I
think you mentioned were about
twenty two percent how much of a
big forty two percent is good
matter Mr speaker madam chair
how much of a big does that have
on the bond ratings to have a
good up reserve.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that isn't very
critical component in bond
rating is what your reserve
hands.
Thank for us it says safety
valve when we have volatility in
our economy.
And things like pandemics we
could see how important a high
reserve level was when we came
in the special session in
meeting our requirements in the
state budget.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker a couple of questions
will go well question madam
chair and speaker how important
is on William gas more budget
and more schools.
Mr speaker gentlemen oil and gas
is a major contributor to our
general fund budget what we're
talking about new money in the
last revenue projections seventy
five percent of that comes from
that sector of the economy and
of course because the largest
portion of our budget falls into
the public school system it
becomes me just by default
incredibly important public
school thank you madam chair
Mister speaker thank but I'm
sure
This is a at around can answer
this question madam chair Mister
speaker public charter was just
for you to run a committee under
the circumstances now right now
a virtual in rules and so forth
out of madam chair.
That's an interesting question
Mr speaker gentlemen but I can
tell you it is incredibly
difficult that's why I was very
important to me that those
members that could be here
personally is because of the
amount of information that has
to that has to be distributed it
becomes very important I can
tell you this is I became the
chairman of the chance to HMC
and in twenty seventeen.
And I've never experienced a
budget building process like the
one we've just been through it
is incredibly difficult
you know when you spend a
quarter of your time.
With things like she we can't
hear you we can't see it there's
raised frame you know there's
things like that I think more
importantly we bond as a
committee would work together.
When we actually can sit
together and we can talk and we
can share information you don't
and it makes me sad that for
rookies they weren't able to
experience that much this year
but we're gonna make up for it
we're gonna make up for next
year.
Madam chair and Mr speaker thank
you just mentioned madam chair
it's awful hard for you to this
usually is on what happened and
can you you know I'm seventy two
years old madam chair it is
really difficult for me to
go into this mode in my lifetime
who's going to rules in virtual
there's very hard you know this
is my fifth year in this
committee and I just want Golden
State your.
A good leader you get together
no.
Considering the hard and we're
having right now madam chair
Mister speaker you did a
fabulous job then you thank you
thank you Mr speaker.
is further debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr.
Gentle lady from McKinley and
selling candles and you'll I
would be happy to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I am one of
those returning members and I
look forward to to the extra
bonding describes next year this
debate has has gone on for a
while so I just want to focus.
Just the two areas that I don't
believe have been highlighted
yet.
Of Mr speaker it's my
understanding.
with regard to judicial
employees specific districts and
measure measure court judges.
That they're receiving of the
one and a half percent that all.
Is receiving that and there are
receiving additional two percent
is that correct Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman the two
percent addition is for judges
only.
Thank you Mr speaker and I I
want to highlight that for the
body because I actually think
this is really important for our
state as an attorney and and one
who practices regularly and the
district court's.
Are being sort of what I would
consider this this rising issue
that if we don't address in the
coming years I think we're going
to be in a serious position and
I think this budget helps to
start addressing that and the
issue that I've seen of the
District Court levels we have
very dedicated District Court
judges but they have a very
large caseload
and when you look at the
salaries of our district judges
compared to what most lawyers
make in the private sector it
can be very difficult to
recruit.
High quality judges because to
me because of that rate
differential and so I think this
budget goes a long ways towards
helping that and I I believe
that there's of some momentum to
do that the future well Mr
speaker the other
the budget a I want to highlight
the city money my last one is.
With regard to future loan
repayment that program as well
as a teacher scholarships if I
read the budget correctly those
two combined as provide twenty
five million Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman they're
two separate categories and yes
we did find increase in that
what I remember for the loan
repayment was five million but
let us to get the exact number.
There we go we have
Of the teacher loan there we go
all the teacher loan repayment
Fund Mr speaker John has a five
million and the teacher
preparatory preparation
affordability scholarship was at
twenty.
Thank you Mr speaker Sir I
believe that combined twenty
five million also will go a long
ways toward serving a practical
need in our state eight of which
is the need to continue to
recruit high quality teachers
and so I this I think this
provides an incentive for people
to consider education of the
realistic career pathway and so
I appreciate that the budget as
well and again I just a clever
and else's can comments
regarding how this committee is
wrong I I as an attorney
appreciate how organized you are
probably through the starting
off point.
the wrong given the opportunity
to address the state agencies
and that the sure one Sherman
very good about bringing us
refuse along and and at times it
it's important to thrown in the
deep and and learn how to swim
and she does that very carefully
and very well so thank you Mr
speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from any County
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker and so the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan CCO and be happy to
yield Mister speaker.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mister speaker.
So the overall budget for fiscal
year twenty twenty two hours
seven point three nine billion
dollars and of that amount madam
chair I believe three point two
billion is devoted to public
schools support my number's
correct madam chair Mister
speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it
sounds correct based on my high
levels right from the thank you
Mr speaker madam chair so
One of the things I think a lot
of people don't know is that we
put together the state budget
we're not just looking at dollar
figures but also at performance
measures for the agencies in for
the public school system one of
those metrics the is found on
page two hundred seventy four
the budget and it deals with
performance measures for reading
and mathematics madam chair
Mister speaker so the outcome
order where is the target of
four percent of fourth grade
students who achieved
proficiency or above are the
standards based assessment in
reading is thirty four percent.
For mathematics of fourth grade
students thirty four percent.
so I just want to make a comment
that are you I'm really
disappointed with how low that
target is I did look at a couple
other schools online just kind
of a random and I saw some
schools are setting targets of
ninety five percent versus
proficiency in above for fourth
grade students.
I also compared madam chair
Mister speaker targets in math
and reading from the previous
year's budget and it was Mike
was thirty four percent in both
categories.
So Mr speaker madam chair I I
hope the public understands that
this is probably really not
acceptable target and as I
explained in committee one day I
consider mathematics is job one
and reading his job Capitalbay
these are the most basic skills
and I would like to see us a
higher in what we do and then Mr
speaker and gentle lady also
point out that the outcome in
math and reading of eighth grade
students is thirty four percent
minorities and striving for the
stretch goal to improve these
outcomes for students as they as
they work through the school
system.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I am
concerned about the other sixty
six percent of the students and
I know this is probably a
cover the statewide average but
I think we need to do much
better than that and we're
spending a lot of money.
The point two billion dollars to
educate our children.
And we should be getting more
for our money at least in math
and reading but on the positive
side Mr speaker and and gentle
lady I I also want to commend
Madam chair for the wonderful
way in which she conducts the
committee I don't think people
realize how much work it is for
her in the Aussies and even you
know we're.
In session for a certain number
of days every year but we also
work in our districts when we're
in the interim but for madam
chair and and a few others I
think it's really a year round
task and I I really think
the representative for all of
her efforts and I also want to
thank the legislative finance
committee the department of
finance and administration and
all the staff none of this could
have been without their support
so madam chair will be
supporting the bill and it is a
privilege to serve on your
committee thank you Mr chairman.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Miguel Santa
Fe and Torrance.
Speaker will
Young lady from McKinley is on
one you'll please.
Happy happy to yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from McKinley I I guess there's
no more words left to say about
your dedication and your hard
work to this committee being a
freshman as well in this
committee I just C. L. U.
gracefully accept bipartisan.
People working together to to
come to a budget that it affects
you Mexico families and I think
being on is what it was a
privilege.
To be here and and see how the
dynamics works with the
chairwoman that.
Involves everybody I think all
of us on this committee had a
chance to discuss.
Or bring up concerns on this
budget in and I just want to
thank you like I say there's no
words left to say how much I
appreciate in on this committee
and and it was a pleasure and I
thank you madam chair Mr speaker
that's all I have to say and I
yield.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Katrin Sapporo
and eight Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan yield I'll yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady hi to echo all the
sentiments that have been stated
about to this committee unless
you're on it
nobody really understands how
hard you work how hard the
legislative finance committee
work how everybody works so hard
and the
training that we go through
thanks to you madam madam chair
and Mr speaker that you are
intentional about teaching us
how things work and the good the
bad the ugly and we appreciate
it
honestly we appreciate it and I
just want you to know that it is
an honor to serve on this
committee it is my favorite
Canadian sorry representative
Debbie Armstrong but this is my
favorite Canadian and the
appreciate all your hard work
and your willingness to work
together and bring us all
together and I to madam chair
and Mr speaker look forward to
the day when we are together
again.
Thank you Mr speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker does that
wonderful gentle chair yield.
I'd be happy to yield Mister
speaker thank you thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady so I
have gotten a text about the
Medicaid budget and some folks
are worried that there's a
significant hole anywhere from
sixty to a hundred million
so so could you talk a little
bit madam chair and Mr speaker
about how we are actually going
to cover that hole in the.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and I know this
is something that you're very
close to and when you served on
HSC this is something that you
are expert in New we're sorry to
lose you because I could always
turn to you and ask you
questions about this budget but
what we're what we're going to
see this year is actually an
increase because of what the ad
federal government has allowed
us to have and that's an
additional two quarters worth of
of
of dollars which is seventy five
million per quarter.
We are of course as you know we
have to match everything we get
and we have provided for that in
our in our budget bill.
areas increased enrollment and
we're glad to see that because
we want people to get care.
But we don't
we don't necessarily think that
there is going to be that kind
of hole
I just haven't seen now and
can't I don't understand where
people are coming from when when
that kind of COVID is the main.
Thank you Mr speaker Madam so
put our thumbs up by saying that
legislative in the the increased
F. map you are assuming will
take care of that of what made
you have a whole.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady I do
I do believe that okay thank you
that's all I have thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you Representative.
Thank you.
Generated from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield I yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlelady Lundstrom I wanted to
just comment as a first year
member of the Appropriations
Committee how much I appreciate
the work that goes into
preparing the budget through the
year not only by the staff who
do a fabulous job but also with
you madam chair the vice chair
and at the senior members of the
committee who really take the
time to explain many of the
intricacies of the budget
process to those of us who are
new
and I also wanted to
particularly recognize what I
believe is very important to be
considered when we're looking at
the budget which is the data and
performance metrics because I
think it's very important that
when we as legislators are
considering how to allocate
funding.
I appreciate having the data
that shows us what is working
and what's not working and I
really wanted to highlight that
because I think it is part of
good governance and so thank you
very much
thank you the chairman Lundstrom
and Mr speaker.
I will use the price of the
chair before just the gentle
lady to close.
Tune thank
the chairman provisions of
finance Canada generated from
McKinley and San Juan for having
done an outstanding job.
in producing a budget during
what I think would probably be
considered the most challenging
will just to call circumstances
ever faced by Appropriations
Committee of the work of a vice
chair representative small in
the entire committee have done
an outstanding job of making
sure that everyone's voices were
heard the committee was
conducted openly and
transparently and that we have
right arrives resolve any result
that appears headed for
a bipartisan support in the for
the house is been a tremendous
effort I personally appreciate.
very very much the hard work of
the committee and other great
result that they have put
together in the bill before the
body thank you very much.
And with that.
The gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I like to
think of I'd like to thank the
body today for the time in
discussing our bill this is a
very important piece of work of
the New Mexico legislature is
involved with certainly under
our New Mexico constitution is
our number one responsibility
again I'd like to thank all the
members of the committee I'd
like to thank all of our staff.
And I'd like to thank you Mr
speaker for allowing us to
actually be here I know it's a
little unusual during this
pandemic but we are the one
committee they got the
opportunity to be here if if we
could be and I certainly
appreciate that.
And with that being said I now
move and we'll get to the
carousel pays for we actually
vote I now move
I now move a do pass on house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and house bill three as
amended.
Passage of house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bills two and three.
Okay yep the summer fantastic
has appropriations and finance
committee sensitive has built
three the vote is now open.
When was.
Thirty seconds to close.
I am sixty in the affirmative
tentative has appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three has
duly passed the house.
Members will now go to the
supplemental calendar number
one.
Item number eight.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison are you
ready on that item.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
take me to the point of the
record reflect on Russian
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House term resolution nine
on final passage has been taken
gentleman to explain the
resolution.
Thank you Mr speaker.
My co sponsor Representative
Christine Chandler and I bring
before this body the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for the house joint resolution
nine.
Language in this resolution is
amending.
Article two section fourteen of
the constitution to allow public
assistance in the development of
infrastructure that allows
essential also electric internet
natural gas water wastewater and
other services connections to
the domicile at this time Madam
speaker I would like to ask if
my ankle sponsor would say a few
words as well thank you Mr
speaker.
General fund was was Rio Arriba
Sandoval and Santa Fe
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from San Juan
yield.
I yield to the gentle lady thank
you thank you body for
listening to this proposal this
is a constitutional amendment
that would amend the what we
what is often referred to as the
anti donation clause in the
state constitution.
The proposal would allow the
state to investor Rackley in
into services that I think most
of us would agree Mr speaker are
essential household services and
serve a public purpose and those
services include internet
electric natural gas water
wastewater or other services as
provided by law to be connected
to the domicile as my colleague
mentions I would point out that
implementing legislation would
be necessary for this amendment
to pass and that implementing
legislation would set the
parameters in the guidelines for
ensuring that these monies were
spent appropriately that there
were proper safeguards in place
for those public monies that
projects were carefully defined
and that the scope of what sorts
of things could be funded with
state funds were adequately
addressed the purpose of the
amendment is to allow the state
to address what some would
consider severe poverty often in
rural areas where households are
are spread from with great
distances and many of those
families need help what got me
interested in this issue Mr
speaker was our work on the
broadband efforts and
initiatives and so on and at
some point we realize that even
the vast majority of our state
the very low densely populated
areas of the state.
Families would need assistance
in all likelihood before they
would get not reliable internet
hook up so that's what initially
brought us to this point but we
expanded it to include other
essential services as I think we
all know Mr speaker there and
died many areas of the state are
in dire need for these services
and with that I will go back to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you ladies Mr speaker
another item that prompted my
participation in this resolution
was on the onset of the
pandemic.
It reveals a lot of
discrepancies all over the
state.
Particularly in my area I will
share examples from my area
because that is the most of that
is the most familiar with.
Of the pandemic set one of the
first requirements from the
department of health was to
constantly wash your hands to
keep in terms.
That was because most of the
missiles in my part of the
district.
And running water.
And then the second requirement
that the delays as Kristin was
the.
No keep social distance to.
And then just so isolate
yourselves and that was kind of
hard to because families in my
district the periodically going
to the border towns madam Esther
phone supply they have to do it
very frequently because there is
no will alleged clients into
these communities in the so they
have to buy their food more
frequently because they do not
have refrigerators some places
they had electors.
Running water but they did not
have waste water systems.
The third requirement from the
range was.
thank you Mr to other schools
and school.
Or get them on the line to
attend classes that's one of
those items that's easier said
than done prior to the pandemic
I used to wonder why we have
teenagers L..
At the burger kings and the
McDonalds and they would be in
the corner of.
On their laptops or things in
really was that we did not have
adequate internet or no
broadband and they were coming
into the border towns four of.
Their internet to do their
homework some residents they
were driving their children for
the teenagers were driving
themselves no less than forty
miles one way to do this.
And.
That was exposed in the media.
Hi and a lot of people started
talk to me about my district and
then when I converse with other
colleagues all over the state I
found out that this is not an
isolated incident on the nation
there was some areas in southern
New Mexico that we're
experiencing similar or almost
very parallel situations so that
is what sparked my interest in
sponsoring this resolution of.
Mr speaker.
With that we will be open for
questions thank you Mr.
Debate the gentleman from Chavis
and on terror Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker the.
Gentleman yield.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Sir
If I could em back up just a
little bit.
Can.
Is there a cap on the investment
amount.
I will refer the question to my
co sponsor.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan and gentleman from Chavis
and Eddy
if there is no cap within the
unconstitutional proposed
constitutional amendment itself
in the as I said earlier in my
remarks there will be
implementing legislation and and
that might be an appropriate
place for it or not but that
will be determined by the
legislature should this
amendment pass thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
yield the floor back to my
colleague from San Juan.
And the.
Further I would like to.
Tell you that the.
When I start talking for
wireless services and I always
assumed I would ask that
the body recognize when Wayne co
sponsored children just in time
that senators I was fading thank
you Mr.
Mr speaker.
Thank you share and
Mr speaker and and
I think we all have that issue
so I appreciate it Sir can you
tell me
I'm trying to get more this is
the first one is that I have
been part of.
Is.
Blind at this point there's no.
There's no we don't know how
much we're going to invest.
We don't know what the.
In the invested.
I don't know what criteria will
be used.
To.
Substantiate and investment.
Is that right and I I and I am
not trying to talk it down I'm
just trying to figure out what
we're doing.
Cosponsored please who thank you
gentleman from San Juan and
thank you gentleman from Chavis
and any for that question
the right I I think I need to
repeat again but this is
authorizing language it will be
the responsibility gentleman
speaker for the body to develop
the criteria upon which we we
determined it is appropriate to
invest in these essential
household services
It is not intended for I think
it's inappropriate frankly for
constitutional language to that
specific although I will
acknowledge it gentleman that Mr
speaker that there are parts of
our constitution that has more
detail when I think is
appropriate thank you and with
that are you back to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you.
Mr speaker.
So.
Can.
That this legislation.
Proposed.
Adequately describes.
The.
Investment.
Opportunities.
What can it be what can it not
be invested in.
Our
first question this amendment
would not be self executing.
Recorder legislation to ensure
that the tax dollars and other.
Resources are properly
safeguarded and that the
legislature has appropriated
oversight was sorting some the
legislative body would be the
ones that are determining what
is eligible for services are
requested.
I don't personally answers your
questions on.
The and.
Welcome to do so Representative
if I may speaker and gentleman
from Chavis and Eddy I I think
there's a whole litany of things
that would not qualify in Mr
chair and gentlemen if you if
you look to the amendment it
defines the essential services
that would be eligible for
public support and I think Mr
chair Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman thank most would agree
that those are those are for the
public welfare of those
communities in the individuals
in the state Mr speaker and
gentleman and I yield back to my
co sponsor from San Juan.
One.
Mr speaker.
As as as I question that the
gentleman asked.
Mr Mr speaker.
yes Sir if you hold on just a
minute.
I had a couple of conversations
going on at the same time
Representative let me get
correct right click on my
questions.
What committees at.
presented in.
Sponsored content as.
yes gentleman from San Juan and
yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from Chavez and Eddy my if my
memory serves me correctly went
to transportation and House
Judiciary Mr speaker and
gentleman and I yield back to my
colleague from San Juan that
that's fine.
J..
Speaker of.
I was trying to figure out.
This type of legislation should
it the.
Question the impact tax or.
Or.
Appropriations but I guess as
it's currently drafted the
speaker explain
This fine work in the
constitution for.
Thank the proposal that would.
And.
I laughed expenditures under the
constitutional is that correct.
This
is correct this.
I had there been talked about.
And
Yeah stand the.
And.
The needs of my community.
And something.
But.
I laugh.
Something that I don't really
know that.
That it would allow because that
it would be a.
Thank.
Action that the legislature will
take up.
Expenditures from.
And because of this piece of
legislation.
How would they.
Appropriated.
would that be.
Through appropriations
committee.
I'm trying to figure out who
would hold the reins on spending
going forward.
There is really.
Information that so poignant
well what this joint resolution
nine.
All this is place a ballot
question before the voters at
the next regular election and
then whether to amend the anti
donation clause in New Mexico
constitution to allow the state
to invest resources in ensuring
access to basic infrastructure
for all Mexicans.
And I I get that Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm just trying to.
Has the I'm sure this is been
done before in the state of New
Mexico.
Is that correct or is that not.
This is.
Yes it has been done in the past
it's a housing assistance and
economic development as well.
And gentleman Mr speaker
controls those.
Those appropriations.
Is.
Is insurance element of.
So with my expert witness my
expert witnesses secretary until
on Salazar.
This is.
I was asked by my expert witness
to the first question to mind co
sponsor and.
Our legal expert.
Sponsor.
Thank you
thank you
calling from San Juan thank you
Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen from Chavez and and
counties
the question I believe that you
asked is how would
appropriations occur should this
amendments passed voters and I
would expect Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavez that it
would follow the normal
appropriation process and I
believe although I am not on
probation officer speaker and
gentleman from Chavis that
programs such as the affordable
housing program and the little
program both of which have
authorizing implementing
legislation follow the
appropriation process and are
reviewed periodically through
appropriations Mr speaker and
Back to my colleague from San
Juan.
thank you.
Lady
And
kind gentleman from San Juan
And another side by
With the speaker of we were
talking about the formation of
Leman that and
New Mexico Housing Authority and
so my question to him whereas.
With all of the appropriations
force.
Continue to follow this path or
we're we're we creating a new
path and I I guess the answer to
that is I don't really know what
this time.
I will
I will.
Here I appreciate your answers
This is
And it traveling but I
understand what you're trying to
do thank you Sir.
As a general from Sierra
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman will.
I yield to the gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
being involved in another life.
And hello from the rural
development.
Can you tell me what the
closest.
Our infrastructure provider.
Is to your reservation for your
were you made to help right now.
Mr speaker phone.
With the gentle lady restate the
question of there's a lot of
echo in the background.
Tell them.
The closest.
Major thoroughfare.
Is to.
Your home.
Thank you Julie if you're
talking about.
The.
That would be interstate forty
which is about two hundred
miles.
Where we live.
Mr journal so there's no major.
Raul
can pause into the kitchen set
up with the headset.
Which is not is not working.
About one hundred.
Please.
There
is.
And and and and and some of
those outside of Albuquerque.
There is a lack of
infrastructure when talking
about roads for is
talking about
And all those different into
these.
It is what is the closest.
I'm going to.
Is wrong to.
Thank you gentle lady
we have like in our area US
sixty four which is a road that
I'm trying to work on as well we
have some four lane highways in
our area but your first question
was a major sort of fair to me
on major forecaster affair is
interstate the nearest one to us
would be high twenty five and I
forty of but we have a roll in
our areas that are two lane four
lane mostly two lane okay.
If of those two.
Happen to have
A lady of Mr Mr speaker of.
We have above ground utility
lines yes but in talking with
the the highway Department the
only place where they're
installing underground internet
services are along the
interstates and they're going to
make that a priority before they
come to our area.
Okay I'm.
Instruction but just the basics
of.
Talking about utilities water.
Because.
This is most elements.
Well for lack of a better word
right now.
To use up to the and then the
owner comes out and connects to
those utilities so how.
This legislation is to us the
state of New Mexico taxpayers
to.
All the way up to the door is
yes that's what this would voted
for the.
Ask for.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I'm asking for is assistance to
the rural communities.
I do not want to make this a
Navajo Nation
project I'm asking on behalf of
all of these rural New Mexico.
From.
Perspective.
Nation.
To.
To introduce.
Understand better as close.
Because.
One of the.
Low income housing.
Is is.
Major thoroughfare and then
however of the complex has a
connected to these two.
Is that what you're asking for I
don't.
It is I don't.
And and not a whole lot of stuff
well that that could be.
Some schools that didn't matter
to me.
So that's what I'm trying to
clarify that is this what this
piece of legislation would ask
the tax.
This legislation to us us
exclude taxpayers.
Develop an entire.
To
take it to the property owners
home.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
thanks for the clarity of your
question of the majority of the
homes in our area well not a
major major but the majority of
our homes to have electrical
lines going to them with that
major lag is running water and
wastewater systems some of the
homes in my district have
running water but they do not
have the accommodations for a
wastewater system of these
systems would not be starting
from scratch we have a network
of electricity we just need
assistance in some areas of
maybe a mile maybe two miles it
is not that we're starting from
scratch I hope that clarifies of
wanting to earn a little bit
more a gentle lady.
there's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis members of
health Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I just had a quick question to
sponsors.
I hope it's not redundant
and I believe in the I I believe
Representative Chandler read
some language that.
the gentleman from San Juan to
yield.
Mr speaker I always think that
would be a good idea well the
gentleman please you.
I yield to the gentleman from
Chavis Lee and Roosevelt County.
Thank you Sir
My question is is sort of a
sample one in the I think I
heard of some of the items that
would be on the ballot the
people would would read it and
see when they cast their vote
and I thought I heard the term
or other.
And if if that one is that
correct in in terms of
encouraging.
Context of the or other you or
response other co sponsor please
thank you.
Thanks for the question Madam I
would prefer to co sponsor.
thank you gentleman from San
Juan and thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentleman from
Chavez and we for that question
yes the the bill does contain
language that includes our other
services provided by law and to
be connected to a domicile that
that particular language other
services provided by law was
added in House Judiciary at the
suggestion of some of some of
the house Judiciary Committee
members Mr speaker and gentleman
and the rationale was these
items that are listed in the
constitution R. what we
currently consider to be
essential household services but
we all know that the world is
changing and there is potential
for other types of essential
household services that could be
included should a future
legislature decide to do so
through appropriate legislation.
Thank you very much for that
answer in some follow up
question Mr speaker
Representative
the.
Good day and then future of
ensure actions could could
obviously be constitutional but
could also be and be statutory
for those
those items falling under the
other language actor by the
Judiciary Committee is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis and lonely I think I
understand your question to be
asking whether or not the
legislature could include other
essential type services under
this this this language in the
answer to that question Mr
speaker and gentleman is yes.
Thank you very much well I
appreciate the Mr speaker
Sanchez representatives plan to
trying to do and
of note that in the.
Opening up of New Mexico's anti
donation clause no matter how
worthy will receive
a shark
short consideration by the
voters of New Mexico with I wish
you the best in your endeavor
thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Wonders of modern technology.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from San Juan you know please.
Mr speaker chairman thank you
very much I have been reading
your house joint resolution Mr
speaker and gentleman starting
on.
A group this.
Starting from starting on line
twenty two.
I.
On page two.
To the end of the line three is
that the anti defamation
Representative right there.
Yes that is the already on the
books our mission
this legislation is on.
Page six section eight that is
our Mr speaker I was asking if
that was the anti defamation
that right there on page one and
two of your
house joint resolution.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I believe the answer is yes.
Thank you very much.
It's very specific but it does
need for the state and county
school district needs parenting
acceptance of the find otherwise
provided in the constitution
show director.
To its credit.
Donation to.
To.
Percent association or public or
private corporation.
Private enterprise for the
construction and.
Sept as provided in section
education I went to the section.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
Proposes to do is to make an
exception to the anti defamation
costs is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct yes.
Gentleman from San Juan yes and
say that this would be
applicable to the entire state
did I understand that right Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is that correct.
Some.
Representative health plans we
need to a major thoroughfare and
you said it was like two hundred
plus miles did I understand
correctly.
Mr speaker.
The lady to me major sort of
fear is an interstate that was
the way I answered that the
nearest interstate to us was two
hundred eighty miles.
Speaker.
Gentleman from San Juan I
understand.
That kind of be in the same way
because the closest one to me is
gusting that would be over by.
The doctor clines corners or
over by Los crucis and both of
those to make room for two
hundred miles Mr speaker I do
have.
Service running to my rents that
is one side of the rent is
covered by.
Cooperatives the other side is
covered by a major.
Provider of electricity on the
other side Mr speaker I do so.
That that branch was first
patented.
Meaning that that's one of those
people around this.
Natural land from the United
States.
The rooms that for those
services when they became
available.
Mr speaker for just to get
telephone service up there.
I had to pay for it Mr speaker.
I am not that also serve from
the majority.
It's located in Travis county.
If this protection and tribal
resolution passed and I said I
want.
Waste water service provided to
me at my ranch in the state's
going to pay for it.
Yes it was time for every farm
and ranch the state of New
Mexico Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman and gentleman from
San Juan.
With this also.
We're talking about waste water
being removed ten.
Be eligible for this money
and future joint resolution
passed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe that the.
Who ever is installing the
system would make sure that it
was running to a community
before they ran let's say of
twenty different services to
twenty different homes they with
of remain tributary and then the
a run all from all for that
hello we have existing
electrical lines presently yes
and water lines yes it's not
going to be a lie each
individual homes.
And the Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan may I assist I
noticed your voice is starting
to to practice then this is me
on system thank thank you very
much Mr speaker and gentle lady
from Chavez county and thank you
for those questions I think we
need to step back a little bit
and and talk about what the bill
actually proposes and the bill
gentlelady and us Mr speaker
proposes that there will be
implementing legislation that
will define the parameters for
for which these the state made
support the services and so I
think it's premature to be
asking questions about what
projects whether your ranch
would be served or not gentle
lady Mr speaker as that will be
the responsibility of the
Legislature to define should
this amendment pass thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady I appreciate the
clarification there but but I am
getting that set that up as an
example of what the potential
problem would be and what the
potential costs might be to the
state of New Mexico that the
taxpayers are gonna have to pay
for and that gives me great
concern because that is the
public tax dollars.
That will ultimately be paying
for these projects that is
outlined in your house joint
resolution nine.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This is one.
The utility would be the state.
Miss Mister speaker gentle lady
again all of those details would
be sorted out through the
implementing legislation
Thank you Mr for that question
then lady Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
So one of these projects is
going to have to be present
through the state legislature
Legislature am I understanding
that correctly.
Give me one moment Mr speaker
gentle lady I'm looking at the
language in the implementing.
I.
Mr speaker gentle lady again I
think the answer to that
question is it would be it would
depend on how the implementing
legislation is drafted and
gentle lady Mister speaker I
would point out that this is not
the only exception to the anti
donation clause there's an
affordable housing exception
there is the lead up what the
one might refer to as the lead
exception Economic Development
exception and all and in those
provisions were expanded upon in
the provide more thoroughly Mr
speaker gentle lady through
implementing legislation and I
think most of us would agree
those are successful programs
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker.
Understand what you just said
that that those are the programs
we are discussing today today
we here is talking about.
Item on page six of your
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution nine that's all
we are discussing today but my
question is.
And because there will be an
exception to the anti donation
clause.
And.
You're
asking essential house smells
Services.
Provided to.
I mean that's pretty vague in my
opinion to begin with.
But.
Specific on.
How these are going to be put in
is going to.
Get the services domiciles.
What happens if there's a
product a problem Sen electric
line goes down the water line
collapses
This goes on and on so those are
some questions that will have to
be answered that I think this is
just to approach
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Well no not required thank.
To CENIC government funds to
build event
Instruction four developments
housing developments.
Mr speaker.
Gap.
I'm sorry I heard some
background as my apologies Mr
speaker gentle lady I think we
need to step back a little bit
and talk about what the purpose
of this is the purpose of this
bill is not to at least from my
perspective and of course it
will be defined in implementing
legislation but from my
perspective is to assist those
many parts of the state largely
rural that last essential
services we are not in my mind
talking about developments.
Also the state where there is a
you know there's there is a
housing project going up and and
there's a developer seeking
assistance that is not what we
are talking about in terms of
essential services to households
of course the parameters again
will be defined through the
implementing legislation Mr
speaker gentle lady from Chavis.
What is certain development
developers currently going goes
away from any town or city's
starting at developments
obviously they didn't have to go
through the county commission
for approval to ATC to make sure
that they're going to be in
compliance but they also have to
set certain parameters.
What is required from that
developer.
The country against the.
Mr speaker.
I think that what you're asking
the taxpayers of the state to be
able to fork over the money to
pay for the potential problems
is going to be created by this.
Is way too far ranging and.
I'm just
trying to continue well we are
continually Representative anti
the nation because Mr speaker
gentle lady and gentleman from
San Juan I appreciate your
responses.
As for the gentleman from Colfax
Corp Colfax mora Rio Arriba and
Sandoval Representative Roger
Montoya.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Los Alamos and the
gentleman from San Juan please
yield.
We yield to the gentleman.
Thank you so much Mr speaker and
kind gentleman from San Juan I
applaud this piece of
legislation I have been watching
closely as it emerged on the
landscape so so to speak and I'm
I'm always.
In all of my my colleague from
Lowe's Los Alamos because for
bills almost surgically
deconstruct statute to ensure
that those most vulnerable
businesses individuals or in
this case infrastructure sorely
needed have a passed we flew
pathway to success it's been
remarkable and learning
I I think that in this time as
we emerge from the Covid
pandemic as we we know ourselves
from fossil fuels and we look to
lifting New Mexico with an eye
towards rural communities we
know that there's a vast
discrepancy between the urban
and the rural setting I myself.
And the proud representative of
a large expense to rural
district sorely in need of
electricity water waste water I
applaud this effort in fact
invite the entire body to to
vote in favor of the when I
called a trifecta House Bill ten
the connectivity New Mexico act
this rural moon shot that we're
talking about right now H. A. R.
nine and in fact each piece
sixteen the roll up
opportunities that they think
they are responsible they are
responsive to the immediate
needs earlier room we were
talking in in.
House Bill to on the measure of
immediate need and be responsive
and if there was ever a time
it's this work I applauded and I
look forward to voting in favor
of this I yield back Mr speaker
and the kind gentleman the kind
gentle lady from Los Alamos.
Thank.
The general fund Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does a kind
gentleman yield.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you I appreciate.
This legislation from Ford I
think it's
Is good for debate I think it's
important for the.
The.
This debate thank funds in the
our system watching understand.
The the rotation of this bill.
You Mr speaker and gentleman we
we listen to this.
Bill on the.
Transportation committee so we
brought several different.
Concerns of that time and and
they they still exist today.
During during opening comments
very responses Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I wrote down the nose the.
Okay I would like the New Mexico
clarification on.
Representative I wrote a
statement.
Mr speaker Representative the.
You indicated the.
Provided legislative the
legislative body would have
oversight on this did I write
that down for us Mr speaker and
handle.
Mr speaker the chairman of the
yes you did read that then again
What what I have is that if
approved the amendment would not
be so thank you it would require
implement new legislation to
ensure that tax dollars and in
other public resources are
properly safeguarded and that
the legislature as appropriate
oversight authority so the
legislature will have that story
on to as to what goes and what
does it go.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The reason I asked that question
specifically is because one of
the analysis is I have here now
see that have.
This to committee substitute Mr
speaker and gentleman removes
any level of legislative
oversight by removing the
requirement for legislature to
approve projects.
But Mr speaker and gentleman
that seems to comply completely
with with what you just said.
Can you can you explain please
start thank you Mr speaker
Crandall Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm gonna refer that
to my co sponsor and her with
this
thank you very much Mr speaker
and kind of gentleman from San
Juan and kind gentleman from Lee
County
the bill I will say again
require is not self executing as
my co sponsor from San Juan has
repeated a number of times it
would require implementing
legislation which would create
the appropriate safeguards and
protections so
that is the answer to your
question Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you.
Currently the thank you.
And gentleman Mr speaker of
those that's what concerns me
the most.
another.
Statements that I wrote
Mr speaker and then presenters.
The.
The committee sub defines
the services and and levels of
specific statement.
As we look to committees
Actually.
Those to provide some services
Mr speaker and present them.
No time line for that also opens
a wide open for anything else in
the future.
The money as soon legislative
body would would determine to be
necessary am I reading that
correctly Mr speaker and
gentleman family to.
Mr speaker kind gentleman from
Lee
it includes the ability for the
legislature to divine other
services of a kind that would
fall within the definition of
essential household services Mr
speaker and gentleman and if I
may just say for example natural
gas water wastewater electric
yeah I think have been for
decades now Mr speaker and kind
gentleman considered essentials
home services I think that
there's little dispute about
that we at but internet we added
and I think now in this day and
age we would all agree that
internet service is an essential
service to all members of the
community now and bring up Mr
speaker and gentleman internet
because it's an example of
something that is a more recent
essential household service and
I think we have left the door
open so that as we go down the
road the the state will change
fifty years from now we won't
know what could be considered an
essential services so we left it
open so that the school state
legislature using its
legislative powers to define
something as essential that we
have no idea about it this time.
Thank you Mr speaker thank
families your response
You know a bit of a conspiracy
Services from time to time Mr
speaker paneling I.
I believe the.
My thoughts turned to minuses
open the doors.
For House Bill ten Senate bill
ninety three house bill one
forty one and I go on down the
list.
To ensure that later on down the
road.
Lawsuit when we start using
state money to connect all the
way and the people was homes and
I truly hope that's not the into
but it sure seems to be.
Prevalent.
And so thank Mexicans turns me
moans for.
Socializing costs.
For things that the majority of
us have had to pay for
Short of our lives.
And so with that
That we're that
house bill two oh six does the
same thing and so with that
It is are you I started out Mr
speaker paneling and gentleman I
think I do appreciate document
and present the ability to
debate.
This this bill.
Continues to.
Rogoway.
The responsibilities of the
people.
To.
Be responsible for for.
For themselves in the the more
we do that.
The harder that's going to be
for our society to continue to
the costs with that Mr speaker I
yield back my time.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Mr.
From San.
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan my neighbor.
Mr speaker and gentleman
The title of this joint
resolution.
In a statement that that.
What's bothersome.
And I I yes.
Of an energy tax can.
for since I've been here about
the Navajo Nation and how.
Asian infrastructure is is very
sparse the last numbers I have
is about fifteen percent.
Has
running water and
electricity to the homes and so
I just.
Thanks that
the cost to
for freshens very expensive
since that we don't have some
services not electricity to do
that.
But with the power plant.
This is the Senate County
potential may that
The.
The statement was a.
By selling part.
I believe that's what
Representative Stansbury stated.
And team roping and knocks.
Also reiterated that.
Service is not there on the
reservation.
And not to approve a.
so services very sparse as well
so
So.
I understand.
The purpose I think in general
to try and bring some of those
services
on to the reservation
and other parts potentially in
the state but I I understand
your your.
Nations trying.
where there is a lot of poverty.
have act to
construction.
At.
This resolution.
About
us matter.
Matters.
Actions to Siles.
That's very specific Mr speaker
and gentleman from Santa Fe San.
It is as if.
so
could lobby to have this
structure brought all the way to
their home.
What is the purpose that are
anti donation clause exists and
so that.
Not.
necessarily be the recipient of
state funds expecting the state.
something that would benefit a
single image or single family.
I think if this were.
I can support this which would
be.
Bring a transformer station into
an area or by.
A lot of treatment plant into
the Mr speaker this is because
of all.
To.
House household.
And I think that's the real
problem.
Was necessarily doing something
to
Funds with that we can do it is.
But connected.
That.
This
effort.
Respond by.
To the state.
In general.
Could could.
Of
the.
And mission plans to the point
that it could take
Benefits of some sort.
I mean this is the internet
natural gas water waste a lot of
connections to the state missile
could contract is a.
That Miller on Saturday would
want to
hello.
Insurance.
to be able to to receive this
kind of a benefit Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman may I
assist with that question.
And San Juan.
Yes please thank you very much
So Mr speaker and the other
gentleman from San Juan I that
is a specifically what this this
provision is intended to assist
with so if I may um Mr speaker
and and gentleman and give you
an example of someone I was just
speaking with today about this
who asked me what I was working
on Mr speaker and gentleman and
I told him this person's is very
active in local governments and
local communities and he says
that's fabulous.
He said that will give us the
pool Mr speaker and gentleman
help people for example who have
septic systems that are failing
on their on their properties.
They are low income people in
many cases and they have no way
to afford a hook up to a sewer
system that's down the road
without some assistance from
state and or their local
community and so I disagree that
it is something that is
undermining the purpose of the
anti donation clause I disagree
completely with that premise
instead it allow it the public
it serves a public purpose when
we have sanitary Services run to
a single domicile or multiple
single domiciles in a low income
area that cannot afford it and
that you hit the nail on the
head Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan when you said we
are contemplating assisting
individuals yes we are those who
are in serious need in the state
those who are in poverty and
cannot afford these essential
services themselves we need to
start thinking differently Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan about how we help people in
the state and how we help them
lift themselves from poverty and
the way we do that is insured
that they have the most basic of
services and I now count
internet within that definition
because our students school
children are suffering right now
because they don't have the
ability to intern access the
internet on a consistent basis
so
no it is not something that
quote is undermining the anti
donation clause instead it falls
in line with many other
exceptions that are within that
constitutional provision Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
yield.
I
I I understand this but we was
fifty percent of the state is on
some sort of government
assistance Medicaid
being a good example
The process of finding some of
the best jobs that exist in
these communities as well.
But we have jobs that are eighty
thousand a hundred thousand
dollars a year that we are and
with and.
First for.
Insurance for themselves
replacing that with with their
jobs and then looking to
Structure that quite frankly
thank you for if they have work
when we expose poverty.
Jobs.
That is what we are this entire
session.
Sessions.
Worried about jobs and and.
Work due to the.
Is a service that I just want to
work and provide these things
for themselves instead of
tackling work that we disagree
with some sort of a hand out and
I and I think that's what tax
compliance.
New Mexico.
The last the pride of part of
taking care of themselves.
this.
I'm just concerned that.
What the.
And says.
it's to.
That is for some is connected
someone who knows how to work
the system just doesn't equally
dire straits is unable to get
the same services.
This legislation.
That that's.
Questing
State funds.
based on financial circumstances
I I've heard over and over the
purpose is to help people.
Financial circumstances but I
don't see
if I can help you point to that.
This legislation to.
This legislation that it's of us
to.
Income for people in dire
straits.
I would appreciate that Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman may I
feel that question.
Go ahead and I'll respond
afterwards as well okay thank
you very much I would refer you
to line nine lines nine through
twelve Mr speaker and gentleman
on page six of the bill the
implementing legislation still
include adequate safeguards to
protect money much of public
money or other resources used
for the purposes authorized in
this subsection.
Mr.
That doesn't say.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm.
I'm not.
Into this.
Mission is not that good.
Representative
Allison wanted to respond as
well to that question.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan of in response to your
first question
I know that you're pretty
familiar with
the some of the arrangements on
the Navajo Nation.
we have an organization for
example the Navajo Nation
Navajo Housing Authority.
They don't just go out and start
building individual homes they
want to make sure that they have
a group of people so that they
can build cluster homes that is
to reduce so.
The the the expensive utilities
electricity and water lines so.
What we are asking for is not.
Individuals lines going to
individual homes our priority at
the present time is getting the
broadband internet into these
established though lower in
communities to help communities
that I'm I know that you're
familiar with the so it's not
like we're going to feed
hundreds of people individually
we can serve hundreds of people
but they might all be at the
same mutual help for the rent
help site so just a little bit
of clarity on that of the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank.
I I understand that is the
purpose but I just don't see
that this resolution to that
there are no protections.
That was the keep someone who's
just a well politically
connected from two.
And services to an eventual
home.
Mr speaker and gentleman of I
believe there is an entire
housing project
in Shiprock that was partially
finished and then abandoned by
the
Contractor in that sense there I
can see where so that is for a
big project or something like
that could benefit but that's
not the way we this legislation
is written and I and I think
that's the problem with it not
that the idea is bad.
That the details are not there.
And
It is
As tensions open to.
this investment of state funds
so
I I that is that is the biggest.
In this legislation the second
question I have is.
What.
Does this make the federal
government on tribal.
And federal lands from for
responsibility I'm.
As.
For tribal the state travel to
the west.
with the federal government has
fallen far short of their
commitment to the tribes into
the problems
What we're doing is because the
federal government has failed in
their commitment we're looking
to take state dollars and
potentially put them in places
where there are no state
revenues generated.
kitchen along with that just a
little bit from Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan
I hope to answer your first
question last sentence in
section eight that we're of
adding to the legislature or the
Legislation this is the
implementing legislation shall
include adequate safeguards to
protect public money or other
resources use for the purposes
authorized into subsection
I think you would agree that
that would protect the state
money.
to your first question and then
your second question about the
federal government.
we know that the federal
government has many programs to
help fund basic infrastructure
but frequently does require at
least a small mention of state
funds to secure the federal
money.
With that Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr.
I'm and I appreciate that
language evolution legislation
because that could really help
determine
how this this is what we're
talking about plantation to take
money from taxpayers.
How is the investment protected
and and and and and.
In order to adequate.
The technician.
Legislation shall include
adequate state safeguards.
To protect public.
Resources.
That is just not defined there's
no definition here
Mr speaker and gentleman
adequate as I have the phone
and I don't know that
That we can look at that and so
that's just Guard adequate
safeguards
Representative guards they're
not defined.
So and and if this gets
Representative Harper and they
were to pass this and then we
have to come up with enabling
legislation the.
This legislation.
Those safeguards are.
With.
But the determination of
adequate.
To provide
I have.
Mexico.
Part of the New Mexico
work on federal lands that where
socialism.
Is the rule of the day where
we're not able to sell property
or.
Property is where we have the
greatest poverty.
That's that's the problem that
we're dealing with here is the
federal government created this
is not a state problem as.
Is is a little over six percent
private property and private
property exists.
Is where prosperity exists or
private property does not exist.
Possibility does not exist and.
Here is
Problem and I I I ask the
members of this body to go one
is time to go and if you just.
Poverty CYFD for for those rural
economic devastation it exists
in New Mexico and and I believe
Representative Assens efforts
for on Google because this is a
real problem.
This legislation is trying was
trying to get.
Mexico tax dollars to pay for
the adequacy of the federal
government I I Mr speaker and
gentleman I think what we need
to do is we need to band
together as a state and then
that the federal government.
Deal with this.
This is their problem.
This is a problem that the
residents in San Juan County on
with and I think this but.
Forward as well asking folks
who.
Representative.
Tax.
Dollars to pay for where the
federal government has failed Mr
speaker if this if this
legislation does not pass I
would like to see just how has.
And Senate Republicans and
Democrats joined together in
contention the state government
petition our congressional
delegation and state and we're
tired of the excuses from the
federal government we're tired
of the
Substantial and the federal
dollars no excuses.
Excuses let's get that money
back into our communities that's
the answer.
And.
For a although some
representative from San Juan my
neighbor to the west that is
answer that I think we can all
stand behind and the federal
government this money that the
printing.
For the last year.
And it for COVID but Mr speaker.
They haven't heard their
commitments Federal is to
compose and my wife and my
children our native so at this
point I I know that my time Mr
speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo those
people killings because someone
lives here Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan County
the shield.
I yield to the gentleman from.
South of my my southern
neighbor.
Thank you.
Sponsored
What what is it you're trying to
do.
Well you don't have any waters
will.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
We're just trying to offer
assistance to see if we could
make it will make that their
lives better bring into the
twenty first century.
Thank you Mr speaker elected
gentleman that and that's you
know I represent
All six counties in the most of
my counties Mr speaker and
gentleman on demands and in this
issue with insured resting both.
Well All my district you know I
have a Mr speaker and gentleman
I have people in the on a more
broadly.
He Baca chapter of mu also your
district also the only be will
have running water and missile
forms and it's a big issue no
there's all kinds of concerns on
the money issue.
Mr speaker volume gentleman and
my concerns are.
our kids out there have no
running water I have no
internet.
Most of them don't have
interesting and Mr speaker point
and gentlemen and you go out
there these communities.
And she's kids huddled up and
then not involved in the parking
lot on the sidewalk right now
the school board to read really
hurts and hurt your feelings you
look at ammunition while not the
recruiting for century and there
is no reason in Gardiner wind
these people are living the way
they are the problems there and
we can help aggression and
that's what you're trying to
remember my correct a financial
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
exactly what we're trying to do.
And Mr speaker volume gentleman
you know you hear from other
constituents rather legislators
of their concerns and concerns
but
You don't know what to do the
final gentleman Mr speaker some
of the people to go out there
and energy.
Although some of the people out
there especially the kids that
they truly are when the kids and
no and I support your
legislation and I was concerned
about.
Money issues and so forth but so
yes I can certainly all I'm glad
to speak on your behalf and
because I have the same district
in New Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman and we really need to
address these issues thank you
Sir yes Sir.
credible of the twenty first
century.
And we should decisions
are so with that well the last
time and I have certainly do for
the station thank you Mr speaker
thank you for an engine there is
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you Representative for
bringing forth house joint
resolution nine which I consider
one of the most important pieces
of legislation this session
I want to ask a few clarifying
questions first of all in
passing this legislation and if
it passes when and if it passes
the Senate actually goes to the
voters of New Mexico to decide
if it should pass or not am I
correct.
Mr Chairman the gentle lady that
is correct and I will give time
to my co sponsor to respond as
well.
Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutely and they will be this
the voter we can rely on the
voters to make a sound and wise
decision I have no doubt of that
thank you very much because.
Mr speaker and representatives
I understand that the need for
this
Amendment to the anti donation
clause came up as different
bills we're addressing broadband
I I understand that the legal
counsel and was concerned that
in addressing the terrible need
that we have that comment
exposed but that we need for all
future economic development
throughout every corner of the
state but this the need for this
anti donation amendment came up
can you elaborate on why this is
needed to address the breakdown
we have in adequately get
internet coverage throughout our
state.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan may I feel that
question since I work on that
piece correctly SO lady thank
you
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you for that question
thank you Mr speaker.
What we discovered as you know
gentle lady of my co sponsor on
house bill ten is that
the department of IT is of
course very interested and
expanding internet access to all
New Mexico's but in particular
to those areas that are either
unserved or under served and
frankly a lot of those areas of
course not exclusively but a lot
of those areas are remote rural
areas with and many of the
individuals that live in those
areas are low income people and
the of the the problem is and
the the the the problem we're
trying to rectify to some degree
with this constitutional
amendment is to allow do with
the ability to provide direct
hook ups internet service to
households who do not have the
financial resources to pay for
those hot cups themselves and I
think we all need to keep the
money Mr speaker gentle lady
that
we are of there are very
lightly populated there are many
lightly populated areas in the
state for which commercial
internet service does not pencil
out from a business perspective
I'll just be blunt about it and
there is a role for the state to
step in so that individual
households and receive support
from the state to ensure that
they receive the essential
service and internet.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady gentlemen I have one
question.
Mr speaker Representative this
constitutional amendment in no
way provides money to anybody is
that correct in my
understanding.
Yes and not be able to answer
hello.
If I might answer that Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan correct thank you for
pointing it out this is a
constitutional amendment it is
it anticipates implementing
legislation that will define the
parameters through which of
financial and other forms of
assistance might occur gentle
lady and gentleman from San Juan
and Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and and
Representative kind of
precautions that the previous
speaker asked about any
implementing legislation could
put.
The appropriate protections
about income levels location all
those concerns that we want to
protect our investment and
ensure people who really have
needs
that could be part of
implementing legislation for any
part of the central services my
understanding that correctly Mr
speaker and gentle lady I I do
believe that is the case and not
only would it should it should
be in the implementing
legislation and I expected to be
in the in implementing
legislation thank you Mr speaker
and kind gentleman kind waiting
those are my questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from San Juan
gentlelady from Los Alamos you.
Mr speaker we will to the
children from Lee.
Speaker gentle gentle lady.
For her to chill.
A four county commissions.
The right to my house is already
paged.
Mr speaker John is that an
actual question.
Mr speaker general fund and
gentle lady that was a natural
question.
Mr speaker gentleman I can't
speak for what the gentleman for
San Juan I've never heard that
quote joke.
I have not heard that either.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Would you describe your.
Understanding if you will.
Okay purpose.
Donation calls.
This.
I will refer the question to my
co sponsor.
Mr speaker of the gentleman my
general understanding is it is
designed to prohibit personal
enrichment through of public
funds and I would point out
Mister speaker and gentleman
from I think it's eight I got
that wrong I apologize
it was a proposed exception does
not do this this these proposals
serve a public purpose and the
public purpose isn't to ensure
that individuals who can not
afford access to essential
household services receive those
services and the community and
state as a whole will benefit
from that for the Sanchez and
education is the gentleman from
Lee thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Speaker and gentle lady.
This is enabling legislation
that if passed all the folders.
Then click.
The provisions of the anti
donation clause would you agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
only I do not agree.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The central hold services
infrastructure water sewer
septic tanks.
Electricity program.
Contract.
Is.
Over services provided our role.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This enabling legislation if you
will.
What she needed to be
completely open ended there is
no mention.
Over requirements for low
income.
There is no mention.
Or any other sort of for each
other than those listed in that
paragraph and.
Grams.
There are no sideboards.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
you agree Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo county
I do not agree the bill provides
that when implementing
legislation approved by the more
a majority of each body of the
legislature shall provide
adequate safeguards to protect
public money or other resources
ians pursuant to this
constitutional amendment if
adopted by the voters of the
great state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let's
go back to your.
Definition your reasoning for
the existence of the anti
donation clause.
Can you see.
And you understand the
consternation of trouble before.
Appropriated been questioning
the wisdom of this.
Use of legislation and you see
the possibility.
The politically well connected
perhaps more generally
scrupulous.
Supporters could take advantage
of us to help industry
infrastructure for their
projects installed.
With the state.
For all the infrastructure.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
understand
That number of members of the
house on your side of the aisle
have raise that is an issue
however.
As I said implementing
legislation will describe the
parameters through which state
monies may be spent to support
essential household services and
the description that you have
described were eight quote
developer work goes to the state
and somehow extract money I
think is a very far fetched
simple and and more alarmist
then
founded in fact in with that I
believe I answered your question
gentleman and speaker.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
but it was an adequate in the
potential issues two one.
Is the installation of the
central infrastructure.
It is roads.
It's water sure it's electrical
service it's Representative.
All of the all of these.
Or is central.
Restrictions were put.
And this legislation which sent
for her on the table for your
body.
Politically well connected
enough to come to the state.
And my current request would you
agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee again I will have to
disagree with you there will be
implementing legislation that
will describe the plant
parameters I doubt the
parameters will include anyone
who comes up to the state
legislature and asked for money
there will be criteria there
will be safeguards and there
will be a structures through
which these funds will run much
in the way Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee County we
have eight and affordable
housing programs that is an
exception to the anti donation
clause as I'm sure you are aware
that program works quite well it
is my understanding that it
doesn't work quite well and it
benefits people through
implementing legislation derive
from this there the
constitutional amendment
included in this constitution.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos Westray one.
Involved a significant degree of
speculation conjecture thank.
And.
Is the core of my concern.
I do not believe that.
These modifications.
The anti donation clause or in
the best interest of the
majority of taxpayers of the
state.
And I will stand in opposition
thank you gentle lady channel
one for your answers thank you
Mr speaker.
For the debate the gentle lady
from tell us Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan and the
gentle lady from Los Alamos to
CO.
This yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you so much for bringing
this on to the legislature you
know I live in a rural area I
have.
Two girls that are in school
here in my house right now of
taking most of the internet way
from me as we as we speak it's a
great challenge I'm I consider
myself lucky because I have some
means to increase my broadband
speed but so many families in
this community I cannot you know
there are children who are Act
hot spots that you know the Taco
Bell are gratefully I am
thankful that they're at U. K.
Carson telecom right there
parked in the you know in the
parking lot doing school and
it's you know it's it's just a
real challenge and that's just
in my district that's not you
know all all over the state
I have a couple of questions
related to internet
and I I'd like to know first you
know how many do you have a
sense of how many households in
New Mexico don't have access to
broadband.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan perhaps you could ask
your expert Mr Salazar.
Mr speaker and.
The gentle lady there are one
hundred and twenty six thousand
without internet.
A lot of families in our state
And you know.
I want to understand better not
I want to be to death course
around around the anti donation
clause we talked a lot about it
but I I really want to
understand how how the
exceptions that we've made to
intimidation in the past around
you know as the gentle lady from
was all those mentioned Mr
speaker around affordable
housing but also we how have
some of those exemptions worked
in the past and how do you think
it'll it might work here.
In the case of broadband.
I will.
Yes my co sponsor to answer.
Mmhm.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
tells County.
the leader provisions are
statutory and they
are implementing legislation of
provisions within the what we're
we're using in our kind of
jargon as the anti donation
clause and the anti donation
clause under subsection team
allows the state to invest in
land building or infrastructure
first first facilities to
support businesses.
It's it's just general language
and Lida is statutory and it
provides the various protections
that this legislature in its
infinite wisdom adopted and and
there are provisions such as
clawback is clawback provisions
if the qualifying entities is
not me meet the requirements of
job recreation for example that
would be one kind of safeguard
that was was developed through
media
usually there's a participating
agreement that's put in place
and that that all of those kinds
of safeguards were invented in
the Lone the statute some of
which we talked about when we
were talking about some
legislation that just recently
passed house bill
eleven so I anticipate Mr
speaker and gentle lady from
tiles that the.
Enabling legislation will find
similar kinds of safeguards and
similar ways to ensure that any
public money spent on these
essential services what will be
well vetted and have the ability
for all of us and transparent so
that any questions about whether
it was an appropriate
expenditure not can needs be
vetted by the legislature and
the public and the state auditor
potential.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos I want to shift
away from broadband for for just
a second you know what what we
experienced here in in my
district and very rural and I'm
imagine other rural districts is
that you know COVID really just
showing up shined a bright light
on on all the challenges that
our rural communities faced you
know that they were already
facing those issues they were
you know they already have lack
of access to broadband and water
connections and waste water
service as well so this question
I have is is related to
wastewater and and.
And water services if if the
state legislator legislature
wanted to provide low interest
loans to New Mexicans to connect
to water or wastewater
Could this with the implementing
legislation allow for that.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan and gentle lady from
tacos yes I believe that there
is a potential develop such a
program I mean this as I get
sent this is simply the
authorization and we as
responsible legislators will
develop the appropriate
safeguards and develop the
appropriate programs including
one potentially one that you
have described gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos settlement from
from San Juan I.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you as most Baker.
Thank you gentle lady and and
gentleman
Yeah okay.
Chennai.
yeah uninsured the gentleman
from someone you'll.
I yield to.
My friend from.
Number earlier.
I hope you don't make me sing.
Mr speaker leaving that up to
the Rockies brother.
Small speaker
You know this type of initiative
so important.
a lot of times it takes the most
vulnerable.
Overpopulation our children.
actually dying.
From lack of a these types of
services.
And
And I always kind of this must
be Kirk uh allude to a my my
larger community.
there in South Aling for New
County.
Unincorporated area County.
but it has three traditional
land grant communities at the
school building the largest of
our lives the middle community
the fall and the southern
community lost by the as of
course with this laptop Pueblo
in the south.
And what brought the attention
legislature the need for a.
Portable water and sewage
treatment.
Well as our babies dying.
Contaminated water.
And
And that was always the most
bicker because.
We have a with our community is
a basin Valley Community.
Our water table back in those
days.
In the sixties and seventies the
water table was about five feet.
Good to go all it five feet
moved it forward fable.
Actually it's dropped.
Because of the type of funding
that the city of affected has
done in terms of providing
potable water.
To the six hundred thousand
residents.
So
But the thing is is the most
speaker.
Is that
Because of the high water table.
Because of different industries.
Specially a nationally
recognized.
Kind of
A the.
Assessing plant.
that was.
Dumping.
A lot of nitrates who when
you're to blood waste.
And and other animal by
products.
Those nitrates found their way
into the our table.
And
What what what are high in
nitrates guns if you drink it
and your a baby.
It basically as the most beaker.
To order the oxygen.
I'm going to bring.
So baby start turning blue they
start basically dying.
And we had that happen.
But not only that most bigger.
Is that what is the mainstream
south valley.
Separable are.
Initially it was an old Indian
trail.
That started way up and more New
Mexico went all the way to the
Yucatan peninsula.
That Indian trail became a
commander at when the Spaniards
came in.
It became state highway one.
It became route sixty six after
that it became national highway
eighty five after that and now
is the table of our.
You have a gasoline station in
there every hundred yards.
Well.
These gasoline stations.
At Peking underground storage
tanks.
That gasoline found itself.
Into the water table.
I actually saw on.
yes.
Just done on the water table.
yes to.
Where they picked up two feet of
gasoline.
I was sitting on top of the
water table.
So all the forces found gasoline
or what's going into the private
wells of which people are using
for water.
Mr speaker.
The legislature did a
commendable thing because of our
babies dying.
And get a ten percent off.
The top or capital only or water
or water sewer systems
surveillance it did that for a
number years ago ninety percent
of the valley.
Was basically looked up.
Mr speaker we have a same
scenario.
Going on.
In all our communities.
Lower income communities
communities that lack
infrastructure.
And I have very little economic
development.
You know and we have similar
scenario.
But on the same path as the cell
value was in terms of outcomes.
And I don't want to I don't
think we would want to go there.
No nation.
One is on the side of the border
of the pockets nor New Mexico.
Pockets even in rural southern
New Mexico eastern New Mexico
western New Mexico.
You know where we lacked those.
Available.
Infrastructure systems.
Find the quality of life.
And healthy outcomes.
For family grow muted growth
spiritual growth.
And the and the fairness madam
speaker.
And the Chennai.
From someone.
Very there are there are kinda
anti donation barriers that was
banks that will basically
inhibits the state from.
Early signing these.
Projects.
I'm getting funding.
The purpose of the.
Mr resolution before us.
Basically.
A very natural process in terms
of addressing needs in our
state.
Miss madam speaker this is a
constitutional amendment.
Both for the voters.
Representative approved.
We come back just like we do
have data.
Most because we passed the
leader of social amendment
nineteen ninety four we came
back what do we do.
At the the.
SO what we create a leader.
Let me share with you how that
constitutional amendment I read
I think that research and
development respite for article
nine section fourteen is the
anti donation plus.
And I didn't do.
Islita maybe that in terms of
how the references amendment
right most bigger intersection
prohibits the satyr or a county
or municipality.
Creating new job opportunities
by providing land buildings or
infrastructure or facilities to
support new or expanding
businesses if this assistance is
granted pursuant to general
employment in Lebanon thing
eight selection as a pro a
majority of all of those elected
to each house of the legislature
implementing legislation selling
food adequate safeguards.
Thank public money or other
resources used for the purpose
authorized in this subsection.
Do hear lead up mentioned in
there.
No.
We're trying to do with this
constitutional amendment.
In terms of being.
facetious.
Is create the male form of art
to leader.
We want to create a legal.
I want to do what is current
practice amendment is create a
need a fund.
To address these specific needs.
And then comes in and Ebeling
Act after the voters approve
this is the most bigger.
So what was approved later we
came back the following year
ninety five.
Good lead up we we put a leader.
But the language in terms of
what qualifies for economic
development.
We actually do find what I
cannot make development means
and program qualified or
requests.
To expand on that as soon as we.
We put the medications as
mentioned by backs.
We got we had initially started
off with the No retail we want
to use leader for I think jobs.
We wanted to bring in high
caliber.
Voice Representative hardball.
And there's more speaker here in
our state.
So that's where all the.
That's that's where all the
ingredients when into.
What Lida would constitute.
And is doing a darn good job.
You know and and that's all we
want to do is the most bigger.
In terms of.
Creating a legal.
You know and that's what'll
happen with the enabling and
discretion will address all
those concerns that you own the
body have addressed.
That can only go into the
enabling legislation is the
most.
That's what we kind of.
Do the nitty gritty.
With the nuts and bolts.
You know where.
What we kind of big the beings
the Max.
Speaker and
And I think is doable.
Is the most Baker we need to
move forward.
And really kind of.
Addressing these dire needs.
That we hope is the most Egolf
will never get to the point that
my community experience.
In terms of experiencing that
because of good quality.
Portable water sewer systems.
You know and there is a sensor
system water system in the
valley we haven't had one case.
No trades babies.
We haven't had one case.
Of course cancers.
Into some of those.
We're coming off of the address
of oil.
I was thinking of contaminants.
Of beryl's fifty gallon barrels.
That we're very in the Arroyo.
Government Air Force base.
Miss madam speaker I know that
for a fact because some of the
elders in my community work at
program airforce base in the
maintenance.
When they were but what they
called found assistance.
Their protective gear.
And we're going to bury these
barrels contaminants jet fuel
etcetera etcetera in the early.
What adverse with fifty gallon
drum.
After it's been in the soil for
twenty thirty years.
In the in the two hearings.
Acceptable goes into the oil and
into that discussion one hundred
and office and the US and Dr
that.
That letter from the oil on to
the Rio Grande.
In the south valley is basically
orders.
The Rio Grande.
Speaker.
So this is a very calculated
initiative now speaker.
To really get us to a point.
We are one of the.
In this state.
And that is where every citizen
in this state.
As the building is of good
quality life.
And doesn't have to worry.
About dealing with the
essentials.
Central household services.
You know and some of these
communities.
Meeting those essential.
Council services.
Think so most of their day.
Is the most bigger.
Wonder what people have to go
take a fifty mile round trip.
To get.
I wonder.
Develop their plastic tanks
yes the container bottle water.
To bring it back to the village.
And they do that.
When it when they're out of the
water must be.
In the end
It must be that we just have to
look at our our ancestors.
You know in terms of how they
survived without water or water
systems.
For a modern source systems
electricity.
Similar speaker thank you up we
we have known for that inside
the house we have not house.
Basically right at the house of
kerosene lamps.
There's an oil.
Speaker.
You know but.
But our parents from committing
us to finish our homework.
Doing our chores.
Renaissance.
They had forced.
Well honest honest must be.
So.
So most people are.
This is.
The legal initiative.
You know it is the mill pond
park.
To the to.
It's in the same.
Walking back as leader.
And I have faith in this body.
We want to do this.
For the betterment.
Of our state our communities.
Our folks.
You know and.
And I have faith that it'll get
done.
We have to see it through to
information is the most.
And this is that one.
The neighbor next steps.
Of the the Fund step three.
Us.
Thank you.
In addition nine.
Thank you are.
Thank you from the cemex thank
you speaker.
Gentleman from and audio
Representative Madrid.
Thank you Mr speaker and as the
the fire engine removed from.
Bear with me.
What do you please.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from nine AM.
Thank you Mr speaker and.
I'd like to make a statement
openly and have moved to this
body.
That I'm so honored to be part
of the also have to to the the
truth to this quest to my
brother here he's from the north
he's carrying the same of those
scenarios and I have in the
south which is not that we don't
have the availability to water
not that we don't have
availability to access waste
treatment not the ability having
natural gas but we have these
things essentially more it's
just the cooperation of needed
body because the body.
To protect the whole body when I
reach out to my bipartisan
people on the other side we've
talked in conversation in the
pass the is essential for us to
build good.
Decisions good registration that
helps the state the people of
the state.
So when I think of the north I
don't see anything different but
a reflection of the south we're
one of the state.
Staff as a body.
Corruption is always existed
before we came here as a body.
It could happen again.
But I have faith in our system
for the corruption that may be
talked about or put into fear.
I also put out.
Nobody's gotten away with it
forever nobody gets away with it
for long and you will pay.
But our state has only one way
to prosper it is investing in
our people of the state as we
talk about.
As a body.
Socialism and we.
Of not wanting.
I
He said.
Because of these are.
People connected up to the home
of Soviet not free.
But with some way of being able
to make it affordable payment.
That could make some still able
to live of the everyday of the
means they have with only the
means they have.
We have a responsibility as a
state that we have greatly
failed up to this point.
In the way of our broadband the
way of our education of our
children.
When you talk to not having and
seeing the same kids go to
places to receive of hot spots I
have a roll of the bus and they
stop but after five o'clock.
No more hot spots.
These are things to me that if I
I say poverty is a there's a
subset of the choice but I great
state along with a great nation
that would go on to.
I think we can you know I come
to this means of realizing.
The opportunities of giving
integrity back to the people of
our great state without losing
face this discussion today as
guardian many different
directions that somewhat sad
moment.
Because of the body we're not
looking.
And thank you of the whole body
of the state.
So are you for an ask the body
to sleep.
As this legislation.
For I to work from the south to
creating those same or different
registration that complements
the north.
My brother Allison is not
without his questions my
questions the same.
We just need a bipartisan
cooperation rather than finger
pointing I'm not looking and
saying that there's just too
much open ended this this
registration is made
availability of not constraints
but in power agency.
Which is great we what are
people of the state of New
Mexico so yes we are waiting for
is empowerment this is an
empowerment of any services to
our people that have a right to
the basic amenities of our
state.
Effect.
Of the.
Thank you Representative trailer
for the system in this and I ask
the body to please import your
heart challenges so.
To let the state court.
Taking it to the services that
we so greatly deserve thank you
Mr speaker thank you.
Thank you for the debate the
gentle lady from going into
Representative Ferrary.
Okay the center for the debate.
Gentlelady nickel and gentleman
close.
Thank you Mr speaker before we
ask for a vote on it we just
want to make some comments so.
There are several legislations
through a program works and
civil war to the works that are
promoting economy for the state
of New Mexico.
We just need to remember that
New Mexico cannot have a
thriving economy if so Mexicans
are suffering from the lack of
basic infrastructure.
A comment was made earlier all
some about difference between
poverty and prosperity.
So.
May be processed in already.
But we should not forget that
they are contributing to the
prosperity.
And with
that said I will ask my co
sponsor to make recommendation I
don't want to hold the whole
screen.
I just want to compliment Mister
speaker my my co sponsor from
San Juan I think he expressed
our sentiments beautifully and I
appreciate the bodies debate of
this bill and I request your
support
Mr speaker I move that house
what excuse me house joint
thanks house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House joint
resolution now pass line now do
pass.
Right now the gentleman with the
title of the legislation.
Passage of House Judiciary
Committee searching for House
joint resolution nine the vote
is now open.
Mr speaker.
Thank you both I'm not able to.
Calling on you the.
Thank you Mr speaker.
When was.
And the remaining number
Representative Allison.
Yes Representative.
Just.
Forty four minutes twenty four
negative how much has to
Judiciary Committee substitute
frustrate resolution line is
duly passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This is.
The next order of business
committee that.
Mr speaker taxation revenue
community been referred house.
In Services Committee substitute
for House Bill the has had it
under consideration for thing
with the commission but I do not
have the house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House health and services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to the impasse respectfully
submitted have advantage chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report.
Transaction in a favorable
committee report on house how
the user's Committee sister for
House Bill twelve a federal
committee before and taxation
revenue Committee substrate for
House health news services
committee substitute frost was
one of those in favor please
signify by saying aye I
aye.
I think all I was was may
Representative.
Million.
Is.
The next order of business this
legislation no objections so
ordered.
Representative Martinez million
item ten.
I'm ready to speaker giving a
point please on the front on the
sensors replacing sample one is
amended with an emergency clause
and final passage is been taken
down to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
one is a continuation of the
COVID relief bills that the
legislature has been working on
this year Senate bill one does
two things number one it
provides for the gross receipts
tax deduction for bar food and
bars tablissements for a period
of one quarter from March until
June
the other thing it does is it
provides one time six hundred
dollar rebates to social workers
that earn fifteen dollars an
hour or less and that qualify
for the working families tax
credit is because bill has
passed out of the Senate
unanimously and out of the house
taxation committee unanimously
and without a center questions.
There is to me the gentle lady
from grant and all of us here
but she's not in the chamber.
State
Bank close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that Senate bill one as amended
to pass with an emergency
clause.
On final passage of Senate bill
one is amended with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Those without a recorded vote.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Millard.
Representative yes.
Representative hammer.
Representative oh yes.
These are support immediately.
Important security message sorry
I'm sorry hi.
Got locked out I don't yes
Representative for both yes
Representative Chandler.
Yes Representative yes.
Representative.
How to convert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
both yes.
The sixty sixty four and one.
As amended with an emergency
clause has duly passed the
house.
General.
Sorry I got into.
The next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Sessions ordered other
announcements.
Since.
Representative Maestas Tennyson
thank you Mr speaker honourable
members the house commerce
committee will be meeting
fifteen minutes after the
adjournment of the floor session
thank you.
The Santa Fe and Taos
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr speaker I'd like to
announce that the agriculture
and now water resource committee
will meet promptly
tomorrow morning at eight
thirty.
Members.
there any nonsense.
Representative Garcia.
Estimate US speaker
Will we be able to smell music
in the air tomorrow.
Yes.
The.
To.
I'm looking forward to speaker
to smell music in the air
manana.
Thank you for the love tonight
gentleman.
Since.
Mr speaker.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker members
please be on the lookout for an
email tomorrow from council
service with your capital outlay
funding sheets those will go out
tomorrow by email and then
they'll be back by by Friday
afternoon it'll give you details
on how much funding is available
and what not so just follow
instructions any questions give
me a ring or shoot me a text
