My.
Your.
Sure Madam chair Rubio.
Here.
Madam chair we have a quorum
great thanksgiving and thank you
everybody for joining us for
those who are watching for folks
who are participating today in
today's discussion
health transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee is I'm going to be
spending time today hearing for
the presentations I know that
legislation is starting to
trickle in into our committee
and so we'll we're we're looking
forward to starting to hear some
of those built next week and so
will we'll be sending out that
agenda by the end of of the day
tomorrow for now I want to
welcome the folks will be
participating today we have the
state of transportation system
overview of the highway
operations from Rick by the I
was the executive director for
the highway operations so Rick
welcome.
About that can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you
very much good morning everybody
madam chair good morning vice
chair good morning Secretary
church good morning good to see
you all I'm gonna speak this
morning from the state of the
transportation system
hopefully you have that in front
of you I don't know if we're
gonna trigger that and I'll be
control you'll be a good so just
let me know and I'll get
started.
Great.
I think we're getting that set
up right now Representative your
did you have a question you
madam chair what I wanted to
you're gonna put it up on the
screen.
Yes let me double check here
We unfortunately yesterday ran
into some logistical issues
Of with the with the staffing
and everything so just be
patient with us shortly give us
one second.
Representative pepper.
Thank you madam chair I.
Which we do I need to.
Perspective.
Well that won't attention on
proposed appropriation anyway
until people behind me are
talking done talking.
Okay.
All right.
Sorry as thank you again I need
to go on record on a couple of
things as we start talking about
Work this is coming up in
district to the committee on the
number of
Everyone I'm vice chair Garcia
can you mail your can you meet
your computer please will you
mean okay.
What you doing.
Mr Garcia.
you.
Madam chair I do have two
presentations one for districts
three one two three and one for
districts for three six we won
the.
Okay do you want to get a
continue by Senator staff would.
Madam chair you're able to to if
you're up I'm not help with the
data that you have the what the
presentation one through us one
through three okay thank you.
Yeah but it is said the you have
to do something about that too
IBM's I want to try to meet
them.
Okay.
Okay let me get make sure it's
coming up for you guys.
Madam chair would like for me to
continue now yes sorry about the
Representative go ahead thank
you
The current socius is a civil
engineering firm in southeastern
New Mexico I need to go on
record now that we do have to
contracts US two eighty five
we're actually finalizing in the
end of our contract will.
A cursory.
And then US eighty two eighteen.
At is a contract that we were
part of the design team on and
will be part of the construction
administration team all
just as we move forward any
thing that is allocated that way
I just wanted to put everybody
on notice that those are two
projects that
For a company that I'm an
executive for as contracts with
okay.
Great thank you so much for
sharing that representative we
appreciate it thank you.
Great.
I'm so Mr by the end go ahead.
Okay good morning can you still
hear me yes we can hear you
thank you for.
Sorry about that let's go ahead
and get started again good
morning and thank you recruiting
executive director for how we
operation so this morning I'm
gonna give you a little special
appropriations we have some
equipment and equipment and some
gaps in the back and but I'm
gonna get started here with the
with our initially our assets if
you go to slide to please.
Okay you can see our New Mexico
road we assets on the left there
we have our six districts you
can see what they encompass
ultimately we are responsible
for about.
Thirty thousand lane miles.
broken out by interstate U. S.
to Mexico and
other consists of frontage roads
and ramps and other access that
we are maintaining the state
right and then we have two
hundred fifty six non right away
parcels thirty one rest areas
you too patrol yards twenty
seven project offices about
three thousand bridges hundred
sixteen another commissions
message signs R. thirty four
traffic sensors to our west and
seven at advisory radio systems
totaling about fourteen point
seven million dollars next slide
please.
The next slide is our our winter
maintenance program I'm as you
can see there's a for your
snapshot here this is we
consider winter maintenance if
you look at the bottom there the
of the graph that shows are
booked.
Sir are.
Sure.
this includes a greater centers
on centers as a material
primarily we also use granular
magnesium chloride and we have
used some liquids and we are
entertaining the program once
again but.
These numbers include equipment
labor material we Budget Office
about nine million nearly right
and if you look in FY twenty we
had a a good year as we did in
FY nineteen this is going to be
a little different right not
give you a little snapshot of
course it's on official right
now as we're still tracking FY
twenty one but we're already in
the winter but the winter months
about eight point three million
that doesn't include the storm
that we saw on Monday and
Tuesday we still need a lot of
that data and get that into the
system we've already pushed
about a half a billion million
miles that's to put that a
little bit perspective you got a
snow plow and drove your in your
lane you go around there is
about twenty four times already
right so FY.
What similar to FY seventeen
right we anticipate about twelve
to thirteen million dollars
expenditures will be pushing
just under million total lane
miles billion excuse me so we
got a.
We have a long winter to go then
we'll see what happens happens
hopefully mother nature of
artists are our hope to sell
hearing gives a some more snow
we needed desperately
next slide.
The next slide we'll talk about
more pavement preservation
program right we're preserving
the land while preserving our
pavements.
We for the slide sorry you will
have your
so this is a preserving our
payments right and this again
includes most of our major
Servicing messed methods right
Matt Millen inlays are hot in
place recycling are here
scarification process no chips
cracks electricity so includes a
majority of our processes we use
to maintain payments if you look
in FY seventeen and eighteen
that's kind of like our base
budget that's kind of what we
average annually without the
money in the probation we've
been receiving from you all are
very grateful for that but if
you look into FY seventeen
eighteen average about twenty
six twenty six hundred lane
miles that's about average for
us and then in twenty nineteen
we started to fill on the money
we're receiving from you all
right in the maintenance program
so if you look in FY nineteen
you can see that we did thirty
one hundred miles and then and
FY twenty we crossed the goal
right our goal is twenty seven
fifty nine miles that's our
performance measure you can see
why twenty we crossed over
almost four thousand the miles
so as you can see we're starting
to fill the money that's coming
in you can see we're putting a
right to the road so that's a
good thing hopefully in twenty
one we'll see that again
and so things are looking good
once coming to preserving lane
miles it's not perfect right as
you know we still have a lot and
you drive a lot of our specially
Garcia rose were losing momentum
those are falling off the back
and just as fast as we can
preserve so just want to touch
on that a little bit next slide
please.
The next slide is really what
NMDOH T. isn't really known for
when it comes to maintenance is
our chips so program spy with
the numbers say here we're very
proud of this program only
budget about eleven million
annually for chip still
again this includes this is base
budget includes equipment
manpower you know the men women
that we have out there and of
course our equipment right and
with that said I'm good for
about a thousand miles annually
I know that goals twenty five
hundred miles but I just don't
have the capacity for that
and then if you look at the
black box is there in the top on
these are the costs that we
incur when we ship still this
again includes equipment labor
material we have coverage about
you know ten thousand lane miles
to do this process we see you
know at ten thousand lane miles
that's that's extremely low for
to get two to five years
performance a.
Costs have been coming down as
you know and secretary church
remembers this we have a lot of
millions right around the state
a lot of cool millions so we've
been crushing those into chips
and using those in our jobs so
program on that's been going
great so the cost per lane mile
for chip sealed road is coming
we doubt the performance we're
seeing out of it is is just one
of those things that that we're
very proud of you looking FY
twenty we graduated about ten
million dollars there.
Only about a thousand lane miles
look compared FY nineteen on the
came down a little bit and for
for awhile there I could get my
Armstrong talking the numbers to
come down so much and you know
the impacts of COVID nineteen
we've been very involved and
participating in that
transporting PPE and other
things around the state and also
we did participate a couple
wildfires the guys have been
trained on in wildfires and so
we've been participating in
those as best we can only water
on you know whatever it takes to
get those done so we did a lot
of that last year and you can
see it there it's not related to
budget is just just one of those
things we do right so next slide
please.
This slide is or somewhere
accomplishments right or
maintenance activities we have a
total of sixty five minutes
activities just a small snapshot
of a few.
but we track everything that we
do within the right away fence
right away by the fence whether
it's fencing mowing pavements
guardrails whatever it is we
have an activity for right we
have sixty five total I'm so
again this is just a small
snapshot and I'm gonna go over a
few of those but on the left
you'll see FY nineteen last year
on the right you'll see FY
twenty.
emergency repairs of X. for
example of a car catches fire in
the shoulder we we have to
repair that right so we did
about thirty five labor hours
last year and a to about one
point nine million of snow and
ice removal I covered that you
can see the past miles there in
the budgets are the expense of
about seventeen million.
A litter pick up that's a hot
button lately.
The talk a little bit more the
next slide but we spend about
ninety thousand dollars on that
activity at a tune of about
three million dollars our whole
patching which we're getting
ready to do here pretty quick
would you about four thousand
cubic yards of material in a to
about two point five million a
rest area maintenance we have
about ten thousand hours
annually usually we spent about
three or seventy two hours on
that graffiti removal we claim
about twenty thousand square
feet additional cost seventy
thousand dollars.
So all sixty five activities if
you total those up at the end of
the FY thank you again includes
equipment labor material read
about a hundred five million
right of that's my forces that
state forces on the ground on
conducting maintenance we also
have a construction maintenance
program we're we have
contractors that help us perform
maintenance right and we spent
another hundred million roughly
in that program as well so the
you can see that we spent about.
Two hundred million maintenance
why annually on our roads a lot
but does.
Out there and we just we can't
touch everything and so there
are gaps right number talk to
you about those at the end of
the presentation but I just
wanted to that up next slide
please.
Litter
you know we spent a lot of time
on litter we average about three
million dollars a year the king
of trash on this is one of those
areas that is extremely
demoralizing toward work means
Cruz right we can go cleanup of
an interchange and two weeks
later it's like we were never
there so the it's been very
tough on our guys but we do
that.
That that activity anyway if you
look at the bottom of the of the
graph or the chart excuse me
shows are FY twenty expenditures
you can see and state forces
which what I'd like I mentioned
in the previous five ninety
thousand dollars on picking up
trash and a tune of about three
million dollars we also have a
inmate labor contract that we
utilize there are some
participating interests in that
we're competing interests excuse
me and the counties have created
their own contracts with them as
well so we're all bad if not
only for the same labor so it's
been tough to get those guys are
those folks out there we spent a
hundred ninety two thousand
dollars there on that are you
know a total of about three
point two million total number
pick up next slide please.
Okay no more talk a little bit
about our fleet or equipment.
Okay
here's are you caught budget
equipment budget this includes
all six districts and the
general office the general
officer main campus certain
service road we do have on this
the vehicles for staff there to
go out conduct
you know inspections or reviews
whatever they need to in the
field so we do have some
vehicles there at the main
campus we have about ten million
dollars are you call budget in
part by chart below that I can
see how it's broken up between
the six districts and the
general office.
Next slide.
The next slide is gonna talk a
little bit about our replacement
criteria for vehicles right our
our fleet is aging we have about
sixty three hundred units
statewide that's total that's
everything we we have when it
comes to rolling stock
we'd like to have our pick up
in our sedans would like to
replace those after about a
hundred twenty five miles or
seven years but unfortunately
we're hanging on to those
vehicles for about fifteen years
so the mileage is way up there
and then when it comes to our
heavy equipment writer don't
trucks backhoes pas eccentric we
capture those a little
differently there in hours right
so we'd like to replace those
are twenty four to five thousand
dollars depending on what piece
of the committee this is about
ten or twelve years you know
that women's use hard and right
now our average replacement for
that equipment is about twenty
years so he's a long time.
And little later the districts
and these will talk about their
equipment needs that's been all
hi topically the we'd really
like to get some of our
equipment replaced next slide
please.
There we go okay of the slides
we talk a little bit about
maintenance gaps right so if you
look at the first
row they're talking about
routine pavement I mean excuse
me routine maintenance of the
things that we do all the time
of the patching pothole repair
ditch cleaning mowing guardrail
in our standard maintenance
operation we graduated about
seventeen million we really need
about twenty four million to get
things done right a gap of about
seven million there are routine
site maintenance we have about
you know a hundred ninety
thousand signs out there we like
to replace about ten percent of
those annually Act you know at a
cost of about five hundred
dollars per sign right roughly
and we're on a fourteen year
cycle and we spent about we
graduated about three point two
million really need nine million
to get to that ten percent this
to me that federal spec right
and then if you go the next row
there talk about pavement
striping about a hundred fifty
million linear feet of pavement
striping around the state
we like to to strike the other
states every year all in all the
routes but every two years plus
or minus a right now read about
sixteen dollars of in our excuse
me sixteen cents a when your
foot we graduated about a
million there and we really
could use about forty million to
get it done to make sure that we
get to those interstates every
year right so we have a gap
there about six million there
are people preservation program
we talked a little bit about
that in a previous slide and
we like to address that twenty
seven fifty at some point.
Andover question you're right
now with the money we we've been
receiving from you all were very
appreciative so that includes
all the money we received so
we've budget a hundred are two
hundred million there we still
need that's a big gap there
three hundred seventy million
there so our gap is to R. sixty
million March of so program you
saw the gap there and not slide
I graduated about ten eleven
million like I told you I need
about fourteen point five
million to make me whole there
enough program and then there's
some equipment replacement I I
we have ten million Saudi call I
can use another five right
annually to get some more
equipment.
and then if you look in at the
bottom there totaling it all up
the department is in about a
hundred sixty six million all in
the maintenance program we
really need about four hundred
eighty two million sore
maintenance gap is about three
or fifteen million plus or minus
right we talk about strictly
numbers here
on the on the back end next
slide please.
The next slide water
construction dust
again our first road
reconstruction real
rehabilitation program we
estimate that we about a fifteen
million dollar investment in the
next twenty years also heard
fifty one million dollars a year
so also for about seventy five
percent of our own most critical
needs right and we receive money
in this area to from you all
were very grateful on the
construction sites or budget is
about a hundred thirty seven
million
in our need is about three
hundred sixty five million it's
coming down thanks to you all
last year's run around a half a
billion so you know we're still
short or we saw of a gap about
two twenty seven million
restriction program of the next
four rows there are talking a
little bit about our bridge
program sort bridge present
preventive maintenance of my
real rehabilitation's our bridge
folks budget about one point
five million they need about
fifteen million to continue that
program so the gap is about
fourteen million there that are
major bridge rehabilitation's we
budget our fourteen million
there and the guy sitting at
about sixteen million.
The bridge replacements we was
about forty seven we fifty six
so those numbers aren't too bad
but if you to look at the bottom
of all again all in for the
department about two hundred
million you could see the need
there's about four hundred fifty
three million in the red they're
kind of totals of all of both
maintenance and construction in
our total gap is about five
hundred sixty million plus or
minus again these are run
numbers were crunching on the
back and see exactly what it
would take to get us to that
state of good repair and all
areas so with that said madam
chair I will stand for
questions.
Thank you.
I'm I know that time did you
have your yeah go ahead.
It madam madam chair thank you I
I I have a question right right
right now the the.
That technical group that's
looking at the budget it appears
that there's going to be roughly
twenty million dollars of of
revenue that wasn't accounted
for in the budget generally the
recommendation has been to put
that into you know like ten
million in debt you caught and
which is heavy equipment and
then of the ten million or so
into a hundred percent state
given the maintenance gaps that
you've just presented not the
construction gaps because
construction gaps are getting a
lot of of bills being presented
for extra money that could help
in that area but in terms of the
maintenance you mentioned the
you caught have a quick meant
you probably only need an
additional five million would
would you have a recommendation
to move some of that money into
maintenance as opposed to a
hundred percent state and and
could you maybe explain that to
the committee a little bit so
that when we give them the
technical recommendations they
can make that decision.
That's a good question Tom and
when we look at our equipment
needs especially the maintenance
area we for many years right we
we were we're spending is as
much as we could and trying to
get our equipment just say a
good repair right we have about
probably opens Center equipment
critical need area and when I
mean critical doesn't mean that
they're they're date there's a
dangerous piece of equipment
just means that we're it's that
it's it's limit and we spent a
lot of money fixing it and
maintaining it and I think if we
could just get up in additional
five million annually I'm gonna
quit then
I think we can start making some
headway when it comes to refer
to a.
Bring in some new equipment and
the good thing about some of
that I'll be off track will be
here to receive new equipment
some of our older comic comes
out the back and we provide that
an auction and public hardships
to our LPI's right a lot of that
equipment goes to them as well
I'm so there's a lot of good
things that come of of new
equipment especially the heavy
equipment which is in in need at
the LPA level
Tom I apologize I I got off
track there but I I would I
don't know if I touched on
exactly what you're after.
Yeah.
Madam chair thank you read REC I
I I guess you could you could
you address the maintenance gaps
because you know currently the
that do that the budget staff at
DOT is suggesting maybe ten
million and heavy equipment and
and you're matching five million
so that and then there's twenty
million roughly of New of
additional revenue that needs to
be budgeted so could you address
the maintenance part of that so
say there is a there is of five
million any caught in a heavy
equipment that leaves about
fifteen million as opposed to
putting it into to a hundred
percent state which is one of
the the fall back moving that
into maintenance could you get
more done that direction under
present state for the committee
for for their information under
present state generally goes to
smaller projects around the
state that don't qualify for
federal funds
however if you know if you're if
you're maintaining more roads
out there it it may have a
better benefit they are and a
hundred percent state given the
movie to build up this local
transportation fund which which
will benefit all of the state at
the local level so it maybe
patch on that just a second I
apologize madam chair I just
thought it be helpful for the
committee get this information
so when budget problems yeah
totally fine.
Madam chair I apologize it I
think I lost connection there
I'm gonna turn off my video so I
don't lose you all okay.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you.
So the REC I don't I don't have
to repeat all of that.
Yeah we we may have lost M.
I know but in the meantime Tom
vice chair did you have a
question and it's probably
towards for Mister by the but
it.
This Madam chairman of the Rick
are you on.
I will keep an eye for him in
the attendees list and the
second you can hop back on I'll
I'll get him on there for you
madam vice chair and madam chair
and vice chair.
Madam chair of the questions
were a.
One to Rick so I guess we'll
have to wait to get back online
great okay so I'm this trend on.
Wait I think grace I'm sure can
you hear me yeah we can hear
your.
Madam chair can you hear we can
hear you.
It sounds like we're either I'm
having technical difficulties
are you all are apologize.
If any I mean you turned my
camera off just in case that
happens against yeah I think
it's coming from your and so
just
don't know I mean don't don't
don't worry of the were you able
to catch the question that Tom
brought up and I know that vice
chair Garcia has a question as
well.
Yes so so I I was given breaking
up yes yes so we want to spend
on lesson equipment and more
contract equipment right so we
if I can get another five
million in two quick meant plus
my ten million eat Committee
hopped out that will be good
this year I'd like to have I
like to put more money to the
roads so we could just if I
could just get additional five
for equipment and then tenant
contracting is that be great.
Richard sensor question.
Right yes yes right what what
would what would be the budget
versus putting it on the present
state.
Well I think the benefit right
now is that we can get it done
right away right we can we can
start doing that you purchase
some of the correct way and will
be using price agreements for
that so that'll happen fairly
quickly.
Thanks Rick and vice chair
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a
reasonable you can you hear me.
Yes I cancer okay you got to
questions you in your comments
madam chair he mentioned control
that we're spending all kinds of
money on that where are the most
problem areas under control.
Madam chair and vice chair
primarily it's in the in the
metro areas right the bigger
cities and towns on that's
that's primarily where the
problems lie Albuquerque metro
as you all know you can drive
anywhere with you know around
there and deliver gets pretty
bass fairly quickly as you go
out to rural New Mexico not so
much but if you go into a major
city
as you get closer and closer or
more.
Thank you very much for your
madam chair Rick the reason I
asked that question is because
if you go to any off from work
on ramp in the state of New
Mexico and interstate I mean
their grasp it's.
You know I have a try to address
these problems you guys have of
of rural barricades.
To make progress form of you
know we can't stop on the on or
off ramps because you know I see
a big big problem there because
my to my whole district
everybody stop on an off ramp or
not Representative I mean
there's trash everywhere you
know your models of.
Hypodermic needles and I've
taken pictures of and that's a
big concern to me Rick and you
know that's gonna be a big big
cost to the state to be clean
and this stuff up.
second question I have a Rick
you mentioned something about a
line you know when you of.
Restrict road in New Mexico you
said every two years or so
forth.
Are you guys prepare for these
are common as vehicles with
driverless trucks and cars are
going to be on the highway and
how are you going to address
those issues for the imagine
they work off the tribunal I
wish.
You know madam chair vice chair
that's a good question that's
something we we've been
discussing for a long time there
there are some hurdles when it
comes to autonomous vehicles
right one of them being Mexico
so rural on.
We're getting there but once we
get to a point no restraint
introduce a lot more of that
technology are strictly programs
that require a lot more budget
yep you're absolutely right I
think we're probably going to
have to even introduce a couple
of different striping
applications meeting we might
have to go to it a stronger more
durable striped alas is a little
longer but that's part of that
it will gear up for that in and
see what other states are doing
and hopefully cutting corporate
that into our into our operation
depending on what that number
looks like will just have to
wait and see yes you know right
now straight the sixteen
stenciling your foot doesn't
sound too bad we have you know
two hundred thousand linear feet
of it we're trying to strike ten
percent of that annually can get
pretty rough so would have to
wait and see I know we're going
to have a workshop on that
you're pretty quick and we'll be
discussing some of those things.
madam chair Rick the you know I
brought that up because you know
all of these other drivers
vehicles are going to be coming
here before we know what and I
don't want the state as a whole
to be caught with their pants
have we done knees J. well we
should have thought about the.
Ten years ago it's going to
happen is going to happen before
we know what because you're
already in the processes of all.
and I do and I think there are
Rudy driving these trucks and
they're going to be sure coming
down I. forty and the we're just
issues that I'm looking at.
Not for today or tomorrow but.
A couple weeks alone this week's
brought chair it's gonna be a
couple years probably but it's
going to be here and I don't
want to say to be okay well we
should have done thank you madam
chair thank you Rick.
Sir.
Thank you Mr
thank you Rick so much for your
presentation I don't know if you
have anything else that you'd
like to say otherwise we can
move forward with
with trying to little.
Thank you madam chair should the
no that's all I have we can
start with these if you'd like
all right awesome thanks so much
for.
Madam chair this is trendy
little can you hear me yes we
can hear you perfect thank it
blanked out for a minute and I
got I thought request passing on
his technical difficulty.
There you can thank you madam
chair first it's nice to visit
with you I apologize for playing
phone tag but know that I'm I'm
here increases I actually live
increases so if there's anything
that you ever need for me feel
free to give me a call.
I believe we have a presentation
that I need somebody to pull up
for me.
Yeah we'll get that real quick
is it just the continuation
of the sites we work on.
A little and madam chair
awesome.
And I think I mean just so you
know and districts one two and
three will be in consecutive
order on that presentation thank
you.
Very madam chair so I'll talk
briefly about our district we
encompass the in the southwest
part of the state you'll see in
the top left hand corner of on
page one we incorporate Hidalgo
grant Luna Dona Ana Sierra and
so coral counties and then we
have the very southern tip of
catching County in that same
paragraph the one thing that's
very unique to district one is
we are the only district that
borders Mexico so we we have
included in our area three
international ports of entry so
we have antelope wells which is
down in the bootheel Columbus
which is just south of of
Deming and then Santa Theresa
which is right there at the at
the corner of.
On the Texas Mexico New Mexico
borders it isn't it is extremely
busy the substantial growth in
that area with the union Pacific
intermodal yard the industrial
park so it is a heavily traveled
route we just spent about forty
million dollars overlaying nine
miles of New Mexico one thirty
six with concrete because of the
oversize overweight zone and
then all the truck traffic
that's coming in at that point
of entry to the to the
commercial are the industrial
park in then on to I. ten and in
el Paso.
In the bottom right hand corner
you'll see our fiscal year
budget and in description of
water district is so we have a
twenty two and a half million
dollar operating budget that
covers our payroll basically
anything that we need to operate
as a district our ongoing
construction activities
yesterday or a last week
secretary Seneal talked about
all the work in district one we
are currently under contract for
a hundred ninety one million
dollars and I'm going to some
details on those a little bit
later in the presentation our
contract maintenance on that's
when we hired a contractor to do
just maintenance work within the
district whether be signing
payment preservation erosion
repair those kinds of things
that's a forty five point four
million dollar
Budget our fuel supplies what
that is is that's the money that
our internal forces use so
that's buying pot hole pothole
patching material guardrail
fencing anything that we do
internally that's the budget
that we utilize we spend five
point four million dollars on
materials it's that utilized
with our internal forces.
We we talk a little bit about
the striping and signing we
actually have a program in our
district we were we strike our
routes annually and the reason
that we're able to do that is W.
Padilla talked a little bit
about a higher quality striping
stoner interstates we've been
placing hot thermal plastic for
many years it's extremely
expensive it's just over a
dollar flat compared to the
sixteen cents per foot that that
the the water based paint is but
it'll last between seven and ten
years with with no maintenance
at all.
so the.
That there was discussion for
representative Garcia about
Being ready for the economists
vehicles so we have been working
with the I. ten
freight corridor group and all
of our striving on I can it we
is is up to up to date and ready
for those economists vehicles
and it's because it is that that
top thermal plastic but we are
able to strike all of our routes
in our district annually you
know unless we have something
major you know our plows you'll
kill some that paint up we have
to do a major
by Patrick something like that
of that may take away a little
bit from that budget but
ultimately we are stripping our
roads annually.
Mr improvements that's money
that we spend to do just
you know general improvements
itself to the rest areas we have
twelve in our district I will
I'm I'm proud to say that all of
our history is our eighty eight
and environmental compliance
we work with Tresco on they are
on contract with us to maintain
and and and keep up with R.
Esther yes we spend sixty
thousand and improvements in
that two point two million
dollars is what we pay Tresco
each year to just maintain keep
keep it clean
you know sweet pick up trash
those kinds of things around the
rest areas.
in the bottom of that you'll see
a breakdown of our of our
districts we have force we have
four sections business support
is our purchasing accounting
risk management I'm it can
extort H. R. so it's basically
anything that Nomar field guys
need the business support guys
provide that that support to
them our maintenance section
Rick talked a little bit about
those we have twelve patrols in
our district we have for
traveling Cruz the chip seal
heavy maintenance repair not
trucking crew.
and you'll see that that's our
biggest section by far which
makes sense.
Our construction program we have
for a project offices.
in our lab in our audit section.
and then engineering support no
those are the guys that the
basically provided technical
support for our field staff so
that includes technical support
survey our local government
program we have a coordinator
who who works with our local
governments on all of their
funding
and that's partly engineering
support section and then traffic
falls under that.
And then the last thing I wanted
to touch on is our vacancies
sold this report is a little is
a little dated
as of yesterday we are eighteen
point two four percent vacancy
rate which is fifty four
positions and honestly that's
the highest we've been in my
tenure as district engineer so
you know in the past eight years
and part of that was that hiring
freeze but we're just in the
process of catching up we've had
a few a few people retire but
honestly we've seen that that
drop from about twenty percent
eighteen so we're on the
downhill on the downhill slide.
next slide please.
Madam chair you'll see at the at
the top of this this page is our
current on going construction
program you'll see there's a
little bit different it's in the
money on this page versus the
first and the reason that is is
these are out on going on active
projects the rest of that money
of projects that are in the
closure faced more working on
final estimates punch list items
those kinds of things so these
are projects that are actually
on going as we speak.
I just want to highlight a few
of them madam chair with you
being from crucis you I'm sure
you've been to the I. twenty
five university project that's a
thirty three million dollar job
or replacing bridges were were
adding some capacity and better
flow into the amendment issue
campus that was expected to be
completed this summer probably
late July early August but it
has been going very well
honestly part of reason that
it's going so well is because
COVID is kept the campus closed
in the specially Mantz
you know from impacting our work
but it's it's been a very good
project for the community.
New Mexico twenty six I just
wanna touch briefly on that one
that's an eighty a project for
hatch
it's reading some sidewalks and
pedestrian access very good
project for the community I'm
very similar to the multi use
path on US one eighty there at
Santa Clara so we're not just
focusing on road we work but
we're also working on
You know multi modal those kinds
of things so these are requests
of the community to try to
provide better access so we do
work very well with them and
that's
you know a couple of projects
that it's providing better
access for for those folks.
The other one I wanted to touch
on is is
and about three quarters of the
way down that first that first
the.
Spreadsheet that first.
Lock we have a project on I. ten
the forty for the fifty five I I
will tell you that our
interstate system is is in
terrible shape
it's reached its life you'll see
towards the end of my
presentation that we have some
projects ready to go but my
staff is doing a really good job
trying to hold it together but
without the funding that you all
are providing for us.
It's difficult for us to keep up
with it so you'll see there on
the on the house bill two
section nine on that I tend that
very first project that that
project said on the show for for
a couple years and we could not
have have completed that payment
preservation with all the money
you gave us so you know why
appreciate it but we are
focusing on a lot of the
interstate system you'll see
what that house bill money three
of those projects or on the
interstate itself the last two
that you see there is The New
Mexico foral four quarter
that that is the Anthony gatt
basically from I can over the
past to chaparral in New South
into el Paso.
That corridor has been extremely
dangerous we have a lot of head
on fatalities in that area and
it's becoming more and more
travel because of the working in
downtown el Paso.
Extent representatives have told
us that they expect to spend the
next ten years doing work on I.
ten in downtown el Paso so
what's being proposed is a
basically a bypass around the
east side of el Paso to the New
Mexico for for Anthony gap so
what we're doing is right now we
just started construction about
a week ago on the I. ten for for
interchange that's the eighteen
million dollar project well
we're gonna replace the
interchange itself and do some
capacity improvements in the
last project on that list is The
New Mexico for for basically
over the entire past for gonna
for learning to positive
separation with Gardner are up.
Concrete wall barrier basically
eliminating all the head on
collisions so that's extremely
important corridor for us it has
been for the last couple years
you'll see the my presentation
that we have three or four
projects that we're focusing on
that corridor.
That next spreadsheet there is
the house bill to that eighty
nine million you'll see all of
that has been completed again we
appreciate that money that's
fourteen point eight million
dollars that we did through our
contract maintenance program.
so we hired some local
contractors just do some some
routine maintenance for us
but very appreciative and ticket
you didn't have the the gap that
Mr Padilla discussed earlier.
And then the last one on the
house bill two that I twenty
five milepost one of five to the
one fifteen.
anybody that's traveled on I.
twenty five there just south of
the coral recognize how quickly
that road we was falling apart
so we were able to spend twenty
million dollars actually work
under construction right now
they started about two weeks ago
source spending twenty million
dollars on that section of road.
The next part of the pages are
is our equipment you'll see we
spent two million dollars in
fiscal year twenty twenty one.
lot of heavy equipment but we
have had to purchase a few small
pieces of equipment sedans
pickups for our construction
inspectors those kinds of things
on that Mr video talked about
our our the cops don't spend a
whole lot of money time on that.
The bottom of that page you'll
see our rest areas.
again that was money that came
from came from you all and we
really appreciate that but
ultimately that helped us bring.
all of our rest areas we
upgraded a few things that were
causing us a lot of maintenance
problems all many of our history
is also have LED lighting so
you'll see on this one we were
able to put some immediate for
Craig.
but again we appreciate that so
that we keep our our restorative
arrester is up to up to speed
the next page please.
Madam chair at the top of this
page you'll see are projects
that are in engineering
development not going to go
through all of them but you'll
see we do have a few on four oh
four on that we're trying to
finish up on to that I would do
wanted to focus on as we are
doing a capacity study of I.
twenty five basically from the
Lohman interchanging Los crucis
north into Dona Ana and the
reason that we're doing that is
we're having some some some
issues with traffic so we're
looking at doing need to do a
six lane
there's been a request from the
community in Dona ana to study
for road and maybe put some
sidewalks and some drainage
improvements so we're in the
process of that study right now.
On the other one that I know has
been important in kind of a hot
topic is the the capacity and
safety study on US one eighty
between Deming and
early impaired we are we had a
meeting last week I'm so we're
working on the preliminary
report before we go to public
comment but it's looking like in
that section we're gonna have
some sort of
modify to Maine so alternating
passing lanes areas to allow
more passing than we have right
now but we are studying that
that area because of the heavy
truck traffic you know the
delays of the people that are
commuting back and forth between
gaming and that Silvercity
communities.
so we're in the process of that
the early process
that study on US one eighty.
I don't really want to go into
all the details of the have any
specific questions about our
projects and development just
just please let me know and then
the last thing I wanted to touch
on is our unfunded and not fully
funded projects so what you see
here is there's five projects on
the list I'm just very recently
we were able to fund that the
very top one that was funded
through federal redistribution.
but the one thing I do want to
mention to you all is you know
this is just the smallest we
currently have ten projects on
the shelf ready to go all of
them on I ten or I. twenty five
and accounts for about a hundred
and thirteen million dollars
worth of work in covers about
eighty five miles of our
interstate system.
as I mentioned earlier our
interstates are falling apart
we're doing the best we can to
maintain it with you know just
play patching and pothole
patching but it's a lot of some
great issue so you'll see we're
doing some major rehabilitation
some more more detail in in late
projects but we are prepared to
spend hundred thirteen million
dollars they are designed and
shelf ready
That's one thing that our
district has always been is been
really good about we work with
our south region to have a
substantial self shelf project
ready to go I think that's why
you'll recognize that you know
we're under contract for a
hundred ninety million dollars.
Madam chair I I think that's the
end of my presentation.
it is my last page so with that
I will stand for any questions.
Great thanks so much trend and
it's good to finally see your
face.
of does anybody have any
questions.
Sure Garcia and then we have
Representative Gary.
Thank you madam chair of Mr
Doolittle
you mention us to roll down a U.
S. state road one eighty along
that road been on the on the
books for a for repairs.
Madam chair vice chair so that
one was actually part of the
original unfunded group
projects.
so it's been on the on the shelf
we are on the radar for a while
we actually have built the first
two phases coming out of Deming
so all of that is for Lane into
you get into the very rural
areas
the discussion that we were
having before was that all of
the great projects were allowing
for affording facility the
reason that we're doing the
study as that was concerned that
if we get a four main facility
now it turns into a high speed
Basically a high speed roadway
so that's why we're doing the
study but it was on the original
list for the great projects.
Thank you madam chair rule
because the.
Representative Martínez we're
working on this for a long as I
can remember.
And it has never gone anywhere
still stalled out and it was
scheduled to be a four lane and
now you're talking about a.
The two Lakewood passing lanes
on it and I I've what what
benefit are we doing what
benefit will get out of that by
doing that other than you're
worried about a speeding on it
or people going too fast on this
rule.
So madam chair vice chair again
the right now there are three
alternatives that that I think
we'll go to the public comment
and ultimately that will decide
which one we go on four lane is
still on the radar.
I have is is and
super to which basically is a
thrilling facility that allows
for too late to miles of passing
that alternates the entire
corridor.
And then the other option that I
think will be considered as what
they call is an improved to main
facility so it's not passing all
the time but in very strategic
locations in the reason that
they have to do that is is you
know we have we have the airport
we have some areas we have a we
have to material pets that are
along that corridor we have
trucks entering and exiting the
roadway we have the turn off to
rock hill road so there may be
some strategic locations that we
can't have passing just two to
allow the side road traffic to
get onto US one eighty but last
year I think those will be the
three alternatives that will go
to public comment and then once
we finish that process then a
preferred alternative will be
decided.
Thank you what last question.
I know there's been on the books
madam chair forever so all this
Madam doing what it is going to
happen or we're going to be
talking about this I you're done
will.
Madam chair vice chair no Sir
the the study is ongoing right
now my expectation is so we had
a a summary with the the study
team about three weeks ago my
guess is you will see public
comment and public meetings
late spring or early summer we
should have a design towards the
end of this year our preferred
alternative.
and then at that point we would
have to come up with the
construction funding and then
begin design the thing I will
tell you vice chair is at this
point that preliminary estimate
is about a hundred and thirty
million dollars for that entire
corridor.
so we may have to look at
phasing that out but once we get
the preferred alternatives you
can begin the design then we can
start seeking the funding
For for that corridor.
Madam chair rather thank you FOR
I reckon.
I know that the price you gave
was of of a lot of money but you
know rural New Mexico deserves.
What everybody else is getting
on urban New Mexico so that just
about the money to pay in
dollars this thing has been on
the books forever and we need to
do some with that thank you
right thank you madam chair.
Sure we have Representative Gary
and then Representative Madrid.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Great presentation
I don't know if you remember I
do you is in the past I like to
see the breakdown of I. T. and
it just seems that in your
district with so much of Thomas
testing going on with the truck
chains the three border
crossings the development of
Santa Theresa and then the
unique Windstar president
everything it just seems that
your I. T. budget is really
important is it adequate or not
only today's names but your
anticipated needs.
Madam chair representative
you're at so I will tell you
that we do have several
permanent message boards along
the I. ten corridor
several years ago we did also
implement some some I. T. very
similar to what they do and
Arizona through the through the
playa where we have such a big
does problems so what that
incorporates as we do have some
message boards we have some some
weather stations and what it
does is as the wind picks up it
turns on message boards it turns
on speed limit reductions signs
so we have addressed at least on
the I. T. side many of the
issues apply at I will tell you
that we continue to work with
our R. I. T. section in Santa Fe
to come up with a master plan
along along the I. ten corridor
to try to capture more of the
incidents that take place in
Arizona in el Paso for instance
just to give heads up for those
travelers but I would tell you
Representative Garrett in my
mind I think that we have
adequate I. T. along the I. ten
corridor we probably could use a
little bit more specifically
between Deming in Lordsburg.
as you approach those kinds of
weather events I think the next
thing that we're gonna start
focusing on with the I. twenty
five corridor but we are working
very closely with the G. O. on a
statewide plan but at this point
I think that we've addressed all
of the immediate needs along
both corridors.
Madam chair and and what about
the economist vehicle with their
testing I think it's called
truck chains does that how does
that interact with your
district.
Madam chair representative here
so we have had those tests those
tests along the I. ten corridor
at this point are I. T. hasn't
been as important it's mostly
the striping that representative
Garcia talked about earlier and
so we do have six inch straight
being on our I ten actually on
all of our interstate corridors
so at this point the tests have
been very good in what in the
New Mexico area we haven't had
any major issues we had we did
have I talked about blade
patching so we did have one
issue where are our maintenance
staff went out and played
patched and we didn't have it
straight in it caused a little
bit of issues with those trucks
but for the most part we are
prepared and we've had success
with the test that took place
along I. ten.
Thank you so much Madam
chairwoman thank you.
Representative next we have
Representative Madrid.
Chair chair and
I missed part of most of the
presentations are copied and I'm
going on the book there were you
have to for four to thirteen and
I see that you have five million
allocated for the bridge
correct.
So we had five million dollars
but it's actually a little bit
more than that it's about a nine
million dollar project.
With the and that being said
what what is that going to cover
up to one point is that just the
four bricks of forming bridge on
for four because you showed up
to thirteen years at the other
end.
Madam chair representative
Madrid so we're actually we have
the first phase is the I. ten
interchange and it just does
east just past the Dona ana
community college.
Phase two will be four laning
the entire facility from the
Dona Ana inner Dona ana
community college to the New
Mexico to thirteen.
That budget in August of twenty
twenty two.
Phase three will be four laning
New Mexico to thirteen from that
intersection south to the Texas
state line that one is in the
study phase right now just
because of all the driveways and
drainage issues and then face
for will be a full blown
interchange at New Mexico to
thirteen and four four we have
the roundabout right now we're
gonna modify that to allow the
freight traffic to continue
along that corridor without
having to go through that round
about.
So what we're talking about
thirty two million is one of the
to gather for the from the
beginning to the end project of
this.
It's probably gonna be
substantially more than that
Representative
if we.
If we have to do an interchange
for instance at two thirteen and
four four that's going to be ten
to fifteen million alone okay.
They were talking about fifty to
sixty.
Yes Sir and that's why
Representative that's why we're
we're looking at phasing it out
I will tell you that again the
two third I mean the for all
four I can project is under
construction right now the for
all four quarters for the four
lane is fully funded for that
August twenty twenty two so we
will at least get the majority
of the safety issues addressed
with that court or project.
Well thank you the chairman and
and commissioner do little for
what you're doing for us out
there that that is been a big
concern of mine that I have
attended many teachers lost on
that route along with many
families along that road so.
Yeah I can do to help expedite
and I will sincerely where to
see what we can do to get more
funding because that's a real
issue I think it also plays in
the way of the growing future
with Connie in the way of the
cells because it has the ability
of the crossing over which is
what has happened and it's
become a major corridor of
circumvent
so I think it's going to be good
for all of us on both sides of
the ball over there but most of
all we're addressing that the
the we called the issues of
people's lives and I think
that's really important so thank
you again chairwoman.
Red Bull for all you do and to
potential reimbursement act and
then you Sir thank you for.
Thank you Representative I don't
see anyone else in for the
questions
so Trent thank you so much for
your presentation I look forward
to getting to know you and
especially with the work that
you are doing in this district
many of those roads I and I rode
them on my bike and so I'm
hello my goal is to maybe
eventually I ride my bike all to
all six districts I'm really
excited to to see once COVID is
is over so thanks so much for
being part of this and and and
we appreciate you taking the
time thank you madam chair.
Great next we will have
Representative come back and
Let me just make the transfer
here.
And and just for folks I do want
to do a time check we are
expected to go back on the floor
to go on the floor at eleven so
we'll do a trying time check at
ten thirty I want to be sure
that everybody gets a fair
amount of time to present so if
we have to delay some
presentations for Tuesday we can
certainly do that so folks don't
feel like they need to rush
and so just giving you all just
just a heads up on on that.
Trying to see if.
Is it right I don't know if his
if
I can't see REC in the.
So madam chair I thought you had
promoted Hamm because he did
hear from the attendee list but
this having connection issues
again we can go on to Justin
Justin are you are the CEO of
transfer more right now.
If it is ready to go will will
promote you to panelists.
Good morning warning just has a
going.
Good.
Are you okay going now yes okay
great awesome.
So we'll just pull up your
presentation and and we'll get
started.
Right.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Justin Gibson I am
the district engineer.
For district three covers the
parts of Santa Fe County.
Excuse me.
Earlier County the Lente county
in scoring County.
District three encompasses
Albuquerque Rio Rancho metro
area as well as communities
along the Rio Grande corridor
including Bernalillo Kerala
spots keep arms Peralta less
than a single and.
Along with that there's also
sixteen other communities within
the district.
Spans from east mountains of
Albuquerque to the west makes
areas there are eight tribal
governments including Ysleta
Sandia Santa Ana centrally bay
sentimento Laguna Mexico City
and to actually.
I have been in this position for
about ten months I look forward
to working with members on the
committee.
For.
Transportation improvements.
Also would like to introduce as
you can see on this first page
shown here is our district three
commissioner Mrs how much time
with.
Who works closely with the
district in promoting progress
here in district three.
I will be going over the if we
can scroll down just a little
bit that FY twenty one budget.
We going over the FY twenty one
budget right now we have out of
our operating budget.
We're at sixteen million.
Currently we have forty four
percent time remaining in FY
twenty one and we have fifty two
percent of the budget remaining
so we're certain really well for
that budget.
Next moving on to our
construction contracts we have a
hundred sixteen million that was
at the time that this report was
drafted in current construction
contracts as was described by Mr
Doolittle and his presentation
that you'll see a little bit of
disparity between this and the
next page right now as of the
current January update that just
came out a few days ago we're at
ninety eight million in current
construction contracts.
The next line below that is our
contract maintenance work at
seven point nine million dollars
for the district three area.
I hello that is more areas that
are within a maintenance which
is our field supplies which is
at two point eight million
dollars.
Our signing and striping budget
for the district is about one
point one similar to district
one all of our interstates we do
use typically on New Mexico
routes you look at the water
based paint being four inches
wide and the Albuquerque metro
area as law and along with other
areas of the state we use up
optimal plastic pavement
markings and all kind of go over
that in detail there some
questions but we we've been
using that for about the past
ten to twelve years and we also
the plant had a wider stripes on
the interstate routes up to
twelve inches in some areas but
normally it's a six inch
straight so anything that's done
to increase stricken budgets is
greatly appreciated next below
that you'll see R. I. T. budget
for the district at two hundred
sixty eight thousand and
currently in Albuquerque metro
area we do have continual
Russian of I. T. S. which is
intelligent transportation
systems we actually house the
cooperative for in the district
three area at many people are
familiar with like a courtesy
patrol that's linked to the ITS
traffic management center and
it's a joint
it's a joint project between
Berlin county City of
Albuquerque the state in New
Mexico so we're really excited
about how we're seen I. T. R.
progress for as far as IT in
ITS.
Next below that will look at our
employee break down.
At the time that we were looking
at this we had our first I'll go
over the employee break down so
as described we have thirty five
support staff members are big
thank you to all the district
three members the support staff
is really what during operations
during the COVID has really
helped out especially our field
mechanics that have CD else and
our shop mechanics that to help
distribute PP to the outlying
areas and shipping it out of the
Albuquerque metro area as long
and as well as most of those
thirty five positions that are
not in operations have been tell
working since last March.
In our maintenance area we have
eighty one positions this
includes our heavy maintenance
as well as our patrols the
patrols that we have for the
Albuquerque district which I
generally just refer to is
district three we have
Bernalillo north Albuquerque
south Albuquerque these are
sometimes referred to as north
Durban in South Irvin as well as
the lan and to get us in the
he's not very.
Below that you'll see that we
have sixty two positions within
construction we have worked
construction offices they are
all houses in one area of the
district as similar to a patrol
and there's for construction
offices and there we have
support staff within district
construction on it our hilltop
last which is the complex where
they're all resigned and also
our districts lab that oversees
our operations.
Hello that you'll see that we
have thirty positions within
engineering support engineering
support really helps with manage
our budget as far as progressing
and securing funding for
construction projects and
putting them through our step
process that you're in the
Albuquerque metro area we go
through the mid region council
of governments and so in that
area we have thirty positions
for full full full full time
employees we have two hundred
and eight at the time that this
was taken in January we had a
total of twenty seven vacancies
I'm pleased to report that we're
twelve point nine percent
unfortunately we've had a few
resignations here at the end of
the month and so we're pumped up
hello closer to about.
Thirteen to fifteen percent we
can go ahead and move to the
next page.
So.
All kind of briefly touch on the
first areas here the top bullet
that you'll see at the top
firstly banner is our ongoing
construction projects.
As you can see they're not just
in the Albuquerque metro area a
lot of these projects are
situated throughout the district
in rural it's about we try to
balance between the rural areas
and the metro area.
One of the projects that you see
there at the top which is just
about four million dollars was
New Mexico fourteen milepost
four to five point eight this
one point seven miles in cedar
crest and this was a very good
project to get done we've now
completed the court R. from mile
post zero that's there by the
term and I with I. forty up to
milepost five point eight and
this will be where we actually
are working at the triangle with
frost road and we're we have
studied and we're preparing to
go into our P. and design for
the frost road.
Triangle with cedar crest R.
Sandia crest road there for a
preferred alternative.
So the low that will look at the
I. forty Zacks interchange we
have a eight point eight million
dollar project to replace that
bridge over I. I forty it's
currently in progress and we're
looking for that to wrap up this
year.
The next project that you'll see
down below that is in Los limits
its New Mexico six it's an
eighteen point five million
dollar project and it was to
replace the X. the old bridge
over the Rio Grande.
The next project that you'll see
below that is our New Mexico six
project where was another
project for resurfacing the deck
it was about a four million
dollar project and it was over
the one of the work BNSF railway
lines west of awesomeness.
The next project when it's kind
of the biggest project in kind
of culminating the end of our
corridor is our US five fifty
project since two thousand
twelve we've been working at are
upgrading the core are from I.
twenty five on US five fifty out
to New Mexico five twenty eight
this is our last project at
twenty three point eight million
we're currently needing about
one more year to complete that
project.
I.
Hello that you'll see the
project that was specific to I.
T. S. it was in multiple areas
of Albuquerque metro area which
was the deployment of new ITS
signs.
Our that was that was about in
about a one million dollar
project and then below that
you'll see that Albuquerque
Milan it's actually south of
Albuquerque New.
Right at the middle part of the
land two eight million dollar
projects that were rink
resurfacing and reconstructing
parts of I. twenty five in those
various locations and at this
time the act projects was at
seventy seven million dollars
for district three below that
you'll see the loss of two
thousand nineteen chapter two
seventy one
in total the district had sixty
eight million dollars the
biggest things that were there
was fifty five million dollars
for a locally project for
Losness and the next one was for
the I. twenty five tips and
Boulevard interchange here in
Albuquerque with I. twenty five
that is currently being looked
out for proposals now you're in
twenty twenty one I.
The New Mexico three forty seven
Purcell level con there's right
of way acquisitions that are
occurring through other areas of
the department at three million
dollars and also for parts of
the road runner that's in
district three there was two
million dollars
those are currently in progress
and if we look down towards the
next section of chapter two
seventy one I'll kind of go over
various projects there that we
have in their construction on
been Tatian about five hundred
thousand when we have bacon sees
our construction augmentation is
labor that supports the
construction of our projects to
provide inspection to make sure
that we're following the federal
and state guidelines for
specifications.
Low that you'll see that we've
worked on our frontage roads on
in I and I twenty five hear from
Comanche to PDN here in
Albuquerque it was a crack seal
project at three hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
Our next project is one that's
actually currently being worked
on is no eight in late right at
the big guy area the guy was
built about twenty years ago and
so this is one of the projects
it's actually going through to
actually service that job you go
west of Carlisle here in
Albuquerque you'll see that
we've started that project was
suspended for the winter we're
looking to pick up here soon
the next project was cracks the
on line forty that's west of
town one thirty two to one forty
three next project was a fencing
project New Mexico three
thirteen in rural areas of our
district that was about eighty
thousand dollar project and then
below that you'll start seeing
more of our servicing projects
million in land Mexico three
thirteen this is from four
seventy three to US five fifty
Mexico three fourteen we went
from New Mexico six New Mexico
forty five and New Mexico three
thirty three we went from off of
six to six six sixteen point
three Mexico three three thirty
three is in the
is a crack seal project that we
did that's in the east mountain
side of Albuquerque.
Our next project was an H. may
overly are tramway is actually
New Mexico state route it's New
Mexico five five six we went
from I. forty to Montgomery.
Our next project is on New
Mexico forty five if you live in
Albuquerque area it's referred
to as cores we went from we had
multiple projects that have been
working on for this no one in
line that this one was Saint
Joseph central.
New Mexico five twenty eight we
did a cracks heal from nine
point five to thirteen point
five and then on US sixty roof
went from I. twenty five to New
Mexico forty seven this is a big
stream southern tip of our
district and we did and gypsy
which is open created friction
course overlay.
The next project was a locally
project where we've actually
executed agreement with that the
town of our Leo and this is to
provide
facilities it provides
circulation within the five
fifty court or on in the
Bernalillo area and this route
will be.
Known as freedom weight within
the town of Berlin that was a
two hundred fifty thousand on
project is currently underway
we've just completed the
agreement and it's in process
for final design and for them to
start construction the last
project there's as I mentioned
Mexico forty five which is
careers and it that one had gone
from Eduardo took Barcelona in
total you can see that we're at
sixteen point six million for
that type of funding and you can
see from that most of the most
all those are complete and the
remainder of those we expect
pretty much and by June of
twenty twenty one.
Hello that you can look at
chapter eighty three of laws of
twenty twenty.
Heavy on mill and inlay as
you'll see as with other
districts we're seeing a
degradation of our interstate
systems we've put a lot of
funding towards million lines so
this this is a service treatment
that actually choose out the top
part of the pavement and replace
the payment so we focused the
majority of our twenty million
on the interstate system you
will see that some of the New
Mexico routes that are.
In the area like I twenty eight
we went from nineteen to seven
and we did New Mexico three
thirty seven from seventeen to
twenty four this is an extreme
mountain part of our district
state goes towards some of the
land grant areas in the
eastbound side Mexico forty five
from don Felipe a tell me don't
this was good because we want to
finish that core or so that we
could serve the residents of the
south south part of Albuquerque
in the west part of Albuquerque
and then New Mexico one sixteen
is down in the land area and it
received an H. me overly as well
as we did have various project
oversight construction
augmentation which was in the
amount of about one million
dollars.
Next below that you'll see that
DOT laws of twenty eighteen
chapter seventy three just to
give you guys an update this was
a are widening that went from
real problem to Broadway it made
a three line facility on I.
twenty five seven three seven
point three million dollars of
state funds was used on the
project is now complete.
Yeah I'm not gonna spend too
much time but I did want to show
it it'll be straddled between
the bottom tab of this page and
the next page which will be our
projects that are in engineering
and development for the twenty
twenty one to twenty twenty
four.
And one of the some of the ones
that I'd like to highlight our
on the second page there you'll
see that New Mexico one oh nine
there's a for Alice bridge over
BNSF railway at twenty six
million dollars at the bottom
you'll see that there's a full
depth reclamation on I. twenty
five at twelve million dollars
above that you'll see that
there's I twenty five gives an
interchange that's currently
estimated at thirty million but
we expect that to actually be a
little bit larger to encompass
Cesar Chavez areas but this
budget about it or targeted at
about thirty million dollars.
Then below that we're going to
kind of look at we can move on
to the unfunded and underfunded
project needs for the
Albuquerque area this list is.
Not comprehensive but it is what
the district is targeting and
what when we received additional
funding this helps us deliver
these type projects if you can
look at the bottom part of that
tab you'll see that there's an
I. twenty five makes they'll
soul and we're out we're looking
to put an RFP so request for
proposal to study that area
because there's actually two
interchanges the could help
develop their which is the Bobby
foster interchange and or which
would be up if the rams to the
existing bridge or may said also
which would be south of Bobby
foster.
And also we're looking at I.
twenty five someone from again
this is Travis to coal and both
of those are currently unfunded
projects below that as other
districts will present is there
a quick minute needs.
District three a cop for quick
meant
prior was one point zero seven
million and below that you'll
see that we've put in what are
equipment needs are worse it's
not about two point two million
that's needed and if you look at
try to keep it separated so the
top of the list is more geared
toward the have your equipment
that's used by our heavy
maintenance
loaders skid steer loaders
loaders will for expected trucks
that are needed for safety
transports and molars those are
hundred thousand and higher
dollar items and then also
within our fleet.
We up we don't put on as many
miles as a some of the more
rural districts but we do put on
some parts seat in miles so it
up will show there that we have
a need for half ton pick ups
that are used Bayern inspectors
and more foreman's that support
the heavy maintenance and sport
utility vehicles that are used
by the similar staff and some of
the other small items that are
needed like a service truck tire
balancer in service track and
another letter Pam and one of
things that I would touch on
because it's been addressed
Ruiloba in the Albuquerque area
we
We partner with the City of
Albuquerque to cooperatively
work on litter within the
Albuquerque area on state routes
this is specifically to the I.
twenty five and I forty corridor
we've seen a dramatic increase
in the past four years we had
started with a budget of two
hundred fifty thousand and City
of Albuquerque was putting in
two hundred fifty thousand
currently we're looking at
projection for the next couple
of years is that.
Over a million dollars our
combined so that districts
portion would be half a million
dollars for litter pick up
between us and the City of
Albuquerque and probably more
about six hundred thousand for
the City of Albuquerque so it's
it's something that we try to
stay on top of but you you
schedule all for crews to go
pick up litter and it seems like
you weren't even there the next
day so it's a we like to work
with our agency partners like
City of Albuquerque but one of
the things that were kind of
entertaining is contracting with
the.
With private industry that up
would provide
Inmate labor that was something
that we have had in the past
that was extremely beneficial
and helped us on some of our
more rural routes like I twenty
five but I I do echo the
committee's comments on letter
it's it's very it's a huge
nuisance that we try to stay on
top but with that that's the end
of my presentation so I'll stand
for any questions.
Great thanks so much Justin do
we have any questions
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair appreciate
the opportunity you hear me
alright.
All right
Thank you Mr Gibson appreciate
you
In here it looks like you're
frozen can you hear me yes.
Okay all right cool so I I have
a.
Thank you for your presentation
I have questions on to roads
some of my district is northern
Rio Rancho essentially.
And I guess I want to first
compliment you in the secretary.
On other what you did on the.
US I wi fi fifty expansions
rocks from Bernalillo that's a
really important road for folks
in my district I I drive it all
the time and I know that kind of
start off Ross the construction
of but we spent
A lot of time on the phone with
you sometimes the secretary and
I just want to thank you for.
For the the work that you did to
make it as painless as possible.
you really have a great team
there and I know the folks I've
talked to really happy with how
it's turned out so I want to
thank you for that.
The the next for the
construction I wanted to
just your thoughts on.
that intersection of five twenty
eight five fifty is going to be.
It's gonna be a weird weird
design I don't do we have any
other intersections designed
like that in New Mexico if you
now.
Chair representative I'm gonna
go and turn off my video I'm
trying to unstable connection
but I'll try to address your
your up.
Sure.
The New Mexico by twenty eight
and your S. five fifty aren't
changed
intersections on your change it
is the first of its kind in New
Mexico it follows are similar
type corridors in Utah it's
Utah's by the closest area where
we it's call discontinuous low
intersection.
And what it does what we're
trying to do is eliminate
conflict points within the
intersection to allow laughs
there's a heavy movement of
vehicles that need to get to Rio
Rancho and there's a heavy
movement of vehicles that need
to get to the northwest court
going towards support wonders
area at so yes Representative
chance your question and we'll
be the first in the.
Yes thank you madam chair and
and the and your gifts and I.
I would normally hopes that new
New Mexicans could learn it
quickly it will cause many
problems.
But if you recall the
intersection at five fifteen
additional rural Khan was just a
little bit different
a little bit nonstandard.
And if you're going
West on highway five fifty there
is that big a long traffic arms
that went across all the lanes
and then there was a little Erro
you know to turn the I guess I
south understandable con and
people that we're not from there
is an intersection what happens
all the time we just slow down
and and because they didn't
think they saw traffic are but
no lights and I don't know what
to do and there are several
times where I saw it near
accidents and I know there were
some accidents there and so
finally I called your department
and they were very very kind and
they put to just permanently
green arrows up on those lanes
and that's made a huge
difference but but but I bring
this up because you know a year
of that intersection like that
we're still having people even
New Mexico plates going through
that intersection just like
coming to a complete stop and
almost causing accidents because
what's going on so I'm really
concerned that this continuous
flow intersection is much more
complicated than than that
simple kind of pass through.
So I I don't know is there.
And I I know the designs done
it's it's going to happen I
just.
I'm just concerned I don't have.
I don't think there's a way we
can really educate people on it
but.
Madam chair representative yeah
the
We are fortunate to have lost
communication staff and we have
expanded our reach on social
media platforms within the last
year with restraints and you're
at the district we have RPO
public information officer can
guidance and what we do plan to
do is run campaigns to help
educate the public there are
models that are stimulated that
we can actually start driving
perspective
that we we have worked with
consultant.
I know when we were designing
the project we were targeting
Using not and at the movie
theater all obviously that is
not the case anymore I'm so
really our outrage reach right
now yes however we are with
social media and I'm happy to
say that wrist mains part of
that team as long as well as can
guide us in our engineering
support staff and we do we do
plan to educate the public
we do have the intersection
Department it it's a heights
intersection are there are
multiple of those and Rio Rancho
type area that intersect by
twenty
we it is it does take some
getting used to but the more
that we can educate the public
the better off that will be and.
Making sure that we don't that
mobility area.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if you can hear me
but I'd like to just touch on
that if I could can hear me yeah
we have the same you know here
Santa Fe we have the divergent I
mean we have the same concerns
right with the same issues and
we did a little campaign on how
to drive that thing And
alternately you know driver was
on the wrong side of the road
and it took some time getting
used to but we have received one
call on it does take some time
to get used to that thank
adjusted to say and I think once
week we get there with of the
campaign a little bit of time
little bit of patience I think
it's going to be just fine.
Okay madam chair and and
Service please thank you for
that I'm grateful here about the
campaign
and and I and I just I'm.
I hope it goes well
so thank you for for me because
of that the last.
Wrote I just want to quickly
talk about it thank you for the
time madam chair.
is percent of Akon so this this
is such an important road for
for my district it goes to our
city center by the high school
that my kids go to to our
hospital.
and then it dead ends right at
on Sir
and and just taking at the next
leg to rainbow or southern I
would just be huge for
connectivity Rio Rancho so so
just you know the connectivity
ranch is a big deal
but the proof more important
and that the project as a whole
providing another server for I.
forty.
Something that you know all of
us legislators in that area on a
bipartisan way have been working
on working up on and and I think
over the last eight years we've
put about twenty million dollars
most that capital outlay towards
out right away acquisition
networking with Luke's Mr
apartment has been great at
setting up these PEV stakeholder
meetings so we're able to
address concerns of different
communities.
and then and we and it seemed
like things were we're we're
really going well we're about to
let the.
the contract to to purchase the
right away and then COVID hits
and that that contract
was challenged.
and so it kind of see it seems
like things are slow down but
no not at Rio Rancho is the
second largest city in the state
not just having a road like this
where we can grow businesses so
people are having to drive to
Albuquerque for their jobs.
You know.
No I just can't over emphasize
how important this road is but.
do you have any any update on
kind of where we're at on that
the right of way I mean
especially the Sandoval county
side which I know it's kind of
the that's and I'm Rapp the
other houses patchwork of half
people what you can get a hold
of them and then at maybe a half
dozen relocations.
Madam chair representative hi we
have acquired the right wing on
teachers speak now one.
The so in the Sandoval county or
you that is been acquired we are
still working on right away a
lot of those that you mentioned
are we locations and so we're
looking at that's going to take
considerable amounts funding to
continue through the court order
on the west side
right now from our last cost
estimate sure the things the I.
forty interchange we were this
these are all the numbers I need
to be updated somewhat but we're
looking about twenty three point
six million for the I. forty
interchange from I. forty to
sail the marketing we're looking
about forty million to get that
right built up that way the sale
delante to southern Boulevard
within about twenty million for
that section no that it's
perception that you would like
addressed about southern concert
we're looking at that building
about forty two dollars so this
these are really proceeds are
important and not it it's going
to take Senator investment for
that and we are we are working
and on it right now it's what.
Thank you madam chair and Mister
Gibson thank you for that could
you repeat the the stretch from
answer to southern what what
that dollar amount was.
Madam chair representative yes
that was forty two point nine
million.
And restrictions Los crucis G.
R. T..
Okay and that that was just
construction costs not the right
of way.
Yes Madam chair representative
with the relocation we're
looking at an average about five
thousand Carrillo cation so it
could be a considerable amount
for the remainder of the court
one estimate that we had was
about sixty million dollars.
Okay
yes thank you for that of course
those are better numbers than we
had in the past and that's
unfortunate but I know that
there's some serious bridge
spanning the in those areas that
we knew it would be costing some
some serious dollars but.
just getting that right of way
acquisition don this is huge
because you know that means we
can now leverage in some federal
dollars.
to help as well we're really
we're really trying hard not to
compete with dollars for
trustco Mr.
those both trust co and suicide
were important projects.
and and I think early on the
project there was some some
ruffled feathers and some
misunderstanding communications
and and so we're we're I think
we've gotten of most of that
take care of I hope but the the
hope is that we can do a lot of
this was was capital outlay with
other federal dollars and kind
of
you know make sure that to and
we're being good neighbors
essentially so.
What will
perhaps more questions for you
later but I appreciate you
spending the time with us now
and given these updates thank
you madam chair for the time.
Madam chair actually if I could
just a ripple more time
Representative Harper we in fact
we have in our of P. selection
committee meeting this afternoon
on the right with PTV so things
are happening as we speak.
That's great news all.
Madam chair representative
please reach out to you adding
it like that talk about specific
needs of the districts are in
all Committee that's the
executive the.
Thank you thank you
representative and is there are
there any other questions for
Mister Gibson.
Great well thanks so much Justin
for your presentation we really
appreciated and next Rick did
you wanna go ahead and and and
years.
Yeah I can do that again madam
chair I apologize I you know I'm
here with my kids they're in
school we're all battling for
internet and.
It is I apologize again but yes
let let's let's try to get it
started awesome there it is okay
it's going to get started okay
Good morning again Rick Padilla
acting district to engineer as
you know district to is in
southeast New Mexico we
encompass Travis Lincoln Otero
Eddie Lee Roosevelt curry to
Baca in other parts of what a
bit torrents and several
counties well we also have the
Mescalero Apache tribe within
our district we maintain about
seventy seven hundred lane miles
we're sixteen Virgil's roughly
about four those are having
maintenance crews you can see in
the on this page here in the
middle of the southeast Mexico
or district was broken out how
it's broken up and we don't have
any other states right but US
two eighty five acts like our
state
we have a sure Bruce Celis.
Down district to if you look at
the bottom right corner budget
will only get into this too much
I know trying to good job
explaining what we use this
money for we have an operating
budget of twenty four million of
ongoing construction projects
that are on a run to move up to
a fifty million.
we have contract maintenance is
special appropriations of thirty
million the supplies we buy
materials with rights on
Senators base course mix in the
the summer six million striping
and signing one point seven Mr
improvements about one point
seven.
Mr maintenance three hundred
eighteen thousand nine hundred
and ninety communications and
I'll just kind of clarify that
and I know
Representative Gary kind of
brought that up with that IT
communications which is really
just to pay the bills of the of
the telephones and things like
that any major I. T. project
related to of.
the the vehicles that comes from
will become one of the of Santa
Fe right will help that will
help fund those projects will
help with the experts that we
have here in Santa Fe traffic
section on on legislative
expertise of those projects as
well our play break down we have
a support staff fifty four
positions we have a hundred
eighty five positions and
maintenance we have seventy
seven positions in construction
and we have sixteen positions
with helping us with insurance
or have a total of three hundred
thirty two positions we have
fifty nine of vacancies and a
vacancy rate of seventeen
percent right that's pretty high
but as you know is this New
Mexico we still compete with the
oil fields on for work.
Next slide please.
The the top half of this P. H.
talks are speaks to our state
program the top piece speaks to
our local projects I'll just
touch on a few I want to get you
know it touch on each one of
these what we have eighty
improvements the city eleven ten
let me take should be on grant
Avenue for a to forestry
essential facilities right so
multi use trail the city
Lovington and we have a multi
use trail and read with Rita
someone school schools White
Mount drive to worry or drive
and then below that you'll see
our step this to the projects
there we have several if you go
down towards the bottom of the
page our construction activities
and and accomplishments ongoing
projects are there on the left
USAT to reconstruction the
county sixty million is
completed our is ongoing excuse
me I I I missed are transposed
also in the left is on going on
the right is completed a US two
eighty five
That's under construction Mexico
one twenty eight the county
fifty four well as you can see
there that are completed
projects on the right choose to
sidewalk eighty improvements in
the county one point five it is
completed a US two twenty five
of eighty in traffic signal
reconstruction accounted for
four million and it was on all
that you guys read that as you
see fit below that you'll see
some of the House Bill to US
eighty five zero to seven
Reconstruction bridge
replacements and it's just a
medication that is currently on
going as you know.
below that so house bill six
there's a few projects there on
US two eighty five well PO seven
seventeen yes again twenty five
seventeen to twenty two and of
course the last project their US
twenty five that is the bridge
project and.
Next page please.
And there's just a continuance
of the some more work there some
General probation US seventy
payment rehabilitation that's
currently ongoing US fifty four
from the eighty to ninety seven
from the one of seven of the one
eight eighteen that's completed
USAT two of from our marker
forty three to fifty three that
project is also completed
the next section there again
house bill two and three some
General Fund probation some
simply to projects you can see
those.
we have some more house bill two
projects there the CYFD for a
project which was completed.
and then if you go down there
some equipment needs for
district two we have a lot of
four point two million are with
the needs for equipment below
that is our own funded project
needs there's a few here that
large sum of money as you know
but as I explained in my first
presentation the roads are
deteriorating pretty fast I'm so
we're looking at US three eighty
uninstalling so passing lanes
laser the cost of a hundred
seventy five million The New
Mexico eighteen nine to forty
eight hostage all you know
that's an important route for us
and for economic I talked to
senator Kerr about that will at
around as well seventy five
million so the list goes on and
on those numbers are pretty big
which you can see our unfunded.
The last page.
some of our our major projects
that are currently in design one
of those being New Mexico one
twenty eight from zero to fifty
two point six The New Mexico
thirty one from zero to twenty
two as you know that's all in
design US three eighty from
milepost one fifty two to forty
two Texas state line right that
was currently also in their
design R. L. G. F. R. G. R. O.
G. R. program excuse me our
projects with twenty seven
capital outlay projects to about
seventeen point.
And without madam chair I will
stand for questions I do have my
construction Jim strong Briley
and in the waiting room where
the lobby there so I can answer
to get strictly bring him on
Appleby answers these questions.
Right thanks so much Mr by the
we have some questions from the
committee Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the presentations yet just a
couple of very quick questions
the district to step at a glance
she.
Are those from top to bottom
ranked in order of priority or
or the random or what can you
explain that please.
Yes Sir madam chair and
representative they are random
must be well these in
we we implemented a specific
priority other than their in
this in this step we do have
some priorities and I think we
they're in a different lock down
below but they are the end of it
this way okay thank you for that
they don't on the one assist
pavement rehabilitation on U. S.
eighty four mile post six point
seven twelve point seven on that
list we're.
Cadence.
Madam chair and representative I
could bring in Mister Allen
Briley he's in the lobby he
could help me answer some of
these questions thank you yes
more specifics.
That's our we we can do it
offline Mr deal out later
the only other questions on the
next page on
your unfunded project needs down
at the bottom.
Yes sixty for faster.
I know that calendar for space
uses that road very happily
between the cannon and in the
Melrose range has there ever
been an attempt made to get that
roadway classified as a straight
at highway.
In order to bring in additional
federal dollars or.
What it is in fact bring an
extra federal dollars.
If we got classified as a
strategic area network for
highway.
You know that's not to my
knowledge and we entertained but
it's something we can certainly
look into it we I think we'd
like to have a discussion with
you about that item and see if
we could team up in approach
federal highways and ask for
that you know I I think it may
be an opportunity I've not heard
about but I I know I haven't
been on this committee very long
and and it it could be something
to bring in a lot of our dollars
to help with that road in that
road is I mean they just reduce
the speed limit out there it's
gotten so bad now and the yes
Madam chair representative we
we've been trying to do the best
we can with me as but you're
right it it is take everything
we have to hold it together and
I station about this could help
I'm all talk to staff and see if
there's been some conversation
about in the past if there has
been will definitely get those
folks involved okay good deal
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you representative and
just for folks are we have
Representative Pettigrew next
but I have brought in Mr
brightly in if folks have any
further questions so
Representative paper.
Thank you madam chair.
The I have two things like that
S. number one.
I would like to be part of that
conversation the the you
Representative Crowder just had
offline so please feel free to
salute me into that
conversation.
The other thing
I think it's very important that
Hasn't been addressed in any of
the district conversation chat.
Can be bought with the.
We we've already seen at the
federal level that we're cutting
right away access to oil and gas
leases.
I'd like to hear the president
the piece of the presentation
from each of the districts what
happens to your staff of what
happens to your budget the phone
gas is shut down in southeastern
New Mexico thank you very much.
Madam chair of.
We'll definitely put some
together you know all the with
the if the oil field has.
What kind impacted hasn't
district to in our personnel so
we can definitely definitely
have that conversation and we'll
put something together for.
Thank you W. and thank you Mr
Riley for coming on I'm if there
are no further questions I don't
see any other hands up we can
move on to the next presentation
thank you all for participating
do we have James Gaydos.
Is here sure thank you all.
Good morning madam chair your
yes Sir I am assuming.
In the morning madam chair of
Rubio and and vice chair Garcia
Jim I'm James guy goes and
members of the committee I'm
James goggles here the district
engineer out of district four
here in Las Vegas New Mexico
again I'll go and provide you
the presentation for district
four of can you go ahead and
pull up a that first
Sure slide for the for.
Gabrielle.
Yeah give us one second okay no
problem.
Right there we go okay.
Again if you look at the we look
at the first slide there and if
you look at kind of in the
middle there to the left you'll
see the the the the map of
district for what one what the
area and compasses
did district for a is located in
the northeast quadrant the state
of New Mexico border Texas
Oklahoma Colorado of the area
covers approximately twenty two
thousand three hundred square
miles we've got seven counties
and in in district four Colfax
union mora.
Harding San Miguel Waterloo been
quick counties in this
particular area.
If you look at the map of
basically we got to two major
corridors that traverse the
district for I. twenty five and
it basically it's on the on the
on the western side of the
district and basically the.
It's a ties into on the south
and ties into pickles role the
villages of Pecos roll on up to
Vegas Las Vegas up to two wagon
on spring or not to rent to own
on the south side of the
distribute that I. forty which
is a major chord or they're a
trucking corner they're free
quarter there as you all know
and we got basically felt the
Santa Rosa to to can carry on
into stand alone in the and the
Texas border so in a not show
those are those are major of
interstate quarters a traverse
the death of the district also
the north side of we have US
sixty forty seven from at two on
the goals and to do more intent
on into to the the city of
Clayton and then we have a US
fifty four that traverses from
from Santa Rosa on in towards a
Logan up to to visor we have a
six rest areas in the district
that we have we have with the
section rest area that's
basically located south of rent
to own and I twenty five for
union which is between what
throws and well north of eight
Las Vegas and the and the wagon
mound of that's called the the
for union syrup Sir grounded on
US sixty forty seven up there by
the mines are young men re blend
rails up in the in the San Juan
area right there at the border
of Texas and I forty and then we
have a the new Cork Newkirk
Anton Chico that's on I. forty
there a run the Santa Rosa area.
District four we basically have
a.
But we also have twenty minutes
Parities that we we we we work
with a little closely with in
the district we have sixteen
patrols I project offices and we
have for traveling Cruz in
addition we maintain were thirty
one hundred center lane miles of
roadway approximately five
hundred ninety five these miles
are interstate four hundred
eighty R. or the US highway
system.
If you look down at the bottom
right of the slide there and and
and and every district I I know
Trent and Rick and also even the
Justin talked about that I'm not
going to go into details but
it's kind of laid out the same
regard store FY twenty one
budget we basically have a total
budget of about thirty seven
million dollars in district four
of you look at the bottom bottom
right hand corner there that's
simply break down we have a
total of three hundred nine FTEs
full time employees within the
district we got forty five they
can seize of the the different
areas of broken down their
support staff maintenance
construction insurance support
we're we're basically set up the
way the other districts are all
right now we have a lot of
fourteen point five percent
vacancy rate in district four we
had when I first got here about
a year and a half two years ago
when I first started the
district engineer we're about
twenty five twenty seven percent
so that that's come down quite a
bit in the last year and a half
into that and that has a lot to
do with my HR staff and also the
chair staff for the general
office helping us to get these
positions filled so we're
looking by the end of the year
to go and try to get that down
to the ten twelve percent that
secretary Seneal talked about
that yesterday or last on
Tuesday you go to the second
page for.
Okay this is kind of broken up
unlike the other districts were
and I'm not going to there's a
lot of projects there and a lot
of detail I'm not going to go
into every little item there but
if you look at the top in the
ongoing projects of with a few
of them the first project there
is on US fifty four and that's
the login the bridge project
that traverses over the Canadian
river that's a that's a major
restructure that we're getting
ready to to complete and open up
to traffic on US fifty four
that's about a seven hundred
fifty foot span there that spans
the Canadian river where we want
to get that open up here in the
next couple of months and we got
to US fifty four projects so
those are in located in two can
carry on I. twenty five the
first phases right there at I.
twenty five and it goes it goes
north up into care for about a
mile and the work and ready to
Representative that project up
here probably this summer that
has is more of an urban type
project a lot extra concrete
paving the turnouts driveways of
signals sidewalks except from
the next project phase two and
phase three hundred fifty four
that basically move that project
forward to another mile and a
half or so through through two
can carry will be breaking
ground there on that particular
project your the summer probably
on March or April of the spring
up to go ahead and get that
going.
Other projects that the I.
twenty five again we're we're FY
twenty five we've been doing a
lot of work up in the **** area
of the recall the **** passed up
on the Colorado border and the
first project there at the role
to pass basically substantially
complete we just need to do a
final walk through the summer
and and do a final inspection
there to get that a project
wrapped up the next phase
basically ties to that head
south down down down the down
the **** past of you if you're
up driven that corridor it's a
it's an uphill climb but we're
we're basically starting from
the top and moving further down
so thick face to we're gonna
start we started breaking down
this summer and basically a lot
of rockfall mitigation we have a
game fence in the reconstruction
of the interstate and all that's
going on also.
You move on down the line we got
some work and I forty with a lot
of work the summer between Santa
Rosa to can carry on doing some
rehab rehabilitation type
projects and I. forty those
projects were wrapped up this
summer and completed of Grand
Avenue that's here in in the
city Las Vegas city come up by
twenty five in the first exit
that you hit your Las Vegas you
get off that's called Grand
Avenue and we just finished a
project there here at the at the
end of the summer and just
basically an urban type job that
was completed pre to project the
bill we got that project done
and they were getting ready to
to do a final walk through with
that also
we have the some other bridge
rehabilitation Representative
replacement projects on the
frontage road those last two
price to their C. one I. twenty
five in the San Juan area up
here just just off the Las Vegas
and then we have another
frontage road bridge over that
we're we're we're wrapping up
there on I. forty as you get
close to send home at the the
Texas border.
We got to several upcoming pro
projects so in the next table
that you see their upcoming
projects I twenty five we got
three there those are all just
north of Las Vegas up toward
Springer the Springer area.
And we got a bridge in like we
have outside a motor that we're
we're gonna go ahead and rebuild
that the traverse is the more up
the motor river creek there
and then of course we have the
next three of tables that you
see here these are the House
Bill to section nine of the two
hundred fifty million that we
that we got in two thousand
nineteen were basically a
utilizing the thirty four
million there to go ahead and
and one of them is to go ahead
and fund that the US fifty four
face to with three project that
I talked about earlier we we
have we don't have enough
funding federal dollars in that
particular job so we we use
thirteen million of that to go
ahead and get that project going
to get an award to get that
going this summer New Mexico
thirty nine that's the twenty
one million that you see there
that's just north of Logan on
New Mexico thirty nine as you
head towards we'll schedule
we're working on that project
approach we can little bit more
difficult to do as we developed
it.
We were going to we want to go
in there and do a good job I go
in there and take care of some
of the drainage issues into a
almost a total reconstruction
and and take care of the fencing
to make sure that we have a good
stretch of road there that we
will have to come back in the
next fifteen or twenty years so
that's the the twenty one
million and we're looking at
next year at this time that the
project go go out to bid.
The next the table the house
bill two of the hesitant the
eighty nine million and we got
you to think it's it's just got
about fourteen point eight those
projects are completed we want
appreciate the funding that we
got of most of those projects
are spread throughout the
district these are pavement
preservation type projects that
we've talked about earlier
Michael servicing cracks dealing
how to place recycling these are
really good the
of procedures that that help
rejuvenate the some of our state
roadways and even our interstate
to to help us keep keep those
those quarters flown in a
positive direction the last
project you see there up on that
table there with a fourteen
point eight you see one point
five million dollar study of
that's the US sixty four eighty
seven I. twenty I. twenty five
interchange project that's up if
you get into about two hundred
coming down coming down the past
and you get into the one of the
first access to that goes into
the heart of wrecked on their we
got a lot of back ups on that on
that it entered on that interest
interchange intersection there
we what we need to do is take a
look at that and see we can do
because we got a lot of backups
onto the interstate as you come
on down the hill there so that's
that's basically paying for the
study and the conceptual kind of
design of what we want to do in
that in that interchange of
there so we get that thing
moving in a positive direction
the last tables the the hundred
thirty five million and that's
we just received by this past
year this past summer again the
US fifty four we we tapped in
about three point seven to go
and help on get that phase two
and phase three done that's the
first project I twenty five and
I forty these are basically
pavement preservation type
projects we have projects that
we we we had a I think that I
twenty five the Watrous to mile
marker three sixty forty three
seventy that project the second
project which you'll notice
there that was a designed in
house or the district and
remember being that that project
go it's awarded and work that we
want to get that done by June
fourteenth of twenty twenty one
the rest of the projects are
just a just to your payment
typical pavement preservation
projects so one of them is
completed and the other three
will wrap up here this summer
but by the end of June twenty
twenty one.
Want to the next page.
Next slide.
Okay these are all the state
projects that the the the state
transportation improvement
program for district four and
I'm not going to go into any
detail on these you can see them
there these are projects that
have been been on the on on our
program for for several years
Note FY twenty one FY twenty two
twenty three of those projects
are are are are are are being
developed of those are in our
program and I'm not gonna going
to do to I probably talk a
little bit about those of some
of those projects earlier the
move on down to the to the the
projects and engineering
development phase of those are
basically tied into the state
projects you know I mean so
those are those are the the the
design and development and what
we're doing here only here at
the at the district with our own
in house design team but also
the the folks at the general
office there that that help us
develop our projects the next
the last table there's a major
unfunded projects and there's
there's you know there's I on
there just like every districts
as we probably have ten that are
there there's a lot of a of
projects that we there's needs
and we got some of these
projects the first project as I
twenty five rectal past that's
the late the last that's faced
three that's the last freeze to
get us down into the towards
Representative tone to get us
down to the bottom of the the
past there so that projects
basically ready to go so but and
and we have funding we have the
other years in the state but we
can get some funding out of that
that project will be completed
complete that quarter make it
safe for the traveling public
and that's an extra to roadway
we have the US sixty four eighty
seven that's a project I talked
about earlier in Representative
tone that we need to really
get that project going to get
the we got the one point five
million that you all help is
with to get the design going in
and do and to do the study but
the again we were looking
probably about fifteen to twenty
million to get the interchange
going that so that so on a major
project that that we like to get
going and we have three of the
other ones are New Mexico forty
four four three four that's
basically between Redstone
initial fire that's a real real
tight to structure road with
that we've got fees for projects
one paid one project is complete
so we want to keep that going as
we get towards angel fire.
And of course the last projects
here in Las Vegas this is the
Grand Avenue to basically finish
Grand Avenue to get us to to get
a hold of to get us to the very
end of the north side of Los
Vegas.
The next slide please.
This is just a quick overview
and I I this is the equipment
that we ordered up with some
money that you all got for us
several years ago I'm not going
to go into detail but it's
broken down and all the
different patrols we got the the
the southern patrols the fifties
and or the patrols the central
patrols and also our special
crews and that kind of gives you
a feel for what where the money
went and what we purchased with
that four point oh sep four
point two million dollars that
we got if you look over to the
left others for Asterix two on
the top two in the bottom of
that particular table those are
those are the only four pieces
of equipment that we haven't
received that we're hoping to
get those in the next several
months all the other pieces of
equipment have been purchased
and and they're out there out on
the job they're out of the
patrols and they're working
right now and it's really a
really brings up the morale of
our operators in our our
maintainers author to have new
pieces of equipment to work on
the very happy in the end though
do a much better quality job
result in the field in regards
to maintenance for.
The last.
Us slightly.
Thank you these are just a quick
minute needs we have one in
every district needs a lot of
equipment I know you're in
district four I've been here for
the last year and a half two
years and we've had a lot of
equipment that that's obsolete
that doesn't really meet OSHA
standards and we got rid of a
lot of our rollers level sync
with the last funding that you
got to us but this kind of I got
together whether MS as our
supervisors and each patroller
our equipment manager and these
are the needs that they need to
to to continue to to do the work
that they need to get the
comment that they need so I know
it's a seven point eight million
a lot of money but we can get a
little bit every year that be
great and the so we can continue
to do the work we need to do
here in a district for.
And for that I stand for any
clues.
Questions madam chair and vice
chair Garcia and and the members
of the committee.
Thank you so much Mr grey ghosts
do we have any questions from
the committee at this time.
I did want to do a time check
because we still do have two
more presentations but if we can
go ahead and and have those
scheduled for next week because
I know that we're gonna have
today's the first time that
we're gonna be using the dash
for of the floors session and so
it be good to have reps maybe
take a break between now and the
floor session but Mr gray goes I
it doesn't look like there's any
questions on your on your on for
for your presentation but thank
you so much for your
participation and I'm W. for all
of the work that you all are
doing I know that I'm certainly
learning a lot and somebody to
describe it it's like oh I'm
drinking water hose a firehose
and so I certainly will be
reaching out to you all as the
days progress as we start
thinking about the budget and
then a lot of the different
questions that might come up
related to projects and things
like that so will certainly be
in touch and so if if for the
committee if there are no other
questions we'll go ahead and and
and for now and then we'll have
the next to presentations
scheduled for next week if
that's okay with everyone.
Thank you I'm sure we appreciate
your time we will definitely
schedule those two presentations
next week anything from us
please please feel free to give
us a call and members you want
to call your keys directly
please do that if you have any
questions were always you know
we're always here to help thank
you we'll see you next week
great thank you so much Mr buddy
yeah and thank you again for
everybody who's watching for
folks who were
listening in and for being so
patient I know that this is a
New World in terms of what we're
trying to navigate and so we
appreciate the patience that
everybody has in just trying to
maneuver and and make this all
work and and and this is in this
new way so thanks again and
we'll see you all very very
soon.
Okay.
