Representative night Burt there.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm here I'm
sorry.
Representative Zamora here.
Representative Eli.
Representative Gallegos.
Madam vice chair.
Here.
You madam chair.
Madam chair we've reached a
quorum with seven members
present.
Right thank you.
Good morning again everyone we
are going to get Senator Sedillo
Lopez on and began with Senate
bill seventy five.
Yeah.
Okay.
Good morning senator good
morning good morning madam chair
it's my pleasure to to come with
shoot I'm calling it Senate bill
seventy five would house yeah it
isn't.
There is there is a house bill
that you have heard that was
brought it was one twenty four
it was brought by
Representative Miguel Garcia but
it has changed a little bit in
the in the Senate and so I
wanted to explain the change the
I think you were aware that was
moved out no actually before.
In your when it was before your
committee was still part of the
government conduct act and now
it has been moved out of the
government conduct act but it's
still in chapter ten and we took
away
The criminal penalties for
violating this this act and I
thought those were both good
improvements because the
government conduct act brought
everything within the government
conduct act with this bill and
what the goal here is to try to
to ensure that government
employees are trained not to
reveal sensitive personal
information and that
And that they don't and we think
that employment consequences
would be sufficient to ensure
that they don't reveal sensitive
personal information I have two
experts with me I have Marcella
yes and and Gabriela boost one
who are here with the has
experts but if you have any
questions I'm ready to stand I
turn it over to to the experts
is yes.
Welcome.
Madam chair members of the
committee we're here for
questions you've already seen
this legislation and I've
already voted on it and it
pretty much remains the same
with some of those changes that
Senator Sedillo Lopez mentioned
thank you okay great.
So Senator work will go ahead
and get called the audience and
then take comments from them and
then go back to you for any
questions.
So we have started the poll and
we keep it open for another ten
seconds if you would like to
raise your hand and support or
in opposition of Senate bill
seventy five.
Okay we are closing the poll and
we have ten in favor and zero
against so if you would like to
speak in favor please raise your
hand.
At the neck Christodoulou.
You are now and muted.
Chair committee members and
sponsor thank you for bringing
this bill and for pushing all
the way through I am the
political director for Adelante
progressive caucus increase to
do and we are in full support of
this bill please give it a do
pass thank you and have a
wonderful work.
Thank you Karen what luck you
are now in muted.
chairman members of the
committee Karen lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in strong support of
this bill.
Thank you very much.
Thank you is there anyone I
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing none we will go to
the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I hate to
sound like a record good
disputes going around around all
the same song with the.
The fact of the matter is.
There are a lot of records of
the state land office and I
understand this only applies to
state agencies about the county
clerk's but there's a lot of
records of the State Land Office
that are public records that
contain information that will be
covered by this this bill and
those public records are
supposed to be disseminated to
the public and the public has a
right to go in there and and
look at those records that but
I'm I'm just the.
Really concerned that the that.
Those records may be impacted by
this type of legislation I've
said it before and I'll I'll say
it again so my question to the
senator would be
why do we not provide an
exemption for public records
that have been read filed with
the State Land Office R. O.
from.
This type of information.
I'm.
Thank you for the question do
the land office records contain
sensitive information such as
LGBTI status social security
numbers and and integration
status I wasn't aware that they
did and don't then they should
not be impacted at all.
There are a lot of recorded
documents.
Assignments of oil and gas
leases are other documents that
are filed with the State Land
Office particularly many years
ago that have social security
numbers that have tax ID numbers
and.
Those those records should be
available to the public for
inspection and I'm afraid that
this type of legislation it's
going to every hair the public's
ability to inspect and to copy
them to receive.
Those recorded instruments that
are by law our.
We record job back bay
constitute constructive notice
to the world
and all right I just.
M..
Flabbergasted that we continue
to see legislation but doesn't
provide exemptions for documents
that that are recorded and but
it State Land Office repository.
They're not records that are
created by the agency these are
records where lawyers and why
and then bam and others record
their instruments with the State
Land Office by pay a filing fee
to reduce up and and because it
may contain some of this
information I'm concerned about
that it's going to cause a
backlash and and those records
will be available for our
copying for inspection for full
review.
You madam chair I believe that
the this statute is very clear
that it is is it if it is
necessary for the HSD function
that the records should be
disclosed and and that that
should be very clear so there
are many circumstances in which
of.
The government shares
information with other agencies
or in this case it sounds like
it's very necessary for notice
so that I can imagine that the
statute would be used to shield
what this statute would do the
way this is this works is and at
is that
The government employees will
get training that they're not to
disclose this sent the listed
sensitive information and then
there will be if if that
information is disclosed
intentionally there might be
some disciplinary consequences
but if you notice in this
The the very the very work with.
He's.
At.
Madam chair I didn't catch that
okay if you notice it says on
page two
a state agency shall not
intentionally the state agency
employees shall not
intentionally disclose sensitive
personal information acquired by
virtue of the employee's
position with a state agency to
anyone outside the state agency
except when such disclosure is
necessary to carry out a
function of the state agency and
it sounds to me that the land
office records you describe
would squarely fit into that
into that it is not the intent
of this legislation to interfere
with the function of any agency
including disclosure functions
as you described Senator madam
chair.
Madam chair and senator I'm not
I'm not sure I would
necessarily.
Re that that covers it the
necessary carry out the function
of the state agencies the
postion of the state agency that
agency is to raise money for for
the the public schools and the
other other beneficiary
institutions it's records are
given constructive notice I I
would be uncomfortable
with that language provided the
exception that you just stated
madam chair and senator I'm sure
you're familiar with the law of
joint tenancy.
So I hold a state oil and gas
we've sent joint tenancy.
Have.
My joint tenant dies.
The only way that I can show
that the the title to that lease
is now solely you're my name is
to report evidence of that
person's Beth which usually is
by virtue of a death certificate
that's certificates necessarily
have a social security number
on.
So.
The experience yeah throughout
New Mexico when.
Some laws were passed.
Number years ago.
County clerks.
Have your back Eddy County put
all their death certificates of
bank of provide in their records
in a special book professorship
get booked and they would let
anybody CEO.
Because of the impact of
legislation that have to be
federal legislation.
But they prevented the access to
the very information that.
Was required to be reviewed by
the public to discern that I now
own that weights and I'm afraid
that this type of legislation to
do the same thing our with the
land office records because.
I would suspect that there are
some that certificates in fact I
think I reviewed several that
that have been filed with the
State Land Office of yours
It it it's it's you know what I
I would feel more comfortable if
you would find a a specific
exception for public records
that appear the State Land
Office.
Because.
We've seen.
The reaction.
Throughout the state of the
public having access to to
certain records that are now off
limits because of of the.
People's concern over sensitive.
Private information that
includes social security numbers
and tax ID numbers and.
Unfortunately particularly in
years past those members were
put on a lot of doctors at that
may exist as are there there.
Probably millions of examples
around the state of documents
that but reported that that
would fall in that category
fortunately this bill is is
tailored better because of the
fact clerks at all insects State
Land Office and other state
agencies so why buy concern rose
St wearable.
All.
Thank you madam chair don't need
to be at that point that that
but the that issue keeps coming
up and there's no effort to
address that so.
There.
Madam chair we there was an
effort and if I could turn it
over to my experts we did
receive an email from the State
land office saying that it was
unnecessary that this would not
interfere with the recordkeeping
function so then turn it over
you madam chair.
So I'll turn it over to Mesilla
yes or or Gabi.
I'm more.
The experts are welcomed which
whichever one wants to answer
can thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Nibert
to answer your question directly
this bill will not impair the
public's ability to go to that
repository at the State Land
Office as Senator Sedillo Lopez
mentioned this bill is your bill
to house bill one two four.
That house Judiciary saw a few
days ago and also an email from
the deputy director of the state
land office was also shared
with members of House Judiciary
including Representative night
bird and in that email deputy
director State Land Office said
that this bill would not impair
of the public's ability
To review those those documents
thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert you still
have the floor.
Madam chair I Representative
spotlight Stewart's the email
and I know what he says but he's
not gonna be there forever and
and this statutes from a
different kinds of statute be on
the books and somebody can
interpret that a lot differently
that by Mr Stewart and so I
still have a concern I I think
the legislation needs to have
some pretty specific language in
there that that deals with the
issue I ten year right and I
will continue to.
The beat the our every time I
see one of these that that
doesn't specifically address
that issues of thank you madam
chair we reduced the have a.
Right at this very I guess but
all right I am more comfortable
with language as for thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and good
to see you Senator.
I guess my question is it may
need to be answered by
Representative divert because we
have seen this bill a number of
times in this committee a couple
of times and then also in House
Judiciary.
What.
This takes effect.
What whenever.
This would take a fact whenever
signed legislation out you've
got July first twenty twenty
one.
So.
One of the Land Office has this
information already that they
need to scrub it.
Senator I less Senator in the
last Representative night if
that.
addresses is considered.
No madam chair of the the
the advocates for this bill to
affect concern very seriously
and contacted the State Land
Office and it would not affect
any recordkeeping function of
any agency because keeping those
records are necessary to their
to their function into their job
so it would not of it would
there would not be any necessity
of scrubbing those records.
And madam chair and
Representative diverted you want
it.
I guess thank my confusion is.
Is it Land Office has a death
certificate now.
We're talking about somebody
who's not living so.
Okay.
Horn either of the the local
person or
And they're not going to get rid
of that record so doesn't that
meet your concerns
representative Nibert.
Madam chair madam chair I wish
that that and I have made that
are too many county clerks
around the state.
they see the black or white on a
statute that that gets sent out
by their.
Organizations that says you
can't do this and they follow
directions very well.
Yes image gallery space they
created a separate book and I
would gladly look at
and.
That creates problems for the
ownership of real property as
you can imagine that that's the
document that the reflection of
the joint at dot
What.
What has happened since then
because of those problems the
county clerk's now or many
County courts I can't say all of
them but certainly the ones I
deal with
They go to extreme lengths to
now read that they do exactly
what you stated but I read that
the social security number
that's fine in ninety nine
percent of cases but if you just
if you have someone with a very
common name.
Often times you need to though
some further information and
since I read that two things I
redact the birth date and I
redact the social security
number.
Knowing that this is Sam Jones
is not the other Sam Jones it is
awfully hard to do
so it it's still create some
problems although.
Ninety nine percent of time
the redaction is not significant
to to the point
so that they do county clerks to
read that information and courts
the the court records
Now we're we're clerks often
times will will redact
information from our meetings
and and other documents that
contain that type of information
in fact last well two weeks ago
I had to get a special order
from the District Court in
Travis county.
To get the social security
numbers of two minor children.
Also we dates because they give
me the waves but they redacted
the social security numbers and
I'm trying to set up
a trust instrument for the
benefit of those children and I
need the social security number
so long story but but I couldn't
get it off of the documents the
clerk would give me and I had to
go to the court to get in order
to get it unredacted copy of a
public plea and so you know I I
didn't point to a number of
instances around the state my
fear is as long as Mr stewards
of the State Land Office I'm
sure things will go as as
planned but.
You'll see a change of the guard
and who knows how they're going
to sure but it have it's it's
awfully hard from this side.
To argue those same exam and
arguing the person's death to
Care through has or social
security number just doesn't get
me very far are we should be at
but I've made that exact
argument Madam chair madam chair
thank you.
I'm thank you very much
Madam chair representative
Nibert and and senator because.
In a way you've started affirms
what I was going to suggest just
if there's an Avenue for.
The person who needs the
information to get then we
probably protected more people
that way if we enact well than
if we just leave things as they
are because there is
And our Avenue you went to court
to get that order I know it's
you know an extra step.
Want to
I that's what I was going to
suggest is there is there a way
for people to get those kinds of
things when.
It is critically important to do
so and it it it seems that the
You need the gentleman child was
it's probably the right one so
that's it for now that the
question that came to my mind
and I'll.
All along let others ask
questions at this time manager.
Thank you Representative
committee members.
Madam chair by moving to pass.
We have a motion by vice chair
Johnson Purdue pass and I'll
second that.
Is there further discussion.
The clerk to call the roll
placed.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm there are
more.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that you have
six in the affirmative and three
and the negative.
Thank you Senator by a vote of
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative you have a do
pass on Senate bill seventy five
as amended thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee.
And next we have.
Senator Gonzales with Senate
bill twenty one.
And Representative Figueroa.
Welcome thank you madam chair.
I am carrying this bill on the
house side for Senator Gonzales.
Great.
Twenty one is a bill that came
out of the interim pension
oversight committee.
Bill for the retiree health care
of forty and in modernizes
language it does three things it
moves the limiting aid for
dependent children from nineteen
to twenty six and this aligns
with the federal law around the
affordable Care Act it has no
fiscal impact because the
retiree health care is already
has been doing this since two
thousand ten but in that case
the language to get it in line
the second thing it does is for
eligible child dependents over
twenty six and modernizes the
language replacing the term
mentally retarded with
intellectual disability.
And the last thing it does is
probably the most substantial it
deletes all references to the
discount prescription drug
program that has been obsolete
and I'm funding since two
thousand eleven.
And.
The director David Archuleta is
here to answer technical
questions if you have them but
we will stand for questions at
this point madam chair.
Great thank you Representative
we will start a poll so folks if
you'd like to raise your hand in
support or in favor of Senate
bill twenty one we will leave
that open for ten more seconds.
Okay great so we have nine in
favor and zero against so we
would like to speak in favor
please raise your hand.
Wrestle golf you are now in
muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Russell
Goff I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico association of
education towers on behalf
association we stand in strong
support of Senate bill twenty
one thank you very much to the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you A. A. R. P. E. state
president Roger Greer here now
and it.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roger
here's the problem here's the
they are New Mexico AT our state
in Mexico is a strong supporter
of Senate bill twenty one and
would like to thank the sponsors
Representative Figueroa Senator
Gonzales for bringing additional
for thank you very much.
Thank you.
Is there anyone I like to speak
in opposition.
Okay seeing none committee
members.
Madam chair I move that do pass
on Senate bill twenty one.
Thank you Representative we have
a due pass motion by
Representative Rehm and I'll
second that motion.
Is there any objection to the
day pass motion.
Okay seeing then you have a do
this with all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair and committee.
How the Senator that it was a
tough one the.
Great Senator Burt.
And Senate bill one forty five.
And good morning madam chair the
morning Senator to see you glad
to be in front of your right
committee this morning we're
happy to have you.
My pleasure.
And I think hi my expert witness
Allison Nichols from LFC is on
board but I I don't know if
we'll need a whole lot from her
if I may proceed madam chair.
Yes please okay Senate bill one
forty five is simply a bill of
the sunset bill you know each
year legislative finance
committee looks at comports
commissions within the state
that are going to sunset and
this year we had a Committee
meeting myself and to.
Representative Gail Armstrong
were cultures that meeting we
met in October we reviewed a
twelve committees ten of which
had been repaired and and were
put into the original bill and
you'll notice the amendment that
we put on in the Senate
because of COVID issues and
scheduling issues and getting
people together the other two
committees which will
chiropractic and physical
therapy working point the rating
go and and you get the okay from
LFC to in the committee to
proceed and that was the
amendment so all twelve of these
committees now are
Representative in the bill and
we're simply asking for the
committee to well
okay the extended sunset so
these boards and commissions can
continue their work supporting
their industry and move forward
and that would be the the gist
of the bill introduction Madam
chair in the at this point would
stand for Representative
professionals in west Allison
white hands in the additional
comments you would like to make
at this point.
Thank you madam chair no I think
senator for debate topics
planning at it's pretty
straightforward as you mentioned
not all boards and commissions
but many boards and commissions
you have sunset dates and time
to time you will usually every
other year the LFC beats and
some committee to review it make
sure to boards and commissions
are meeting their statutory
duties and hassle boards and so
this is kind of
checking the box for this year
thank you and happy to answer
any questions.
It madam chair for may I I I
want to thank Alison for all the
the work on this and the work
that LESC does on a day in and
day out year to year basis the
some wonderful work specially
valuation all the agencies and
over three hundred boards and
commissions in the state and and
I just want to thank them
publicly for the the good work
that they do thank you madam
chair.
Thank you senator and so we will
open with a poll if you would
like to raise your hand in
support or in favor of Senate
bill one forty five we will
leave that open for ten more
seconds.
And then we'll go to public
comment.
Great so we have two in favor
and zero against if you would
like to speak please raise your
hand.
Jason Thompson you're now and
it.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Jason Thompson I'm the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico athletic trainers
association and I'm also here
representing the state chapter
of the.
American massage therapy
association I like thank the the
Sanchez Senator Burt and
Representative Armstrong for
bringing this bill forward and
also again much thanks to a.
The LFC MS Alice and I really
appreciate all the work they've
done this
And that we stand in full
support of the bill this bill
allows our all the boards and
commissions along with trainers
and the massage therapist to
continue to provide the
essential health care services
that they provide on a on a day
to day basis for our citizens
here so we stand full support
thanks again.
Thank you reddit Garrity.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Brady Garrity I am a student
intern with Giuliana crew and it
today I stand in support of this
bill on behalf of the American
physical therapist association
of New Mexico thank you for your
time you reckons Committee.
Great thank you that can cook
concludes public comment
committee members.
Chair Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just.
One comment on the.
All.
I guess it's.
New program she yes I'm looking
at the moment to expose that's
all by.
new paragraph G. talk about a
committee member for safety
critical income to it and the
committee meeting by get
reimbursed up to three hundred
dollars and I I guess my
question is how do you how does
the agency establish.
Whether or not the committee
member our our state record job.
I guess that means a person
who's.
Who's.
Employer would not let them off
to attend the meeting or they
will be.
I have to take care of.
Time off without pay to attend
the meeting but they can submit
for reimbursement up to the
doctor about it that would
otherwise that how that works.
I don't have the room.
We apologize for that in front
what you said.
All.
Madam chair I'm sorry I'm I'm
I have them on the backs bill
sorry so.
I had no comment for your bill.
The next bill already.
During the game got got focused
on the next spring so I'm sorry
I apologize.
century spoke we can allow you
to speak on the next bill but.
Yeah those would be some some
retribution for the.
Thank you thank you
Representative I appreciate
interest.
Thank you for.
At least one.
Representative.
You have my attention
Representative.
For that page line there.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and I
actually it was going to do past
that I have a question I was
looking at the analysis.
about what girls are really
lated to this particular one
Senator Burt.
And.
I noticed that at the top of
your list here are our list in
additional dietetics practice
board is.
At the top of our list extend
that and it says there's Senate
bill one forty seven extending
that board to the twenty twenty
six that is that bill just.
Not moving.
In.
I I believe I can answer that
correctly and then
Representative the.
Sometimes boards and commissions
will get a legislators to run
specific legislation to support
that what I will tell you is
this is the thank you sister and
the official list coming out of
LESC who does this basically for
living and so I am not familiar
with with with one forty seven I
did see that in the analysis and
I don't know thousand would have
any other.
Information on that but to the
I'm I'm just really can in
concerned about the the boards
commissions in this particular
bill and these are in fact the
dates that would be a the all
these boards commissions would
be extended to should this pass.
This is
cheesy.
Yes I don't know too much about
that bill it doesn't look like
it's.
No I guess it is moving I guess
we would just you know probably
recommended that the sponsors
amends that to either aligned
with ours the top line with our
sunset dates this on the dates
Senate bill one forty five go a
little further so I think that
would probably be what the
Sanchez and and what the Ford
would prefer anyways but I can
follow up with them just to make
sure they're aware and the same
age thanks for noticing that.
Actually.
One forty six that it.
This is the right.
Because that's the bill you have
a Judiciary today Senator yes.
Yes one forty five is the bill
that we're talking about right
now.
Let me look at that in Alice's
again maybe that's wrong you
know what yes I just have so
it's house bill one forty seven
not Senate bill one forty seven
that is wrong.
You're you're.
I really confusing myself.
The bills passed the matter
Representative is to.
Confuse everybody but so this is
pretty straightforward thanks.
Thanks someone else make it
doesn't sound so straightforward
everyone.
Such a simple bill I even I'm
getting confused chair.
Is built.
Germany is not going to talk
Madam let me quickly make a do
pass before anybody else refers.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay we have a two passed motion
by Representative Eli and a
second by Representative Nibert
ten it looks like vice chair
just lowered her hand so I thank
you it's going to make that
motion as well is there further
discussion or confusion or for
her anything okay is there any
objection to the past motion.
Thank you have a do pass showing
all members present voting in
the affirmative thank you
senator thank you madam chair
and and most of the committee
some of you need to obviously
there's a little bit but but I
do appreciate the effort thank
you ma'am thank.
Allison if I actually know her.
Sure you know each other.
Representative Chasey yes we
have met I am the god daughter
and hearing and Alan Morgan and
they produced a few years ago so
you down to the other their
oldest son is my god so.
Okay great.
About a parent thing going on
nice to see into thank you bye
bye.
Thank you.
So we do have a next on the
agenda Senate bill ninety six
and I don't see Senator
Rodriguez on and I did text her
I haven't heard back from her so
I think we can move on to.
House memorial twenty three.
And I do see Representative
Allison.
We can promote him.
And
Representative Montoya said he's
getting on now.
You.
This.
This.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative.
Maybe we can go ahead and
proceed the I can ask my sister
Representative Johnson to help
me when I start stumbling.
Okay that's fine.
At the house memorial twenty
three.
Okay thanks very much madam
chair and.
Thank you to the committee as
well this was a memorials that
was drafted by Representative
Montoya on our behalf I I
believe and the.
Synopsis on this bill is urging
the federal government and the
New Mexico congressional
delegation to collaborate with
New Mexico Indian nations tribes
and pueblos increase in interest
from.
American populations.
It's pretty much says it all and
then the rest of the bill just
explains of why we need help
with infrastructure and
Things to reduce poverty.
Great thank you Representative
are you ready to stand for
questions and I'm ready stand
for questions okay great let's
take a poll first and open it up
for folks that want to raise
their hand if and support or in
favor of house memorial twenty
three keep that open for ten
more seconds.
Okay we're closing and and we
have four people that raise
their hands and support and zero
against so now we will go to the
public.
Ateca centre leanest.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee to take
us on the honest registered
lobbyists.
Or Navajo Nation under the
office of the president or vice
president.
strongly supports house tomorrow
twenty three we want to thank
the sponsors Representative
Montoya Representative Allison
Representative Johnson and
Representative Lewis for
bringing this initiative forward
to ask federal government and
congressional delegation to
support the efforts for Indian
nations tribes and pueblos to
expand utility and broadband
infrastructure and encourage
economic development
we strongly support the memorial
on behalf of president and vice
president and ask for your
support and thank you for the
opportunity to be with you this
one he.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Okay and before we go to the
committee Representative Montoya
do you want to stay anything
Representative Allison started.
Yes says thank you madam chair
sorry and then another my other
committees so
sorry for joining you are late
yes.
The.
A little bit of a debate on the
floor of the house.
One days ago and during that
debate it just became clear
that our our Navajo tribes.
and pueblo's in New Mexico
have support for years.
I'm not receive the funding
that's necessary for
infrastructure in particular
this so we we talk about other
things like economic development
and poverty and.
Joblessness
On it when we talk about our
native tribes here in New
Mexico.
but a lot of it boils down to
just the initial basic
infrastructure that doesn't
exist
we look at
Or.
Well our kids have been.
remote learning.
Z. the broadband that just does
not exist in great.
Questions of our.
Native lands here in New Mexico
all it's just a great just it's
just really a highlighted during
COVID and during our shut down
this year and we were and where
it's there's been some
discussion about how we go
forward how we move forward
with the new economy and how do
we help
all of our rural areas
House waited to join this a
comedy.
Without broadband without
internet service.
What it's going to be
impossible.
To to even join in to this
economy and if you look and I'm
most familiar with the Navajo
Nation because my wife is Navajo
and my kids are Navajo
and I worked for twenty years
approximately on the Navajo
Nation and so
the workforce I worked with was
eighty percent eighty five
percent Navajo so it just might.
The friends all the people that
I've that I've
worked with been around.
Just hearing.
What it's like not for them but
for relatives for
The the struggles the distance
for their kids to to get to
school in many instances
but just the the lack of
infrastructure
I've heard about and I've seen
it with my receipt with my own
eyes but.
This year with COVID it's just.
Is glaringly obvious disparity
and that's just not right it is
not right that
Just you can cross off of of
tribal lands into a border town
and.
And it's night and day it's as
far as opportunity does but.
Just basic basic infrastructure
that is needed.
it has to be addressed and this.
Quite frankly is a federal issue
we're talking about.
Tribal lands federal lands
trees that have been signed.
The agency that are in place.
And as far as I'm concerned
they're just falling far far
short
and then when I see budgets this
this new a COVID
of relief plan that is that is
gonna be passing out of the
federal government it has money
for COVID relief for other
countries.
I don't know how the world we
can go and ignore our tribal
lands in America and we can take
money and give it to other
countries
this this just can't continue
and electricity is going to be
necessary for broadband
of the work the the number of
homes that just don't have
electricity or running water
That this is America and we
cannot continue to go down this
road where where
There there are.
As al gore used to say to
America's at CYFD to Americans
go and and and and and of seeds
that.
Already see that joblessness and
see a lack of infrastructure
it's just time for not only for
the federal government is to
stand up but our delegations we
charge in DC we have our five
congressional members and they
need to work towards a stand and
all this memorial does it
doesn't it can't force them to
do anything all it does is say
okay it's time for you to put
your attention here it's time if
you're gonna do work for New
Mexico let's to work for all of
New Mexico and let's not leave
the tribes and pueblos behind so
with that madam chair I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you I'm Representative.
Ortez.
Thank you madam chair some
of the pack Allison in
Representative Montoya eight I
wanted to make a motion but I'm
not sure if I Representative
Johnson has a question.
And for the committee members
information you can make a
motion at any time and that can
occur and then we can continue a
discussion and and hold off on
voting on the motion hello right
click discussion.
So do you like to come in that
thank.
Thank thank you madam chair for
all the reasons mentioned by
Representative Montoya I choose
to pass of a ten twenty three.
Okay great we have a two passed
by Representative Ortez and a
second by Representative Chasey
discussion Representative
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say thank you to our
caucus here who's listed on this
bill we're bringing this bill
forward and it is true that we
need to reach out to our
congressional delegation.
Not that we don't already due to
expand and coordinate our
infrastructure development and
even with the work that we're
doing now with our tribes and
pueblos we do call co coordinate
we do try to coast co sponsor
Mexico fund projects roads and
bridges facilities everything
that we need it's still not
enough so I just wanted to thank
you for bringing this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Johnson is there
further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
past motion.
Thank you have a do pass showing
members all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you representatives.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so now we are going
back to Senate bill ninety six
and we do have Senator
Rodriguez.
Welcome Senator.
Committee it's nice to see you
again with that time thank you
all for your hard work anyone
knows how many hours it takes
you get something like this done
it's me right and us we work
together for a long time you're
interim committees and otherwise
thank you I just I have a bill
before you Madam chairman
members of the committee I and I
have very and drive in Coronado
do now it just from the
department of health here to if
you can elevator to participant
to participant list in the event
of any other questions that I I
would need help with in detail
and gas your your responses sh
this bill madam chairman is out
has passed unanimously both when
I first concert at a couple of
years ago and and then now we're
just trying to perfect the
language to out to make some
changes to to make this
committee that the bill had
established more on more
productive and let me be a
little more detailed on it it is
called the maternal mortality
review committee we establish
this committee to the Department
of Health a few years ago
because we discovered that women
were dying at a very high
alarming rate within a year of
giving birth to their baby they
either died at birth or they
died after within a year of that
birth and we thought what is
going on here we need to try and
figure out what the
circumstances are could be
depression could it be something
having to do with post pardon
disk problems after you get
delivery to the baby or what
could be so we need to to to
start looking at that the
committee has done a wonderful
job in general.
Years chairman.
The committee.
They have the death occurred
postpartum and that seventy four
percent of the deaths could have
been prevented that is very fact
but at the same time it is
encouraging that to this
committee we will be able to put
our our fingers on the problems
that are existing in why this is
happening so madam chairman my
bill merrily tries to improve
this committee set up it's made
up of clinic clinicians
professional physicians
specialists that everyone that
could have some input from the
medical profession in their in
this committee we want included
we also in this bill we added
our to African Americans to make
sure that we had a good balance
in that committee we also add it
to native Americans to make sure
that those areas rural areas and
other areas that are most
impacted by the staff problems I
get to have a voice and and
hopefully we can get down to the
very bottom of the problem so it
is also ranging to have a yeah
to be able to participate.
These are clinicians to eight
eight per diem rate with a grant
they qualify for a grant to the
center of disease control in
Washington to be able to get the
reimbursement so madam chairman
in a nut shell that is what the
bill does thank you.
Answer questions if you have
greetings you Senator good
seeing you again we will open up
a poll for the oaks of the
audience members that would like
to raise our hands and support
are in favor of Senate bill
ninety six and we'll keep it
open for another ten seconds.
Great so we have eight in favor
and zero against if you would
like to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand.
Regarding your now and it it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Gregory can and Franco this
to New Mexico I'm here to stand
strong support of this bill on
behalf of Planned Parenthood of
the rocky mountain thank you for
your time.
Thank you Kering Sanchez here
now and get it.
Green you'll have to and you on
your end.
On chairman committee members
thank you Tom I am doctor that
it is with respect
Representative a woman and I did
and our voices that then that
focuses on indigenous women and
girls Tallman United believes
that the MMRC legislation needs
to articulate that he knocked in
process for MMRC ship includes
community representation voice
and input specifically our rural
part impacted Communities New
Mexico are indigenous and.
That and the six insurers that
black indigenous women two of
the health care workers and in
that organization let's see
table in meaningful ways I think
you just this is a and then an
African American affairs to
create opportunities for
community's participation
provides training and funds for
MMRC member the Culbert removing
barriers to our communities
previously in place your help in
these important the end of this
nation putting that Senate bill
ninety six is greatly
appreciate.
Thank you Tracy McDaniel your
now and muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Tracy
McDaniel I'm here today to speak
in support of HB ninety six as
amended on behalf of southwest
women's Law Center and
personally as a mama and a birth
worker US maternal mortality
rates are the highest among peer
countries is current rates and
the disproportionately severe
impact on African American and
native American for the folks
are unacceptable we know these
disparities are rooted in
systemic racism and chronic
stress we must do better to
improve the lives of families in
our state because of the good
work already done by the MMRC in
recent years we know that
seventy four percent of maternal
that city Mexico are preventable
this helps inform interventions
to change these at I appreciate
the effort take into a
representation from the best
impacted communities in our
state so we ask you to vote to
pass on eighteen nineties thank
you.
Thank you sunshine muse you are
now and it.
I thank you so much honorable
chairwoman and committee members
I'm very happy to be here and
support of Senate bill ninety
six today I think that it's a
really wonderful thing I'm
representing the New Mexico
birth equity collaborative were
a multi ethnic inter
disciplinary body that works to
achieve birth equity in our
State Farm Mamas and babies.
Senate bill ninety six addresses
issues that will bring greater
expertise to the difficult work
of reviewing maternal mortality
cases to recommend remedies and
to decrease related to severity
right.
Senate bill ninety six includes
training on trauma and the
impacts of trauma including
secondary trauma of having to
hear these cases and the trauma
of racism and trauma of maternal
mortality and morbidity for all
of its members it ensures
inclusion of members of the
communities most impacted the
state mortality maternal
mortality ratio in order to.
Ellie rush forth your now and
it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Sally rush for the items that
reproductive rights attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico we are in
strong support of this
legislation for all of the
reasons stated before maternal
mortality is a public health
crisis was stark racial
disparities and we are grateful
for the Sanchez and that excuse
me the black indigenous and
women of color who would lead on
these changes in maternal
mortality review commission
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you we will now go to the
committee members.
Representative Chasey now I'm
trying to pass.
We have a motion for a day pass
and I will second that motion is
there a discussion.
Is there any objection to the
day passed motion.
Okay seeing then you have a do
pass Senator showing all members
present voting in the
affirmative and I want to thank
the senator for this I thank you
very much for this bill thank
you.
Thank you the committee thank
you madam chair and thank you I
presenters that with great help
the the people who who have
contributed to this thank you.
Thank you.
And next we have for the first
time ever in this committee.
Senator McKenna.
Welcome Senator.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members thank you for
having me this morning I am
presenting.
just three oh four to you today
and madam chair I do have a.
Subject matter expert with me
today it's this kind of pack she
is an open data expert and also
a.
Volunteer with legal women
voters today madam chair and
committee members.
We have both the district
geographic data.
And what is behind this bill
madam chair is
We have a lot of inconsistency
when it comes to the thirty
three counties
in the state of New Mexico when
it comes to maps and boundaries
and in particular when when a an
individual an official even a
third party is looking for such
data to share with voters
they get responses such as I'm
not sure the data is accurate we
can send it to you right away
one counties such as San Juan.
County how's this information
readily available other counties
madam chair will charge anywhere
from ten dollars for the
information on the disk.
Or up two hundred fifty dollars
and so what this bill will do is
bring consistency and have all
these maps in one centralized
place would be with which is
with the secretary of state
the the other good
aspect of this bill madam chair
is that there's no cost to the
state of New Mexico the
secretary of state has a federal
grants to pay for a contractor
to get this work done.
And with that madam chair
if you so welcome I I would like
to welcome my subject matter
expert to say an opening
statement that's alright.
Welcome.
Your your Senator your subject
matter expert is
Act thank misconduct yes okay we
have here
but now okay yes you're welcome
to speak.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and members of the
committee this bill came out of
the league of women voters
nonpartisan voter guide last
year for the first time we met
an online voter guide covering
the entire state of New Mexico
the way it works was that each
voter would enter an address in
the state which are customized
ballot for that location but to
do that we needed a way to find
all the voting districts even
down to the county level.
And it turned out that was very
difficult we spent many hours
and as senator McCain already
said.
It some of it isn't available
some of it some counties wanted
to charge us some County said
that they didn't know where
their data was or that they
didn't think it was accurate.
So it was a mess and in the end
we couldn't show all voters
their customized ballot some
counties we weren't able to.
So we the data is also used to
displace maps of voting
districts so that voters can go
to a customized map of it an
online mapping and sort of drill
down to find their house and see
what district Aaron and
legislators can also use that to
I've talked to several
legislators who aren't entirely
sure where they're districts
extend because some apps are so
hard to find.
SB three oh four has two
important provisions first of
the data be available to the
public without charge all in one
place.
And second that it be available
in geographic information system
formats.
Why do I ask for matched because
that's the way computers
Representative maps.
Some counties provided PDF for
JPEG but does not provide a lot
of detail if you try to zoom in
and find your house you really
can't.
And I want to stress to the
state only shows where the
voting districts go there are
outlined set boundaries it
doesn't have any personal voter
information.
So this would provide
consistency it would make things
easier for the secretary of
state and the secretary of
state's office has told us they
strongly support the bill.
And it will help.
Legislators and individual
voters find out what districts
are and and who else is in their
shame districts.
I'm happy to answer any
questions you have thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you.
And
Senator are you ready to stand
for questions.
Yes madam chair thank you great
so we will open a pool for
fifteen seconds and if you would
like to raise your hand in
support or in favor of Senate
bill three zero four we'll keep
it open for ten more seconds.
Okay we have to in favor and
zero against if you would like
to speak.
Please raise your hand.
At the.
Christodoulou.
You're now and it.
Thank you chair.
Chair committee members and
sponsors my name is Athena
Christodoulou and on the
political director for the
Atlanta progressive caucuses
will as a legal women voters
member I am we are in full
support of this bill voters need
to be able to register to be
able to get information and we
need to be able to help them
Google maps changed everything
for transportation for traveling
this could do the same thing for
voting thank you very much and
to do pass on just be three oh
four.
Thank you.
So that is everyone.
We will go to committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chairman and senator.
There's a.
There's a lot of data it looks
like this is just Geographic
that is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
that's correct as my subject
matter expert explained no
personal information is would be
disclosed it's only boundaries.
I get I guess I'm a bit confused
by by.
Why districts
I I thought I was able to get
most of this data already
And they're pretty.
Right.
Good detail but the maybe that's
not.
Not available statewide I guess
that's what you're trying to do
but I I thought that in my
district so I was.
Where to get.
This type of data already
So with the intent would be to
have it available the secretary
of state website.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes the biggest
Challenge right now is it's it's
inconsistent non existent or
inaccurate.
And so this bill would put in
statute but the secretary of
state's office is to do this for
that very reason consistency one
place and three.
And if it's only showing
boundaries about personal data
how would it be capable of
showing.
Which various our.
Districts side with them.
if it's you're showing the
boundaries of of those
districts.
pardon me Sir.
I thought part of the our.
Discussion leading up to this
was that you would be able to
customize a ballot for someone
and if it's only showing a
boundaries.
Out how would you be able to
get.
The precise data for for me as
an individual vote are located
at.
This address.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for the question I
like to do for of the question
Madam chair representative to
Miss pack.
Yes Representative and madam
chair.
The.
There are ways to take an
address and find out what the
geographic coordinates of that
address our
In particular the census bureau
has a way to do that so if
someone puts in their own
address then they can find out.
A program like our voter guide
you can figure out from that
address where it is on the map
and then if it has the
boundaries of the voting
district you can find out which
voting district judge had but it
can't go the other way so
somebody couldn't take the
boundaries of the voting
district and get the address
back it only goes one way and in
fact voters don't have to put in
their own address they can put
in any address like the address
of the local chapter house or
whatever so it that's also
useful for people living on
tribal land where they don't
have a good address for rural
people.
Do that your question.
Madam chair.
Yes ma'am
Yes I'm I'm further confused if
your budget providing that
customize ballot for primary
election we're gonna have to
borrow which party that I'm
registered to have it sounded
like there would not be any
personal information that all
get.
About so how would it get made
by customize ballot without
knowing.
by registration for instance.
A representative madam chair.
The that's something that the
voter would put and so the voter
would explicitly ask for the
Republican ballot or the
democratic ballot for this
particular address it's not part
of the district information
we're asking for.
So so that anyone could put in
that address that have the.
Yes Sir.
What I'm hearing you say madam
chair.
The.
Our
work would be that.
The person putting in the
address would now have
registered by that program both
parties that that one of the
state both ballots at but they
would never find out my
registration may never find out
why more but never find out why
Other information that might be
on a voter registration.
That's right Representative and
madam chair.
The voter for instance a
democratic voter could ask to
see the Republican ballot but
they wouldn't learn anything
else about other Republican
voters in their district only
who was on the ball.
At that particular location
right at that particular terms.
Madam chair but Mr what the.
We have a a brat federal grant
to get this data how's that the
secretary of state's office my
my question is madam chair is
how much will it cost to buy Hey
in this database.
And secondly who is going to pay
for that but it's.
A representative madam chair I
don't know the answer to who's
going to pay for the maintenance
probably someone of the
secretary of state's office but
there shouldn't be much
maintenance involved it should
only happen when voting
districts change which doesn't
happen all that often
you know after each census and
an unusual other other cations.
And in fact once once their
voting districts and present
data available in GIS formats
it'll be pretty easy in most
cases to go from eight to change
one district or if you
districts.
Madam chair respect I agree with
you and most cases are I would
disagree with you yeah some
cases because our we have
undergone.
A number of changes of the past
two years with the laws we have
enacted regarding voting and
requiring precincts to be split
our.
Requiring are certain
parameters.
Four four three six and I think
moving forward particularly up
in areas where there is.
This growth you're going to see
our changes are every election
cycle maps being adjusted and by
all the the best restaurants is
is all about is all the panel
she might want to your comment
as to how how often or how how
may pre six statewide were
adjusted justice past year yeah
and if she has any data maybe
how often precincts will be
adjusted in the future some of
that's baseball broke but I I I
don't think we're going to have
a static system I think there's
going to have to be some by.
And those precinct boundaries
are.
Will be adjusted to to
accommodate their statutes that
the limit the population with
that appreciate that the number
of votes from I appreciate all
so yes Representative if you
have a friend that I I would
ask.
We're very chair to allow you to
speak your if that would be
appropriate share.
Yes.
Good morning madam chair.
Thank thank you for the
opportunity to answer
Representative nine point
question and
Yes just generally speaking I I
think
I would agree with with miss
pack that the data does not
change very often however
Representative Nibert did did
pinpointing that kind of the one
exception to that so so Mister
miss pac was correct and in
stating you know the the
district boundaries are are
likely not going to change but
but every once every ten years
however there is an opportunity.
To split precincts after every
couple of of general elections
and an analysis is done looking
for that role so I think it you
know it would you know be who
the secretary of state as we
have gathered all of the the
data and bills the the pool that
would be on our website in order
to allow people to to view the
graphical display of the
boundaries it would be who the
secretary of state to do a
general.
Review I would recommend on a
annual basis just to check that
we have the latest and greatest
graphical data in regards to
precincts and you know if we're
if we're going not far I think
we should make sure were also we
also have the latest snaps in
right in regards to data in
regards to state roads and those
kind of things so at an annual
review to make sure the data is
current I think what is going to
be where we settle on on on and
how to make sure to maintain the
data.
Madam chair Mr Burciaga and I
would assume that you would
update the the precinct
information at present support
or
There's some change in your
precinct boundaries but one
thing that people do want
bellows started business address
and present water resistant
grasses respect to our at our no
Representative I live and is one
of those presents that it gets
for the this past year have the.
We we still I still think of it
as as present eleven even though
bye bye county commissioner who
was increasing the level is no
longer Breezango Levin I can't
even tell you what respect to
that but that's not a level or
but we we would need to keep
track of out of MMI my second
question is
get out I suspect the secretary
of state's office would have to
maintain that that would have to
pay for those for the
maintenance costs Jim would
would buy assumption in that
regard be accurate Madam chair
of the stresses.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
yes
and then the state has a really
good relationship with the
geospatial group that works at
that the situated at the
University of New Mexico we are
negotiating the the heavy lift
if you will contract as we speak
in order to help us with with
the heavy left of gathering the
data identifying data that
doesn't exist
and creating the data in those
cases as well as the as well as
the online tool so we will use
the federal grant for that and
then we do anticipate
and I think it's worth
mentioning the
the G. I. S. software that makes
the data viewable and you can
use of all that's that's a ATM
expense that's already paid for
out of the department of
information technology.
They maintain an enterprise
license for something that
otherwise would be quite costly
if every agency had to had to
provide those software licenses
so and we will however to answer
your question I I do think we
will have an engagement with the
UNM group on at at most annual
basis in order to help help us
make a determination on whether
any of the data needs to be
updated.
Madam chair of mistrust of state
do you pay your amendment for
provided services.
Yes madam chair what we would do
for those services.
And so madam chair and and the
rest restaurants your the
secretary of state's budget
moving forward would have to
contemplate the potential cost
it may occur to to maintain this
this data buyers.
I.
You're you're correct.
Madam chair I I do think that
that's that that's correct
however being that way you know
at most we would need some
assistance Act on an annual
basis I I think the expense
would be I'm pretty nominal in
comparison to the value of
having a clearing house
available of of the state at it
really will create a a clearing
house all in one place for all
of this G. I. S. data
that will that will be useful
for you know making making
election decisions helping to
keep the election
And help with you know
districting help with insuring
we have voters in the correct
districts identifying you know
once we have the data some of
the decision making that can be
made you know finding a polling
location so I I think the value
add to election officials local
districts even campaigns as miss
packet mention
I think that the value is is
worth the the the investment and
and the fact that we're lucky
enough to have a federal grant
for the heavy lift piece of it
is is really is really lucky for
us.
Madam chair and mistrust because
we're.
What this data
I I guess maybe not initially
but ultimately trip this data.
Help discern.
Are some other issues that arise
senator broader registrations at
a location where there is no
residents or things of that
nature.
Madam chair representative
Nibert what once we have the the
boundary date.
it can help us you know isolate
the it you know of a voter that
maybe you know make misaligned
weren't up there you know
they're pretty seeing to support
other addresses is assigned
outside of the line so that we
can fix the date I think those
will be all natural fallout from
you know beneficial followers of
of being able to to consolidate
all of all of the state and and
put it full together does that
answer kind of where you're
headed without.
Yes so you know I think you're
you know if we get.
Well we're becoming more more
dependent upon
Whether it's Google maps server
or are being mapped Sir or
other.
Fighters were were were becoming
more dependent upon those signs
for not only.
Looking at a map but also
helping us get from point a to
point B. R. I'm just passionate
at some point the the state it
could be years.
for right purposes including
your
or the county clerk's
verification of addresses and
Be able to the work and and make
sure that there is a factor as
well as our residence at that
location.
That's been.
But somebody's putting down
their place of residence so all
so it seems like there's some
things that that also but where
this could be useful for in
other in other ways as well
other than just supports
somebody with a sample ballot so
I appreciate Madam chair of the
opportunity to discuss the so
Interested technology.
Appreciate the bring a Senator
bringing this forward thank you.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I am
moving to pass and then I would
like to explain my vote.
I mean.
Make a comment.
Call then I wanted to do it it's
my Senator also.
Second.
So we have a due pass a motion
by Representative Eli and a
second by Representative Johnson
and we're still in discussions
or Representative jobs.
Thank you senator I wanted to
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I represent two counties
and half of the scallop Act you
know half a gallon which is is
Gallup and then at nineteen
chapters and as it is today I
cannot find a good geographical
then.
Regarding my boundaries.
In my district so I think a
clear district boundary map is
going to be really useful for us
so that's all I wanted to thank
thank you.
Thank you.
And and before we go to the vote
Senator I just want to thank you
as well I think this is a great
bill and I think it's really
going to help when we're able to
reach out to voters accurately
and let them know that
they have candidates that are
running and then once those
candidates are elected to be
able to reach out to them and
discuss those issues that are
important to them so I think
this is a great bill and I'm
glad the secretary of state's
office is on board and we'll be
helping with that so thank you.
Madam chair and I really value
the discussion with your.
Representative my birch and yes
this is really exciting and the
secretary of state is so
enthusiastic about this I want
to think Miss frescoes joining
us and Miss pack for being our
experts today.
Yes thank you all and so the
clerk to call the roll please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative someone up.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that you have
money in the affirmative.
Great so you have a unanimous
vote in the affirmative Senator
so the like you thank you madam
chair thank you committee
members really appreciate your
time.
And with that committee members
we are concluding our agenda and
I want to thank everyone
especially the public that
joined us today and we will meet
again on Friday and with that
we're adjourned have a great
day.
