Here
good morning everyone.
There will be buried os
will be bringing some we have a
change to the agenda this
morning we're going to hear
senate bill one sixty nine is
amended and I will present that
bill after that we will hear how
moral fifty so my vice chair
will now take over for me and
that I will present the the bill
thank you manager good morning
everyone thank you.
Morning madam chair you're ready
to present your bill good
morning at mr chair members of
the committee I have a witness
with me today and expert witness
doctor stokes is that rate okay
good
thank you
i'm here to present senate bill
one sixty nine which makes some
really important changes to the
land water conservation fund for
the states I program here in new
mexico at the land water
conservation fund has been
around for decades and we have
received a portion of the
funding that comes from the
federal government since twenty
nineteen we've received more
money than ever before about
years three million or so
a year this past year in twenty
twenty three was a three point
two million we've had some
challenges getting that money
out the door to the tribes and
political subdivisions in our
state that could use that money
to fund parks trails public
access to natural open spaces
which are really important for
the public health of our
community and those challenges
are for a variety of reasons not
least of which is related to the
match that is required by those
by those political subdivisions
so this bill makes some changes
to how we allocate the funds
to is eligible and how we can
get those funds out the door and
i'm going to turn it over to my
expert witness doctor stokes.
Good morning by mister weister
and without we stand for
questions okay well we're
probably gonna go to the items
first everybody anybody in favor
in the audience of senate bill
one sixty nine please raise your
hand.
Within this site okay anybody
wanted just fine about one
sixteen.
Guide.
Good morning mr vice chair
members of the committee my name
is roughly he chairman of the
new mexico second commission and
community organizer pickles
valley i'm supported this
legislation could help.
I'll remove some very some
language that was there before
that would help our traditional
communities and smaller
communities receive this funding
to help improve out
directoration opportunities I
know impose they want to feel
the trail between the historical
park and the community in on
this type of funding would help
so I would.
At surprise chairman members of
the committee patrick killing
red true obvious for chevron
shiron said what's this bill
other folks don't know but the
land and water conservation find
that the federal level is funded
by the proceeds above short as
leases and those funds then come
to the states to help support
very worthwhile projects public
parts local recreation centers
we believe this is a really good
bill it's a really great cost
and support the efforts to
enhance the land water
conservation find that the state
level thank you thank you
anybody else.
He'll go to zoom anybody answer.
Scott
good morning mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
carry robert and bringed her oh
no i'm not actually this is
scott scanlan on behalf of a
carry robin and brunder who was
taking care of little baby shalo
carry represents the western
resource advocates and we stand
in a supported of the bill the
land and water conservation fund
has been a bipartisan effort to
fund out or recreation projects
since the nineteen sixties and
fortunately new mexico stop
providing a monetary match for
these projects in the nineteen
nineties and his last tens of
millions of dollars and federal
funding to support recreation
projects in our local
communities ever since sp one
sixty nine revives the state
supplemental fund by providing
local communities with ten
million dollars to match lwc
dollars it also expands
community el cability and makes
technical changes so the state
can support those communities as
they apply for projects like
rodeos shooting ranges baseball
fields parks and playgrounds and
she who doesn't want more rodeos
and play grants we support
senate bill one sixty nine thank
you mister chairman
mister anybody else on zoom
though okay we'll go anybody.
Not in favor of hospital or
senate bill one sixty nine and
the areas.
He known anybody on zoom.
No okay thank you I guess.
Committee members.
Instrument god.
Thank you
mister chairman
we the recent why that
population amount was raised was
to allow some counties to apply
as well
which are if we kept the lower
population level some counties
might not be able to apply for
the supplemental fund.
The.
Mr chair representative mason
then then the language that
we've amended includes tribal
nations publo state parks and
political subdivisions and that
that includes land grants cities
towns yeah so it's okay another
question.
I believe in perhaps doctors
does can confirm is really for
the administrative costs that
state parks would use and state
parts say begin the past is used
a lot of this funding for
operations and improvements to
existing parks but that.
We want to limit it mister chair
representative mason to seven
percent so that.
We can prioritize publishing
tribes and rural community so
that they can get a greater
percentage of the money that is
coming in from the federal
government but
a little bit.
It was a long time
representative you know by my
thank you mr chair
representative thank you I i'm I
I really like this bill and in a
representative mason that was
always the that's always the
concern when you when you read
stuff about acquiring lands
and from what I read in here it
it doesn't give the state the
opportunity to do that kind of
stuff or be element any of those
entities deserve these are for
me these are for
you know the the the people that
need it so if if my area needs
which actually I think valency
county does is looking into
getting or building a new
ballpark and rodio grounds so
they can they will be able to
now access federal funds
in order to be able to do that
so in it and it kind of it it
shocks me when you when you sit
in you and you research this and
you find out how many millions
of dollars we've left on the
table because we did not have
the match in order to get it
done so i'm glad that we're
gonna start bringing those
moneys to to the mexico so thank
you for this.
Mister president that uses and
thank you mister
yes yes a lot of people ask us
is mortition society nothing do
the spill if we sleep in our
students because we go out in
the middle of the night and so
someone asked for you
are you tired of so no I just
left my suit and I just changed
my tie because we were up till
two two thirty the morning right
it's just a joke trying to wake
you up manchester so
quick question can you can this
all of it is just cannot check
marks to kind of clear you know
that the room of questions is
there is there any can this be
used to purchase water rights.
Mister chair representatives as
no good and so
does this this can this fund be
used to leverage things through
and and maybe already heard it
but i'm little slow this morning
things are to improve the some
of the access to m or use for
service property or
you know you to be asked if
anything like that.
Miss chair representative to
assist
these points can I be used on
federal lands primarily
in less the applicant has a long
term at least twenty five year
old more agreement for control
of rights of way or easements
etc but normally federal lands
are not eligible to have l c f
dollars.
My next question is are there
caps on that amount one project
can take
my almost chair scheme
representative.
Thank you mister chair
representative to roses the
state for lwc of itself the
stake does put a cap on the ask
amount which the past two years
was five hundred thousand
dollars but we do have the
opportunity if we have extra
money available to increase the
ask to a true fifty fifty match.
And mister chair representative
are there any
priorities do some come out
communities or
political subdivisions or
anything have higher priorities
and others there in swelve
ranking that you know someone
get funded before someone else
mister chair represents the
assets there is
a priority listing that you'll
see that on page two that
funding request from indignation
tribes and published our
priorities priorities secondly
rural communities are
prioritized in what people's
attempts and on page two.
Starting online twenty so
indian nations tries in public
get to priority
then rural communities then
you'll see them that the state
parks will get this
this seven cap of seven percent
with technical assistance and
yeah
it must cherry center so how
does this help my soil water
conservation district
in my area if if some of these.
Um
entities fall
over and above the
mister chair and represent have
assessed the
you're so margistric is in a row
community rate
I think that's I think that's
correct mister chair so they
they are
top of the priority list.
That those are just my questions
and and you know it sounds good
it's just it's always the what
the doubles in the details right
so I just wanted cannot go
through us
and I think that's all I have
thank you mister chair
thank you very much to losses
and I just want to make a
community it's good that we get
these funds out to our
communities like I got it in my
area like ral said they're
willing to build a trail up
through their son these funds
are well needed in our rule
community
will go back to committee what
is the will of the committee
I would do pass motion second by
my speed a lot of the clear to
call the road
representative luhan
representative mason
yes representative mirable more
yeah yes representative centers
representative that us us yes.
Best your customer yes her or
test yes we have a unanimous
dupation.
Thank you
thank you very much.
Thank you so much presentative
being so patient
just a eleven with twelve
minutes nineteen minutes late
we're we're on to a house
memorial fifty and I i'm
apologized by when I have to
leave
a few minutes into this but
representative please go ahead
and present the bill thank you
manager members of the committee
I do have a a sub.
So will be working off the sub.
And
yes you should have.
The.
And they're also passing the
hand out
that the experts brought.
So if you'd like to move the sub
for a discussion purpose as
manager.
Motion to move
I make a motion to
thank you manager
tomorrow fifty deals with a
historical community that goes
back over.
Posted over over three hundred
years there are not the other
book cargo which is now.
For the most part the city of a
broker.
And we're dealing with a
historical farming.
Operation that's existed pretty
close to the founding of about
carcard which was seventeen oh
six and that's that's the the
area known as in haran and I
don't matter his spanish for
san barra willow tree.
Grove.
And and naturally willow is.
Had a earned spanish and mister
chair a manager as memorial
fifty request the city would get
a cat to maintain the centres
old residential and agricultural
character of the inherent
neighborhood which is starting
to separate verse environmental
and economic impacts resulting
from urbans from and i'd like to
my expert
album back who resides in the
the and how do an area to kind
of further elaborate on the
significance of the community
and this memorial mister
chairman bucker.
Okay mister chair my name is
avan barca I reside on mentoring
road in our turkey it's an area
where both my grandparents and
my parents have resided and
various times i'm actually from
sign of and grew up here but I
haven't spent a tremendous
amount of time in albuquerque
this neighborhood is not very
far from old town it's just a
few blocks away it's not very
far from the bio park and those
were places that are very
popular and
receive an enough a lot of
traffic from tourists and local
residents.
It's also a farm community and
it's very attractive there's a
number of reasons for that one
of the things that the community
enjoys is the use of a
grain drink from the real grand
it's called the dude on his
drain and the entire
neighborhood is I guess you can
say check the boarded with an
essential system that makes the
neighborhood
enjoy the possibility of having
green and
divorced trees and makes very
attractive and unfortunately
over the years it's
been viewed by a lot of
developers as a place to check
that have the capacity to change
the den said he by having multi
unit and says housing systems
are various types such as mobile
homes multiple units and
potentially large attractive
homes so one of the things that
happened was a few years ago was
there was a prospect of changing
zone designation from a one to r
a two in that district which
would have changed the the
neighborhood substantially the
neighborhood it served by a
wagon road the properties
they're jason to this road and
it would have a tremendous
impact and it would impose very
serious
financial costs to either the
medicality and to developers and
I have with me too
the only thing with this
memorial was asking is that the
said he
maintain a.
Continual dialogue from the
beginning to end with this
neighborhood and involve the new
neighborhood in an active way to
any proposed changes such as
what the letter you see and the
petition that was signed
when we were concerned about
this change the proposed change
back in two thousand seven so I
have with me.
Excuse me I have
attached to this letter with of
transmitter is an original
petition that was developed in
two thousand seven and the thing
I want to emphasize is the
signatures on this petition
represent all of the residents
on mentor road where the
proposal was in a was in effect
and the
every resident signed this with
the same concerns that that are
articulated in the mobile that
you have in front of you.
And with this i'd i'd like to
introduce two people.
You said and with this i'd like
to yield back to the morning
sponsor mister chairman thank
you thank you similar chairman
and
i'm sending back in them with
that there is the military men
we stand for questions thank you
thank you garcia anybody in the
items in favor of house memorial
fifty if you are raised your
hand
anybody on zoom
in favor.
Anybody wanting a testify loss
at least yes
everybody muddies gregory space
and I am a farmer in the
neighborhood I grow apples and
pairs and peaches and ever parts
black barriers of grapes and I
water off this agent ditch
system on
this.
The.
And I just want to say that I
support this this morning
because we'll preserve the
neighborhood my neighbors are
are all
old residents in the
neighborhood i'm relatively new
i've been there maybe fifteen
years but i'm a new commerce
this neighborhood the old timers
told me that was mostly sheep
and orchards and I I believe
this this neighborhood this area
fed fledged in all town in the
early seventeen hundreds it was
the first army area in all the
currently I do believe so I just
want to say that I support this
this memorial and then
it'll help keep the organization
from creeping in and destroying
the the the flavor of the
neighborhood
thank you very much thank you
anybody else.
Good morning many members my
name is landing town we have a
farm all town far in this area
on month away
from what we know this was
originally farmland from the
tweblo that was an old town of
them the disystem was there
before the introductor so it's
really hold and we want maintain
the character this area as as
far as the extent that we can
because this is a story
and history's important to new
mexico.
Anyhow
we
they're used to be a sector
developed plan it was what in
place back in the early
seventies one of the guys
involved who remember I need to
manage anyhow the sector
development plan was replaced by
a new zoning city and we're just
concerned that the second
developed plans specifically
said that this sector of the
city they needed to look at
preserving the semi rural
characteristics I know that in
nineteen eighty six
when we acquired some more land
for our form there were a
hundred and fifty acres of small
farms between the freeway and
central avenue brand boulevard
in the river that's gone quite a
bit we have a little twelve
peace and we grow a lot of we
had horses there for a long time
in any event we want to just
keep this so I rural so we want
this to be looked at more
closely by the city because they
have a new ordinary you allow
more development that happened
and they they were out the
sector plan so that's this all I
have to say thank you very much
thank you.
Anybody
opposing memorial fifty hus more
or fifty
anybody on zoom now we will go
to committee for questions
committee.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative and mr
bucket I so so basically the
between the the committee sub
and the original what is the
major differences I I think the
one thing i'm seeing is that in
the original you're referencing
the actual residential zoning
and in the in the committee sub
it's just that you're that it
was a real community is that
like what what are the major
differences between the.
Yeah
basically.
Uh we're we're we were asking
for a different conclusion in
the end the original bill
that kind of
wasn't in in.
Wasn't in step with the existing
zoning so the south kind of
clarified that in terms of.
The
the trucks of the asked which is
the city web
to continue to maintain and have
kind of a dialogue with a
hurried in terms of continuing
to maintain the agricultural
status of this historical site
thank you mister chair and
representative so so in in in
that's it that just sorty so we
know exactly all you're asking
is there the community gets a
seat at the table when when
stuffers is discussed any kind
of changes anything like that
because I just looked up where
it was that so it's proximity to
to all town I understand why
developers are salivating over
this but
but I also know how hard it is
to keep.
Keep historical lands and and
and farmlands is that they'd
have been there for hundreds of
years and you have family
members that are many
generations that have been there
and and want to keep it that way
we definitely
know what that is like
especially when when things are
developing all around us so i'd
I definitely support this
because you're like I said
you're not you're not asking a
lot you're just asking for a
voice and so thank you thank you
representing representatives.
Thank you mister chair
representative did you go to
burbing street last night like I
did
you little.
At least all
three is right nor let's so much
for chair representative I you
know i've just got some.
It's not really concerns where
they kind of
yes I know I mean I understand
what you guys are trying to do
and it sounds into i'm gonna ask
you and that we instead of me
putting words in your mouth whom
all these how many people are we
talking about in this area on
property there mister terra I
used to level back to.
Property owners toya
not probably not more than it
doesn't.
In the whole western town
with the sector plan applied to
their probably close to a
hundred or more there's traveler
parks it's all that's what
it you know it this was the
corner
that they swipped everything
under the rook long time ago
because it was a federal pocket
poverty representation was
minimal
and and.
You just you don't want to be
left along and so anyhow there's
there's there's not all there a
hundred fifty eight years of
farms are in more for sure there
are a lot of houses there trade
apart so there's a lot of people
live there but as far as
property owners who still own
large chunks of property I would
put that.
Thirty.
Okay thank you mister chair
represents your so what i'm
understanding here's your land
use code already says that
you're
a dash two which was residential
agricultural dash to zone in his
end is that what i'm
understanding here mister ferrer
representative
mr character even I can do it
explain that my understanding
mister chair is that this area
was owned
r e two.
And then there was a a and a new
administration I came into the
city that resolved this area
PE plan development and there's
been enough initiatives by
different entities within the
city to
redo that zoning that occurred.
Uh over twelve years ago to
coincide with the historical
development and historical
contributions of the r.
Back to the
rate to
some mister care representative
is this in.
The city limits of albuquerque
yes it is it's within the city
line so you know you have your
zone in department your your
plan zoning department that
manages us in which we reached
out and we didn't didn't seem
like they had any any plans to
change the zoning and I just
didn't know what the zoning so
you're sure that it's right now
as residential a or a
residential agricultural dash to
zoning is that what is
differently is if I could mister
chair representative bottle of
done a lot of opening but
properly support looks like
you've got some of that
the sector plan originally said
when and there's some still some
county property within the city
limits there are farmers county
so it's a one
that I say and some of the other
forms I think are still avoid
but when they the second place
and when they were brought in
the zone at four houses the city
council came out in nineteen
eighties and balance on the
sector plan two is going to be
played when it's brought into
the city so that was whatever
they're already was for that two
houses
then they throughout the sector
plan and and the city changed
the zoning all I know is
developers come in and ask for a
special
dispensation from any zoning
there they want sixty four they
want this that i've been through
this many times so all we want
is
we don't you know the rose and
rules played by the rules we
don't want to read the middle
so mister chair representative
what what what i'm understanding
here
is generally what we have as we
have a property that's inside
the city limits and then most
developed
cities are municipalities have
an et zone extra territorial
home.
Outside in a bov there
city limits so they can plan
growth and so forth right so
there can be some rules and and
that that all under the ethies
on the replied in zoning four
future development just so that
you just you know like he said
mister chair represented his is
got some of this property that
is county but he's adjacent to
the city limits and so what they
do as they just want to plan
ahead or development just you
know you want to street to
starting over here and you want
everything to cut out work
together so generally turn up
mister chair excuse me
there is no territorial zone for
the same book okay if the
serious work that can wishes to
expand their boundaries they
have to get permission from
berlio county that's the status
and so two thousand
four two thousand five somewhere
in there so just took on the
correct faking mister chair
represented reading all that I
know in silver city we have a we
have a your regular city limits
in an etc zone and so they've
made and they've made an
agreement between the the county
and the and the city to to make
that work but inside i'm not
will familiar with what the
albert is done but the point
that i'm making is generally
you've got a hear a person
saying that in that area they
have county property and then I
hear that some of them aren't a
city property and so I I don't
know that this this would even
apply if you're you're in the
county
that was only I don't know what
that is only would be in the
county if if it is incorporates
that area how that's worked but
I just a point that i'm making
as generally when they're going
to change the
so the plan is only you have to
go through that there is a a
thirty day
period that they have to post
that they're going to make any
changes to when his own and it's
up to the residence of that
area.
To support or not support any
zoning change so it's something
that that is that is that is
important to for that area to
pay attention it is generally
mister chair representative of
that
that choose you can't just
change it on the overnight it's
generally up there's a process
with it you don't wake up one
day and you're in a commercial
zone it goes to her process and
that's that's what i'm offered
from your with so it's just a
future thought I just was
looking here and I and i'm going
to for the record say
or or are here from you that
you're saying because you you
supped this out as residential r
eight dash two zones homes as
soon that's what it
currently is as at true mister
chair representative mister
chairman understanding is that
we're looking at a community
and her eye.
Within a had there's different
designations and as one of the
experts in order to state it
there are some properties that
are a one that are in the
unincorporated area
and that's very common
especially in some of these all
traditional land base
uh
islanded communities and what
the throttle the memorial is to
kind of approach the city as a
community
and two and to make decisions a
based on the community as a
community regardless if they're
in the corporate area or within
the city limits and as a
community
arrived at a vision of a
continuity of the existing
agricultural contributions that
in her art has me
to the city of a book a car is
since its inception and but I
can't be more clearer in this
mister baka
the gentleman in the audience
wished to for the home that down
it
of the eight of the thirty
families that constituted in her
eye how many of them are in the
county a many are zoned r eight
two a minute our zone a pe which
is uhm planned development
I don't have an information I
know that the analyst mister
well there's that a thorough
search in terms of
the zoning existing zone and we
might want to yield to him in
terms of what he has to offer to
your question yet let me just
tell you why i'm seeing this
with return representative
because of if we all property
here all of us on property and
it's all multi zone like you're
saying and I see you know what
i've been saving this property
to sell it for my retirement and
a developer comes into it we've
got to be careful of why we do
this I understand what you're
doing and I agree with that.
But the person that has the most
power to do that is a property
owner themselves right they
decide whether they want to keep
it as a cultural night I like
what you're doing i'd love that
and I want to destroy it at all
I just i'm afraid of that that's
the only thing i'm afraid of
when you have multiple times
that in the serious multi zoning
and the work sending a message
that you you know going above
and beyond the the plan is only
a department there and with this
is what we want you to do is
zone it all this way and it just
causes me pause at that because
because of other other different
property mister chair
representatives are as mister
bucker stated every family in
her
every one of them signed this
participant okay to continue in
that tradition so it's not that
there's doubt with those
families is that they're
consolidated a hundred percent
and then this community moving
forward in terms of his
traditional find over a
processes
in our own beat you up anymore
and not trying to be too often
chair representative I think
what through me office we had a
sub and I and I go over let me
just go to back up here and he
just kind of put me in questions
or that I have mister
thank you mister basses
what is the will of the
committee
i'll second that we have a due
classroom represent just and the
second by middle one moya.
Particularly representative
representative mason yeah
representative yeah
representative sanchez yes
representative yes was your
customer yes.
Yeah.
House will development language
cultural affairs has a two
passion committee sub house
memorial fifty thank you mister
chairman committee us and we
