good to see you all again
committee members
this is house bill forty eight
and it's a bill that really is
the outcome com of the
collaborative effort is that the
secretary of workforce solutions
put together there was a
committee that was put together
this summer that included the
business community staff from
workforce solutions me and the
problem we were tasked to try to
sort out an address was what to
do about the unemployment
insurance fund
so just stepping back and giving
some of the background some I
know some of your business
people and probably have a
handle on what what that funds
about but everyone may not that
fund is a trust fund
to which employers contribute
to support employees who are
terminated from their employment
that's kind of the short answer
for and prior to the pandemic we
should be proud to say that New
Mexico had a very healthy
unemployment insurance fund it
was I think we ranked I think in
the top sixteen or seventeen in
the country in terms of healthy
funds but with the pandemic the
fund took a significant hit as
you might Amanda mansion many
people became unemployed and
also the federal government
through its various acts you
know cares acts and so on
required us and we were happy to
do it at least I was happy to do
it to provide enhanced benefits
and that kind of thing so the
fund has been hit pretty hard as
a result of the financial strain
on it.
in September the state of
Department found it necessary to
borrow money to put into the
fund so that's how we started
with over four hundred million
dollars in the trust fund and it
has been drained and we have
borrowed now.
Out I think two hundred and ten
million or so roughly and and I
do have a wonderful expert with
me here Mr Torres who shaking
his head in Vigil correct me I
know when he's wrong when I'm
wrong
The fund is has debt.
And it also continues to have
obligations to pay a pay
individuals who are unemployed
so there we are and the and so
this bill is designed as a
backstop to try to try to find a
solution that will mitigate the
burdens on those contributing
into the frontier and it's not a
perfect solution we will be the
first ones to tell you that
because it will involve some
bird and again on employers in
terms of contributing but it's
what we're proposing as a way to
help mitigate the problem so
what's the problem one is the
debt and one is the shortfall in
the fund right now there's I
think about thirty million or so
into my Mr Taurus is that about
right thirty million or so in
the fund I believe eighteen
million at that eighteen million
there's eighteen million in part
because one of the acts of the
legislature in the past you know
we had to special sessions was
to allocate certain monies and
fifty million was put into the
fund I believe on January one of
this year is that not right Mr
Torres as a result of actions
taken by those of us who are in
the legislature last year okay
so that was an effort to make
sure we have money and and that
stop some of the borrowing for
now right because we have money
in the fund but borrowing is
likely to continue once we get
through that eighteen million
so this this is a three pronged
approach to try to address the
problem one is to allocate three
hundred million dollars from the
general fund to help support the
unemployment trust fund and
those monies will be used to
pay claims okay so we won't have
to buy.
R. O. any additional monies we
help you know that that's a
whole these things there's this
is not a perfect science but the
three hundred million that is in
the budget and it is
appropriated now is in the house
budget now would be used to help
pay claims so we don't have to
borrow now the problem exists as
to what to do about the monies
we have borrowed because we are
at least this point obligated to
repay those monies to the
federal government the federal
government at the moment has
suspended the need for interest
so interest is not accruing on
the money but it will start
accruing I believe the secretary
said in August Mr Taurus is that
right did you hear him say that
the current provisions of the
last cares act actually have
them starting in March so in
large package would include a
further delay on interest yes
okay you know there's an
additional cares Act type bill
that's being discussed in
Congress so it could that could
be pushed out but that's not a
certainty so at the moment
interest will start accruing in
March unless something else
happens.
And so we need a plan to try to
address some of the shortfall in
the fund in the plan that we're
proposing and I will say again
this was something that was
derived through this working
group is to adjust what they
call the taxable wage base I
hope I got the terminology right
but the bottom line is right now
there's a fee put on wages to a
certain point and that point
right now is about I think
twenty six thousand dollars is
based on a formula.
We're proposing to raise and
bees wage base to forty thousand
based on a formula and we're
also proposing to and and
enhancement of a point point to
can I get that right now okay
that would increase our ability
to raise monies from employers
This is not a perfect solution
we know this this this these
additional enhancements will
raise I think about fifty
million dollars a year to help
us start paying off the debt
that we owe the federal
government the goal of course is
to ask the federal government to
take care of all the debt that
would be the ultimate outcome
but we don't have that yet and
we are just trying to plan ahead
so I do this kind of as a
backstop bill and there is an
amendment which Mr chair may I
just talk a little bit about
what the amendment does.
I'm supposed to on mute okay.
Why don't you ruins is your
discussion okay and then we'll
go ahead and go to your all
right so as the bill as
currently drafted their is a
memo which I'll explain that
that enhancement that I just
talked about raising the taxable
wage base in the the point two
percent additional revenue
is is it is on a two year time
line so it would sunset in two
years the amendment add
something to that and I'm happy
to discuss that when the chair
is ready for me to do so.
Okay so are you are you done
with the the discussion of your
bill as of now yes Mr chair I
think I am did I miss anything
if I may ask the expert Mr
Taurus now okay.
Okay so what we'll do now is a
we have a motion to
reacted and then for a
discussion.
The amendment number Mr chair is
point two two one nine three
zero nine point one.
You can explain your amendment
now thank you Mr chair the and
and committee members that
amendment.
provides that the enhancements
that I just referenced a minute
ago would sunset either in two
years or if we get some relief
from the federal if we get
relief from the federal
government that's the essence of
it and Mr Taurus helping draft
this Mr tore is is a staff
member with LFC so we're trying
to plan for eventuality so we
have a two year window where
which were where it could to
sunset but if things it in
Congress we're such that they
provided relief to our fund then
it could sunset earlier that's
what that's what this is
intended to do so we're just
trying to plan for multiple
eventualities Mr chair.
To do I have any of the
discussion about the amendment.
Do I have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
The I'm to the doctor.
Mr chair.
I'm here who.
The most.
The vast quantity comes at.
Representative rural area okay
and for represents the real real
and the second from
Representative Roybal Caballero
to adopt the amendment is there
any junction to the motion.
So you've done so it does show
all members present voting in
the affirmative a lot of doctors
in the amendment.
Okay so now I think we've got
everything discussed and.
Everything is correct and we
will go to
I'm here.
In this case is you there's
anybody here who would like to
testify for or against the.
The legislation.
All right I see that as a
starting to raise up the okay do
not allow you to minutes each
okay and we we that I know how
to count and I will ask you.
And okay so also was Kyra if you
will identify yourself in on
mute yourselves.
This.
Well you should see.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm car less contact
with the New Mexico business
coalition.
We are Representative hundreds
of businesses in thousands of
individuals throughout the state
our focus is a better place to
do business so we can create
jobs for New Mexicans to provide
for their families.
We strongly oppose house bill
one forty eight.
This is absolutely the worst
time to raise any tax on the New
Mexico business especially based
on an issue over which they had
no control when their businesses
were shut down.
For severely limited in
operations.
Increase taxes when they would
love to be hiring their
employees back creates a
hardship on the business but
it's also hard on employees
because you will see employers
out of necessity shrink back
from being able to hire or to
find the hours that they would
like to do.
Many other states have put
millions of dollars into their
unemployment fund when I
understand we have three hundred
million earmarked for that fund
but that doesn't even cover that
debt to the federal government
what we need to do is find a way
to put money more money
significant funds into the
unemployment insurance fund in
order to get it back to a
healthy status.
But taking it out of our
employers right now is just not
a good thing to do I appreciate
your time and your consideration
today thank you.
Thank you
Ron black.
You yourself Mr Chairman the
members of the committee the.
It's a pleasure to be here today
but it is a it's tough to talk
about these sort of issues in
these times
house bill one forty eight you
know deals with an issue around
unemployment unemployment was as
a as a program was designed to
support employees who lost their
job or who were laid off and the
employer funds that program but
it's typically to offset you
know what the employer laying
someone off.
at the employee at the
employer's discretion.
Of the situation we found
ourself here it in New Mexico is
that through the pandemic
through the public health
orders.
we've had to lay off.
Tens of thousands of people from
updated from jobs that just
don't exist now and it it's not
fair it's not fair to businesses
it's not fair to those employees
but frankly the viruses and
fair and so fairness while it's
an important conversation it's
one that doesn't help us in this
situation.
what I think house bill one
forty eight does do is try to
get to a place that is as fair
as possible given the
circumstances and we had the
opportunity to work directly
with Representative Chandler
with secretary mccamley in in
exploring all sorts of different
options about how to offset
these costs in to get us back to
of us the strong fiscal balance
we believe that this is a is a
thoughtful and sensible approach
to get there again is it fair
you know it's hard to say you
again the viruses and Sarah but
we have to do what's right by
our employees by the fund and so
we think this is a thoughtful
balanced approach to try to
replenish the fund what we at
the state chamber will continue
to work at the federal level to
get those additional federal
funds to back fill that
Representative Chandler
mentioned we do think that the
state contributing three hundred
million today through this
process and fifty million at the
end of last year of the cares
Act funds goes a long way to
help with the funds so we stand
today in support of the process
in support of the bill thank
you.
Thank you learn better soon.
Yes chairman members of the
committee my name is Lauren
Patterson I represent New Mexico
cattle growers association.
Mexico okay outdoors currently
opposes H. B. one forty eight
although we understand the.
The need to
we currently think this is poor
timing on this employers of New
Mexico are not responsible for
the outbreak of the COVID
nineteen or the impacts of the
closing their businesses.
Employers are not responsible
for the can federal government's
allegations of the bonuses paid
out to employees.
I'm we also think that the.
The decisions made by the
federal government should not be
passed off to Mexico employers I
workforce solutions informed
employers that there would not
be an increase in their rates
and this legislation negates
that statement.
We understand that the need but
like say we we still feel
strongly that this is probably
poor timing thank you.
Thank you
the repair you madam.
Well.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members but it was for
the big about and I'm an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty today
we stand strong support of H. B.
one forty eight unemployment is
a crucial safety net that
benefits you Mexican employers
and employees this system are
partially funded by the federal
government during times of high
unemployment also depends on
employer contributions but in
two thousand nineteen only seven
other states have lower
contribution rates based on
taxable wages in New Mexico and
more than half of the states had
a higher contribution rate based
on total employee wages these
low contribution rents at Mexico
to deplete its funds in a time
of high unemployment now New
Mexico's having to borrow
significant amount of money to
cover unemployment benefits
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic I requiring employers
to contribute a bit more into
the unemployment trust fund for
every worker the employee New
Mexico will be better prepared
to address the needs of
thousands of New Mexico New
Mexico to set up a system such
as the system version by HB one
forty eight that requires
employers to contribute more
than they have to the
unemployment trust fund for all
the reasons stated above we send
a strong support of H. H. B. one
forty eight thank you.
Thank you Sir are a Joan
nationally on.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Jonas more you have the
executive director of the New
Mexico will growers incorporated
we are state association
Representative sheep producers
across New Mexico we
respectively oppose house bill
forty eight due to its impacts
on family farms or ranches and
the severe impact would have on
rural New Mexico businesses that
operate on a very thin margin so
for those reasons and reasons
previously stated we urge you to
vote against house bill one
forty eight think of the impacts
in rural communities and
agriculture when making your
decision thank you Sir for your
time and thank you for the
committee for the army to.
Madam.
Okay with that I don't have any
more hands raise so
I will go to the committee and I
don't have any hand raised on
the committee led the for many
members that want to.
Discussed the legislation.
I just want to make sure we're
still on the amendment correct.
We.
The amendment already corporate
so we're back on the line the
bills drafted with no opposition
okay.
And I have my fabulous one in
Ollie's Mr representative
Douglas us the floor is yours
Sir.
I like the introduction up Mr
chair.
Well I just stop no three in the
bill and I and and the number
here in soliciting concerns I
had out I I just have a couple
questions first of all.
I'm assuming these numbers are
are based on.
Before it well without.
Any of the on minimum wage
increases are included on this
so I'm I'm assuming that the
figures that are that are you
are given to us as far as the
increase in are based on what
we're dealing with today assume
that that legislation doesn't
passed not true Mr chair
representative Mr chair
Representative I believe that's
true I'm looking to my he's
nodding that's true that's
correct the so the and so
that being true today's
unemployment not an employment
report are minimum wages about
is I think.
The ten fifteen our.
What is it today Madam chair
representative our students Mr
chair Representative remember I
have a my other churches.
Sorry Mr chair
Representative.
What is this excuse me minimum
wage.
Mr chair Representative I think
it is ten fifty but it will be
going up to Mr Taurus do you
remember
what.
Thank okay.
And so the reason I ask that is
I'm just I'm just thinking are
that if if in fact the
Which.
Increase so that to affect will
definitely be raising.
Are we just by about forty
percent on and then on top of
that this would be calculated on
top of that.
And I'm just very concerned
with all this legislation.
We now.
All put on on the backs
shoulders of of small businesses
that are.
Trying to open up again and get
going again and so on free that
we're stifling them you further
on we do this we have an issue
and so I'm gonna ask you some
questions in in in part of this
is that this obviously because
I'm just I don't you guys have
answers that I don't this
feature on Representative so all
any cares money because at one
time and the money I don't know
this but position cares money
that was not.
Used for spare are in that been
allocated in the sitting there.
Your.
Mr chair Representative all
cares Act money if I understand
it had to have been expended by
the end of last year meaning
December thirty one
twenty twenty and Mr Tory you
feel free to jump in when I say
something that's incorrect I
would point out to you when we
realized we had a special
session and November recognizing
we needed to ensure that all of
those monies were allocated and
fifty million dollars of those
monies that had not been
originally allocated to the
unemployment funds were
allocated and if I could just
clarify one additional thing Mr
Chairman representative this
bill was designed to invoke to
avoid a bigger disaster which I
should have highlighted more
prominently but I I get frankly
had thought the business
community would have known this
and that is if we do if we do if
we do not begin paying back on a
car loan and we did not address
the deficiency that is in our
unemployment insurance fund the
federal government will do that
to us and they will begin
ratcheting up the insurance
premiums that they apply to a
degree that is greater than what
I am proposing here and I think
that's a fair statement if I
said anything wrong Mr tore as
my experts from LFC please
correct me so I need to set the
table for people that apparently
was not recognized by the some
of the commenters in the
business community if we don't
do this as a way to mollify and
soften the blow the federal
government will do it unless
there is legislation in
Congress.
Mr chair Representative that
being said
Would there be an impact if.
We were able to open our
businesses so that they could
because I mean that all the
funds are coming in are based on
on on on on point right so yes I
this is are allowed to open up
again and start generating.
Revenue and.
Turned it would have a roll
starting up again I would assume
that that would help us
replenish that fund is that
correct Mr Chairman.
Chair of.
This is what all agree with you
on.
We need to get the pandemic
under control so that we can
open up businesses so I implore
everyone on this call to ask
their citizens to follow all of
the health rules.
So that the pandemic will get
under control and businesses
will open up but it's not until
the pandemic is under control
will it be safe for people to
attend go to restaurants and I
personally wouldn't go to a
restaurant when I know that the
pandemic is still raging and I
have many friends who will not
do that either so let's get the
pandemic under control business
also open up and this problem
will be easier to address.
Mr chair representative I I
understand what you're saying
I'm not trying to I'm just my
question was with that help the
leave the that was my question
yes getting the pandemic under
control and then allowing
businesses open once the
pandemic is under control would
help alleviate it.
Committee chair of both the both
of you please go to the chair.
Yes Mr chair sorry about that.
Mr chair representative again
yeah that that was just my point
I'm not trying to but it's not
to wear the masks and go out and
party on I'm just saying I'm
just trying to calculated to see
how how what what can be done
and our that's one of the
options
So.
Might might be on course the
state is some of its will to
yellow some words hopefully we
to bring had a good conversation
with the governor yesterday and
but then she's she was concerned
about the murder of
possibilities of the streams and
stuff so I mean there's it's a
no but but it was just I was
just trying to get all of their
understanding make sure our I I
was clarifying that
I just a again I think we help
on so the.
I think I think what what are in
my opinion just to make a
statement Mr chair on
Representative I think we're
we're.
This is so spot on.
The spent that money on before
me before was a legislation and
and and now we get paid if I
pronounce I guess I do have a
question are we able to continue
our borrowing money Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative I
believe we are able to at this
point we do not need to because
the state has L. look has at
will be allocating an additional
three hundred million dollars
assuming our budget passes and
there's presently eighteen
million or so in the fund at
this time.
So Mr chair representative what
I'm understanding is without
this bill right now they are
running on on funding if it
passes three hundred mil
additional million into the
fund.
Mr chair representative that's
correct if the bill if the
budget passes as is.
With this bill
Without this bill passed.
That is correct there is an
allocation Mr chair
Representative and Mr Taurus
correct me if I'm wrong there is
currently some money in the
budget.
Researchers Representative it
what was three pandemic what was
our balance in the in the
parking.
Mr chair out Representative I
believe I mentioned earlier it
was over I think it was four
hundred and fifty million or so
give or take and we were one of
the best funded trust funds in
the country.
So I think I think I just want
to clear my mind on those
questions Mr chair
representative all you'll for
this anyone else has a
discussion on that would like to
participate in but for now those
are my questions thank you for
helping understand more Mr chair
representative.
Thank you Representative Rubio.
Yes I for the past.
The motion for a new fast I will
see if I
go right for a new that's a lot
the bill one forty eight
disincentive.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Every.
You just do it correctly so that
nobody will complain about it
okay
Mr chair I ask for do pass on
house bill one forty eight as
amended.
And I.
Okay I have a promotion proper
second
madam secretary would you
call the roll Representative
bash yes Representative Black.
No.
Answer.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative.
No electors removal.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr chair Alcorn yes to explain
my vote.
Yes.
So before you announce a
Representative lack of feelings
for new road please.
Yes.
I'm sorry.
One second.
Thank you Mr chairman echoing in
my head there for a minute.
So I had to vote no.
I'm only because they feel like
you know I don't know that this
is as a representative that her
Garcia always says I don't know
that this bill is ready for a
prime time I think it has a few
flaws in I see the point that
you know that the lo needs to be
paid back to the federal
government however I a.
I wish it didn't have to come
from the general fund and my
biggest issue is that that we
are going to hold our employers.
For the harm that that they
didn't actually costs so thank
you Mr chairman.
Assesses you can explain you
will please.
Thank you.
Mr chair again it's just very
worried about the.
The pressure and all of that
small businesses are green right
now and I.
Yes this is a bill and and I
just thank you for allowing me
to to understand a little bit
better but
your day on I would like for
these little guys to be able to
open back up and safely and
hopefully not with as much
strain on their back again it's
it's it's nobody's fault that
fifteen all this happened but I
just I can't support.
That at this time thank you Mr
chair thank you.
Just wanted to explain I know
how painful it sounds that the
this point two percent is going
to hurt everybody small business
I mean the average employee in
the state of New Mexico averages
about thirty six thousand
dollars a year.
That's about that we need that
we need to come to the cost to
the employer the person that
employs them twenty two percent
would come out to seventy two
dollars a year.
Most people spend seventy two
dollars a year going out to
dinner whenever restaurants
opened so foreign to me that
painful and I'm not be able to
support something like this just
bothers me intensely.
So that the madam secretary if
you'll amounts of those thank.
Have six in the affirmative into
in the opposition.
Thank you.
Okay well go on thank you
representative thank you so much
committee very much appreciate
your time thank you.
And we will go on to our next
bill which is.
Hopefully a nice one by one.
Representative Sweetser issue in
the.
And if you.
I see it there are.
I do you have any X. for
witnesses sent to Reno on yes
good to see you Mr chair I have
my co chair Meredith Dixon
Representative Dixon and Jason
Espinoza with KW consulting.
So whenever you are ready
Representative free to the hot
two years.
Thank you very much chair al
cone and committee members it's
good to be before you this
afternoon with house bill one
fifty five workforce training
residency requirements and
hopefully it will be a nice easy
bill as you requested Mr chair I
was told never to say this is a
simple bill because that's kind
of that you know kiss of death
to a bit but but this one
actually is what house bill one
fifty five does is remove the
sunset provision and make
permanent the reduced residency
requirement under the job
training incentive program J.
tip we call it when the training
is provided for high wage jobs
since the legislation
unanimously was approved in two
thousand seventeen and it was
sponsored by representatives
bill mccamley and George Dodge
it's a lab for the reduction of
the residency requirement for
high wage position and since
that time a hundred seventeen
high wage jobs have been
approved of which twenty three
were in rural communities
throughout New Mexico which I
appreciate and the the bill
reduce the one your residency
requirement under certain
circumstances that allowed for a
one date residency requirement
for these high skill high wage
jobs now if you look at your
fiscal impact report it said
that attraction at workforce
development and retention of
talent is vital in diversifying
new Mexico's economy that came
from the economic development
departments analysis in and it
went on to say that this
provision has been helpful with
the traction of highly skilled
employees so removing the sunset
clause will help continue the
recruitment efforts to
businesses by attracting a
workforce for today's job
openings and those in the future
and just one other thing I
wanted to point out to the
committee Mr chair.
Is that the residency
requirement has not been abuse
of the seven thousand four
hundred ninety two jobs that
need to have allocated funding
to since the inception of this
policy the one day residency
option has accounted for one
point three percent of the jobs
created under J. tip so that
means the focus remains on your
long term residents well when
you're residents but it has
given a critical tool for
companies to recruit individuals
when they need them so what
we're doing is just removing
that sense that so we don't have
to come before your committee
every five years or sell allow
this to still be a tool that can
be used and remind you that it
is not the over use to get out
of state residents preference
over in state and with that
might my co chair representative
Dixon and to my experts Jason
Espinoza will stand for
questions.
When.
Jurors we know so would you and
anybody else want to add to it
before I go to the attendees and
CEOs in support of the
legislation.
Mr chairman Jason Espinoza just
just a note to on the register
lobbyist with New Mexico idea
which is the statewide economic
development association in here
to answer any questions that you
may have thank you.
Thank you okay to the to the
participants out there is there
anybody out there who wants to
speak in favor or in opposition
of the legislation I will allow
you to minutes so I'll start
with Mister Montgomery.
Your chair members of the
committee my name's Eric
Montgomery I am with the Misia
valley economic development
alliance in Los crucis New
Mexico
I am a ten year veteran of
economic development in in New
Mexico and also board member for
New Mexico idea
I hate as a as a resident
district thirty five hi we
strongly support this
legislation it is one critical
piece in a system of
infrastructure of support for
economic development and and
hope and ask for you to support
it as well.
Thank you Sir.
Anybody else all right.
If not go to the committee.
Are you ready.
No.
At the end of.
In the money on the committee
that would that have any
questions do I have a motion
from the committee.
All of the motion for due
process
okay second.
Share the motion for a new
Representative two Romeo and the
from per second for the tide
between Representative assets
and Representative bags so I'll
give it to me Representative to
rass.
Okay was.
About percent in to
Representative the last US.
Do I have any opposition to that
motion.
See you online and then
secretary so all members present
voting in the affirmative
Representative Sweetser you're
on the road home thank you very
much Mr chair I gave you your
easy bill that you ask for thank
you committee have a great.
Thank you so with that in mind
the we keep the the for for
Tuesday's agenda I'm not exactly
sure what we have left but we're
getting pretty close to.
Congress so we need to do the
session almost yeah we're doing
good.
So for let me ask my fifty
questions to understand and in
because I'm the new guy.
I still do a lot of research in
the in in today's world into a
lot of research before I even
come here so stuff like this and
I won't have any problem Mr
chair yes study a lot more.
Measures came here thirteen
years ago when my hair was
completely dark.
Well greens out of us all right
now we'll see what what I look
like in a few years god bless
you thank you.
The good night these these nice
and easy that you can go to
dinner.
Thank you.
Yes.
