books move for discussion. We
have a motion for discussion
please uh let us know about your
amendment. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam chair, uh, the
amendment is a minor amendment.
In that it makes a grammatical
corrections and adds terminology
inadvertently left out in
drafting.
But that I stand for questions.
Representative, you want to
explain your bill a little bit
as well or just I actually it's
fine. You explained what it did
to that. Um, are there any, is
there any discussion about the
amendment?
Is there a motion to adopt the
amendment?
Moved by vice chair uh Sanchez.
OK, thank you, man.
Man, uh,
House Bill 30 is a monumental
piece of legislation.
That places are centuries old
Spanish land grant and Aseca
communities.
On a sound footing and
addressing much needed
infrastructure projects.
Madame Chera, such improvements
will enhance the public safety,
public welfare.
In public health of these
entities.
Madam Chair, house building.
3:30 places the land grants in
Asea infrastructure fund in the
same pie chart.
For all capital projects.
We're on January 15th of each
year, the state board of Finance
will estimate the amount of
bonding capacity available for
severance tax bonds to be
authorized by the legislature.
Men in chair currently the
division allocates 9.5%.
Of the estimate bonding capacity
each year for water projects in
the amount of close to $107
million of which the legislature
will authorize the state Board
of Finance to issue severance
tax bonds for that amount to be
used for water projects.
Me and chair
Likewise, the division will
allocate 4.5% for the tribal
infrastructure fund.
Totaling approximately $85
million.
And Madame Chair, in that same
process, house about 3:30 has a
division allocating 1.1% of the
bonding capacity for the land
grant infrastructure fund,
approximately 1819 million per
year and 1.1% of the bonding
capacity for Rosea's
infrastructure fund
approximately 1819 million per
year.
Me and houseboat 330 has the
land grant council betting,
reviewing and prioritizing
capital projects by individual
land grants.
And House Bill 3:30 as the Osea
bureau.
Of the interstate stream
commission vetting and reviewing
projects by individual asseass
with prioritization falling
within the Interstate stream
commission.
Madam Chair, I'd like to yield
to my two experts. I'd like to
start off with, uh,
Paul Garcia, she can introduced
herself as Will Arturo.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, and
thank you, Representative
Garcia. Uh, Madam Chair, my name
is Paula Garcia, and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Ase Association.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present to you today.
House Bill 3:30 seeks to address
unmet needs for a second
infrastructure funding, as
described by Representative
Garcia, the bill proposes to
create two project funds that
would be used to fund land grant
and projects via bonding
capacity from 1.1% severance tax
bonds. The 1.1% allocation is
estimated to be 18 million.
There's also a trust fund
created that is a placeholder
for future appropriations. The
primary rationale for House Bill
3:30 is to have a reliable,
recurring funding source.
For a second infrastructure. The
needs for a second
infrastructure across the state
are tremendous. There are over
700 cents and community ditches
and 23 counties in New Mexico.
They support the agricultural
economy and the livelihoods of
thousands of rural families, and
they contribute to aquifer
recharge through earthen
ditches, thereby benefiting
rural users and community water
systems.
The NMAA has compiled a list of
unmet second needs from recent
unfunded capital outly requests
from fiscal year 25. New
requests from ICIPs for fiscal
year 26. In the past two years
of requests for the to the Asia
bureau at the Interstate stream
Commission.
Before I show these numbers, it
should be noted that this is
just a slice of the unknown
needs of the known needs. There
has never been a comprehensive
assessment of all our
infrastructure needs across the
state.
The data we share is for a
second that have made requests
in recent years.
For unfunded capital outlay for
fiscal year 25, it was 7
million.
ICIP total request for fiscal
year 26 was 40 million. The
total damage for 2024 disasters
was 83 million.
The 25% cost share is 21
million, and that's the, the
part of our estimate that we're
concerned with.
The IOC execute Bureau
allocations for the past 2 years
have been 6 and 5.8 million
respectively, even though they
only get 2.5 in recurring
funding. So that leaves about a
4 million um gap in unmet need
and they've been relying on
special appropriations for that
funding.
The second infrastructure
project fund would be managed by
the Interstate Stream Commission
in conjunction with the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
The INC has administered a
second construction project
since the 1980s through the
Roseki construction program. The
ISC recently formalized an Aseca
bureau.
And expanded staff to, uh,
operate um according to agency
guidelines, and they operate two
parallel funding cycles, one for
engineering design and one for
construction.
In the most recent completed
fiscal year, the ISC had a
completion rate for their
projects of 90%. So they have uh
a good track record of
completing projects in a timely
manner and fully completing
using this programmatic approach
whereby the funds are fully
funded and they're completed
within the time frame that's
specified. Uh, so, Madam Chair,
uh, those are my comments and
I'll yield to um Representative
Garcia and Arttuor Angellita.
Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield
to uh.
My next uh expert, and he can
introduce himself.
Buenosos, madam chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Arturo Archuleta. I am the
director of the New Mexico Land
Grant Council and the UNM La
Grant Merced Institute.
A pleasure to be here this
morning and uh talk about this
important piece of legislation,
uh, as Representative Garcia
mentioned, um, this is really uh
a landmark bill that will
provide uh some stabilized
funding uh for land grant
communities, um, throughout the
state, uh, with regard to
infrastructure, one of the
biggest challenges that our
language communities have, uh,
when it comes to infrastructure
development is that
Um, oftentimes they are the only
sort of unit of government
within these rural communities
and so they provide a lot of the
services and infrastructure
needs for those communities.
But as many of you know, um, who
are rule legislators, um, it's
hard to find uh funding for
these projects in their
entirety, and so what this bill
aims to do is provide a revenue
source for these uh types of
projects that will also
alleviate uh some of the
pressures that um are
legislators and uh senators feel
um from their rural districts
trying to get these projects
funded and out the gate. Um,
they have a lot of priorities
and oftentimes let's say we have
a
Million dollar project and we
get 100 $100,000 appropriation,
or $150,000 appropriation.
That's just a drop in the bucket
and it doesn't really provide
enough funding to get these
projects off the ground. Uh, and
just to give you some examples
of the types of projects that
land grant Mercedes, um, have
needs for in terms of
infrastructure and, and work
towards that includes community
multi-purpose centers, um, both
construction and improvements,
uh, oftentimes these centers
serve as senior mill sites. They
serve as
for the youth, uh, programming,
um, as well as just communal
meeting spaces, affordable
housing projects, and the
necessary infrastructure to kind
of get those off the ground. Uh,
community park and playground
construction and improvements,
community fire department
construction and improvements.
Um, we have several land grants
that um have community, um,
local community fire departments
are part of the sort of on the
common lands and part of the
infrastructure that they
maintain, uh, and as you know,
that's become increasingly more
important as um it becomes dry.
and hotter here in New Mexico.
Economic development, uh,
projects such as the Tres
Mercedes Unida Center, uh, in
Rio Riba County, um, which is a
collective of uh land grants
coming together to try to do
some economic development
initiatives on some former uh
Forest Service properties that
were
purchased several years back,
uh, solar power installations,
uh, both on the structures
themselves for the land grants
as well as uh as economic
development, uh, community
drinking water systems,
community wastewater systems.
Historic preservation of both
community buildings, uh, this
can include also, um,
Main maintenance and upkeep of
cultural museums.
Uh, we have some land grants
that have dams, uh, and water
storage systems on their common
lands that are in need of
repair, uh, including the Tierra
Maria land grant, um, has the
Laguna del Campo, which is a
fishing lake that's open to the
general public, and that's a dam
that's in need of some repair
and improvements based on
changes in in the requirements,
um, safety requirements from
the uh state.
Also heavy equipment needs, as
you can imagine, land grants,
uh, in maintaining their common
lands and their common roads,
um, there's a need for heavy
equipment, uh, such as front end
loaders, dump trucks and
trailers, bulldozers, graders,
skid steers, uh, and then also
those facilities to store that
heavy equipment. And um with
that, Madam Chair, almost done.
Madam Chair, uh, in this
handout.
That has a list of all the land
grants.
And what they're requesting this
year.
Um, totals approximately $18
million which is what uh the
share of the bonding capacity
will be for land grants and uh
Uh, and I want to state that for
the last 4 years.
The request had been coming in
between 13 and 18 million, and
yet we the legislature have only
been able to
Fund
Approximately 5% of that.
And the reason for that man and
chair is because.
Land grants depend on local
legislators.
To fund these projects.
And these projects sometimes run
over $800,000.
The most that legislators can
apply in terms of their capital
to these land grant projects is
maybe.
Anywhere from 25 to $100,000.
Based on the needs that they
have in their communities with
other land grants and then
dozens of vaseas.
So, uh you can see that there is
this dire need in terms of
How land grants have been coming
to the legislature for
assistance.
Yet we have been unable to
deliver.
Mainly because there is no.
Permanent
Revenue stream that can really
address the need.
And so we kind of nickel and
dime some projects and projects
go by the wayside and we have to
kind of reauthorize them.
Sometimes we fall in within that
window of 3 years where we're
able to kind of get other
legislators from outside that
the districts where these land
grants are located that can
pitch in and we complete a
project that way, but that is
basically uh
Uh, the exception, Madam Chair.
So, um,
Uh, with that we
It's time for questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
Um, those materials that the
representative was referring to
at the top it says HB 330 land
grant slash Aseki infrastructure
fund Act Garcia. It's in red and
then the other one is the
Landgrad Merced and Ase
Infrastructure Act proposed
funding structure. Those are the
two that they were referring to.
And then you should have them on
your binder. Um, we'll go ahead
and ask folks online to go ahead
and raise your hand if you're
opposed to this bill.
Is there anyone opposed to this
bill in the room?
Not seeing anyone online. Oh, we
should go to the attendance.
Please raise your hand online if
you're in favor of this bill.
And please raise your hand in
the room if you're in favor of
this bill.
Wonderful. So let's keep the
comments to about a minute, um,
and we'll have the attendant
hold on to the microphone and
he'll go ahead and take it
around.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Juan Sanchez. I am president
of La Merced Pueblo de Chilili,
uh, for Chilile this, uh, piece
of legislation is very
important. Uh, we have uh
developed uh 87 parcels of
common land for affordable
housing, and we are now in the
process of uh doing 10 more.
Uh, the difference in the cost
when we started to nowadays is
really escalated, uh, for, I'll
give you an example. There's
other project we're working on
now just for the service for PNM
is going to be over $150,000 for
5 units only, uh, so this piece
of legislation is very
important. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Robert
Apodaca. Um, I'm originally
from, uh, uh, Taos, New Mexico,
uh, originally part of the
Antonio Martinez land grant and
also part of the Sea Mo in Taos
County. Um, I also do a
consulting for the psychic
commission. Uh, this bill is
very important for uh secul
online grants, you know,
throughout the state, um, you
know, I was talking, uh actually
Wesley, um, Billingsley from DFA
had sent me some statistics
showing uh he mentioned that
there's approximately
50 seconds to get funded on an
annual basis through the
capitality process totaling
about $12 million a year, um, as
you know, many of these projects
that are funded are not always
fully funded projects. This
would allow some of these
projects to be fully funded
through this process, so we, uh,
strongly support this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of HB 330.
Uh, HB 330 is important because
this infrastructure fund will
help land grants uh with um
Capital projects, uh, in our
community in Los Vela, we have a
community center that we're,
we're trying to uh restore and
to rebuild this this fund would
definitely help us to move in
that direction. So, with that
said, I would strongly encourage
the, the committee to and to
consider to moving this bill
forward. Thank you so much for
your time.
My name is Edie Quintana. I'm
sorry for that.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Pamela. I'm here
representing Farm to Table and
the New Mexico Food and
Agriculture Policy Council. We
consider this such an important
fund, um, to stabilize our rural
communities, our land grants,
I'm closely associated with the
Anton Chiko land grant, and I've
seen where um projects can be
really benefiting from that,
from these funds, even there,
and um very importantly to our
is there are waterways for
agriculture and our local food
system that is strong and
resilient.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, or members of the
committee. My name is Alfredo
Montoya and I'm a president of
La Nuease Northern Ireriva
County.
I'm also a member of the New
Mexicose commission.
And I'm the vice chair of the
Mexico Ase Association.
And I like to uh speak on behalf
of uh.
The House Bill 330.
Um
In our meetings, we're able to
to do fairly well in policy, but
we've done not that well when
you come to finances, and I'll
give you an example on my
personal alcalde representative
Sanchez has helped us a lot on
the Rose.
But we went out to bed.
And we're supposed to do 1800 ft
of silk removal, and when we
went out to bid with we had
$480,000. We ended up only being
able to do 400 ft, so we, we
came out 1400 ft short because
we didn't have enough funds and
over 180,000 were part loan,
part grant, that's what
representative Sanchez Artos
with and not nearly enough, so.
They strongly support HP 330,
madam.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Andrea
Padilla, and I am president of
El Concerco de las Mercedes and
president of the town of Toma
Land Grant, and I stand in full
support of this bill, uh, the
town of Tamil land grant is
trying to
um, preserve our agricultural
community, and this will help us
with some ditches and stuff that
we can use to have better
irrigation abilities for our
lands, and we also want to begin
some affordable housing for our
community members, because right
now what's happening is they're
being outpriced and they're
having to leave a community that
their family has lived in for
hundreds of years, and we want
to try to somehow keep them in
our community, so we will be
able to build some small
affordable homes for them to.
remain in the community and to
keep our community as a farming
community that I think is very
important to the state of New
Mexico. So please support this
bill. Thank you.
OK.
Uh, good morning, uh, Madam
chair, vice chair, members of
the committee. My name is Rick
Martinez. I'm a resident of
Northern New Mexico, a second
member and uh treasurer for Los
Alavaresunity ditch in the Rio
Chama Seque Association. I have
experienced firsthand the need
for increased funding to support
the state agencies that this
bill supports. Early in our FEMA
claim, uh, for our SIA, the
funding that supports our
experts that help us navigate
this nearly impossible federal
system ran out, leaving us on
our own. Help is needed now at a
state.
level, uh, Asecus cannot afford
to work at FEMA speed. We need
state lawmakers' help in
addressing our needs up north.
Thank you.
Madame Chair and uh
representatives, my name is
Antonio Gourlay and I'm a
commissioner uh on our Sea and
also commissioner on a regional
Santa Barbara United,
uh, Association. We are one of
18 Asekis and Penasco that draw
water from the Santa Barbara
drainage. Some of these sections
were established in sort of
1776, are ona seco was
established sort of 1776 and is
situated downriver from the
Antonio San.
the Perragua Church founded in
1866, like many of the sections
around the state.
Requesting for infrastructure
needs in order to efficiently
use the water available in a
respectivesecus in the Penasco
Valley and surrounding community
are wells are compromised
because the water table has
dropped over time. Our ability
to irrigate our fields, crops,
promotes recharging the aquifer,
thereby reducing the impact of
the well's drawing up. Water is
a precious resource that we
upstream with Rio Grande take
seriously and are considered of
all irrigators that use the same
resources.
A respectfully request your
support in House Bill 330 as it
will provide the much needed
funding for all such in New
Mexico.
Yeah. I'm Harold Dod Trujillo.
I'm president of New Mexico
Association and also president
of uh Mayasecasecala Ila in Mora
and I've had a lot of uh
experience in the last 15 years
getting a capital outlay money,
and I'm, uh, it's a really
difficult process in one of the
projects, I get $10,000.01 year,
18,000 another, 24,000 another,
and then I, I'm barely keeping
up with inflation and I cannot
do a project.
because of all the small
appropriations. I have 5
contracts with the uh with the
ISC, you know, to, to get this
project done, but it becomes
very frustrating, you know, that
you can spend a lifetime just to
do one project. So this
approach, this funding will help
us, you know, implement, you
know, this projects in a, in a
more efficient way. Also, it'll
help our communities a lot. I
would like to remind people that
the land grants and assecas are
really
The backbone of rural
communities in New Mexico. And I
think it's important, you know,
that we sustain, you know, this
communities and keep them
economically viable. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mary Kay Root Paciente
for the Placitaribaun dish up in
San Miguel, uh, we are at the
headwaters of the Guinness
River, and we have been hit very
hard cause we're in the burn
scar. We're right there where
those two fires met. So what's
happening with us is the
continued flooding means that
we're cleaning up someone else's
mess with our resources and we
are stretched thin. Thank you
for the supporting this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. Camila Romero
within Mexico State Land Office.
The Land Office stands in
support of. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. My name is
Sarah Cannope and I'm a policy
specialist with Amigos Bravos.
Amigos Bravos is a statewide
water quality protection and
restoration organization based
in Taos, New Mexico, were guided
by social justice principles and
dedicated to preserving and
restoring the ecological and
cultural integrity of New
Mexico's water and the
communities that depend on it.
We stand in strong support of HB
330, because we recognize the
important role that Esea
communities and land grant
communities play in stewarding
and protecting the waters of New
Mexico for everyone, not just
for those communities, but for
the entire state. And I think we
all recognize what makes New
Mexico different and special,
and we just think that that that
needs to be supported by the
funding to keep it that way. And
so we, uh, strongly urge you to
vote yes on this and thank you.
Good morning, everybody. Thank
you for having us here and I'm
glad I could make it. I'm
listening to the other room, but
I wanted to come in and speak
over here, so I'm here. I asked
for permission, so I'm here now,
but I am the chairman of the New
MexicoIA Commission. My name's
Mary Trujillo Mascarinas. I come
from the Penasco area, Tao
County, where we have many
Asecas and many needs.
We haven't had rain in quite a
while now, or ase's entire need
of help.
And Mercedes and Asecas are like
a family or a husband and wife,
they don't separate, so we need
your help, and that's the only
way we can tell you that.
If there's a sickest, there's
much say if there's Mercedes,
there's a sick and we work
together hand in hand, but we do
need help and I appreciate all
your help and attention you've
given us. Thank you very much.
Thank you. That looks like
that's.
There's
Um, can we allow them in one of,
uh, maybe 3 at a time, and then
2.2, absolutely.
Welcome. So we're doing about a
minute each. Thank you, Madam
Chair. My name is Monica
Rodriguez. Thank you committee
for allowing us to speak today.
I sit on the New Mexico Land
Grant Council, I'm also a a paid
lobbyist for the New Mexicoe
Association. And so it's really
important that this legislation
gets through, um, my land grant,
for example, is one hour away
from the local Walmart.
And so the, the community
depends on us to provide the
simple infrastructure you might
get in Albuquerque, like a
community center to hold a
birthday party or somewhere to
hold a meeting for our local um
our local mutual domestic. In
addition, um, allowing a second
to put water back in there and
take through the infrastructure
that they need recharges our
water, our aquifer, and it's
just really important to rural
communities if we're going to
continue to be rural. Like
myself, I had to leave
Albuquerque to get a job and
educate my child, but I'd like
to go back.
to my real community and make a
difference there. And so it's
really important integral that
we have this funding in order to
do that. So thank you again for
your time.
I was told to come to this very
important uh meeting this
morning, so I did show up, uh, I
want to thank all the uh land
grant communities that uh
continue to follow up in
particularly with regard to this
bill that has to do with uh
funding some governance and uh
and what have you, so.
Uh, I stand in favor of Miguel
Garcia and the other proponents
of this bill. Thank you. Jaime
Chavez. I'm in the Orisco land
grant.
Hi, my name is Amalio Maweeno,
representing the town of Taos,
uh, here to urge the committee
to pass this bill and support of
it. It's been.
Uh, a necessary part of uh uh an
essential part of the history
and culture.
House in New Mexico.
Thank you for your help as well,
Sergeant Arms, this was really
helpful. Um, thank you for all
the commenters. We'll bring it
over to the committee, um,
Representative Gonzalez.
Oh, I apologize. Hold on, I'm
gonna hold it. I forgot there
were folks online. Uh, let's go
ahead and start with Steve
Polaco.
Mr. Polaco, you're on if you
want m, we should be able to
hear you.
Do you hear me now?
Do you hear me now? Yes.
Yes,
uh, one Ios. My name is Steve
Polaco. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm the president of the Merce
delos Poos de Tierra Maria,
formerly president of the
Associacion dese Nortenia and uh
a signed by the government to be
the liai liaison for the Assecus
Nortenass. First of all, uh,
this bill helps our
infrastructure, uh, on both land
grants and I say, uh, we
have 5 projects going up in in
the Tierra Marilla area, uh, but
we've run across a big problem
with contractors and
professional services, which uh
prices keep increasing, um.
The, uh, another thing for the
assecas, uh, we have a head gate
that was built in the late 40s
uh on the uh main confluence on
the Rio Brazos that feed our
three asecas, the aseca and
nada, uh Los Sojos and Puerto
Renil and La Puente, which is
the 4th 1. I'm sorry I didn't
mention that, but anyway, uh, we
have a head gate that's been dis
disintegrating, and we need to
uh uh rebuild that head gate and
we need architectures and
engineers to
to help us so we can uh have
irrigation for our, for our vast
Vegas and crops for uh veg veg
vegetables and etc. and animals,
uh, as well, uh, we, um,
Uh, on behalf of the Terra Maria
land grant, we respectfully res
uh uh request your support for
the House Bill 330. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Next up we have um
Patrick Haramil, Mr. Jaramillo,
you can unmute.
Does that work?
Good morning. Uh, and chaired
members of the commission. Uh,
my name is Patrick Jaramino. I'm
a Pariante, an irrigator, and
the asequelos Garcias and San
Pedro after the Rio Santa Cruz.
Uh, I'm a member of the Sea New
Mexico Sea Commission.
And I'm also the co-director of
the American Friends Service
Committee, New Mexico program.
Uh, and I stay here in full
support. I ask you, ask you to
respectfully ask you to support
uh HP 330. I'll keep it short.
It just, it's will finally
address um
The funding issues that are se
and land grants have faced um
and it will, I think, as people
have mentioned, uh, are, these
are institutions that demons
that are sustainable. These are
the backbones of our community,
New Mexico owes, uh, everything
it has to the land grants and
the Aseys and this funding,
this, this bill would allow that
to uh to fund them appropriately
and um allow the stewards and
caretakers of the
these institutions to keep them
strong and healthy for the next
several centuries, hopefully.
Thank you very much again.
I ask you to support.
House Bill 3:30. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mm
Next up we'll go to Jorge
Garcia. Mr. Garcia, you can
unmute.
My name is Jorge Garcia. I live
here in the uh in the Atrisco
area on the secretary of the um
South Valley Regional
Association of Osecus also the
director of the Center for
Sustainable Systems and noariane
here in the uh in Loanchos
derico de Armijo here in the in
the uh in the in the Orisco area
and I'm, uh, I'm calling to
support the House Bill 330, uh
Don't you in uh in a school, uh,
the accretion of the MRGDC, uh,
left a lot of uh little uh
unattended, and without a
support to get him going and so
Bills like this BHP 330 will
help us to have funding for
thosesecus that are not attached
to the plan of the MITDC and and
there are not taking care of by
them. So the Aztecas can
actually have funding to
re-establish some of the little
Atecas that are not.
necessarily part of the larger
plan and so, uh, I strongly, uh,
encourage this committee to vote
yes for house bill 3:30. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next up we have Don
Bustos, Mr. Bustos.
Yeah,
thank you very much, uh,
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Don
Bustos. I own a small farm up
here in northern New Mexico, in
the little village of Santa
Cruz.
I named our farm after our
church, the Santa Cruz Church,
and the Santa Cruz de la Cannada
land grant.
We've been farming the same land
our ancestors have farmed for
400 years with the same
traditional crops.
We believe in feeding our
families, our friends and our
community.
And part of the way we do that
is by honoring our cultural and
our spiritual practices of
keeping the secular alive and
healthy and keeping the
community vibrant through land
grant activity.
I also represent the Rio Santa
Cruz Association. We have about
57 Aseys and over 5000 parentes.
We stand in full support of Bill
3:30. Thank you very much.
Thank you, and I believe last we
have uh Carmichael Dominguez,
counselor Dominguez.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yeah, we can.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I just
want to thank you very quickly
for giving everyone the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Carmichael Dominguez, and I
think for me it's pretty simple.
Uh, we should listen to those
members who are intimately
involved with the Arias and the
Merced community, um, they know
what's best, they know what's
needed, they understand the
intricacies of um what it takes
to get things done. So we ought
to do what we can to listen to
them and just finally real
quickly as a Nuevo.
Ricano, um, I think it's
important that we maintain those
things that are making um New
Mexico so special. And of
course, um our Mercedes and our
sekis are um absolutely a part
of that. So thank you very much.
Thank you.
I believe we have one more Paul
McSherry, Mr. McSherry.
Morning.
Um,
some folks forget that we have
an asseo on the south end of the
state and uh I'll, I'll
represent them today, uh, since
my
at least my great grandfather
was there in the late 1800s, who
knows who was there before him,
um, on the Memphis River, uh,
and mostly in Grant County. We
haven't Oseka and uh uh we'll
support the bill.
For several reasons, usually our
little projects are paid out of
pocket, to be quite frank, and
um, however, about 2 years ago,
we had some significant rainfall
down there to washed out our
ability to divert water uh
efficiently into our ditches.
We've been doing it mostly with
our own bulldozers and uh we, we
could use a little help, uh,
putting together a project to
make our diversion more.
ef fi ci ent Um, so, once again,
I support the bill and thanks
for your time.
Thank you. Uh, we have Joaquin
Aguele, Mr. Arguello.
See one of the others, uh,
Joaquin Arguello here
representing the Arroyodoriva
Community land grant in the Taos
area. Um, we, we, uh, are here
to support this bill, um, for
many reasons. One of them I can
mention is, uh, we've been
tasked with carrying the sero
Forest council thinning project,
which was initially a Forest
Service grant for 4 years for
300 acres. Um, and because of
just the current state of our
environment to.
Um, we had to as a land grant,
uh, carry it and learn how to
manage it and deal with, you
know,
Um, the good intentions of maybe
the county, but also just the
very slow, um, reimbursement and
processing and and and fiscal
realities, which often um put us
at a huge burden, um, one,
because we're volunteers, we're
a volunteer board, but two,
there's way more work than than
we can get done through small
piecemeal type approaches, and
especially with the summer
coming, I think a bill like this
would be crucial, not just for
us, but we were fortunate to
have this this model replicated
throughout the um
circle, all throughout northern
New Mexico and in the Forest
Service was really big in trying
to sponsor and replicate this.
So, so having a bill like this
that could help us address
infrastructure needs even in the
natural environment, whether
it's on forester lands or Merced
lands or on private lands,
really helps maintain the
ecology, um, the historical
ecology.
Uh, not just of the land, the
trees and the water and the
asseas, but our own, right? Our
own place-based ecology as
people, so we don't have to
worry about having forest fires,
um, destroy us or or vacation
homes or, or any of our
infrastructure. Uh, with that,
I, I turn over my time. Thank
you.
Thank you. I want to thank
everyone again for all the
comments and everyone, uh, you
know, respecting kind of
everyone's time. So I really
appreciate that. I'm gonna turn
it over to discussion amongst
the debate among the committee,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I do echo the sentiments of many
in this room, um, but I just
have a question is maybe um just
some thoughts as to how do you
think that this fund um would
affect capital LA requests, um,
you know.
I myself, you know, within just
a second alone, um, I think I
received like over a million in
requests from Justice Seki here
in my district. And so, but with
a fund like this, do you see a
decrease in those requests
trying to um streamline the
process a little bit better,
trying to make it more
efficiently for distribution,
um, you know, so that in turn
maybe ideally those funds could
be allocated, you know,
elsewhere for other capital
projects in the region. Thank
you.
Madam Chair and Representative
Gonzalez, thank you for that
insightful question.
In, in my estimation, there
would be if you had this fun in
place, there would be less of a
demand for capital outlay. I
think this is especially
relevant for rural legislators
because there are so many needs
for basic needs for
infrastructure in your
districts.
Um, I'll give you an example of,
of what happens with a second
capital outlay. Usually the
projects that, that Ase has come
to your, to their legislators
and ask for, for support for
our, um, typically a diversion
dam or some type of, of major
construction project.
Um, with the, the new prices
with, with inflation of what
used to be 150,000 is now about
$250,000 and um in, in a rural
district if you have only uh say
a million dollars to give up for
all your district, you probably
won't be able to cover the full
250. So what happens is
legislators will fund a partial
amount, 10,000 or 25,000. And
it, it's, it's, it's not a good
situation for anybody. It's not
good for the state, it's not
good for the Asea. And so you,
you tend to
see unfinished projects, um,
through this fund, what we would
anticipate is having a reliable,
uh, recurring funding source
thatsecus could apply for and,
and I think as policymakers, it
would make sense to direct
asekis toward the fund and not
necessarily toward Caly unless
there's a, a gap that can be
met, but really keptley should
be the fund of last resort and
that this would be the preferred
mechanism to get funding to
AIAS.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that answer. And I
also didn't mean to leave land
grants out. I have quite a few
from them also in this year. But
um thank you. That answered my
question.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
I.
We're quick in this committee.
Thank you, Madam, Thank you
representatives.
Uh
A few questions.
Is this, are these?
Beam chair represented are these
for are these gonna be loans?
Or grants or what is the.
That they apply for through this
fund.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
this would they essentially this
is capital dollars in the sense
that um it's still severance tax
funds, um, so it, it just sort
of instead of having to have
each individual legislator
appropriate those funds, um, a
portion of the bonding capacity
would be set aside for potential
um funding of projects um from
the severance tax bonding fund,
uh, and so it would be similar
to any capital appropriation, it
would just be a capital, a grant
um from the.
Tax bond fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
uh,
So
The applicants will still have
to abide by all the compliance
and, and, uh.
Audits and things to apply for
these that they do for.
Cattal outlay rules of basically
the same.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that's correct. Um, there will
be, uh, part of the process is,
is having to set up um the
actual promulgation of the rules
and, and what will be required,
it'll still have to go to uh
land grants and the sets that
meet those, uh, requirements of
the reporting under the State
Audit Act, um, as well for the
land grants, they have to submit
their annual budget reports, um,
so all that will have to be done
in the projects themselves will
have to be certified uh as being
ready to proceed to
construction, um, or maybe if
it's a plant design.
I'm ready to go out to bid for
those services, uh, prior to
them selling the bonds. And so
once, you know, that has to get
certified by the state board of
Finance, um, and then it'll take
place in one of the two bond
sales, um, so that the state's
not paying any interest on
projects that aren't ready to
roll.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative. One question I
have.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, of
course, in my
District
We have no
Executives my grants.
Those type of
Of deals and uh.
And in this avenue then.
We
In the old ways, the capital
outlay, you know, the
representatives from the land
grant areas pretty.
Pretty well funded the projects.
isn't that right, uh, madam
chairs representative.
Representative, uh,
In some cases, yes, but we have
other funds that fund these
types of initiatives already,
so, yes and no. Right. And I
get, get the late end of my
question represented uh.
In my area we don't have these,
but we have lots of in
unincorporated villages and
towns that have basically the
same needs.
Be thee and land grants do in
the northern part.
You know, I made a list just in
50 miles of.
My house we have weed pinon
local hills like.
Like Arthur Hope Mayhill and
that's just.
I mean within an hour driving
distance of where I live.
You know, there's
I tried to look it up somewhere
in the 30 or 400, probably at
least.
Unincorporated
Villages and towns.
That are not land grants
Ezekius.
Against my, my lady, madam chair
and Representative why part of
them, why can't they?
Access funds for their projects
also.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
as you see in, uh, like Rep
Silva is running a study to
incorporate chapera, uh, your
Ares can do a similar process. A
lot of these land grants have
gone through the process of
passing the bill to become a
political subdivisions.
So there's a process they could
follow to get access to this
money.
OK, uh, Madam chair
representative, if they're
They have
You have to be incorporated to
access these funds.
Madam Chair, you have to be a
political subdivision, from what
I understand.
Thank you. It, uh.
I'll have to thank you for that
info. We'll have to look into
that.
It, uh, but, you know, to me,
Madam Chair represented, you
know, this bill is a lot of
money and it's.
For a specific
Area
So, I mean, kind of carves out.
The others that are in similar.
Um
Desires and it's funded by.
The entire state
You through 7 tax money.
Madam Chair, uh,
Mason, I'll be happy to support
your bill for your
unincorporated uh areas if you
go through that process so
represent wouldn't it be easier
just to amend and let them apply
to the same source of funds.
Madam Chair, our rep Mason, uh,
maybe, but, uh, I guess we'd
have to look at the legislation
when you bring it forward.
Thank you, thank you much. No,
it's uh and I will look into it.
I mean, you know, nobody's gonna
disagree that all of these.
Y'all's land grants and secs.
Uh,
If
have needs and
And I just wanted to bring up
the 3rd, not the.
Only ones in the state of New
Mexico, there's hundreds of
other.
That are not included in this
that have just as great a need.
Uh, let's see what else I've got
here.
Uh
and
Madam Chair Representative, uh
oh.
On these funds.
I heard her say that kept a lot
la will be decreased in this.
And are these?
Grants or something, is there a
minimum?
I mean, are they for projects?
We, we talked about the larger
projects we can't get funded.
Is there gonna be a
Is there any like 100,000.
At least by um, I mean,
Project or a maximum amount of
money for a project.
They can be used by this fund.
Madam Chair Representative, he
said, uh, those will all be set
as part of the sort of the rules
promulgation, um, at least in
terms of the land grants, the,
the intention would be to be
able to fund full projects, so
whether it's the full project
cost is $100,000 or the full
project cost is um a couple
million uh like in a new
construction, uh, the intention
would be to be able to fully
fund those projects so they can
get up and off the ground as
opposed to sort of trying to
piecemeal them and then you
don't ever get a complete
project, um, Madam Chair, and
I'll yield to uh.
also for this I guess.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason for the
AEAS, it would be similar that,
that, the subject of
Caps on projects would be
addressed through rulemaking.
To give you an example with the
Interstate remission, the
current executive Bureau, uh,
the fund that they administer
currently has a cap of 250,000
and that
That um
Generally covers the, the, the
need, but they may reconsider
higher, uh.
Depending on how things go. And
I just wanted to, to uh make a
comment on a prior question that
you asked about the um
unincorporated communities and,
and I'm, I'm personally
sensitive to that topic. Uh, I
was, I'm a former county
commissioner and uh there are
tremendous needs in rural
communities, but I think one
thing that distinguishes um
counties and uh um.
In small towns is that that they
have a tax base and at least,
you know, the unincorporated
communities can, can potentially
um
Um
The addressed through counties
or, or they can incorporate, but
what's what's really different
about uh line grants and the
second is is that we don't have
that taxing ability that other
local governments have just that
address as part of your
question. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
question back to her, Madam
Chair.
The, the land grants.
And Ezekius's Kate, they're not
in a county, they don't.
I mean, some, some of the
counties they're in have tax
bases also same as.
That's correct. uh, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Do they get any funding through
the counties generally ours.
Um, Madam Chair and reps of
Mason uh uh for a second is
generally no.
Um, the counties typically have
too many other needs like roads
and other infrastructure.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
Madam Chair represent I guess
what I was more interested in,
I'm not too interested in
capping the top end.
Of the fun, you know, because
who knows what a project's gonna
cost.
But I guess my theory was
Is it gonna be burdened down
with 250 and $30,000 request
that we've traditionally
addressed through.
Or kept the Lala projects. I
tell my.
Little towns down there don't
put in big requests because you
won't get because we won't.
In our area between me and my
other reps Madam Gerson, we
commingle our funds. We won't
start a project unless we can
fund it.
You know, if it takes 5 of us,
it takes 5, you know, because
From our area, Madame Chair
represented, we have a lot of
trouble with those those
requests being.
Line item out if we don't fully
fund them, but uh.
So I guess my question is, is
there a
Will they nickel and dime this
fun to death almost on the low
end.
Instead of going to the capital
request and that.
Josepher
$30,000 for.
I mean, you know, you know what
I'm saying.
I don't want it to be too big a
burden the small end.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason, I can address that
question from the perspective of
the Aseques and how the current
ISCSI bureau uh deals with
projects and that, that program
is um very specific to a psychic
construction projects and they
have to have a complete design.
So, um, the first round of
funding is for engineering
design, and then only after they
have an engineering design, are
they eligible to apply for the
construction phase.
And so that's one of the reasons
that they're able to have a
higher completion rate and the
success rate is that, that the
funding they get is adequate to
fully fund the project and the,
the projects that they're, um,
undertaking our, our
construction projects that
require
tend to be larger in size. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just to close, you know, with
uh.
No, I have no
No problem knowing that the need
is there.
And uh
The, uh
The needs are great, especially
with the, the disasters we've
had.
And even the executives in in
our in the redosa area and
stuff, you know, they've they've
all been impacted.
Greatly by the
Natural disasters of the last
few years and.
Those projects
That I wasn't interested in
necessarily in capping the top
end more or less.
Just keeping it from being a.
But we need $5 to go buy Coke
let's put in for a.
But uh
Madam Chair, representative,
thank you much.
Thank you. Uh, we have ranking
member Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you experts. Good to see you all
again. Good to see everybody
here. Uh, I do a few quick
questions on this council that
we're going to be putting
together on page 2.
Uh, I'm sorry if you redress
this. Who's going to be the
members of the council and how
will they prioritize anything
that needs to be handled.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, uh
Representative Lord, uh, are you
referring to the, uh, the land
grant council? I'm looking
on this bill, hold on, I'm on.
I.
Yes
I'm on
page
2, it says page 2, new material
line 22, section 3.
There's a council powers and
duties.
Oh
Look, everything changed
Madam chair.
Representative Lord, that, that,
uh, yeah, that's referring to
the land grant council, which is
already in existence. This is
just giving them the additional
authority um to be able to uh
promulgate the rules, um, and
oversee those projects, but the
council itself is already in
existence, um, and they're 5
members that are appointed by
the governor Madam Chair,
so what you're saying is those
people would now be involved in
this process of of of the
entirety. Is that correct? I see
head shaking already back there,
Madam Chair, represented, that's
correct. OK. And so, uh
people
Understanding the land grant, I
would assume would have a better
understanding of what the needs
are.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Represented,
that's correct.
Um, mentor representative looked
down, um.
Hold on, I do have a question on
the amount of money.
So on page
5
Will you help me uh understand
when on July 14 and 7 10% of the
average of the year, the market
value of $55 million. Uh, can
you explain that a little bit
more to me because I always get
confused when there's these
tents in the portions and the
parts.
Madam Chair Representative,
yeah, it's a great question.
Thank you. Um, and they're in
your packet is also a sort of
little cheat sheet that sort of
explains the fund. Um, it's this
little
Uh, handout here, um, so there's
kind of two different mechanisms
that are involved in this bill.
Uh, one of them is the uh
severance tax bond and it's 1.1%
of the bonding capacity and then
what you're referring to on page
5 deals with the trust fund
portion, and so it is a little
bit wonky um and I'll try to do
my best to sort of walk and
explain uh what this does. Um
the trust fund is sort of
something that would hopefully
be built up over time and then
if um if we ever get to a point
where the severance
tax bonding capacity is
diminished. Um this will in the
future be able to sort of
continue to to fund those
project funds, uh, and the way
it works is that there's kind of
two different criteria. One is
money put into the fund, and
we'll sit there until it reaches
the principal balance reaches $5
million. And then at that point,
uh 3% of the earnings would be
distributed into the project
funds on an annual basis, in
order to keep sort of that fund,
the corpus of that fund growing.
And that's um subsection B on
page 5 and then subsection C,
um, when the fund, and this is a
weird way that that um that they
do it, um, and I agree with you,
the, the percentages, um, and
apparently 4. 70% is essentially
how much earnings would have to
be made on an annual basis to
get that um dollar amount to be
around 5 million in and so what
that means is that if the fund
in my understanding of the math
is that if the fund
The trust fund would ever get to
rough roughly $17 million then
that 4 and 70% would be enough
to keep that fund of 5 million
distribution from the fund and
then also allow the fund to
continue to grow. And so C
doesn't kick in unless it gets
to that point, until it gets to
that point, you operate under
subsection B, which is just 3%
of the total earnings on the
fund per year.
So, Madam Chair, uh,
representative Exford, I have a
really stupid question.
Does that money go into a fund
where it's earning interest. Is
that where that is going?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
so for the trust fund that's
created, that's correct. That
money would would sit in the
front and it would um have a
principal corpus and then they
would earn earnings and then,
you know, you'd only draw from
that. Um, in the initial years
and for the foreseeable future,
um, the way that we would fund
these projects would be through
that 1.1% bonding capacity for
the land grants in the 1.1% set
aside for the Aseas. And so what
that means is that the, the, the
total bonding capacity in the
severance tax, uh.
Bonding trust fund, um, 1.1%
would be set aside or earmarked
for these projects, but it
doesn't necessarily mean that
those funds will actually be
funded, um, as I mentioned
earlier, the, uh, what'll happen
is 1.1% will be set aside, which
is roughly 19 million is what
sort of the estimation would be,
let's say, in this year, uh, and
then for those projects that are
certified and ready to roll,
bonds can be sold up to the $19
million and then at the point
that the bonds are sold is when
the projects would actually be
funded.
And then interest would start
being paid on those uh bonds.
Otherwise it's just uh more of
like a math game on paper and
there's no actual impact and the
funds would that money would
still remain in the sevens tax
bond.
Thank you, Madam Chaser that
clear as mud explanation.
I kind of understand. The only
reason I ask is because there's
another bill coming in the
Senate side where they want to
set aside $1 billion.
Behavior's like, yeah, we like
that, see. But that earns a a
tremendous amount of interest,
right? So that's what I was
trying to say if this is going
into account for the interest.
So when there's projects, uh,
manures that have to be
completed and the council
saying, OK, this is a priority,
you know, let's take it, we just
had the big fires is huge. How
how does that work get
contracted out. It it will the
council be responsible or what
entity is going to be
responsible for hiring the
people to do work or.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, um, they'll be sort of two
separate processes for the land
grants and for the assekis, um,
and for the land grants, I, I
can speak to that, and then I
can turn over to Paula and sort
of talk about how the process
works. Um, for the land grants,
it really depends on the
capacity. Um, we have some land
grants that are phenomenal at
taking these projects on on
themselves. They have the, the
institutional capacity to with a
little assistance from the
council, but they're able to put
the projects out to bid. They're
able to go through the full uh
procurement process on their
own, um, and then we have other
language.
plants that are maybe still
building capacity, and we
provide them more direct
assistance and help them through
that procurement process, helped
him um go through whatever that
is, whether it's just, you know,
start the design and engineering
or if it's to even just to draw
down on the funds. So they will
be supported throughout the
process, um, and it'll just
depend on the capacity of each
land grant in terms of their
ability to, to fully execute the
project, and then I'll yield to
Paula.
Thank you.
Mearian Representative Lord for
the EEA,
the, the, the um
Uh, bonds, uh, when the funding,
funding is available, um, it
would be administered by the
Interstate stream Commission and
SEA Bureau, um, but it's the,
the interstate stream commission
currently, um, it's a, it's a,
it's a, a commission that's
existing agency, um, and they
currently operate a small fund
that gets about 2.5 million a
year. This would supplement
that. The way that one operates
is that the Aseki Bureau has an
application process and the AIA
Bureau has
Um, technical staff that rank
them according to to merit and
Project readiness, and then they
present a work plan
excuse me, of projects that have
been deemed um ready to proceed
And the, I mean the stream
commission approves the work
plan. And in that work plan,
there is a set of engineering
design projects and then there's
a set of construction projects,
um.
If this were to proceed and
there would be an additional um
uh uh funding available through
severance tax bonds, that would
be the body, the interstate
stream commission that would
approve those projects, um, for,
for proceeding to uh uh to sell
the bonds so that there would be
um uh there would be a set list,
there would be a dollar amount,
and you'd know exactly which
projects are getting the funds
in terms of implementing the
projects, the execu bureau also
administers those and so the,
the projects that are chosen,
the individual is sick uh play a
role in terms of the
procurement, but all of the
expenditures are approved
through the execute bureau at
the Interse Stream Commission.
So, so there's um a fair amount
of work that the Asea has to do
on their own, but they also have
some administrative support
through the SEC bureau. Thank
you for that explanation, Madam
Chair and Representative. So
with this whole project, um, is
there, and I, I'm sorry if I
missed it, there probably is.
Is who is doing the oversight,
the ultimate oversight on the
projects and are they gonna come
back to report to us or who
they're reporting to about where
this money has been spent and
where that it's going.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lord, um, I can explain how the
current system works with the
Asseki Bureau, um, every time
that there's a project that's
funded by the AEA Bureau, um,
there are a number of approvals
that have to be made by the SEC
bureau before the Eze can spend
funds. Um, so the, um, there is
a, a high degree of oversight
throughout the process, um,
once, once there's been a, a
contract to sign.
collected, the funds are
obligated. Um, the AI has to get
approval from the executive
bureau before the expenditure is
actually made, so there's,
there's a, a reasonable degree
of oversight for, for those
projects and um
And periodically through the
year, at least at the end of the
year, uh, fiscal year, the
executive Bureau reports back to
the Interstate stream Commission
on the status of those projects
and for, for the most recent
completed fiscal year, which was
um which was an overall work
plan of about $6 million. That
was about a 90% completion rate.
Anything else on that?
And representative um there is a
reporting.
section on page 8. OK.
Section 8
921.
That kind of clarifies your
question in terms of
The council reporting the
legislative interim committee in
terms of the status of the
project and likewise with the
Asecas, uh, where the
Um, Interstate commission kind
of really uh
Um, a second bureau reports
directly through the legislature
in terms of the status of the
projects.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That's always
good. I always check on that
with every single bill because
sometimes money goes out.
And I never hear about it again.
It just went off into the abyss.
Uh, Manur representative, I, I.
I know that there's a lot of new
material here in 12 and on page
13.
I'm on page 12 where it starts
with a new material.
Um
How does this change from how
things are and how this Madam
Chair representative make things
different with the new wording
that you're putting there on.
H and I on page 12.
What is the end goal with that
and how will that make that
different? How will that change?
What is, how things are working
right now.
Anybody.
Beer
bedroom chair, uh,
representative.
Lord, this, um, so this
essentially provides the
authority for the state board of
Finance, which they, which they
do for other projects now, uh,
for example, with the um other
project funds um set of sites
that exist for the tribal
infrastructure funded for the
water projects and, and, um, Pro
Colonia projects. Uh, and so
what this just essentially does
is it authorizes the state board
of finance, um.
To authorize those projects that
are certified and sell the
bonds. So when I mentioned
earlier, there's that 1.1% um
the set aside once those
projects are authorized by the
state board of Finance, they can
then sell those bonds and then
transfer the proceeds of that
sale into the individual project
funds for either the land grants
or the eass, so that they can
then begin the projects. And
that's all this language does is
authorizes them to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
experts because we had a lengthy
3-hour discussion about bonds
last night, so we are now.
And had a nightmare, I think
about bonds last time we went
through bonds extensively last
night. So, uh, the only thing I
want to say is I appreciate you
bringing this forward. Uh, I
know with my land grants, um,
There's a lot of infrastructure
issues that need to be dealt
with, and there's, I don't know
if all of you have been out to
Langret, if not, I highly
recommend that you do because
There's some very obvious
infrastructure issues and
there's a lot of issues that
need to be dealt with and dealt
with quickly, not like we have
to beg for $50,000 to represent
more to, to get, you know, a
chainsaw. So
This will more than likely help
with the land grant and the asse
issues of getting to the money
more quickly and and and
streamlining the process.
Because what I found from seeing
that, I mean, I saw the pictures
of the assass which were
destroyed after the fires, it
just all mud, you know, it's
just big mud pit and
everything's been destroyed. And
I think there was some issues
too.
On one of the land grants that
also was having a safety issues
and literally sometimes it comes
down to them. I'll volunteering
to dig holes and dig ditches,
which still do, and this is what
I love about the land grads,
man, there's an issue they'll
handle it, but there should be
assistance on this stuff as well
with things that need to get
handled and, and projects that
need to get completed instead
of, you know, 5 people out with
a shovel digging this stuff out,
breaking their backs, get things
done. So because I hang out in
the land grants a lot and talk
to other people.
land grants, I know what the
issues are.
And I'm going to support this
because I believe this will help
streamline the system to make
sure that the infrastructure and
the projects get handled, uh,
quicker and with more
efficiency. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Great, thank you. I appreciate
this, you know, at the, we have
a lot of infrastructure issues
that come up, um, and you know,
obviously the state level, I
think we can move a little
faster, so this is wonderful to
see us really investing in the
infrastructure that our state
needs. So, um, with that, I will
entertain a motion.
I move.
Uh, we have a motion for a due
pass on House Bill 330 as
amended by Representative
Sanchez, seconded by
Representative Lord. Uh, let's
take a roll call vote.
Representative Cullen.
Representative Gonzalez. Yes.
Ranking member Lord, yes.
Representative Mason? Yes.
Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado.
Yes, you with the 60 you have a
due pass. Thank you to the
committee.
Thank you
so it's kind of weird to be
adopted this one.
So this is the 16.
We're gonna move to House Bill
135 housing study requirement
for LIDA funds.
Um.
So should we skip that bill?
Should we skip that film
so we're going to skip that
building. Yes. OK.
Yeah, tell her to come down.
We're gonna do the next one
right now, yeah.
So, uh, we're still waiting for
the um sponsors for House Bill
135. Uh we're gonna move to
House Bill 315 archaeology
fielded at school education
program. Uh, looks likesentative
Dao is here.
Adam Chair, I'm really hoping
that my colleague from the right
side of the aisle will not table
my bill today.
all.
I make no promises in the
committee process,
Representative.
Did you want to hand those to?
Representative whenever you're
ready, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, um, this bill,
you would think that we would
already be doing this. Um, when
I used to have Grant County,
Louis Tarasas is not here this
morning, representross has asked
me to carry the bill for him,
but I'm very familiar with the
issue and very happy to support
this bill, um, when I served
before, I had Grant County.
There's 146,000 sections of land
around the wildland urban
interface, the WUI.
Just in Grant County on the
Silver City side of the Gila
that has had the biological
inspections has had the
environmental inspections. They
passed every single inspection
that they need other than the
archaeological survey. That's
the bottleneck. We do not have
enough archaeologists in our
state. And despite the very,
very generous funding that we're
putting towards fire mitigation,
fire recovery, wildfire research
center, all the things that
we're doing. The bottlenecks,
the archaeologists. That's
That that is one of the major
bottlenecks that we have. They
can only physically walk or
physically cover a certain
amount of land per year. It's
very expensive. We're trying to
grow, uh, feel workforce demand
jobs and what this does is
creates the paraprofessional
certification that New Mexico
used to have, it brings it back
and within just a 6 month, up to
6 months, depending on the type
of certification, uh, Debbie
Hughes will explain that. These
folks will be able to
work underneath an
archaeologist, get out in the
field and help us cover. And I
think a good example that
Representative Trassas would
explain to you if he was here,
is when he has a a community
meeting on how are they going to
stop a wildfire from impacting
Silver City.
hundreds of people show up,
including trail groups, tra
trail clubs, including people
who kayak in the Gila,
including, uh, every single monk
from the monastery up in the
Gila our volunteer firefighters.
They would sign up for this
class, and they would volunteer
their time to help cover the
ground so that they can create a
defensible space. And my expert
witness is Debbie Hughes with
the Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, they
operate at New Mexic under um
the NMDA at New Mexico State
University.
And so she's going to talk a
little bit more about the
technical process in the bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, Debbie Hughes on
the
Executive director for the New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, so the
soil and water conservation
districts and uh we do work very
closely with USDA, uh, the
Natural Resource Conservation
Service that brings a lot of the
farm bill money here, but even
with that, uh, we have a hard
time having enough
archaeologists to do this work
and so, uh, when Rebecca wanted
to and the other sponsors wanted
to do this kind of thing. I
contacted the For service and I
was able to talk to the very top
person in the Forester.
it's over, uh, New Mexico and
Arizona and um she was very
supportive. In fact, she said
she had actually taught this
before and what this would be,
it would be like a 2 to 3 month
course. It's not necessarily a
college course, but it has to be
done under a trained
archaeologist, so we would have
to have a, a trained
archaeologist to actually do the
schooling, but she told me for
somebody to go and get the
degree to become an
archaeologist, that they're
still required to do this field
school, she called it. And so
she said this
was a great step and of course,
right now, federal uh hiring is,
is banned and so Forer was gonna
hire 4 or 5 more people, uh,
USDA Natural Resource
Conservation Service was gonna
hire more and they can't, so
they are very supportive. We
also met with cultural affairs
and SIPO, which is the state
historic preservation, and they
were very supportive. They said
this would help their work here
in the state. And so, you know,
if we can encourage more people
to be interested in this
possibly help get.
these jobs done on the ground so
we can do more thinning and
other kinds of projects, then
maybe some of those people will
also go on and become a, a
trained archaeologist. So that's
the goal is to try to help cover
these projects and get more work
done on the ground. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we'll look
online. Is there anyone opposed
to this bill online, please
raise your hand.
Is everyone opposed to this bill
in the room?
And uh online, is there anyone
in favor of this bill, please
raise your hand if there's
anyone in the room in favor,
please raise your hand.
And the attendant will take it
around. Please keep your
comments about a minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gillian
Joyce. I am government relations
for Rocky Mountain Farmers
Union, and we stand in support
of this bill. This will allow us
to do time sensitive
conservation work, allow our
producers to stay on schedule
and allow us to be better
stewards of our land while still
protecting our historic
resources. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Jim
Berlear, registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Association of
Soil and Water Conservation
Districts and for the reasons I
stated and many others we this
is a necessity to have this
implemented in New Mexico. I
just got off a two hour phone
call with the NRCS and they sent
11 contracts up today that are
waiting on archaeological
clearances just in our little
district at home and there's 47
districts in the state. So let's
say NRCS money.
For service BLM, all the federal
and state funds that are being
held up if we could get this
passed it, get a lot more
conservation on the ground.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexican farm and Livestock
Bureau, archaeological studies
are essential in managing,
preserving our land while
facilitating necessary wildfire
recovery and fire mitigation
efforts. Uh, so we do stand in
strong support of the bill.
Thank you.
does not look like we have
anyone online. It looks like
we'll come to the committee, um,
Representative Mason. Thank you,
Madam Chair, represented, uh.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I, I feel that it is a
need basically, Madam Char
representative.
This is just
In order to move our projects
forward to completion, I mean
we're just in that basics of the
bill.
Uh, only other real question I
had the funding is gonna go
through New Mexico State
University.
Is there a reason?
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, because the water districts,
it goes through the regions, New
Mexico Department of Ag is
located under the regions and
then within New Mexico
Department of Ag is a so and
water conservation districts. So
they will get this out into the
districts.
OK
Thank you representative Madam
Chair.
Uh
Good luck.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I'm so honored
to have
uh your support today.
Oh, he's not through yet. Oh,
good luck.
I missed the emphasis.
I believe that was a question
representative. He didn't have
to respond. Sorry, all good. Um,
I'm not seeing any other
questions. I'll entertain them.
Uh, uh, ranking member Lord.
Sorry, uh, real quick, on, on
this, um, is this a one-time
mask or is this going to be
reoccurring, Madam Chair and
Representative, we are hoping
that it, it becomes grow money
and it's, we're doing catch up
and cleanup today. It is
something that we're asking for
and there's a lot of support
behind it, so I'm hoping that it
becomes grow money. OK.
Or it's added into House Bill 2.
And thank you, Madam Sharon
Representative, and I wish you
guys would come out to Sandia
Park and and do an analysis on
this huge 12,000, uh, city,
12,000 person city that they
want to build right up the
street on Campbell Ranch and say
no because it's gonna erode the
water and there's archaeological
dig sites, uh, and we don't need
that there. So just say thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, are you
referring that to the folks that
are here from the Office of
archaeology.
and with Shippo behind me they
are here to answer questions.
I wish it would go out there
because I'm, I'm sure they,
they, uh.
Original people lived on that
land, and I'm sure that there's
archaeological digs and before
they destroy it and take all our
water and erode the land. I
would love for you guys to go
out there and look at it and,
and find a bunch of digs so that
they can't build 12,000 houses
with no water in my district.
Thank you.
representative, I did, I should
have mentioned this is also
addressing a housing issue. If
you are on tribal land, you have
to have an archaeological survey
before you can build a home or
own a home. So this also is a
bottleneck for native
homeownership.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Uh, I believe,
I'm not sure if I'm saying it
was a Tiwa.
That lived in that district and
they lived there for a very long
time, and I'm sure that there's
all kinds of archaeological
stuff just laying out there on
dying to be dug up on the ground
of Campbell Ranch in Sandia Park
on Frost, uh, on 14 across from
Paco. Just saying thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass.
We have a due pass motion from
Vice Cha Sanchez and a 2nd from
ranking member Lord. Um, is
there any opposition objection
to that to Pa?
Seeing none, uh, please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative, uh, you have a do
pass on house build uh 315.
Thank you.
sure.
Great. Next up, we're gonna go
back to 135 housing study
requirement for LIDA funds, just
as a reminder to the committee,
we had heard this bill and we
rolled it for later. There was
an amendment already on it. So I
believe they're going to bring
forward another amendment, um,
is what we're anticipating. Um,
and so if that is the case,
it'll be twice amended with the
amendment that we did.
Previously, and then the new
amendment should be adopt that
one as well. Just wanted to give
everyone an update on how that's
going to look. And if you want
to see the old amendment, I know
Barbara has some copies as well.
Oh, fantastic. Thank you.
All right, Senator, welcome to
uh Rural Development land
grants, Cultural Affairs. Glad
to have you back, Roger. Um,
please, uh, uh, thank you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
it's good to be here. This is, I
believe it's the first time I've
ever been in this committee. So.
I'm glad to be here. Um, as you
know, I'm covering for
Representative Ortez, we are
co-sponsoring this bill. Um, of
course we don't have to look at
anywhere to see that housing
affordability has been um just
really crucial for New Mexicans
recently and when we create new
jobs, we should also figure out
how these new jobs are going to
affect demand for housing.
That's why we proposed this
bill. Concerns were raised by
the economic development
department about the cost of the
housing study, um, and
amendments.
to address these concerns,
limiting the cost of the study
to 75,000 and the requirement to
conduct the study to projects
above 10 million, um, and so,
uh, I would like to, well, I
can't move the amendment. So I
would like to offer the
amendment, um.
So that you can discuss the we
discussed the amended bill.
We have a motion to discuss
amendment and I believe it's
230928.1, is that correct? Wait,
no, wait, am I wrong? No, no,
I'm the wrong one sorry yes
2230563, Madam Chair, member of
the committee. Do you have it?
OK, so that's we're going to go
ahead and discuss that
amendment. Are there questions
from the committee or uh do you
want to, uh, note anything about
your amendment?
I just noted it, it limits the
cost of the study, study to
$75,000 and it only
Uh, applies this requirement to
projects worth more than $10
million. Is there a discussion
among the committee?
Representative ranking member.
So it should be here and then
this.
And, and I did, I did.
Thank you. I know how that is.
There's so much paper.
And Madam Chair, finally, the
cost of the housing study um.
That doesn't exceed $75,000 will
be reimbursed by the department
upon the award of public
support.
So it's, it's just to, like I
said, we need to understand,
doesn't that way the local
governments and everybody can
kind of understand what the
impact of the project is going
to be in housing and so they can
prepare for it. Um, I know in
Albuquerque when the base, I
worked with the bass, for
example, um, which is in my
district now because they're
having um some housing issues
and so we're getting together
with the local governments and,
and working on it. And that's
what this does is it makes this
issue.
um, puts it out there, makes it
transparent so that people can
um
So that the relevant policy
makers can do something about
the housing needs, both of the
project and also of the people
in, in the
That are there.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Senator
and out I remember senator not
representative, so I apologize
if I, OK, so on page 8 line 25
after project, we're gonna
insert if the amount of the
public support requested by the
proposed economic development
projectceeds $10 million. So are
you saying that like, like that
would
So now we're taking out somebody
who's gonna open up.
A coffee shop with, with the
small project and now this is
gonna be for a project that
exceeds $10 million more like a
Netflix. Is that what we're
trying to get with this?
Absolutely, Madam Chair,
Senator, I mean, uh
representative if you have the
same issue. I know it's
absolutely, uh, um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, yeah, this
is not, this is not about the
coffee shop that's that that's
this is about the Netflix and
I'm from Valencia County and um
people are trying to talk my
mother into
casita in her yard because she's
got, you know, it's just, it's a
problem, um, and they, the Los
Lunas is really trying hard to
work on it now, but it would
have been good if they would
have had
No, a little bit more before,
before Netflix went in, they
would have, I think, had a
better planning for this.
Yeah, I remember that. Uh,
sorry, Madam Chair, Senator,
there was something that we
just, I remember somewhere a
dream or something there's
something about putting casitas
and allowing that, changing the
zoning. I remember going through
that before. Um, so on page 9,
line 2, the cost of housing
study pursuant to the subsection
shall not exceed $75,000. So if
I'm understanding, we're now
putting a cap saying the maximum
amount, ma'am Chair and center
and expert that the max they'll
have to pay is 75,000. So is
that going to be a sliding scale
based.
On
Something or is it just that's
the that's the cap, but I will
turn it over to my expert about
how he envisions um
The cost.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Lord, it's, it's just a cap,
the, the consensus amongst the
experts that that I've talked
with is that the cost would
never exceed about $45,000. They
ranged between 150 and 45, so
this would simply limit it and,
and they could recover that cost
if they're successful from the
proceeds.
OK, and manager and
representative that is senator,
um that is the cost that they
pay.
And do they get oh, that's
further down, sorry there,
sorry, on page 1 for the cost of
housing project pursued the
section, so that, and that'll be
reimbursed by
The project that leader funds.
In the lead. OK, and the last
question I have, um, Madam
Chair, Senator, if the amount of
public support requested.
the pro proposed project to see
10 million. Can you explain it
to me because I, I'm not
understanding that at all. I'm
sorry. I'm not understanding the
public support or or what, what
this is stating public support
is the money that is granted in
the LIDA project. That's what I,
I, I understand what you're
saying, but I was like public
support, of course, being
politicians, we think of the
public supporting us, but no
public support is the words that
are used to describe the money
that is awarded to the project.
In, in other words, taxpayer
funded support.
So Madam Chair representatives
so taxpayer funded support.
Requested by the proposed
project.
And I, let me go back and look
at how does this change what is
in the bill currently?
It's simply requires an
economic, uh, it just, it simply
requires uh an analysis of the
impact of housing, because when
the project comes forward and,
and it's built out.
So that's right now, um, they
put a, put together a proposal
and
It, it's vetted and decisions
are made about whether the
funding is going to be given to
this project, um.
There is no requirement now that
the project analyze what the
impact of it is on housing, and
I'm sure they'd want to know.
Uh, I'm sure they would want to
know that there's going to be
sufficient housing.
For their project what this bill
does is it allows them to look
at that question for themselves
instead of just relying on
assurances, um, that, oh yeah,
housing's not a problem.
This way they would uh do the
research themselves and
determine whether housing's
gonna be sufficient for their
project and what kind of impact
it's gonna have on the local
community.
I'm sure it's all the questions
I have on the amendment.
Give us a moment. Sorry. Do you
want me to ask some more
questions I really had a high
expectation for you,
um, yeah, I'm so I'm gonna turn
it over to, uh, uh, Vice Chair
Sanchez we had an amendment
where we insert it 2.15%.
Right.
So that should be taken out in
the new amendment, right? Do we
do that?
I don't know that you ever, did
you admit the other amendment?
Yes, so we adopted the previous
amendment and you did. I, I'm
sorry, I had no idea.
So, um, I will take the part of
the chair, and what I will say
is that, uh, I will entertain
emotion to uh remove
amendment 0.2300463.1 to remove
that from the bill, uh, is, and
that will be um uh an amendment
that we make here right now on
the fly to remove that.
Uh, is there a second to do or
is there a motion to do that.
0, we don't need uh we, is there
a second to make the amendment.
Thank you. So.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment?
OK, so that is so moving.
I moved to adopt the new
amendment. So now we're going to
go ahead and adopt amendment.
Uh, 0.230563.1, uh, is that is
moved by vice chair Sanchez.
Seconded by
Uh, uh, Representative Gonzalez.
And now we will take a roll call
on your amended on House Bill
134 as amended, as twice
amended.
3 times amended today.
Uh, I just want to add real
quick, uh.
Rep Lord, were you here for the
last hearing? I can't remember.
OK,
My concerns were, uh, we needed
uh.
Just to get the big guys, so
that's how we did all this, so
thank you for putting this
amendment. OK, so, so we're on a
do pass motion by uh
Representative Ravi Sanchez,
seconded by ranking member Lord
on House Bill 135 is thrice
amended. Uh, is there any
opposition to this?
To a no to a pet, oh my gosh, do
we not up this.
Or just the amendment. You're
right, you're right. Sorry,
because we're doing so many
pieces. So we've adopted the
segment, we're on a uh a do we
need a motion to adopt, uh,
0.230563.1. So we're on adoption
of that amendment so moved by
Vice Chair Sanchez. OK, is there
any opposition to adopting that
amendment?
Great. So that's, so you have it
mended bill.
Sorry, was that was just some
fun here. Now, we have a now
what my a motion.
From vice chair
I moved to pass on the
3 times amended House bill.
Second. And OK, so we have a
motion on a do pass on House
Bill 135 is thrice amended,
moved by Vice Sanchez, seconded
by Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you committee and everyone
for your patience. Uh, is there
any opposition to this due pass
motion. OK, so we will go ahead
and go to a roll call vote.
Uh, Representative Cullen.
No, and explanation.
Uh, representative Gonzalez.
Yes.
Uh, ranking member Lord.
Uh, no, with a brief
explanation.
Of Representative Mason. No.
Sanchez? Yes.
And Madame Cerrado.
Yes, 33. So you have a tie vote,
so your, your bill is rolled
until later. Thank you so much.
Um, I, I apologize actually we
need to go to Representative
Collin for an explanation of
her.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
at my position still stands is
the first time that we had read
the um the bill is that I don't
believe it's um where the
businesses should be doing.
These studies. So thank you.
Uh, Representative Lord, thank
you, Ma'am Cherry. I appreciate
all the changes. These were all
the changes I wanted to see in
the bill. However, I got
bombarded by people in my
constituents that still were not
in support of the bill. So I got
to go back and look to see what
that issue was. Thank you.
Thank you. So we have a little
bill. Thank you. Thank you
everyone for your patience as we
navigated some of those
amendment pieces, um, that is
frustrating,
but I, but I appreciate the
committee's collaborative to
make sure we're doing it the
right way. We have one last one,
HB 326 small business disaster
relief tax credit, um, from our
very own Representative
Gonzalez.
It's you.
There will be no singing today.
Just kidding.
Doesn't count. I didn't hear it.
when you're ready.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I do want to make a note that I
have submitted an amendment for
consideration.
Is there a motion to discuss the
amendment, and I have here got
230928.1.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
That's, I've got questions on
the amendment. I just got it
handed a motion to discuss the
amendment? Yes, OK, so that was
moved by Rick Lord, uh, uh,
representative, can you
introduce your amendment? Um,
yes, no, this amendment was
presented, um, in response to
some of the um analysis
suggestions, um, particularly,
um, number one, does better
define what a declaration of the
governor would mean. Um, number
2, specifically eliminates,
like, should we be in
a, uh, a COVID-like scenario
where it would encompass all of
New Mexico, takes that out, um,
number 3 and number 4, both
clarify the, the duration of
the, the comparison to receive
the tax credit. Thank you. Um,
and it looks like ranking member
Lord has a question on the
amendment. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair, representative. So let me
go to this. I always ask
questions on the amendments.
Nobody take it personally just
because I'm trying to get
clarification on what is
happening. So, uh, on page 2
lines 5 and.
6, strike declared by the
governor as a disaster.
And insert in lieu therefore.
For which a governor's state of
emergency. OK, so you're, so if
I'm clear about what you're
asking mentor representative.
The governor doesn't declare a
specific thing, a disaster.
Instead, it's the governor does
a state of emergency for an
event. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
yes, that is correct. It was
just better defining the
declaration and the definition
of what would be a declaration.
That makes sense, Madam Chair,
because otherwise it would have
to be this lightning bolt hit
this building versus this is a
state of emergency from all the
lightning bolt. OK, got that.
Um,
And Madam Chair representative
line 2 page 7 after the
semicolons cert provided that
the area for which the
proclamation is issued.
Shall not encompass all of New
Mexico. So can you explain that
just a little bit and how that
changed the bill, um, Madam
Chair Representative, um, a
concern brought up in the, in
some of the analysis was that um
they should we have a situation
say similar to a COVID pandemic
where the entire state of New
Mexico would be in declaration
of a state of emergency, that
that would be a, a greatly large
financial burden. So it was just
um remaining true to the intent
of the bill, which I will
describe here in a minute, but
the intent of the bill.
That it remain um geographic and
that it remained per situation,
not necessarily if something was
to encompass the entire state,
likely there would be additional
aid or additional proclamations
made for. OK. I think the rest
all make sense, ma'am, so I just
said clarification on those two
things. Thank you.
I move, can I move to adopt the.
There for discussion?
Um, you can go make the motion,
uh, Madam Chair, I moved to, um,
Adopt adopt the amendment.
Seeing no opposition, you have
an adopted bill.
Uh, now, Representative, uh, do
you want to present your adopted
bill?
Oh sorry, your amended bill. I'm
sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives, um, today
I'm here presenting um House
Bill 326, which essentially is a
small business tax credit for
those businesses that are in
affected areas of a governor's
state of emergency proclamation.
Um, I live in Las Vegas, um, we,
we more than most have been have
literally seen a state of
declaration of emergency every
year since COVID, um, going from
COVID to fires to flood, to
blizzard, to
Water, um, and as it would have
it, um, my witnesses today, we
are in another emergency due to
another cascading event from an
emergency. Um, these effects are
far wide, they're far-reaching,
they're long lasting, um, in
certain emergency situations,
um, there is FEMA relief and
some of our declarations, there
is not, um, in our case, many of
our small businesses are still
waiting on FEMA dollars. So you
have areas this last year that
hit Roswell, that hit Riaoso.
Um, even when FEMA money comes
and goes, um, long standing
effects on our community
long-standing effects on our
businesses are still there. Um.
Years later, right now, you
still have issues with rising
insurance costs. You have issues
with um employee retention, um,
you have issues with patron
retention, um, so this is just a
small credit poultry in the
amount of really what the cost
is to these communities just to
really give gratitude and thanks
to our small businesses for
staying in the community, for
choosing to remain in businesses
in these disaster, disaster
areas, um, and encourage
them to remain in business in
these affected communities. Um,
I do want to make note that some
of the
Some of the analysis was given
that some decisions were made in
the bill were very intentional,
um, for instance, um, this, this
income, this tax credit, um, was
intentionally put in as a credit
versus a prior deduction so that
it would be an immediate relief
to our small businesses. Um, it
was put in at this amount to be
fiscally prudent, very aware,
um, that I do not have the
privilege of an interim putting
this in, um, understanding that
um,
A larger amount not really being
able to understand the impact
that this could be and what that
cost would be to the state. Um,
again, should this tax credit be
successful, which
I, I would predict that it would
be, um, it would prove as
intended. Um, then later, you
know, should this be, there
would, there could be means to
amend this and give, you know,
give the greater reach, um, and
reaching out to my small, small
businesses in true small
business heart, um, each one of
them, even if they do not even
qualify for this credit because
their revenue generated is
higher than this would allow.
Every single business was in
support of this because
You know, if it meant one person
was making payroll, if it meant
another small business is kept
from closing. If another small
business was, um, made a
payment. It was worth doing and
it was worth bringing up. Um, so
that is the basis of the credit.
It just really is should a state
declaration occur, um,
That we would give a $5000 tax
credit given, um, some other
specifics of the bill are given
that the gross revenue.
is under $2 million and using
similar language, a lot of the
language also adapted was in
previous tax credit legislation,
um, it was also put in there,
um, due to some other COVID
relief packages that were
passed. Um, it does have a
requirement that business be in
business for 2 years, again,
having that comparison here and
showing a 30% decline in
revenue. So, um, and then the
statement, the wording in here
is due to the disaster, but
essentially, um, as evidence,
what I have seen.
The Declaration is declared for
the county, say in San Miguel
County. You may not have
actually physically experienced
the flood yourself, but you
still have a lot of those
effects. You still have your
rise in insurance. You still
have your decline in patrons.
You still have people moving out
of the area. And so again, the,
the, the issues that were
brought up in, in critique were
very intentional to be put in
there that it was meant to be
all encompassing of the
geographic declaration area. And
with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online in opposition to this
bill?
Is there anyone in the room in
opposition to this, seeing none.
Is there anyone online in favor
of this bill?
Is there anyone on uh in person
in favor of this bill.
One commenter, please keep your
comments to about a minute.
Thank you, Chair members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, standing in strong
support of this bill. It's a
critical lifeline for small
businesses in New Mexico that
face unexpected hardships due to
natural disasters. Small
businesses often struggle to
recover from these, unlike the
large corporations, as they
don't have the financial
reserves to weather these long
disruptions. This legislation is
fiscally responsible and
business friendly. It ensures
that relief is targeted with
only businesses that operated
for at least 2 years and have
suffered a 30% revenue loss due
to
declared disaster can qualify.
It keeps New Mexico competitive,
ensuring that we stand by our
entrepreneurs.
By supporting this legislation,
you are supporting economic
resilience and community
stability. I urge you to vote in
favor of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, seeing no further
comments from the public, I
believe we have a question from
ranking ranking overlord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, representative. You
have a non-controversial bill so
far.
Very good.
So far. Uh, the question I had
when I looked at the FIR there
was some questions that were
also asked by the Department of
Justice.
The problems that they had were
uh a couple was definition.
Was that addressed because when
they say first bill does not
define a disaster area. Have you
thought about that? Has that
been addressed? Like what?
How, how are they going to
define the disaster? Um, so,
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I did run that through our
drafters, also through um but I
was given that this disaster,
this, this the language has been
used in prior legislation and it
has stood up, um, and in the
given declaration, it does
include a disaster area in this
language is concurrent. It, it,
it, um, collaborates with the
with the language because I
could see that being a problem
if, if they said in the East
Mountains.
That is a disaster area and then
we would have to define.
What the area is, and that makes
me a little nervous when I leave
it to other people to define,
but then again, if you say
within a 20 mile radius or the
3, you know, I, I can understand
that, but that might be
something that it's where, where
does this bill go next, um,
Madam Chair um this bill I
believe does go to tax and rev.
OK, yeah, they're gonna ask you
a bunch. You're, they're gonna
get,
oh, have fun. Madam Chair, Madam
Representative. No, I was
prepared for that and I did, um,
I did ask them and so they.
did provide the previous
legislation and then they, the
drafters, um, Texan rev that
this was language that was
concurrent, um, and they provide
other statues where it's at, so,
um, I do have for for some of
the other issues in here, I do
have existing statutes to
compare that to as to where some
of the language is pulled from.
Yeah, that was, uh, some of the
issue, other issues, um.
That they had in here was also
if a business is listed.
As well, people can list them in
Delaware technically because
it's a better tax exemption.
But the business is actually
located in the area where
there's an issue, then how would
that be?
Address, ma'am and
representative because how, how
are they going to go in and
explain, yes, it's listed in
Delaware, but it's in uh Cedar
Crest, New Mexico. Um, there is
language in here saying that
they have to be in the area that
they, that the disaster, they
have to be located in the area
that has been affected. Also,
they do have to be claiming New
Mexico income taxes to be
eligible for this credit. Madam
Chair and represent, that was
one of the issues they had on
the significant issues, uh,
which could become a problem as
this moves forward.
I support the bill, but, uh, the
New Mexico Department of Justice
said in Section C1 provided to
be eligible for the credit,
taxpayer shall be an owner of
the business, which they can, so
somebody could technically own a
business, a coffee shop.
And
across New Mexico, pay taxes,
but then their LLC and possibly
their residents is in another
state. So how, how would that go
through the process and how
could that be? And how would
that hindrance in that hurdle be
handled when they go to put in
for this disaster relief.
Or, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Representative, um, on page 2,
Lane 5, number 1 is located in
the area declared by the
governor, um, I was assured that
the language is located in an
area with sufficient enough, but
prior to, should this pass,
should it go on to the next
committee? I will definitely do
my due diligence if we need to
do anything to strengthen that
language, um, I will indeed do
so. Thank you, Madam
Representative.
OK, thank you, ma'am. I would, I
always when I have a barrel
that's moving forward, I always
look at all of those things
because they're gonna get
brought up. And I know
especially in taxation, they're
gonna go through, because I've
heard enough taxation to last a
lifetime on the floor.
That usually there is, how is
this applicable? How is this
happened? How, how is this going
to affect
The tax board, how is this going
to affect all these things and
they're gonna go through a
million different scenarios with
you, uh, on the taxation side,
uh, that most of the like I
said, how you apply this in that
situation. So just be prepared.
They're going to expect you, and
do you have Madam Chair, do you
have a
Tax expert that's going with you
to present in your next bill. I
do. I have a local business
expert right now. They are
currently tied up in Las Vegas
right now with the water and
dealing with their home
emergency. So a lot of my local
representatives are not here
with us today, but, um, should
this continue and should this go
on to text and rev, I will have
experts sitting beside me here
men it's very technical, and I
know even on little things like
there's a bill that's going
through right now with the safe
and, and giving.
Tax credits on that and that
actually died last time, it's
progressing faster this time,
but that died last time because
of how it's going to be applied
and there are so many steps and
tacks and rev just be ready for
that in that next.
Maybe that
They're not always the easiest
to get things through because of
how things work. Anyway, that's
all I had to say in that. Thank
you, Madam Chair instead of.
Representative Sanchez, Madam
Chair.
There's a motion for a do pass
on House Bill 326 as amended.
Seconded by ranking member Lord,
uh, is there any opposition to
the Du pass motion on the bill?
Um.
I think, I think that being
said, uh, you have a, a, um,
seeing no opposition to the due
pass motion on House Bill 326
your bill passes as amended.
Thank you.
That's the last bill we're
hearing today. Thank you,
everyone. Uh, we'll see you
again Thursday morning. I think
we'll stay at 9 o'clock if I'll
look at the bill, see if we need
to move to 8:30, but I'm gonna
try my best to keep it at 9. and
then, uh, we'll catch you all
about committee dinner on
Wednesday.
Thank you.
Yes, tomorrow. Thank you. Uh,
committee is adjourned. Thank
you.
