President.
Representative Montoya.
President.
Representative Serrato.
Here.
Mr Chairman isn't that.
Members we we just have one
built today Representative guy
and goes kind of rolled over her
bill but then shortly after she
did that she just kind of
basically withdrew her bill from
the session so we won't be kinda
entertaining that bill.
For the duration of our
committee hearings so we'll
start with the one bill that we
do have
No you'll be.
I'm basically putting on House
Bill.
two six one four percent of
Not the he's gonna try to fund
his transportation committee
there with our House Bill three.
Interpretation budget so that's
understandable Representative
Castellano to put on House Bill
two six one.
you and data for this fund
creation additions.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
concluded this bill like a
German center for a
Representative Madrid the
essence of house bill two sixty
one is availability to help
unincorporated community center
shop online New Mexico to take
on the opportunity coming on
incorporated city for the
consensus combined of the
University of New Mexico this is
an important question begins to
set the foreground to
establishing parameters in which
we will become the City of shop
around thank you and Mr chairman
we have one amendment to house
bill is house bill.
Representative customer can you
read the.
The number at the bottom left
see if it corresponds with the
copy we have yes Sir it's point
two one nine nine zero zero
point one that's what we have
And members are hello.
Basically moved to entertain the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
mainly because it's it's the
it's the bill.
And otherwise I'd be dealing
with the amendment after.
Our presenter our witnesses
present and that's that Sandra
so Representative a Castellano
are are you are going to present
the amendment or is your witness
going to do that
I guess the witness will be
doing that Mr Frank copper
Mr Chairman met Marion or Mr
Cutler you yourself and
and kind of explain the bill.
in a general sense not in the
item by item sense number Bethe.
All right Mr Chairman for for a
couple of thank you very much
can unite and identify yourself
on Mr cobbler.
Yes for a couple of
I am on.
You're helping of Representative
Madrid because I represent the
Anthony water sanitation
district which provides water
and wastewater services up into
does your chair in desert air is
up in two.
Representative Madrid's district
of a part of the chaparral the
chaparral area.
Representative Madrid is asked
me to look at the incorporation
statute of because he is
interested in.
Putting forth a citizens
petition under the statutes two
form a municipality of city of
chaparral I understand they have
around fifteen thousand people
down there and Mr Cutler when we
hold off in terms of your
they're all presentation until
we kind of adopt the amendment
okay let me quickly you have the
amendment with you Mr coupler I
do and let me just quickly
explained that the amendment is
a technical amendment.
Are requests by the University
of New Mexico because in the
federal we refer to the bureau
Business and Economic Research.
As being major.
Is is being the source of the
information that we would find.
And they.
Corrected that to read
geospatial and population
studies group throughout the
bill so it's just a technical
amendment that changes the
source of this population
information and corrects it yes
in the bill pursuant to UNM's
request.
Thank you for that Mr Cutler and
I know that the.
That suggestion also as
mentioned in the FIR minutes
also mentioned in the agency
analysis
UNM did.
Some members
A questions discussion on the
amendment.
Seen on is our opposition to the
amendment.
See none
The amendment is adopted.
So now we have an amended bill
the Representative Castellano
and
Mr Cutler
Feel free to elaborate on the
legislation as amended so if you
would like to start from the
very beginning in terms of what
you've already shared with us go
right ahead and and and and and
continue to elaborate on the
significance of the legislation
and.
Of and Representative month
reads initiative in terms of
bringing this legislation
forward and your role in this
process as well so Mr copper you
we've got the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman up the
reason I was requested to create
such a bill is because of I did
I've done the work on
incorporation of up nine or ten
do municipal governments over
the last thirty years including.
Up north angel fire Red River
tell ski valley in over in San
Juan County the town of Kirtland
of we incorporated that some
time about five years ago I also
did the work incorporating
thirty thirty five years ago the
city is on the park in about
the.
Eight years ago the city of
Anthony which is just south of
chaparral and so.
Representative Madrid got a hold
of me and said that he would
like to initiate a petition to
go ahead and incorporates
chaparral.
These incorporations are but a
citizens petition and under the
current law.
The county commission.
Has the right to require cash
from the citizens volunteer
citizens has the right to
require cash from them to do a
census and census can be defined
as an exercise where you get
trained to census takers at
significant expense and you have
those trained census workers go
into the community and go door
to door and count and recount
until you have personally
verified through it census taker
each person in the each
household
that can be a very very
expensive proposition and so now
of this census this cash deposit
for census requirement has been
in the loss since the nineteen
fifties.
Now however we have modern
technology and modern research
institutions that are able to
of.
Provided that information on a
geospatial basis and what we
mean by that is that under the
statutes under incorporation
statutes.
The citizens.
Pretty much prepare a petition
and the petition must be there
must be attached a map showing
the boundaries of the proposed
municipality and so.
The UNM of.
Operation has the ability to go
into their database and tell you
how many people live in that
boundary and I understand that.
Is available as a matter of
service by the university of New
Mexico I contacted the lobbyist
for you amendment of Saturday Mr
Thompson.
And he was kind enough to send
this bill onto UNM and they gave
me the language for this
amendment that you just the that
you have in front of you and I
don't have a definitive action
answer on what it would charge
but I can tell you for sure it's
going to be a lot less than what
it would cost to do a door to
door census with census takers
now that's all this bill does
all this bill does is substitute
the cash deposit for a census
for this availability of the
data through UNM that's it it
helps these volunteer citizens
who would go door to door and
asked people to sign a petition
for incorporation because the
volunteers don't have that kind
of money so I I I'd I don't want
to beat this thing to death it's
a simple bill and that's what it
us.
Thank you Mr cobbler
Is that the it on the
presentation Representative
Castellano.
Yes Sir Mr chairman.
Okay I'll go to
I go to the audience.
and
Those that are it Dale Steyn
opposition and those that are in
support.
I don't see that many people the
attendee list so I'll go to the
audience
short of doing our Paul.
And asked those in attendance
who is in opposition to this
legislation.
raise your hand.
There is a little hand icon.
Very we're not doing the ball.
Those wish to speak in
opposition there's a a a a raise
hand icon at the bottom of your
screen.
I don't see anybody those in
support I would like to our
address the committee in terms
of support for the legislation.
raise your hand.
Those in support I would like to
address the committee.
raise your hand.
I don't see any hands going up.
if they come up during the
discussion by the committee
all the recognize them.
Members of the committee.
The question discussion we have
Representative Black.
Thank you Mr chairman
Thank you Representative
Castellano for presenting this I
am kind of bummed that
Representative Madrid is not
actually on here so I could ask
him some specific questions
about chaparral
but let me ask Mr copper.
In your past.
History with with doing this for
other communities.
You Sir do you know is there
going to be an issue with
incorporating chaparral because
it's because chaparral process
to counties do you know is that
an issue.
Representative is current is
that correct I'm sorry lack.
Thank hopes are.
I don't have the names and
phone.
Mr Chairman Representative Black
no there's not an issue the
current law takes care of that.
In that the current law provides
that we're as in chaparral as
you very astutely pointed out
the area goes across the county
line of.
Dona ana county and Otero
County.
And the.
As a matter of fact we that's
not unusual in New Mexico in
Espanola New Mexico just north
of Santa Fe Espanola crosses the
county line Rio Arriba county
and Santa Fe County.
And so the current incorporation
statutes which we do not change
with this bill allow the
boundary.
Of chaparral to be drawn.
To include both sides of the
county line and then the
petition goes to the county
commission either Dona Ana or or
Terrel where the majority of the
land within the proposed
municipality lies.
That's the way it works and
that's the current law.
Thank you for that Mr copper Mr
Chairman.
Okay so you said that it it goes
to the county commission where
the majority of the land sets is
that correct correct majority of
the land students within the
boundaries of the proposed
municipality and those
boundaries are drawn at the two
by the citizens at the time they
prepare their petition and those
boundaries are also what will be
needs to.
Request the data from U. N. M.
under this bill with respect to
the amount of population.
So once those boundaries are
drawn you got to population
numbers then you take the
petition to the.
Board of county commissioners in
which the majority of the land
within those boundaries Law.
Okay well thank you so much for
answering my questions Mr
cobbler that's all I have thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Black next we
have Representative the line.
you so they don't think he
stated thank you Mr chair I want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this this bill forward
I think that I know this very
very well and it's one of the
most
Areas in our state that you to
help and I think that the the
development of of of this for
the surrounding area would bring
economic potential this very
very needed in the area and I
just want to say support is a
thank you.
Thank you.
Further questions discussion
members.
I know I've got some questions
I know that the.
The analysis kind of our.
Don't kind of really reflect
the.
The fiscal impact.
In terms of whether UNM.
the spatial and population
studies group.
is able to kind of be able to.
Find these resources.
to these communities that are
initiating incorporation efforts
because.
This bill
Also it affects the whole state.
So this is this bill is not
exclusive to drop out rate.
and and some communities that
have initiated.
Russian efforts.
Ben Salazar financially well off
in terms of the organizing
group.
very easily four.
thirty or fifty thousand dollars
census.
And based on the population I
think it's estimated that.
The cost up around like maybe
around twenty to do that.
And
So I took it upon myself to
follow up with you on M..
And
left a message with the
geospatial and population
studies.
Group office and haven't heard
from them but I also brought it
to the attention of the lobbyist
when the lobbyist for UNM and
And he kind of
hasn't provided me with any.
With with a solid.
Answer in terms of that impact.
So
You know there's nothing really
kind of impeding.
this initiative in terms of.
From UNM then I see no reason
not to move this bill forward.
and
And kind of
maybe have those issues come up
in the next committee but I
think in terms of what our
committee can do I think we've
done basically all that's been
asked of us even coming from UNM
themselves okay in terms of
changing the language from
bureau to the geospatial group.
And and I know for a fact that
the geospatial population
studies group is a very
competent group.
They were left for the longest
time by Dr dalli contact.
she's the one that oversaw.
Our incorporation effort there
in the south valley in two
thousand and nine.
And which we did have to pay for
US Census.
And fortunately I was able to
use your money to pay for that
fifty thousand dollars census.
And it's something that
doesn't happen.
We cannot use general fund we
cannot use capital outlay for
census.
But also in the process Mr
popular is is that you guys have
to also submit a
A feasibility study.
in terms of the GNU municipality
to be able to sustain itself so
how far are you.
Along in that.
In in that in that analysis Mr
copper have you already done in
a feasibility study.
On the ability of Chapada to
kind of stand on this on two
feet.
If it's incorporated
or just forty cent where word of
course as does the organizing
committee currently stand in
regards to that.
Thank you Mr chairman of with
regard to that the I have
started the study up.
Just as a little bit of
background Mr Chairman the
Anthony water and sanitation
district out of Anthony we went
ahead on a citizen to petition
and annex desert air of for
those of you who are familiar
with the area down there does
are there is a there is a not
very on wealthy community of
just out of chaparral so the
entity wanted sanitation
district provides water and
wastewater services up in two
districts.
Right now the area in on
chaparral is provided water and
wastewater systems.
Services by a private company
the the issue going forward of
course it will once you create a
municipality is you have to
provide those five services that
are listed in the statute and
three of those services you have
to show that you can find
through the study that you're
referring to Mr Chairman and so
the fundamental of the study
will be to look at water and
wastewater because those are
essential those are building
first they're the first building
block to providing community
services and then we are looking
at the local businesses with
respect to the gross receipts
tax and also looking at the.
Small cities assistance money
that you all appropriate each
year as well as money that may
be available in house bill two
the junior to get these.
Fundamental services that are
required as you pointed out in
the feasibility study that
feasibility study under the
statute as you as you probably
recall from your experience in
the south valley goes to the
local government division of the
department of finance
administration in unless we
prove in that feasibility study
that the municipality is
financially viable we cannot go
hit but we are working on the
feasibility study as we speak
with respect to the issues that
I mentioned.
Thank you for that Mr Cutler a
and Representative Castellano
The other thing that that kind
of comes to mind is
You know again.
In the we knew we had to do a
pretty concise usability study
there on FY at the school that
was the name of the muse valley
that we were giving the south
valley which is kind of the
historic building it goes back
to the sixteen hundreds that's
what the Spanish called the
whole valley backed them by the
at the school and
the other thing the
is that we we had a few our
feasibility study done by the
Ramos they're at bureau.
And I don't know if she's still
around but she did an excellent
job under feasibility study in
terms of that yeah we did have
the necessary resources to move
forward and the ability of the
G. R. T. to me
the ex the the expansion of.
Our police force are.
Municipal governments are fired
and actually we had water answer
there already.
but again you know I I paid for
that we pay for that piece of
the study gender money.
H. R. which we we you know we
can do that
The the other thing Mr Carter
comes to mind in this effort is
that you have a dual County you
have to jurisdictions that are
going to basically
Comprise the municipality how
does that how is that reflected
in the election.
Is there going to be like a Lee
County that oversees the
election or or is it gonna be a
tool election in both counties.
It'll only be one election Mr
chairman in the way it works is
that when we filed the petition
the majority of the the land
within the boundaries of the
proposed municipality the
majority of that land that's
where we go in other words if
when we get our boundaries drawn
up there's Landen Otero and
there's land in Dona Ana within
the proposed boundaries of the
municipality if more of the land
is in Dona ana county the
petition goes to Dona Ana County
and done in a county is
responsible for running the
election even though the voting
booth is set up to accommodate
people in both counties it's one
counties will run the election.
Okay and that leads me to a my
last question regarding the
election is
Does the onion the county have
the resources to call the
election and to
basically
find.
All the resources for that
election on the incorporation.
Thanks.
You Mr chairman that's a very
good question that's one things
we have to work out in detail
and that's one of the things
that the team the financial.
Responsibility team financial
feasibility I'm sorry
feasibility team at the FAA
before they approve this to go
forward to election they're
gonna have to look at those
issues of does the dynamic
county court clerk have
sufficient money in their budget
and how are we going to do this
are we going to do it with the
voting machines how are we going
to do it with the you know all
mail ballot of that those kind
of issues that will be on part
of what the team looks at.
Yeah.
And you know Mr coupler
representative quest'anno on.
We knew going into our
incorporation effort in the
south valley.
That there would be some back
resistance from the county Irma
County.
and
so.
So again.
Provided you need to pay for the
election.
That way that way there won't be
any any headaches in terms of
trying to get the county to.
You know the address that issue
resources and
and and and and and I guess that
leads me to my last question Mr
Cutler and Representative I
stand on
what is what is the opposition
is there is there a kind of a
organized or not organized or
maybe just the US small local
group
I mean the you know what what
are what are what are you guys
looking at in terms of.
The the the whole population.
in terms of being support have
you guys done some some polling
maybe very informally terms of
that this is what the majority
of folks are saying they want to
do our third or is it.
It's just what is what is the
the landscape.
In regards to pro and con on
this effort right.
That's a very astute question Mr
Chairman Representative Madrid
tells me that he has run down
there I think three times check
my memory but I believe he's run
for election three times for
state representative down there
and all you know a big chunk is
votes of courses and chaparral
which is the area where he I
understand he lives.
And so he tells me that
throughout his three election
campaigns.
the first time we ran people
were you know when he talked
about the potential of
incorporating the municipality
of chaparral people were sort of
well we don't know we don't know
about that we're doing okay
right now it's centers center
Representative Madrid tells me
the second time you ran and was
you know talking to people with
respect to the same questions
they became more and more
informed and the and then he
tells me the last time he ran
because of the issues that I'm
sure you're all aware of with
regard to the president and the
main on the main source of
revenue and employment it
etcetera etcetera.
Up here he said.
You are now aware of that they
need to have a.
This is Representative Madrid's
language I hope I'm perfect
phrasing it correctly.
He Representative Madrid told me
that the people are more and
more aware of the need for local
government so that they have a
local government Representative
at the table in Dona ana county.
In order to face the issues and
the issues that Representative
Madrid is facing is the
prison and have them they wrote
the the road situation trying to
get a transportation.
Network to serve chaparral we're
a lot of people that are there
opportunities for jobs you know
if there's issues with the
president are going to be in el
Paso which is twenty miles
straight south and of getting up
in alternative method of getting
to a passerby sites that.
Interstate up so all of those
issues transportation network of
jobs consider a need to be it
can't can only be addressed as
Mr Madrid told me Representative
Madrid at the he talked to his
constituents and they're more
and more and more interested in
looking at incorporation he and
he believes that there's a lot
that that any opposition that
was Harris is fading fading
fast.
What thank you for that Mr
Cutler and
You know and and and and mostly
you I don't think Representative
Fajardo was on board yet but.
Back from two thousand five to
about two thousand.
Come on Garcia.
There
There was a this really unique a
group of it was like a network.
this high school students.
from throughout the state.
That would meet.
And the and there was there was
some coordination by some adult
groups
And the these kids.
would basically have a a yearly
forum in the summer.
And
and what they would do is a they
would identify okay so capital
outlay project.
In our lives in their
communities.
And this was this was statewide
you had kids from the northwest
from the northeast from the
central area from the south
these from the southwest
well represented it just wasn't
one basic population area or
region.
And
These kids has a really
incredible projects their past
was to come up with a capital
outlay project for their area.
And
The kids from the ground up
but blow.
Came up with a really incredible
proposal of the needed some a
couple of bands to transport
students that say after school
for extra curricular activities
etcetera etcetera.
there was an initiative to kind
of address.
Child childcare childcare
centers in some of the
communities in the the in terms
of providing that service for
their parents.
and in chaparral and there is an
amazing group of high school
students.
That we're proposing help your
project was assistance from the
legislature in terms of capital
outlay for a community center
they have not.
And
The
They were real convincing.
And one of their arguments was
that.
They have no local government in
Tripura.
Where they can go to a
municipality.
And seek funding.
You know to kind of help them
with their and and this
initiative is that they have
nowhere to turn to accept the
legislature.
And so they saw the merit of
kind of
this process that you're trying
to unfold
The kind of become a reality at
some point in time.
And and you know.
About a dozen of us legislators
different parts of the state.
Antifa contributed to that
initiative you know now about
our has a.
A community center.
So I just kind of wanted to
compliment Mister are you Mister
popular and this organizing
group
in terms of moving this
initiative for because it's well
deserved and and I think the the
the rules are there to kind of
really make it happen and I'm
almost sure that some of these
young individuals in the
community would really jump on
this opportunity the kind of our
think that type of local
government happen even though
they can't vote.
You know but in spirit I feel
they'll they'll do everything
possible
to kind of a assist in that
endeavor if it's registering
people if it's getting people
out to vote if it's you know
putting out the message you know
through their different networks
and encouraging their mom and
dad their uncles and aunties
support this initiative you know
that's what it's all about.
we do have one other member has
questions Representative
Montoya.
Good morning Mr chairman and
representatives I.
Applaud the support that
Representative Castellano is
bringing to date to
Representative mother it.
As a rural representative I
understand the the importance of
incorporation I have been
meeting very closely with very
small towns and villages and
frontier communities and in this
time as we emerge from COVID it
is so important that we give the
small regions any tool to lift
their economies the social
determinants of health I applaud
it in a rise and support I yield
back.
Thank you representative further
questions discussion members of
non what is the wish of the
committee.
Move to do pass.
We have a do pass recommendation
by residents of the line in the
second by Representative Fajardo
is there further questions
discussion.
Mr chairman up for us or before
I take a vote the I'd like to
kind of recognize Representative
Castellano harms to popular for
any closing remarks.
I do I just want to make sure
the motion includes the
amendment Mr we've already
adopted the amendment Mr okay
sorry I'm sorry thank you.
Representative Castellano Mr Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you and I think
that you know supporting rural
communities and small
communities is is a very
important thing that you know I
I vote for and in my campaign
and I just want to thank you
guys for supporting me on this
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you representative members
as their opposition to the do
pass recommendation.
Seen that the record reflect.
that are all those present voted
in the affirmative
consent because they are non Mr
popular you have a do pass
recommendation on house bill two
sixty one as amended.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you Mr
chairman.
And members that that does it
for today we have a full agenda
on Thursday.
So I know what it's get the skis
out before we start our section.
It kind of spin around the
neighborhood Harper and on the
ranch you know.
In our skis thank you members up
as you all have a great day
thank you for sharing this you
all to.
