Representatives Madam Flo
leader, Representative Zamora.
Here.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Here we have a.
Thank you. We have a quorum, so
let's go ahead and begin with
house Bill.
111
And we'll do a little bit of
housekeeping while uh
Representative Matthews makes
chair. We are gonna rule House
Bill 260 at the request of the
sponsor.
And we will roll that to Friday.
So with that representative
Matthews. Go ahead.
Thank you Madam Chair um.
I'm Marion Matthews and
represent District 27.
And with me today is uh my
expert Bree.
Richard, Pritchard, who is
Uh, service dogs in New Mexico
and Academy of Canine
Excellence.
Yeah
Uh, Brion Pritchard with Service
Dogs from New Mexico and Academy
of Canine Excellence.
OK and
Ma'am sure, members of the
committee, thank you for letting
us proceed, um.
This HB 111, uh,
Arises out of an incident that
happened on July 28 last year in
where there was a water main
explosion on the street next to
the home of Rose Romero in
Albuquerque. Rose is blind and
for 11 years she was helped by
her faithful seeing eye dog Ivy.
After the explosion, Rose was
desperately trying to locate
Ivy, telling the first
responders that her service dog
was missing.
It took 11 days for Rose to
learn that Ivy had died in the
garage of her home in the
explosion.
The reason she didn't know
earlier was because emergency
responders.
failed to adequately search for
IV.
HB 111 amends the service Animal
Act to say that if a first
responder at an emergency
situation is made aware that the
owner has a qualified service
animal. The first responders
shall.
To the extent practicable and
while prioritizing human safety,
make a reasonable effort to
search for the qualified service
animal.
Uh, Rose Romero wanted to be
here today, but is in poor
health and had prior doctor
appointments, she needed to keep
this morning, um.
With me this morning is uh Brie
Pritchard, who works with
service dogs and uh with that
was standard questions.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the audience.
With those in favor of this
bill, raise your hands.
Those in opposition.
Seeing none, let's go online.
Karen Kushner, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. Can you
hear me. You have one minute.
Right. My name is Karen Kushner.
I am a service animal handler
for over 15+ years. Um, I have a
self-trained service animal as
well as having an animal that
was trained by um an ADI
accredited service animal, um,
agency.
What I wanted to speak to today
was that under the ADA service
animals are already covered, um,
under the state, uh, service
animal Assistance Act, um, we,
we changed that to mirror the
ADA so that the federal law and
the state law were completely in
alignment. Now, my, the problem
that I have is that the service
animal in question, I really
didn't want to get in these
weeds, but I
will. The service animal in
question was 11. Most service
animals quit working by the time
they're about 9, and they're
replaced with a successor
service animal because it's just
too much stress and strain on
the dog to work for that many
years. So that would be my first
question. My second question is,
why change it? Because anytime
I've had an incident at my home
where I've had to have first
responders come. They have
worked well with my service
animal. They have
Gone above and beyond with my
service animal and if the
situation was such of a fire,
which we just recently had, and.
I would, I would say that the
the the first responder should
not be put in grave danger to
look for an animal that has not
recalled to its handler as it
should have. Thank you very
much. Thank you so much.
Uh, under admin, you hear us?
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair of the committee, uh,
advocates and sponsors. My name
is Nat Dean and I am a person
with multiple disabilities, and
I am a disability advocate, and
I was one of the primary uh
individuals who modified with
the sponsor, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez, the former assistant
Animal Act to be the Service
Animal Act with the very
intention that that a service
animal act in New Mexico
mirrored the federal Americans
disabilities regarding service
animals and handlers. We are one
of more than 40 states who put
teeth into the law where it is a
misdemeanor fined by up to $1000
and or jail time for
misrepresenting a pet as a
service animal. I have been a
service animal handler for more
years than the Americans with
Disabilities Act has existed,
and with my 5th dog over 39
years.
And the training must be
impeccable, and the plethora of
people passing off their pets,
emotional support animals or uh
therapy animals as service
animals is very devastating
because it is extremely hard to
have the, the um Thank you so
much uh be included, but thank
you for making this attempt, but
I have always been kept with my
service animal and my service
animal has always been in recall
to come to me, even in an
emergency because they're highly
trained to respond to emergency
settings.
Thank you very much, Madam S
sponsor, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
and advocates.
Thank you so much.
Anybody here to make comments in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I'm, I'm sorry.
Couldn't hear what you said. Do
you have any, do you have a
closing comment before we go to
committee?
We do, we did have another uh
come in.
And sponsors of the bill. My
name is Gris.
We support uh House Bill 111
with more than 7 years in the
animal welfare industry, I
understand the deep pain people
endure theyluche.
That pain is even greater and in
some instances, life altering.
As the 111. He's a common sense
bill that would help protect the
animals providing unparalleled
service to their humans.
I believe it is in our updating
the law to add this provision
will help me.
When we make animals safer.
Passing this bill was part of my
delay.
You, OK, Representative, do you
have a closing comment before we
go to committee members.
Um.
Madam Chair, there's.
Are there no questions?
No, I'll go ahead and go to
committee members
representatives,
uh, Madam Sheridan in closing,
um.
Sorry, it's kind of an echo in
here. It's a little hard to
hear, um.
This is a uh
this is not a change that I
think is incompatible with the
ADA recognizes the incredible.
Value of service animals and
simply reminds, if you will, um,
First responders that that
there's a priority.
After human safety, there is a
priority for these animals
because if they're not pets,
they're part of the life needs
of these people with
disabilities and with that we'd
ask for Du pass.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I and,
and representative, I, I think
you misunderstood that there
were still questions, but and
you're trying to close on the
bill, but kind of got ahead of
ourselves a little bit. I don't,
I don't want you to think that
I'm being disrespectful and
asking questions or anything,
uh.
Madam Chair and, and
representative.
Is this the first time that
you've ever seen this happen?
This
Like, like the service animal.
Not being found.
Till
11 days after, uh, I've, I've
never heard of this. And, and
Madam Chair and Representative.
Every time I've
A lot of times we see the news
and then
They, they always show a cat
that they went in and saved and
they show a dog a pet or, or
whatever.
And
Uh, I'm wondering if this
legislation was brought forward.
Over 1 case.
That wasn't preventable anyway.
The, the animal was dead and
And died in the explosion from
what I understand.
And this wouldn't have prevented
anything anyway. And and I'm
wondering.
That's why I'm asking the
question, is there other cases
that you can bring forth that,
that this would address or?
Madam Chair and Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I don't personally, but I
think my expert can address that
question. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam. So in this particular
instance, Ivy was unable to be
recovered, but it, it had been
an incident where there was
another animal or some another
emergency where people could go
in and save the animal, then
yes. Um I know particularly of
another fire in Albuquerque,
where it was a situation where
the fire and EMT's emergency
response teams went in and did
rescue the animal, but in that.
situation having guidelines for
such would be important.
And, and thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and that's exactly what I'm
getting to, uh, representative
and, and expert witness.
I, I think the first responders
have a real good record.
Uh
Addressing all life in the, in
the situations.
I've never seen first
responders.
I've never had a complaint from
anybody about first responders
not addressing
Even the pets or anything, so,
so I'm seeing a bill come in
front of us, Madam Chair and
Representative that I wonder why
it's even here.
I, I, I
It looks like we're, we're
trying to look down on first
responders and trying to say
that they're not doing their job
well, or there's an issue yet.
We're not finding an issue even
with the situation that, that
we're discussing.
That
That happened and, and I'll
drop, I'll leave that at that,
Madam Chair, and Representative,
and then.
What about the time?
That this would involve for
first responders. Let, let's,
let's do it, uh, uh, for
instance.
Say, say they, they, they run on
this call.
And they take care of what they
did.
on the call.
And then they stop.
To take care of searching for
this animal.
And they spend a bunch of time
searching for this animal. What
about the calls that are running
ahead of time that they don't
know are coming on.
And they're over here.
Doing a search.
Should there may be somebody
else searching other than first
responders should maybe.
The community have like a
organization of people who have.
These kind of pets that would be
willing to come to the scene and
maybe search for this pet. I'm,
I'm seeing.
First responders times.
Being used up here at uh on this
scene.
And then they.
They in the public first
responders are very
Self
Uh, conscious about their time,
their response time.
And the public wants a fast
response time if they call him
to a heart attack or a wreck or
anything. We want them there now
because we know seconds could
mean the life of a person.
And yet we're placing another.
Responsibility on him.
That would take time and consume
their schedules, so, so I'm
wondering, I'm wondering what
we're doing here. I'm, I'm very
interested, Madam Chair, and
Representative to listen to the
rest of the debate.
And, and see how it goes.
But, but I think, I think we're
looking down on our first
responders with this bill.
And, and I think they do a great
job of doing what they do.
Madam chair.
Madam Chair representative, if
I, if I could respond briefly.
Uh, this is not meant at all to
look down on first responders.
Um, however, um,
We are living in a world in
which we are seeing more and
more.
calamities, many of them natural
fires, we just saw the fires in
Los Angeles, we saw the fires in
New Mexico.
Um, because of climate warming,
we are facing um incredible
challenges, uh, of situations
where first responders are going
to be called. All the bill does
is say.
First, always humans, and 2.
If you know that there is a.
Um, service animal because
they're not pets, they are so
important to.
Ivy was rose Romero's eyes.
It was her eyesight.
And if
Something had happened at that
scene where let's say she had
not been blind, but all of a
sudden she had started to
because of the, the stuff in the
air has started to say I'm, I, I
can't see. It would have
absolutely immediately responded
to that. There's no question in
my mind.
The dog plays that role.
In this case, site, I mean,
there's different kinds of
service animals.
And all we're saying is first
humans, and then second, if you
know, and it's practical and you
can do it.
Without risking human life.
That service.
The 2nd.
Um, that's a guidance for people
who are first responders.
And it's not a penalty, it's
just a guidance to say, these
animals are very, very important
to the people they serve. And
Madam Chair and Representative.
On, on page 4.
Line 6.
It says, shall make.
Not may make, it says shall make
a reasonable effort to search.
For the qualified service
animal.
I'm afraid this is gonna place
liabilities on our first
responders.
And, and I think they're doing a
good job and with us putting
this in this bill.
We're gonna see lawsuits against
first responders.
And, and yet they've, they've
done their job well. We don't,
we, we have this one instance.
And then on the other instance,
There wasn't, there really
wasn't any, any reason for this
bill on the, on the second
example that was given and over
the whole state we have one
instance that we're talking
about.
And, and we're making.
To me, we're creating a
liability on first responders.
And putting in that they shall
make a reasonable effort to
search for the qualified animal.
And to me they are they're
already making a reasonable
effort, but.
They, we don't know their
schedules, their time frame.
How, how much they're pushing
for the next call and, and they,
they finished up a call and they
go get ready for the next one
and they want to be ready to be
there Johnny on the spot.
I, I, I, I look forward to the
rest of the debate from the
committee.
And then, uh
I, I want to take care of the
animals. I want to take care of
the service animals and, and
everything, but, but I see some
I have some
Issues with this, with this bill
and what it's doing. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lujan.
Representative Block.
You so much, Madam Chair.
Representative. Good to see you
again for this bill. You know,
I, I, I'm glad that we heard in
CPAC and and hear the testimony
of folks. So I'm glad we, we got
to see one on one what they
were uh experiencing. So Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, uh, actually,
something came up in my inbox
from one of my constituents
about the Service Animal Act.
I think it was in 2013 or
something, and I believe Madam
Chair, they said that the
service animal.
I pretty much trained to stand
right next to the owner at all
times.
Could you just give me, I, I see
uh nod here. So can you just
give me some more information on
that. Thank you, madam chair.
Um, every animal is individually
trained. Some animals are
trained to stay right by their
owners. Others are trained not
to, um, in this particular
incident, I'm sure Ivy was
trained to be right next to
Rose, uh, you know, in an
explosion or emergency situation
where the dog cannot get to
their handler, there's not a lot
of options for them to do so. So
it really does depend on the
individual specific situation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, not
to get too in the weeds on, on
this one scenario, 11 days seems
like a really long time. I'm
wondering, Madam Chair, did, did
anyone hear the dog?
Um
barking or anything, how I, I
hate to get too into the weeds
on a, on an instance that's not
specifically on the bill, but
I'm just wondering how, how
could we negate that in the
future maybe.
With uh some kind of rulemaking
or I don't know, some guidelines
when it comes to the service
dogs cause I, I've actually
worked when I was in high
school, we, we helped with the
service dogs of the West
program, and we, I, I don't know
if that's what you guys became
after that, but, but, but we did
work, work hard with those folks
and I just want to make sure
that that that's some something
that we do periodically to just
check on the dog to make sure
it's there because 11 days was
this individual calling
Any authorities or or anything
after the incident and
I'm just wondering how that
happened. Sorry, madam I'm sure,
it's kind of a long question.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, we, we can explain further
about what happened specifically
in this case and I have a
photograph of the garage door.
And I'm happy to share it, uh,
and explain.
What happened in this particular
situation, if that would be of
help to the.
Committee
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
I'm sure I can get with you and
look, look at those later unless
we want to pass them along. I'd
be happy to look at it. I was
just curious about that. It
wasn't like a very probing
question in that case and I
certainly don't want to be
accusing anyone of anything. So
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I'm wondering regarding the
current guidelines, is there a
way we could do this through
rulemaking instead of law when
it comes to certain first
responder protocols for.
seeing
and assisting with service
animals, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair representative, um.
I, I quite frankly am not
familiar with what the
rulemaking procedure would be
for um first responders
generally. I know that within
each of their professions they
have protocols and.
Uh, rules and so forth.
Um
But I think what we're talking
to here is a broader audience
and letting also the people with
Service dogs, no.
what the priority is for their
animals.
Uh, so it's not just the
First responders.
Um, it's also to emphasize to uh
and and let the let the owners
of the service animals, the
people who need them to live,
uh, know that these are animals
that are have some special
protection.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And then one of
the last questions.
That I had for you. I don't know
if you have anything to add on
that last one.
I'm sure, uh my expert has some
additional information on that.
Currently, there's very little
to no guidelines at all for any
first responders or emergency
teams to know what to do with
service animals, including just
putting them in the ambulance to
take him to the hospital, which
is covered by federal law.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
That's a perfect segue into my
next question actually. So I see
on the fur, it talks about the
PETs Act, it's a federal act.
And I'm just wondering how this
works in conjunction with that
act, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, I personally do
not have experience with the
PETs Act. I am more familiar
with service dogs specific, um,
information which goes into the
transport of animals in
emergency situations, as they're
not to be separated from their
handlers is pretty much the only
guideline that currently exists.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I get
that, but I'm, I'm just
wondering if they're not
supposed to be separated from
their owners.
How do we, how do they determine
that when they get to the scene.
Because Madam Chair, if they
don't see the dog there
immediately. I would just guess
a first responder could infer
that they did not have a service
animal. So would this require
them to say to that person, do
you have a qualified service
animal when they get to
to them,
Madam Chair, if I can answer
that, the act I think makes it
very specific that there's only
applies if
If the first responder is aware
that there is a service dog.
Uh, involved and in the
situation like we had here.
Uh, people who have service dogs
and they're they're they're
suddenly missing because of an
explosion or a fire or whatever,
and the first responders show
up.
Um, the notice is gonna come
from
Um, I mean, it's not like you
have to have a checklist or
anything, the, the individual is
going to say, just as happened
here, uh, my service dog is
missing.
Can you help me find him?
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Matthews. So it
sounds like it's initiated by
the by the individual when this,
when the first responders come
forward, they say, I have a
service animal, please help me
find them. And then in, in that
case, it would trigger this,
this, uh, language where they,
they would have to give a
reasonable uh search of the
area. OK. That, that clears it
up for me. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank yous
representative, and I'm sorry,
the other day we, we kind of
rushed through that committee
and we didn't get too many
questions, but I'm really glad
that you brought this.
forward. Thank you so much for
your expert today and I look
forward to supporting your
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for
Bringing this
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I appreciate it. Um, I
have a couple of questions, been
listening to the, to the um
Questions and the points made,
uh, a couple, I'm not familiar
with this, uh.
With the original bill, the,
the, um.
Service animals in emergencies,
my apologies. I'm, I was trying
to write my questions and.
It, oh, the Animal Services Act.
OK. So that's established. I'm
wondering if in this or the, the
ADA that was mentioned, uh.
Uh, earlier, whether
I'm curious, our owners required
to have them uh chipped or
marked or have some way to
locate.
Their service animals.
And I'm sure I'd like my expert,
thank you,
Madam Chair.
No, they are not required by
federal law to be marked or
labeled in any way, um, in
Albuquerque, we do recommend, of
course, they have a microchips
so they can be recovered and
there are other systems in place
where they can um notify if you
would first responders and other
um organizations that there is a
service animal on the property.
OK, my next question, uh, is
whether there are
When they receive a service
animal.
Mm
This could be touchy, I would
imagine, but I'm gonna ask the
question. Are there signs to
indicate to someone, anyone that
there is a service animal on the
premises.
Uh, Madam Chair, typically, most
people that have a surface
animal, um, we'll do proactive
things like post something in
their windows. Um, as I
mentioned, there are systems
already in place through the um
911 operating system that they
can note hazards or situations
like I, for example, have a
child with hearing loss or I
have a service animal in the
back room. So there are already
systems in place to notify.
Finally, I'm, I, I believe I'm
my question will be,
I'm wondering, could guidance
I've, I heard that they're
currently is no, there is.
Limited guidance.
On this, and I'm wondering if
this guidance could be provided
without having to create a law.
To, to put this in effect.
Madam Chair, um, we currently
feel that the, the law brings an
important, um,
Option for first responders to
be able to respond accurately
without having to go through
another guideline book to make
sure they're checking off the
boxes and um following a
checklist as they currently are.
I guess to that that my uh
follow up would be um.
If this was gonna be
incorporated, it would be, there
would be guidance required.
There would be checklists to
follow.
Um, and I'm wondering if that
couldn't already be incorporated
into what currently exists in
perhaps the regulations.
and it's a question. Thank you.
Um, I'm sorry, Madam Chair, um,
can you say this question one
more time?
If, if you were talking about
having them to read another set
of guide of instructions and
checking boxes. And I'm
wondering with this in place, it
would require that anyhow.
I mean, I'm wondering if the
Wondering if this could be
satisfied those.
That additional training could
be.
Uh, incorporated through um.
More guidance through the uh
that which is already
established. Thank you.
I hope I didn't confuse the
situation. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair, I do believe that this
bill does, um, impart that the
person in the situation would be
notifying the first responder on
the scene, um, and in those
situations, gives them an option
to search for the animal at that
moment, rather than coming back
and searching in the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Madam Fle leader Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Representative
Matthews for bringing forward
this legislation. Um, I just
wanted to make a
Uh
I, I just wanted to tell you how
I'm looking at this bill and see
if this makes sense and is, is
sort of part of your intention
in bringing forward this bill,
um,
It seems to me that in the
absence of
Clear direction in law.
That we're sort of putting first
responders into a quandary and
also exposing them to more
liability.
And I think what you're
establishing here is first, that
the first responder has to be
made aware.
That the service animal is
missing.
Um, and so that is an important
fact. I think that would be
considered in any kind of
litigation, and secondly, that
they need to make a reasonable
effort to find this service
animal. Um,
I would worry that without
something in statute like this,
that say a service animal was
lost in a, in an emergency
situation that that the owner or
the, the owner's family, uh,
Handler's family could, you
know, bring suits saying, well,
you should have done this and
you should have done this and
you should have done this,
whereas just clearly
establishing what is required
and also what's not required,
right? So if there are
other uh risks that are, or
another call that the person has
to go to or um that there are
other individuals that are, uh,
Needing to be rescued in that
moment, that, that the first
responder then has clear
guidance in this, that they,
they need to prioritize the
human safety search for, you
know, other people in the home
first, that they, if they aren't
aware that the service animal is
there that they don't have to
then um be searching around to
say, is there a service animal?
every time they make a service
call, they have to be made aware
of that fact so, Madam Chair,
I'm just wondering if that's uh
an accurate reflection of why
this is needed.
Uh, madam
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the question. We,
in drafting it, we wanted to
make clear that
First of all, the first, the
first responder had to be made
aware.
And that it would be the
responsibility of the person who
um
Uh, knows that there's a service
dog there. Uh, secondly, we
wanted to be sure that
Human safety was always
prioritized.
And 3rd,
That
because these are chaotic
scenes, and we understand that,
Madam Chair Representative, that
we put in the extent
practicable, which is going to
be facts specific to the
situation as many, and these are
difficult situations. Um, and
then the effort has to be
reasonable. It doesn't have to
be exhaustive. It just has to be
reasonable for the situation,
and it just is
I see it, Madam Chair,
represented as a guidance to
first responders to help them.
Understand what should be
occurring in these kinds of
rather unusual situations that I
don't, I don't know how often
they, they run into a case where
there's a a a service dog, but I
would assume it's not every day,
and I think that's probably a
little bit about what happened
at Rose Romero's home. They
weren't.
Really thinking about, oh, gee,
this dog.
Um, is
It is incredibly important to
the life of this person, not as
a pet, but as an aid to living.
Um, and so that's the purpose of
the bill.
And I hopefully we put in
appropriate guidelines so that
we're not.
Causing first responders to.
Um, do anything other than if
they're told that there's a
person that there's an animal,
then.
To take that into account,
making their decisions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um
Representative Matthews, I
appreciate you walking us
through.
sort of the elements, because I
think that those are things that
would be considered, um,
If
Someone were to in a situation
where things didn't go well in
litigation was brought, and I,
um, I'm glad that you pointed
out the reasonable effort.
Needed, so not superhuman, not
at their own peril, um, and
certainly not to the peril of
others that, that may be
involved in this emergency
situation, but that there were
clearly laying this out to, so
to me, I see this as being more
um protective of first
responders, Madam Chair, and,
and, uh, representative because
I think it clarifies legally how
this might be handled in a
situation where it does go
wrong, um, and sort of makes it
uniform across
the state so that we're just
making sure that, that these
service animals are dealt with
in exactly the same way, no
matter what jurisdiction, and I
think that's especially
important because we know first
responders move and they travel
from, you know, or they may be
called into emergency
situations, you know, often if
there is some kind of large
scale, say wildfire, for
example, you'll have
firefighters from across the
state, all descending of one
location and just knowing that
the standard is the same across
the state, I think is super
helpful.
So I appreciate you bringing
this forward. Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Lujan.
Mm
OK. Representative Barrago.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
always good to go last because
then I hear comment, um, so, um,
have you
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, have you
guys run this through the fire,
the firefighters.
I'm just curious.
Is this, have, have they
commented on this?
Legislation, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, thank you for
the question. Yes, I talked with
the uh Esperdati.
Uh, who is the who is a
firefighter.
Um, and, uh, we talked about
this bill.
And uh he said that.
Um, the Albuquerque Fire
Department was fine with it.
And that's why we don't see
first responders here.
Uh
Um
Objecting to the bill.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and, and Madam Chair, um, you
know, my father was a
firefighter for 30 years. I'm
proud to say, and um I um
Having worked for the city for
28 years and worked with first
responders for that almost that
entire time. And then as a city
councilor,
Um, this situation that you
described with this woman, um,
we saw more than once. I mean,
it was not this one instance, I
appreciate that you brought this
one instance to light, but this
has happened.
Many times over the years, um.
32 years that I worked with the
city, um, and I, you know, it's
always disheartening to hear
that somebody's uh service
animal um has been lost.
And I think it just happened a
couple of months ago, Madam
Chair, up in, uh, the Northeast
Heights, um, there was an there
was another person. I don't
know, I don't think it was the
same person that you brought up
today, but.
Um, you know.
There was another
Service animal that was lost in
that fire, and Madam Chair for
an individual like myself who
has no children, but has 3 pets
in my home, um.
They're not
Qualified as service animals,
but I will tell you what they
are service animals, and I have
a little sticker on my door that
says in the case of an emergency
or a fire, uh, please look for
these animals.
Um, if I lost any of them, they
are like my four legged
children.
And there are many people in,
in, um, you know, in my same
situation who would say that
those are our children.
Um, and, you know, to lose any
of them, and especially a
service animal that.
Guides
Rex
Whether that person is blind,
um, hearing impaired or
handicapped in any way.
Um, you know,
That is devastating to that
individual. And when I read the
um
Legislation, Madam Chair, it
says that
And, and, and this goes back to
sort of the liability question.
That individual or or some
individual would have to make
the first responder aware that
there is this service animal in
the house.
Um, and I think that, you know,
if people don't make the the
fire, um,
The emergency responder, um,
aware.
Then
You know, there could not really
be a liability. I'm not an
attorney. I have one sitting
next to me, but I think that um
That is a key language in this
bill, is that is made aware.
And that's very clear, uh, Madam
Chair, and, and representative.
And then the second piece that
Really pops out to me is is that
they make a reasonable effort.
And, you know, I've had a little
bit of experience with law. Um,
I think those two pieces in this
in this um
In this legislation.
Really give guidance, Madam
Chair, and representative to the
First responders that
As long as they're made aware
and that to a reasonable effort
to search for those animals.
Um, I think it's, it's clear
that
It gives the the fire, um,
Emergency responders, some
direction.
In clear direction.
That in their guidelines, these
are things that they need to be
looking out for.
And I will do everything in my
power and everything in my
effort to make sure that
Animals who are part of families
are protected. So, Madam Chair,
I'm, I fully support this
legislation.
Representative Aonorno.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
do pass.
2
Thank you. I have a motion for
to pass and a second.
Would you like roll call?
Roll please.
Does it have on you? Yes.
Representative Block, yes, with
an explanation.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Resentative Mejia.
Yes.
Madam Floor leader
Representative Zamora.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair.
Thank you and representative
block to explain your vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative and uh
I, I've heard a lot from a lot
of advocates who have
More questions than answers
sometimes when it comes to this
bill because there are all these
questions like, does this
pertain to retired service
animals and uh and also there's
other things regarding people
who are nonverbal, who can't
tell the first responder if, if
they do have a service animal.
So there are just some questions
I have for this, but I do
support the idea, and I thank
you for bringing this forward.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews. OK, let's move along.
Let's go back to House Joint
Memorial 2.
I see representative Herrera.
Has joined us.
Uh
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Good to see this committee
again, um, and thank you for
hearing this this morning. I
think this is a really important
bill. I'm going on my, um, 4th
term in the House of
Representatives, uh, 7th year,
and what I have come to find is
I, I think we need to have
year-round staff helping major
committees in this house. Uh,
I've also served on
appropriations. I know how many
staff people we have working on
a.
appropriations. I've always said
that.
You know, money should follow
policy, and I think in this
house policy happens to follow
money. And that's just the way
we've set it up and there's no
reason we have to do that. We,
um, I, I also think, and I'm
glad, I'm glad this started in
the house because the house
members are the closest to the
people we represent. Senators
come in there here for 4 years.
We run every 2 years. So we have
to keep in real content.
with our constituency, right? So
when we're putting together,
trying to put together and, and
people do put together huge
bills. Imagine working all
summer long trying to get a bill
together like uh Representative
Japanski is doing on kind of a
big Medicaid overview.
And then coming to the house and
not coming in with the same
staff that guided you through
the interim.
So what I'm trying to do is set
up a memorialist study along
with Senator Carrie Hamlin and
you know my, my other
co-sponsors on this bill, so
that we can study how we would
do this. I, I first thought I
could just write the bill.
And it was so complicated that
there's no way I could have done
it because, because whether or
not you're a standing committee
summer in statute, some aren't
in statutes, some are just named
by the, the, you know, the
speaker at the time, the titles
changed, so what I would like to
see is the major committees of
this house, judiciary
transportation, health and human
services, you know, I could go
on government so that you would
have year-round staff.
So that they would follow you
from here, not that we don't
love the staff we have. I want
to say they're doing a good job,
but I'm sure they'd love to be a
year-round staff. And what we do
is we come to the Capitol and
then, you know, our chief clerk
Lisa is just scrambling to get
the the best staff she can, but
it's a, you know, temporary 3
month job and then everybody
disappears again after learning
a lot, so I would like to have
staff for major committees the
year round, follow you
During the interim, come back,
knowing the legislation you
worked on, knowing the hearings
you had and be able to put
together a substantive piece of
legislation that everybody
understands, everybody's in
agreement with. I think it would
eliminate a lot of the
replication we have, um, and I,
I, in my, in my 7th year, I just
said this just doesn't work very
well. And, and so it's a, it's a
recommendation. I think it's an
important one. Again, this is a
memorial.
It's just calling for a study. I
also asked that it would be by,
uh, done by, I think November
was at the date, um, so that
this committee House government
could have a chance to review
it, decide whether or not you
want to endorse that legislation
and know exactly what the costs
are, what committees would
involve have the have all the
statutes clear and then bring it
back to the house for a vote, so
that is my recommendation, and
that's just a brief synopsis of
my bill, and I, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the audience.
Do we have any uh
opposing comments in the
audience.
Any supporting comments, please
raise your hands if you do.
OK, let's go online.
Anyone who would like to make
public comment, please raise
your hand.
Hey seeing the committee
members.
Representative block.
Madam Chair, Representative and
I, I know what you just said you
don't want to have policymaking
follow the the moneymaking
decisions, but it's usually part
of the process, unfortunately
right now, right? So I'm just
wondering, I see on the fur, it
says that the task force is
estimated budget will be
$500,000 to a million dollars to
be allocated. Can you just tell
me a little bit about, about
that. Are we looking for that in
HB 2 and how will this uh task
force convene, Madam Chair.
You know,
Uh, Madam Chair and uh
Representative Black I I kind of
thought that was a little high.
I, I think the study will show
how much it will cost to really
implement that. I think this is
a guess. I think they allowed
250,000 to put the, you know,
pay for the per diem for the
members, but I, I don't think
until you have a study that you
really understand how much that
would cost, but, you know, I
imagine we'd have a majority in
a minority staff person on every
committee and then probably a
secretary and an analyst kind
of.
Kinda like we do when we have a
regular, you know, committee
here. I, I could see that going
into the interim, but I, I think
that's first of all, I think
they have to decide what
committees would be year round
and then how much the staffing
would cost. So I think that's a
guess.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, that helps
me. So, I'm just trying to
figure out how this would work
in practice now. So, for
example, we have the Senate.
I think they have an energy
committee on the Senate side. We
have our energy, natural
resources Committee on the House
side.
And so
We're looking for a committee on
the in the interim, and I don't
think there's really an
equivalent except for maybe,
maybe a radioactive and
hazardous materials they touch
on that, but would this create a
new one for something like that
where we don't necessarily have
a specific energy in a room,
Madam Chair.
You know, uh, madam chair and
said, I thought about the same
thing but here's, here's what I
think. Again, that's I think why
we need to study. I think you
would have, if we're gonna have
two energy committees, you would
have an energy committee on the
house and the staff on both
sides that would probably work
through the interarm and then go
back and serve that those staffs
during the uh the full
committee. This is actually a
pretty complicated study. I'm
not saying this is easy, but I
think it's something we should
do, and, and.
So we don't, you don't want to
have opposing legislation from
the house. Hopefully we could
get it more together, so that,
and I think this would help do
that job, but, you know, I,
that's why I'm calling for this
study. I, I mean, I could be
wrong, but I, I think it's an
important thing to consider. I,
I, you know, look at judiciary,
look at health and human
services, look at transport,
those are huge budgets when you
put together the federal and the
state money.
Representative Japansky, I know
you could weigh in on that for
me. I don't know what our
combined uh federal state budget
is for health in this state.
Madam Chair and uh
representative Herrera, it's 25%
of the state's general fund when
you include federal funds, it
eclipses the entire size of the
state's general fund budget.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and my next
question actually was probably
about that when it comes to the
finances, because I know I sit
on the, I'm an advisory member
on.
LHHS Health and Human Services
in the interim, and a lot of the
time LHHS is always begging for
funds for certain things, but at
the end of the day they have to
go beg the finance committee.
And the appropriations committee
and the
The, what is it, the interim.
It's appropriation LFC LFC,
there you go.
I haven't had my second cup of
coffee yet, Madam Chair. So I'm
just wondering, could, could
this in theory,
If we did implement this, could
this even
further strengthen that LFC.
HAFC Senate Finance to be more
enshrined, whereas they they
even have more power because I
know they already currently have
full-time staff on LFC. So how
would that work regarding the
needs of healthcare, for
example, or education, how would
they have a better seat at the
table to get those budgetary
asks in HB 2 at the end of the
day, Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
and a representative Block. I, I
think we're just, I think it
would strengthen uh the.
The, the policy committees, and
yes, they would still have to go
for an appropriation. I'm not
saying that would change at all,
but you would have a, you, I
think you would have a stronger
authorization bill.
And you would have people
working very closely, uh, with
the LFC, for example, I also
have said on the Easy, and
that's the only other, you know,
um, body that has the only other
committee that has a full-time
year-round staff. So I can tell
you from my experience with
that, which also led to this
bill. They have a much closer
alliance with the LFC worked
very closely with them because
they're here year round and, and
we come together and when
presenting the um uh the
education budget, it's pretty
closely aligned with the LESC
and the LFC. Not really. I mean,
we have some differences that
we'll find out in appropriations
and that's, that's what it will
be, but everybody certainly
understands the issues both on
the LSC side and the LESC side,
and I would like for people to
understand that on the Health
and Human Services side and on
the LFC side and that's how I
think this would work.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I was just
thinking that because currently
they already have staff, right?
We have two committees that all
year and I'm on LESC as well, so
I, I know how hard those folks
work and so they do have really
long term plans when it comes to
certain metrics that they're
looking for and then we have
Sonny Lou, who's amazing, who's
always in our committee at LESC
watching over what LFC might
might be needing for that. So, I
mean, I'm not opposed to this
idea. I think it's a it's
interesting, and I think it's
worthy of
Further insight, in my opinion.
So I'm not, I'm not set on how
I'm going to vote on this yet,
but I
Sounds good to me, so I'll
listen to the debate. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thanks, Madam
Chair. Thanks, Rep. That's good
news.
I have a representative Barrago
and then Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward.
Being a planner, you know, I'm
always looking for studies and
so I'll put that right on the
table. Um, I, uh, Madam Chair.
I think it was 2 weeks ago, we
had a 2 bills that were brought
forward by Representative
McQueen, um,
One was regarding a time frame.
And for the legislative session,
um, another one was regarding,
well, there were
Parts of it that were regarding
the governor's veto power and
pocket vetoes, and so there was
a lot of discussion at this
committee, um, regarding, you
know,
How we do business and
Sort of good governance, I
guess. Um, and I, and I made
some comments then, Madam Chair
and a representative, um,
regarding
I worked for the state in the
80s, by the way, guys, and um
coming back.
2 years ago.
I was truly surprised that
nothing has really changed that
much in terms of the way we do
business, and it, it's very
concerning to me and I, and I
made those comments, um, when uh
Representative McQueen.
Presented, uh, representative
and, and Madam Chair, um, I
think that the overall structure
of the kind of how we do
business should be looked at.
Kind of completely for good
governance, not just for good
governance, but for efficiency
in government and the
effectiveness that we have as as
legislators, um, I see this
again as another piece of sort
of that puzzle.
Um
That of of legislation that was
brought before us a couple of
weeks ago. Um, I think that
All of these pieces need to be
looked at whether we paid
legislators have just in general
how we do business, um, and how
we provide, how, how we do some
cost savings, how we do our
work, uh, more effectively.
And um, so I, I fully support
what you're doing here, our
representative, but
I guess what I'm saying is that
I think that we should be
looking at the whole bicycle,
not just a piece, not just
pieces at a time, and um I just
put that out on the table, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Mm
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, thank you for
bringing this forward. Um, I
just wanna be
Um, couple of questions on the
fiscal impact the FIR impact
report, um.
for this next fiscal year would
be 2.5 to $6 million is that
that's probably 250,000. That's
what I thought. Thank you.
I think that's pretty accurate,
actually, I think.
We're looking at per DM and this
sort of things, um.
Last task force I I participated
in was the rural and economic
development task force and I
think we got some really.
With your guide, a lot from your
guidance, Madam Chair, um, a lot
of really good pieces of
legislation that I've seen
change.
And develop through these last
two years after, after the, the
task force met. Would this be a
two year task or 1 year?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it's, it would
be a one year one year just a
one year and hopefully they'd
get back by November of next
year to present to the interim
committee, uh, for either
rejection or endorsement,
depending on what the uh study
shows.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
And so I see from the constructs
of it, you'd have um the
members.
That would be appointed to the
task force would be um
appointed by the Legislative
council to include 4 members of
the House.
And 2 from the majority and 2
from the minority and 4 members
of the Senate.
From the majority, 2 from the
minority.
They're not the actual
leadership, uh, correct of
those, of those, the two houses.
It's just that the, the council
would
Direct that. Is that correct,
Madam Chair, yes. Thank you. And
3 public members who have
expertise in legislative affairs
that so who.
As opposed to. I think that what
in your view, what were you, who
are you looking at members?
Um, Madam Chair, and I, I really
did. I thought someone like
David Abbey or Roll people who
have been around the block for a
few times, could, could do that,
uh, you know, from a different
point of view and a fish, I
mean, I think we have a lot of
people that could do that, but
those are two that come to mind.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I, I just don't know I
endorse them though. They don't
know I'm recommending.
And then you just man um.
You just have the the report
going to legislative council.
Um
Should it, should it also be
included to go to the finance
committee as well, Madam Chair.
Um, I guess we could do that. I
think legis legislative council
really makes the decisions about
how the House and the Senate
runs, so that's why I thought I
should go back to them. They're
the ones that decide on the
committees, decide on, and this
is, this wouldn't need, you
know, constitutional amendment
or anything like that because
it's really the body deciding
how the body should run.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
this is a, a good place to work,
start from, I would just
recommend it also go to
legislative finance as well as
we
This would have a price tag to
it, so Madam chair, that's,
that's the only thing I would, I
would bet. Thank you. Oh, OK.
Thank you.
You, I just want to add really
quickly, thank you for bringing
this bill forward.
As it is now in the summertime,
we have the Indian Affairs
Interim Committee.
So it would be nice to add.
Indian Affairs state government
and elections to the summer
interim committee meetings so
that
You know, where
We have, we can discuss those
issues during our interim
committee. So with that,
Representative Little.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
do pass.
We have a motion
and 3 seconds.
Do we, is there any opposition?
Seeing none, representative, you
have a due pass. Thanks
everybody. Good to be here.
getting to be my favorite
committee.
Hm
OK, moving along, we will now
Um.
Yeah, Madam Chair, we're focused
on page 116 today.
Um
And I don't know which order to
go in because um I just want to
allow the body here, um, Madam
Chair, um,
To understand that House Joint
Resolution 11 dovetails with
House Bill 290 completely. Um,
the point of how, how resolution
11 is to um
Have, uh, it's, uh,
As a companion, uh, House Bill
290, so we can't have one
without the other, just so that
we understanding this
discussion, um.
Good
morning. Um, we are here to talk
about the anti-Donation clause.
Um,
For many of you who have been
here for um some time, you'll
hear that a lot, and for those
of you new, you'll find that
you'll start hearing it a lot um
in regards to how it is that our
state is able to invest, um, in
itself and into the various
projects and programs that we
have across the state.
What how joint resolution 11
seeks to do is repeal and
replace an antiquated law that
has unfortunately impeded us
from being able to invest in
ourselves, um, what we've done
year after year for the last 113
years since this idea came
around in the robber baron era
of the railroads, um, is finding
ways to get around it.
It was interpreted by the
Supreme Court in 1915 to say
that anti-domation means you
cannot invest in, um, the things
in the state that um
Essentially, um,
You would need to in order to
prevent this waste fraud and
abuse. And what we've been doing
by way of everything from
capital outlay to the way that
we invest in nonprofits into
social programs, into our
students into COVID payments is
finding ways to get out and
around it.
Um, what this does is clarify a
process for which
If we can repeal and replace
this portion of the law is look
at public purpose projects that
are then um able to be processed
through House Bill 290 and
creates a way for DFA to honor
and respect the laws that we
have on the audits required, the
laws of the land needed to
prevent waste, fraud and abuse,
um,
And ensure that we can invest in
these projects without having to
jump through the hoops and go
through the various uh
municipalities, governments,
ownership, the way that we've
convoluted a process to really
just get the money out into our
communities and invest in the
things that we need to.
Um, this conversation has been a
multi-year process that um has
has had multiple iterations,
various versions of this, um,
uh, change in our constitution
have appeared. Um, we think this
is the best way forward. It's
the cleanest way for us to
approach this process. Um, we,
this last year convened, um,
hundreds of folks over the
course of several months to try
to figure out a strategy to make
this.
move forward, um, and this is
what we have presented to you
today on how this looks and how
this becomes enacted with the
two companion pieces. Um,
I think just as a
Refresher on a number of
different pieces. They're the
legislative council Service
wrote a memo for us regarding
how states have approached this.
Um,
44 states have revised or
re-approached their uh way in
which they've looked at
anti-donation clauses. These
came about again at the time of
the robber baron era of, of the
uh railroads and 33 states have
come up with this public purpose
statement, um, that you see in
front of you through House Bill
290.
Um, we've been very methodical,
intentional about how we do
this. We've spoken to the
Secretary of State, the auditor,
we've approached every person we
believed to be involved in this,
including the various nonprofits
that do this work, the
municipalities that have been
part of how we run fiscal
agency, etc. to help inform this
process. Um, so we're really
looking forward to the
discussion, Madam Chair, um, and
with, of course, is, um,
representative Kate.
Um, she and I and among
A number of other legislators
worked um across the, the um
span of this last year to, to
really unpack this. And, um,
Sephora and Naresh, um, who is
the director, executive director
of New Mexico thrives, which
helps nonprofit organizations,
um, thrive here in New Mexico,
um, helped us convene those um
various meetings and we'll help
and serve as an expert in the
process, especially for House
Bill 290.
Um
I think with that, Madam Chair,
uh, will stand for questions or
reps did you wanna?
No.
I, I think you covered it all,
Representative. I think you did
very well, so thank you.
I forgot. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Tippora Nefesh.
And I'm the executive director
of New Mexico Thrives, the state
nonprofit association and I have
been working with um Senator
Ortizino and the representatives
here and others.
On trying to find a way to make
the anti-donation clause work.
Thank you. OK, let's go to the
audience, those in favor of the
bill, who wish to express
yourselves, please raise your
hand. One minute, please, and
we'll begin with my right, your
left. Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sergio Mata Cisneros,
and I am the government
relations um manager for the
Food Depot, which is not only
Mexico's food bank and also here
in and also representing the
Association of Food Banks of New
Mexico.
We stand in support of the
resolution and the bill because
as food banks we have seen how
the anti-donation has affected
us in providing services to the
people we serve throughout the
state. Um, we have to rely on
local municipalities to
administer funds, infrastructure
projects, and some of the local
municipalities, especially those
in rural counties, it makes it
more difficult for them to
sometimes administer big grants,
um, that the state has given us.
And sometimes um not fully
Being able to utilize all the
funds that have been allocated,
uh, for example, one example is
in grants, where they were
allocated 1.5 million or just
open a new facility, they were
not able to spend all those
funds and had to give the state
back half a million dollars.
Currently, thank you. Hello, I'm
Shell Nmark, uh, uh, director of
the New Mexico Rural Library
Initiative. There are 19501c3
public libraries in rural areas
in the state. They have to
organize this 501c3s because
usually municipalities organized
libraries, um, in towns from
Anton Chico Teilla to uh Abby Q,
these libraries have been
impacted by the anti-donation
clause, um, in
uh, Villanueva, for example,
they need money to fix their
heating system. They close our
during the winter because they
have in inadequate heat, um,
they're the close only free
internet for 75 miles around in
Capitan, the roof is, uh, caving
in and they're building, um,
they really need capital
funding. They support themselves
with a thrift store, um, they,
they provide a public service to
the state of New Mexico. A.
would like to build on to add on
to its building, um, thank you
so much, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, my name
is Anna Hanson. I'm a former
Santa Fe County commissioner.
I'm also the chair of uh
coalition of sustainable
Communities for New Mexico and
As a county commissioner, the
anti-donation clause constantly
causes problems for us because
we have to be the fiscal agent
for all of these nonprofits, and
it would be much better for them
to be able to get the money
directly from the legislature.
Thank you very much.
Um, Roger Valdez, Center for
Housing Economics, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
very much support the intention
of this, um, but very concerned.
About the impact of the removal
of
The exemptions, particularly for
housing,
We live in an anti-donation free
world. Many people don't
understand that or know that,
but
I think the better approach
might be to look at adding an
exemption H for public purpose
and keeping 290 as the enabling
act.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Alvin
Warren with the Lano Foundation,
we support this bill and uh this
uh joint resolution and the
concurrent bill that you'll be
hearing in a little bit. Um, I
think that the sponsors can
speak to this more, but I think
the existing exemptions are, are
protected, so that I think they
can speak to that more, but I
think this, this solves a a
really or begins to solve a very
fundamental issue for our entire
state. As the Lano Foundation,
we provide grants to a number of
nonprofits across northern New
Mexico. We know that nonprofit
s provide a critical capacity,
particularly for rural
communities, um, but there's a
barrier in accessing public
funds. These nonprofits are very
much doing public purposes.
They're accomplishing public
purposes for your constituents,
um, in partnership often with
local government, with tribal
government, but they have
difficulty accessing public
funds. And so we really, I think
to address the needs and the
opportunities in our
communities, we need a better
mechanism for
collaboration between nonprofits
and our state government, we
support a due pass for this
legislation.
Thank you. Let's go online for
supporting comments.
Catherine Anderson, can you hear
us?
I do. Can you all hear me?
Wonderful. Thank you all so much
for letting me speak, uh, Madam
Chair and, and members of the
committee. My name is Katie
Anderson, and I work with
Roadrunner Food Bank to add on
to Sergio's comments earlier,
uh, the, we are very much in
support of this, uh, the
anti-donation clause has often
caused barriers for not only the
food banks, but our 500+ partner
network to access public funds
to assist and care for the
people in communities across the
state, especially rural
communities and puts undue
Pressure on many uh governmental
systems to have to handle all of
it instead of being able to
create a pathway where
nonprofits and government can
work more, more closely together
to uh address the needs that
exist for our members of our
state. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much.
Jill Dixon, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Thank you for your
time today, um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I also
want to, I'm Jill Dixon on the
executive director of the Food
Depot, where the food bank based
out of Santa Fe, um, we are
also, as my colleagues mentioned
in support of the modernization
of the anti-donation clause, I
can point to a specific example
in Mora County during the
governor's administration of the
Hunger initiative funding where
Mora County passed on developing
a food security center because
the county government just could
not
Take on the obligation of
administering funding for two
separate crises, um, which
included the fire at that time,
and then also the food security
center.
It is definitely a clause that
is holding back, um, the action
of nonprofit organizations
across the state and really
impeding in the progress that we
need to make for the people that
we serve.
Thank you so much, Joe.
Thank you. Let's go back to the
audience for comments and
opposition to the bill. Please,
please raise your hands.
Seeing none, let's go online for
opposing comments.
Anybody who would like to make a
ponies opposing comment, please
raise your hand.
OK.
We have veterans and military.
family's caucus, can you hear
us?
Yes, I can. I'm actually in
support of this. May I give some
public testimony,
we have to move on.
OK, well, we strongly support
it. Thank you. Thank you so
much.
OK, committee members.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Representatives, all three of
you, you're all here. Great. I
didn't see you all jump in here,
so, good to see everybody. I do
have questions regarding the
definition on page 2.
public purpose on, I'm on the
HDR 11.
Are we doing both concurrently?
Are we doing both at the same
time?
OK.
Got it. Bring HDR 11 1st block.
OK, well then I have a question
on both then because Madam
Chair, represented by C it says
public purpose means the benefit
of public health, safety and
welfare, and then I'm gonna go
to the bill here and where it
has the definition on the bill.
Let me find it.
It's on page 3, I believe,
Madame Chair, this is public
purpose project means a project
proposed and performed by a
qualifying entity to address a
public purpose. And so I kind of
find that confusing because the
definition of public purpose
uses the word public purpose to
define itself.
Which is confusing to me. So
could you just help me clarify
what that means.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so, um, item G line for public
purpose, um, means for the
purpose of providing facilities
or services for the benefit of
public health, safety or
welfare. So that's that
definition.
And then the type of project
that we would be defining is
just below that.
So there are two separate
definitions. Thank you, and I
see that it matches on HDR what
that means, but
From what I hear
The benefit of the public
health, safety and welfare is
pretty much anything.
Right, I mean, because public
health safety, welfare, as long
as there's a C3 or a C12.
You could brand yourself as
anything and say, well, it's for
the public welfare and
technically receive money if if
these two pass, is that what I'm
understanding, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, no, so public
health, safety, welfare is a, is
a definition of what it is that
we would be investing in and
then the enabling legislation
requires what that would mean if
there was a project to invest
in. So it's not just anything
under the sun that perhaps could
touch on that definition.
There's a requirement
for each project, each, each
anticipation of what, uh, could
or or maybe um on the table for
investment with from the state,
it requires a very strict um
read of what that would mean,
um, through the process of, of
DFA's enabling um process.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then who
would be excluded from receiving
these funds if they are a C3, a
C12, and they purport to have a
position of being the public
peace health or.
Or sorry, health, safety or
welfare.
Madam, anyone who was not
qualified to receive that fund,
so there would be a
qualification process for each
of those, um, and essentially
they would have to follow each
of the mandates, they would have
to have performance evaluations,
etc. We can go through what that
looks like, um, overall, but
essentially anyone would anyone
who could not meet that demand
would be.
Go ahead, Madam Chair and
Representative public purpose is
broad.
And it is broad because 100
years from now, we don't know
what might serve a public
purpose.
Back in 2012, they couldn't have
conceived a baby bonds.
We're guaranteed basic income.
If those are topics of
discussion.
Currently in the legislature.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and the reason
I'm concerned about how broad it
is is because it wasn't just in
the 19th century with the robber
baron scandals and all those
scandals, I see a lot of
scandals that have violated the
current.
Anti-Donation clauses that have
been really grievously
Albuquerque housing and
authority scandal in '06 that
They borrowed over $18 million
that that violated it. And if we
were more strictly regulating
it, that wouldn't have happened.
Thank you Downs. I just have a
few madam. I have a few more,
Madam Chair, Downs racetrack in
'97.
We all know what happened there.
Finance Authority fake audit
scandal in 2012.
The sun killed Tid debacle in
2008 and 209.
The Sunport American Virgin
Galactic fiasco, 220 million,
and there's there's a lot of
those funds that I hear have not
been recovered from a couple of
those projects as well as the
art bus project waste from 2016
to present. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering what mechanisms
specifically are in here to
negate any waste, fraud and
abuse when we're expanding the
current statute where we've
already seen some abuse of the
current one that's already in
place.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I think you're proving the point
is that we've been dealing with,
despite the anti-donation
clause, um, a number of issues
that still exist and still
persist, unfortunately. However,
upon discussion with the auditor
and putting together a process
that would work um for these
types of investments that we're
proposing here and we're only
adding the vibrant Communities
Act. We're not saying everyone
under the sun gets money now,
right? The point of the enacting
and and um uh enabling
legislation.
is to focus on the nonprofit
angle of this. We already have
many exceptions, Lita. We have,
um, you know, looked at and
focused on scholarships, on a
number of other programs that we
want to, um, again, exempt from
uh affordable housing that's
already an act within our, um,
the purview of our, uh,
Enabling legislation. So what
we're talking about, Madam Chair
Representative, is tightening
the reins on what we're able to
do with nonprofits here through
the uh vibrant Communities Act,
um, and again, in conjunction
with the various monies that
would be invested could trigger
an audit, could trigger a number
of other investigations, etc.
But to your point, Madam Chair
Representative, despite the
anti-donation clause, um, we, we
have put mechanisms in place to
tamp down on fraud, waste and
abuse and have learned
more in the last 113 years about
how to do that properly, um, and
have the mechanisms to ensure
that that does not, um, persist
or hopefully exist within our
state.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I agree
with you. I, I do want to make
sure that that doesn't happen. I
don't want another Santa Fe
ring.
Which some people argue
currently exists sometimes when
it comes to the current state,
state of our state. And so I
just want to make sure that we
don't have any of those kind of
pay for pay pay to play schemes,
things like that. And so I see
on section 8, we have different
reports that must be given, I
think it's on page 9 of your
bill.
And it doesn't really say
specifically the
What it requires in the reports,
it says, you know, deadlines,
details,
um point of order manager. Are
we on the bill or are we on the
um?
Uh, joint res House joint
resolution or are we discussing
um HB 290 or both under the
apprehension we were under both,
but I can stick to whichever.
Oh, Madam Chair, I think the
confusion is that they're meant
to be read together when we're
looking at some of the
definitions of public purpose
and that putting into the
statute. Um, however you prefer
reading them separately or
together they're in conjunction
we understand they'll be voted
for Madam Chair, we understand
they'll be voted separately, but
we wanted the ability to be able
to present them together since
they're so interlinked.
What is the direction of the
chair, madam. Let's go ahead and
do HDR 11 1st and then we'll
move on to the bill. Thank you.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. I
think they kind of interweave
together, so I'm just gonna
Stop there, so that's all.
Next, I have it on the list to
representative Luhan.
Thank you.
And, um,
It is confusing because they
are, they, they do go together
and, and even in, as I'm reading
through both of the, the bill
and the joint resolution
reference, um.
The references to HJR 11 are
repeated throughout um HB.
90, um.
commentary from agencies. So
Madam chair, um, but I'm only
gonna refer to the HGR 11
comments that I'm reading
through. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
So the concerns that I'm hearing
uh throughout some of the
comments are from the ethics
commission, state ethics
commission and um I'll repeat
also what Representative Block
was going, uh, was.
Speaking of regarding broad
exemptions.
So I'll read one of the points
here, Madam Chair. Um, the state
ethics commission adds that if
amended as proposed in HJR 11,
the gift clause of the
Constitution would operate less
as a constitutional constraint
on subsidies of public funds to
private organizations and more
as a general authorization for
legislature to allow or require
state agencies, counties,
municipalities, and school
districts to
Donate public funds or property.
to private entities.
Additionally, the ethics
commission notes the broad
exemption in HJR 11 interferes
with the voter's ability to
approve each specific
permissible category of
exemption from the anti-donation
clause, as it occurred to date.
As has occurred to date.
So my question goes to where are
the regulations?
Where's the oversight?
Mm
As we're broadening, um, the
scope.
And what was just mentioned with
waste, fraud and abuse.
Potentially, I'm not saying that
this bill does. I just want to
know where the regulations and
oversight will
Be seen for this legislation.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. So
they'll be in statute, um, the
constitution clarifies that
essentially we remove that, you
start with anti-donation, thou
shalt not donate, right? Now
we're saying like the the uh
legislature shall do this for a
public purpose. Um, so you're,
you're removing that initial
impediment that then lends to
the miss or confusing or
inequitable interpretation of
everything that follows. So we
clean
that clause and then in the
enabling legislation, we
essentially look at any
investment that we've made and
we've seen this with Lita, we've
seen this with, um, affordable
housing with uh all of the
scholarships. So until there's
enabling legislation, and that's
in the clause, um, section 1B,
um, the provisions of this
section are not self-executing.
So it requires that we have
legislation attached to any
investment that the state is
making.
Um, and so therefore, it's, it
clarifies what we can and can't
uh contribute to, however, it
requires enabling legislation to
do just that.
Madam chaired the enabling
legislation would be attached to
each appropriation. Is that how
I understand this, um, Madam
Chair, uh representative. So
depending on what we're talking
about, right? So for in, in the
case of DFA they have various
projects that require contracts.
Um, this is what essentially
House Bill 290 clarifies for the
nonprofit and cooperative piece,
um, but for everything else that
already has enabling legislation
that was exempted from
The original anti-donation
clause remains, um, the law of
the land. We don't touch those
whatsoever.
Thank you. I, I appreciate that.
I think that.
It not being self-executing is,
is probably a bigger
conversation, maybe we.
To come forward as you're moving
forward with this legislation
because that um that clarifies a
lot for me, Madam Chair, also,
um, but I'm still having some
So, um, questions about
You said you spoke with the um.
Where did I have a note here.
The auditor's office and the
concern that the auditor's
office had mentioned is the
additional work and what would
Would it um require them to do
when working with now private uh
nonprofit entities, Madam Chair,
did you have a
Can you expand on your, um,
Madam Chair representatives. So
depending on the investment
where we follow federal, um,
statute in the way that um this
is the enforcement of an audit
would be. So anything over a
million dollars that the state
would invest in would would
immediately trigger an audit,
um, through the state, um,
auditor and, um, so, in fact, we
are updating the state audit Act
separately this legislative
session, um, having spoken to
them, just making sure that
whatever
the triggers would be that are
enabled within the um vibrant
Communities Act are in
conjunction with their
preexisting um
Uh, jurisdiction, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Do you
really know how many millions of
dollars we already contribute
through our budget to um
Uh, Lida or other like uh NMFA
MFA, I'm sure.
We do, manager, I, I don't. Do
you? Yeah, I don't have the
numbers off if we enable this,
what would happen to those
quasi-governmental agencies,
Madam.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, with this legislation
legislation or the um
The constitutional amendment
affected those MFA and MFA.
Madam Chair, we do see in the
FIR that um MFA um will take on
additional responsibility, but
again, we give them additional
responsibility, I think every
single year, um at DFA, um, that
said, Madam Chair,
Representative, we also see a
number of cost saving
opportunities in the
administrative role that not
only our local governments have
to serve, um, but our Department
of Justice that has to
consistently issue, um,
Uh, opinions about what anti how
anti-donation is interpreted for
various governments, um,
organizations, etc. Um, so with
the administrative overhead with
many of the investments that we
do make either in capital outlay
or into nonprofits already, they
have to take on an
administrative fees for fiscal
agency, etc. that is a cost to
the state government through
those processes. So we, well
again, we can't calculate the
exact um
sort of penciling out as to how
impactful it will be across
state government. um, but we
overall hope that there's a
great amount of cost savings
given how much of administrative
burden it has been on a number
of our agencies and local
governments.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative,
although we cannot calculate we
have had support across the
board from the municipalities
and counties, um, and we do
believe having a centralized
clearing house and oversight
through DFA will not only um
strengthen our accountability
efforts that is all spread out
amongst thousands of entities,
but also um help address the the
specific
issue that you brought.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, I
think that one of the other
issues I'd like to bring
forward, I mean, this is a huge
topic, and I'm glad we're
spending some time on it. Um,
this also comes from, uh, I
guess from the Attorney
General's office.
Um
This legislation would have
implications for as you
mentioned, and I'll, I'll just
make this quote from them
municipalities and counties
because of the Home Rule
Amendment Section 6 of Article.
10 of the New Mexico
constitution for non-home rule
counties and cities, this
silence would likely operate as
a prohibition.
Because non-home rural counties
and cities typically require an
express express grant of
authority from the legislator to
act like much what we talked
about. In contrast, Home Rule
counties and cities would
presumably be able to receive
such requests and make donations
because their authority exists
unless prohibited by the
legislature.
Um, and then it goes into um
regarding the home rule, um,
Let's see, um, the counties and
municipalities receiving
donation requests would be in
the position of having to
interpret the broad meaning of
the terms public public purpose.
Public health, safety and
welfare.
It is very likely that there
would be pressure to include the
activities of some groups and
exclude others, for example,
frequent requests that test the
current anti-donation clause is
a free use of public facilities
under a new HJR 111 framework.
Would a boy uh little boys,
little girls, little league
baseball organization meet the
definition of the public purpose
because it promotes public
health, safety or welfare.
What about the, the boy and Girl
Scouts, what about a
religious-based drug
rehabilitation group, the
possibilities abound and without
more legislative guidance, Home
Rule counties.
And cities would likely make
different determinations of
public purpose based on local
preferences, requiring the
courts to be called upon to
delineate what is what is not a
public purpose. So there would
be an additional
Time and cost if we have to go
to the courts for any kind of
determination. Can you respond
to this to
certainly uh representative. So
first and foremost, that already
happens, um, local governments
decide what projects they want
to take on. Um, we see that
through grow funds. We see that
through a number of different
capital outlay projects. Um,
it's their decision already, um,
and how that gets executed. The
second part I will point you to
is within the
Uh, vibrant communities program
application process, Madam
Chair, Representative, it
clarifies what qualifies, still
allows for that interpretation
locally to say, we do need a
behavioral health facility
locally. We do need, um, you
know, a new, uh, facility for
baseball, soccer, etc. Um,
however, those projects are
vetted through the application
process and then determined as
to whether or not they are
merited, um, and lacking in.
conflict of interest, etc. So it
clarifies the process uniformly
for each of these projects to
have their equal, um,
opportunity to apply for those
funds as well, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you for the clarification.
I think these are some of the
big issues and some of the big
questions that I'm hearing as
well as we're, we're filtering
through and getting the
direction of, of carefully.
Modeling what we want to see,
um.
Move forward it for the public
to decide whether they want to
have this and give.
Directly, I guess if you will,
more directly.
Public funds to private.
Um, resources, um.
I thank you for, I thank you for
the conversation. I think this
is a huge conversation and and I
may have some other questions,
but I, I think you covered like
some of the big ones that I
think are gonna continuously
come up for you, and I just
wanted to bring those forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madame Floor leader Skanski.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and representatives,
um, I am thrilled.
That you have brought this
forward. Um, I actually
Um, did a bunch of research a
few years ago, um, because we
had to uh.
Amend in
Uh, the Congress, the states
enabling Act and in the process
of looking at out the the act of
Congress that recognized New
Mexico as a state, I started
looking at
How other states uh compared and
and what what became clear to me
is that many other states.
Had these anti-donation clauses
similar to this, particularly
Western states, particularly
states with land grants or other
um kinds of sovereign wealth
funds and every other state
around us has either repealed
theirs or significantly modified
it, and I think it's a real, um,
it's been a real challenge and
uh barrier for us to move
forward as a state because we
don't have the flexibility that
a number of other states have.
Um, one suggestion for you all
is, uh, you know, the long title
is what is placed on the ballot.
And I do think you could look at
an amendment between now and
judiciary to make that a little
more descriptive to the voters,
um, and I certainly am happy to
help, um, I, along with one of
our staff, did quite a bit of
help with uh several of
Representative McQueen's joint
resolutions on the long title,
um, because I'm not sure in its
current form that it
Uh, makes it clear to the
public, um,
and this is always the challenge
with items that are going onto
the ballot is how to make it
very, very clear to the voter
what exactly they're voting on,
um, and so I think simplifying
the language, I have a couple of
ideas, but um would love to get
together with you after this
committee to simplify that. Um,
I do have a bunch of comments on
HB 290, but I will hold those
for now. Thank you.
Madam, uh, vice chair, Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Uh, I need.
I'm going to ask uh if I am
understanding this correctly.
Please thank you, thank you for
bringing this forward. Thank you
for wanting to modernize again
and bring current those pieces
that we are working with now,
and so, um,
On I want to speak just to, I
have questions on 290, but I'm
gonna save those. This one
though, I don't believe.
I believe this question is
specific to uh HGR 11, and it
has
It is in reference to the
Attorney General's concerns.
Um
Uh, on the
Repeal and replacement of this
clot with the anti-donation
clause, with the public purpose
doctrine. Can you walk me
through and if I maybe didn't
understand it when it was
explained earlier. Could you
help walk me through um
The rationale behind it?
Thank you. I would appreciate
it.
Are, are you, Madam Chair, are
you asking why we are choosing
to repeal and replace it.
Generally or
The, the rationale for the
current language. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, it, what I'm
bringing up came up under the
significant issues in the FIR
related specifically to.
This, the HDR 11. So I just
wanna understand it better more
clearly.
Maybe it, it might just be me.
Everybody else might be on the
page with you.
Uh, sure. Um, I'm just gonna
borrow.
So, um
Madam Chair, Representative,
again, let me, let me, I, I, I
realized I get some quizzical
looks here and it, I, I maybe
one is uh narrowed down my, my
question with um
The
Repealing and replacing.
Yeah
This clause with the with the
public.
purpose, doc, specifically.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so what we're, what we're
looking to do is essentially,
um, the current anti-donation
clause starts with.
You cannot donate as a state.
That's essentially how it's been
interpreted for the last 113
years.
And so what we are replacing it
with is the state can, uh, the
legislature must act,
essentially, um, so it repeals
that and essentially says,
What the state can do.
Rather than what it can't do.
And so maybe if I could help us
along, correct me if I'm wrong.
So having the ability to clean
this up.
Ensures that when money if money
should be made available funding
should be available to these
entities that there are.
Pieces in place.
To
I like, now I, I liken it to the
capital outlay process. Excuse
me, um, capital outlay process
where uh there are, there is an
application process. There are,
there are ways to determine
whether this is one that's ready
to go, not only when they
receive it, they are getting uh
the recipient also has to make
reports and there are matrices
that are.
Established and a report to show
whether.
continued.
Uh
Progress that this is something
worth.
Providing.
Am I correct in that
understanding, Madam Chair
Representative, yes, correct.
Um, the processes that currently
exist stay from the state, the
part that would be um
essentially streamlined is the
unfortunate piece about the
fiscal agency, you'd be going
straight through the state on
each contract. Um, you wouldn't
have to have that administrative
burden on the municipalities or
localities to have to provide
that extra layer of
accountability, which currently
we know isn't necessarily
providing any additional service
other than an administrative
burden.
Um, so that would go directly
through the state, and we
already require all of that
reporting, all of that, um,
information on every capital
outlay project, that process
stays, um, from the state level,
the same.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Vice Chair, um,
Representative, it also uh
creates a centralized area for
review and guard rails where now
we have a 1000 or more
interpretations of what the
guardrails are as well. So this
will also, we believe will um
help close that loophole for
accountability and, and also
streamlined for efficiency and
um and I, I do apologize for not
being here for the first couple
of minutes, just because you
were talking about like getting
your
Head around the organization. So
I like to use this example is if
you have a 501c3 providing
services for veterans and equine
program for veterans. We as
legislators maybe through,
through our grow money could
help fund that, but when they
have a hole in their roof, we
are not allowed to help fix that
unless the state owns the
building. So this will allow
another process of still
accountability.
To make sure that the public
purposes being met, um, without
having to
Find those workarounds like we
do with leads funds. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for that
response. So one of the um
applications that I can see it
too is in my district,
Bernalillo County, uh, we're
unincorporated in the area that
we're at, we have that piece in
there and so uh um.
How
I, I can't think of another way
to say it, but how?
What this means then is they'll
be competing against the county
as well as others, no thank you
please clarify that for me,
Madam Chair Representative, no,
I would say that it actually
will give your unincorporated
area a more equitable, um,
because, uh, currently, the
unincorporated area.
We'll have to find their fiscal
agent might be the county, might
be the cog, I'm, I'm not sure,
but it won't be the city of
Albuquerque. Now there'll be one
fiscal agent. So they will have
more equitable footing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
the end of my questions.
Many members.
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
You know, I've worked with this
legislation representative and,
and Madam Chair, um,
On both sides of the aisle, um,
I do have some questions and um
I know that the county, County
has um.
You know, past a resolution, I
think, to
Support this, which I mean, I, I
can see the benefit.
Um, but I, my, my concern is,
well, a couple of concerns that
I still have, and I'm gonna just
put those out there as the guard
rails, and I don't see anything
in the legislation.
I'm sorry about that.
I don't see anything in the
legislation that talks about the
guard rails or suggests the
guard rails that are would be in
place to prevent and what I see,
Madam Chair, and, and
Representative is in the um
The analysis for this.
Let me see where let me find my
page here
in the um analysis.
Um, right up front, it says um
The implementation of HJR 11
could lead to significant
administrative burdens on state
agencies, particularly
particularly the state ethics
commission, this Office of the
State Auditor due to potential
increase in donations and need
for oversight. And I think
you've, you've somewhat
addressed that in terms of, you
know, moving forward if this was
passed, there would be certain,
um, you know, increases for
funding. So I think that
has been addressed, but
On the second page, it talks the
state of ethics commission warns
this could enable subsidies
without transparencies
increasing corruption risks, and
that
That
Concerns me that that's in here
and
You know, I just
Knowing 30 years of working in
government, um, and I have seen
corruption, and I have seen and
I'll give you an example, um, a
long time ago and probably the
90, late 80s, 90s, there was a
dental program in the South
Broadway area where there was
corruption and um people.
Literally went to jail over it.
Um, and it was, uh,
A nonprofit dental.
You know, situation that
occurred. I, I guess what I'm
raising Madam Chair, um, and,
and I'm not hearing a lot of
discussion about this and it's
concerning me some, um, is the
risk, the risk factors.
4
Probably not so much
Albuquerque, but the smaller
communities where you don't have
the kind of oversight, you don't
have the kind of staff.
That
You may have in Bernnaleo County
or, you know, the city of
Albuquerque or places like that,
um.
So can you address that, please?
Thank you, and then we can do it
together, but thank you very
much, Representative. Thank you,
Madam Chair. um, and thank you
for being an advocate for, you
know, our state funding and in
our communities. I very much
appreciate that. This is very
much important to us as well and
why we've worked so long and so
hard on the details of this. So
this goes back to this is an odd
piece of legislation, you know,
HG HJR 11.
And HB 290 don't exist without
each other. So that's how we
have to think about it. So we,
they have to be in, so the idea
is that if we get both of them
signed this session by the
governor, then we present the
HGR 11 to the public for voting
and only if it passes, does the
enabling legislation kick on,
even though it's been approved.
It doesn't. So I believe that
the analysis was trying to silo
each one of those bills, and
they can't be siloed. They are
intertwined. So the guard guard
rails are very detailed and
specific and, and this scenario
that you talked about like our
smaller communities, I think
that that is the issue that we
run into today and why there's
inconsistency on the
interpretation or even the
misinterpretation of our current
anti-donation clause.
Because it is only as uh uh uh
viewed and and has the
guardrails as your resources
show with these bills, we will
have consistent and, and uh the
larger amount of uh a resources
towards the implementation in
the guardrails, but I will defer
to also my colleagues here.
Thank you. So, Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you for
your um.
Um, statements of concern, and I
think that if I'd like to just
direct you to the same FIR page
3, and I think it says that in
I guess it would be the 3rd
paragraph.
Um, and, and confirms what was
just said by my colleague as
proposing if you could just
please
um wrap up quickly. We have to
move along to hospital 290.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's why I'm just
pointing you to this so that you
can use it as a reference to
confirm what uh representative
Kates and uh representative
Romero said they would
eliminate, uh, they would
instead.
They act in concert, sorry, the
3rd paragraph, page 3 of the uh
FIR that will help clarify, I
believe, if you refer to it.
Page 3 of the FIR under
significant issues as proposed
HJR 11 in concert.
With HB 290. They work in
concert and it does exactly what
you're response to the concern.
So if you would just refer to
that. I appreciate it. Thank
you. Just one additional comment
while we are absolutely
sensitive to waste fraud and
abuse in the state and want
those guardrails to be very
clear and we believe the
enabling legislation does so,
again, 44 other states have
wrestled with this 35, going
with the public purpose
statement, most recently Iowa,
having done.
that. So we've seen in modern
times how folks are able to, to
implement this legislation and
do it thoughtfully, which is
what we've been able to um not
only learn from but interpret in
the same ways here.
Um, thank, thank you,
Representatives and thank you,
Madam Chair.
I feel a little bit more
comfortable with that, Senator
Barrego, there is no on that
point in this committee. So I
said, I don't do it on that
points in this committee.
So I'm moving on to
Representative Anya Nonu
and representative Zamora I
hadn't finished my discussion
OK,
I'm sorry, you were done. I know
we're kind of rushed for time.
I'm sorry about that, but, you
know, I understand uh that we're
are trying to get more funding,
um, you know, kind of released,
I guess you could say. Um, to
the nonprofits, and I understand
that, um, and, and I feel a
little more comfortable with
Representative.
s discussion regarding how the
two work together, um, I think
that
You know,
One of the things, and I don't
have that in front of me from
the, the, the statue, and I'll
have to go look for that, but
the, the definition of public
purpose, I think and and
representative uh Little raised
that question. Um, is that, you
know, how that
Interpretation for, I mean,
those are very specific, and we
know that, you know, um,
definitions are very important,
especially when attorneys are
arguing them in court. Um, so I
just, uh.
You know, put that on the table
and thank you for your
discussion.
Representative onion or.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
presenters, thank you.
Representative, uh, before I
take the second representatives
Moura, you had your hand up.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you presenters for
bringing this bill forward.
My concerns are.
that
We're going to see
A bunch of nonprofits being.
Uh
Develop or
He filed for if, if this goes
through. Do you perceive
something like that
representative of Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, not only would we
Assume that that wouldn't be the
case. Um, it is very possible
that there could be some um
activity there, uh,
representative, um, Madam Chair,
they're, we're hopeful that
within the guardrails that we
have in place, that any
nonprofit that would be
fraudulent in nature would be
weeded out from performing at
all in the state of New Mexico,
Madam Chair, Representative. So
Madam Chair and Representative,
so, so the guardrails will be
in, in, in the House Bill 290,
if I'm.
And
Some other, other concerns that
I have are
Why should the, the taxpayers of
the state of New Mexico.
The
Responsible for
The cost of nonprofits.
And, and, and I understand that
they're doing public work for
the public good.
But, but there's more to it than
that.
And, and how they're developed
and why they came about and
everything else and, and maybe
you'd want to give me an
explanation, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Zora. Um, so
currently the taxpayers and our
legislation, are both of us are
funding nonprofits within our
communities. So then what this
bill will help
Um, clarify, bring more
accountability and more
efficiency, we believe it will
ultimately save money from
centralized um uh review process
and consistency is, it will save
that money, but for the funding
of the nonprofits, we have
already decided as a community
for the last.
80 years or 501c3s that we do
not want to expand our
government. We do not have a
department of food insecurity.
We do not have a department of
domestic violence. We do not
have a department of employment
for people out of uh uh.
Out of our prison system, but we
want, but we understand how that
it will benefit our community by
being able to fund that. So
rather than expand our
government, we have chosen to
fund nonprofits. This is an an
avenue we have to be able to
make sure that those nonprofits
are doing what we want them to
do, that they have uh up to-date
accountability and, and, and
audits reports, and there's
accountability for what we need
in the public purpose.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, but when you,
let's take food banks for
example.
We already allocate money to
them.
So why would we need this in
place.
If we already allocate money to
food banks Medi representative,
I think you heard from the
various speakers in specific to
food banks and more critically
to the essential services that
are being provided by our
nonprofits, um, generally, first
and foremost, they can't meet
the demands of the services they
provide without that
supplementation from state
government, local government to
be able to function. And
secondly, they have an
administrative burden currently
that, um, with this overhead
that they have to
Pay in order to be able to
perform those essential services
because of the anti-donation
clause. They cannot perform and
oftentimes it creates such a
burden that they're, that local
governments are choosing not to
implement these projects or
funding because of the
anti-donation clause, so the
lack of clarity, the, um, the
ownership, etc. creates this
impediment to even do those good
works in our communities, Madam
Chair Representative.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
why don't we just increase the
funding to the food banks.
If it was that simple, that's
the bill we would have today,
um, Madam Chair, Representative,
I think the systemic issues that
we're seeing across state
government across local
government and in the
implementation of the funding
that we want to appropriate
directly to these programs
directly into our communities
right now is unfortunately, um,
Very, very complicated, very
convoluted. And when it comes to
anti-donation, very inequitable
is how, as to how it's applied.
Um, so, you know, when we're
looking at how we want this to
be streamlined and centralized
within our government. It
clarifies for many um
organizations, those that are
performing these essential
services, um, how that, how
those projects and that purpose
will, will be implemented, um,
Madam Chair Representative.
And Madam Chair and
representatives, I'll end with,
with one last.
Probably more of a statement
than a question.
Is that
Representative Little and
Representative Barrego.
were concerned about the
guidelines and, and the money's
being put out.
And
We have responsibilities as, as,
as uh
Senators and representatives,
legislators of our of our state.
To manage the monies of the
taxpayers well.
And what the problem is,
whenever we broaden up.
Broaden
The language and in the
constitution and, and, and the
and the
Programs that we're gonna fund
and broaden that language out
where we put more money out in a
more easy way to.
The
People that create.
Programs for the betterment of
the community.
It's not that the monies are
gonna be misused within the
language. It's that the monies
are gonna be used by
by the people that don't care
about the language.
About the laws and the language,
so we're gonna be, we're gonna
be more loose with our money.
We're gonna put it out to more
people.
And then
We're going to create more fraud
and, and, and not create it, but
there's more likely to be more
fraud and, and
Misuse of our monies in the
state. And I, I think we
deserve.
The, the public, the, the
taxpayers in New Mexico deserve
the tight language that's in
there now and us take a real
close look at how we spend their
money. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan for a 2nd
time.
As quickly as you can, please.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate the time. I don't, I
don't know how quickly it's
gonna be, but um.
As I'm
you know, um, the budget process
and um.
Other, other issues. I would
like to bring up, uh,
How this would
Would this allow for
Um, funding for private schools.
Um
Uh, Madam Chair, I guess it's as
basic as I can make it, Madam
Chair, Representative, the HDR
would not allow for funding for
private schools in the way that
it's worded again, unless
there's enabling legislation
attached to um any uh
appropriation, it would not.
The madam chair, then it would
make it easier for private
schools in in the form of
vouchers that we've been, that I
will say I stand against and
have a problem with the way that
our budget is processing out
through our education, um,
For public schools.
Then we could have
This would open the door for
Legislation for enabling.
Appropriations for
Madam Cha representative that's
already the case, um, we could
already have a bill today that
would do that, um, Madam Chair
Representative. So this wouldn't
hinder that, nor would it um
help or encourage that
whatsoever, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um mountain chair, I would
disagree. I would say it would
make it a lot easier for that to
happen, um, where we have
strong, um,
That we don't have the support,
I would hope, but
There is already an issue in in
parity within the constructs of
our education system as it
stands. I think this would
allow.
And I'd, I'd like further
discussion with you maybe later
to prove that, but right now, I
don't see that that.
That is an issue for me.
And I think that this would be
um put us in a position where
that would make that easier.
I will just point thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative,
I'll just again point you to
page 2 of the HJR, um, lines 7
through 11 that require that
with any of the investments that
the legislature would make that
they're not self-executing
before public funds are donated
to a private person or private
entity implementing legislation
shall be enacted by
ity vote of the members elected
to each house of the
legislature. So it requires that
Again, the majority of the
legislative process would, um,
That into statute prior to um
any
Appropriation. Adam Chair
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm not arguing the
process. I'm arguing the um the
argument that could be made and
that it would make it easier and
have a stronger argument for
those sorts of things to happen,
Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan, are you,
are you done with your question?
I think I'm done with my
questions now. Thank you.
I have emotion. I representative
Anya Nonunez seconded by Madame
Fleur Leader, please call roll.
Representative Onon or.
Representative Black.
Pass
Representative Borego.
House
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Task.
Madame Floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Representative Black.
And
We're if you're back.
OK, um,
no.
Represented Breo.
Madame Cha moved to table.
Representative, we're on a vote
for a due pass motion, please
vote.
Mm
No, with an explanation.
Representative Lujan.
No, with the substitute motion
after.
Represented Mia.
No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair.
Yes. 45.
No.
Uh, yes, uh 4 yeses, 5 nos.
Representative of your house
bill, uh, your HDR 11 has
failed.
Du.
And we have a substitute motion
to table.
This coral.
Madam Chair, I think you called
a substitute motion table, and
there was a substitute motion
made but not, not.
Said what was it about what it
was about, Madam Chair, the, the
motion to table uh
Moves forward until we take a
vote on the motion to table.
Me was going back to represent
of Luhan because um.
Respectfully, you can't make a
motion in the middle of a vote.
I see. So.
So to me, my, my motion would be
uh do you pass no wreck until we
fix.
Some of the things that
representative Suppansy wanted
to work on subsequent motion to
table.
OK. So the motion to table.
Um
to table takes precedent.
Overrepresentative Lujan's
motion for a do pass with no
wreck.
Do we have a second?
I'm sure.
Uh
I have a question on rules, so.
If there was a motion to
Do not pass.
Can you override that? the vote
was taken on a do not pass,
right? The, the do pass and it
failed.
So can they, can they still move
a motion to table?
OK.
Cause it, cause it failed,
right? The first time.
OK, so call ro for the
substitute motion to table.
Great. uh Representative Marin.
No to table.
Represent a block to table.
Representative Borego. Yes.
Representative Lujan.
resented Mia.
Yes, the table.
Madam F floor leader.
a table
Representative Zamora.
the table.
Madam Vice Chair.
No.
Madam Chair.
4 or 5 motion fails. Your motion
to table has failed.
Back to the uh representative
Lujan's motion for a due pass
with no wreck. Do we have a
second? A second by Anya Norno,
please call Roll.
Representative on.
Representative Black, no.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yeah.
Madame Floli,
yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Thank you.
I, I'm, one moment, please.
I've.
I, we've got 3.
that's.
Yes. Thank you on emotion.
For no wreck. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Yes, please.
63
Congratulations. We got through
this. You have a due pass with
no wreck. OK.
Are we, do we have time for
House Bill 290 then or
We are.
We are excused from house floor.
What can we do in 10 minutes?
Um
OK,
so.
Let's go ahead and uh do.
House Bill 291st thing Wednesday
morning.
And then we will have to do
house Bill 228238, we'll have to
add those to our existing
Wednesday agenda.
Thank you. We are adjourned.
