Present.
Representative Barrego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
floor leader.
Uh, representative Zamora.
Vice chair.
here.
Chairwoman?
Here
we have quorum.
Thank you. We have a quorum this
morning. So let's do some
housekeeping.
Uh, Senate Bill 85, um, we'll
just hold that place and see if
we're gonna roll it. House
Memorial 57.
We will hear on Monday, however,
we will take public comment
today since I see a lot of.
But before we begin with public
comment on House Memorial 57.
We as a committee reviewed
Senate bills 100.
Senate bill 221 as amended.
Senate Bill 345.
And Senate Bill 357.
And having been reviewed in
advance and those uh Senate
bills having passed.
Senate committees unanimously in
the Senate floor unanimously,
uh, we'd like to consent those
bills out of this committee. Is
there?
OK, and I'll second that. Is
there any opposition?
Seeing none, those Senate bills
are consented.
Thank you.
All right, um.
House Memorial 57.
Representative on
Would you just sit up there.
It's like a nightmare from.
High school
OK,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am happy to present
House Memorial 57.
And I'm just going to read the
long title, if that's OK, for
purposes of introducing the
bill, requesting a designee from
the Department of Public Safety,
the director of the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy. The
deputy director of training for
the New Mexico Law enforcement
Academy and a designee of the
Public Employees Retirement
Association to collaborate and
study the issues regarding
recruitment and retention of New
Mexico law enforcement academy
instructors and provide a
consensus recommendation to the
legislative interim committee
charged with reviewing matters
related to investments and
pensions. And with that,
I do not at all stand for
questions.
Representative. So let's go
ahead and here uh public
comment.
On House Memorial 57, those in
support, please raise your
hands.
Those in opposition.
Please raise your hands.
Seeing none, let's go to the
audience.
I mean, online.
For those on Zoom, if you are in
favor, please raise your hand.
For those in opposition, please
raise your hand.
OK, OK. Seeing no public
comment. We'll continue House
Memorial 57 on Monday.
Thank you, Representative.
OK, with that, uh,
Senate Bill 290 Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sitting in for Representative
Small who is expected to be here
in just a moment. Thank you.
Um, and we are here. They will
be here to present Senate Bill
376.
State employee health benefit
contributions, and I'll ask
representative small to
introduce herself, her expert to
his expert to introduce herself.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Carrie Armijo. I'm the cabinet
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority.
I'm sure if it is acceptable,
um.
Madam Secretary will present the
bill.
Uh, sure, Madam Chair, uh, good
morning, everyone. Um, as many
of you know, uh, the state
health benefits plan, which
offers coverage uh to state
employees has faced a deficit
for years, um, at the same time,
New Mexico contributes just 65%
of the cost of insurance for our
employees, which is the lowest
level of any state in the
country. The healthcare
authority has been working on a
data-driven proposal for months,
identifying ways to set the
state's health.
plan on a fiscally responsible
path while making health
coverage more affordable for our
employees. Senate Bill 376 is a
critical first step to achieving
these goals. The bill saves
taxpayers money and paves the
way for other state public
insurance partners to adopt
similar reforms next year. Um,
the changes in the bill reduce
employee costs by more than 40%
on average, eliminate the state
health benefits budget shortfall
decrease the uninsured rate
members of the National Guard
give local public bodies more
certainty around their costs and
save the state general fund 155
million over the next five
years. Um, in launching the
healthcare authority last July,
the governor charged me, the HCA
leadership team, uh, and the
secretary myself uh to fix the
state of New Mexico health
insurance uh plan that covers
60,000 New Mexicans. Um, Senate
Bill 376 does just that. As the
largest payer of healthcare in
New Mexico.
Co, the healthcare authority has
a responsibility to the market,
providers into New Mexicans to
leverage our expertise,
partnerships, and purchasing
power as the largest payer of
healthcare in the state to make
state of New Mexico health
insurance more accessible and
more affordable.
Um, and just before I'll just
summarize the bill really
briefly before I hand things
over to Representative Small
here, um, at its core, the bill
does 5 things. First, it
requires the secretary to submit
actuarially sound budget
requests. When we set the
premium tiers for uh the premium
levels for state employee health
insurance. It uh second, it
replaces the outdated salary
brackets for insurance
contributions with it with an
80/20 split for all employees
eligible for state health
benefits.
Third, it provides a program to
pay down a portion of all of the
premiums for lower income
employees through the Healthcare
Affordability Fund.
Fourth, it creates patient
protections for initiatives
related to the establishment of
fair hospital pricing, and 5th,
it creates a program to lower
premiums for members of the
National Guard who qualify for
Tricare Select Reserve, um, with
that, Madam Chair, members of
the committee all um turn things
over to her.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee, and thank you,
Madam Secretary. Uh, the
secretary has done an excellent
job, um, summarizing the
legislation. I think we show a
lot of confidence in this coming
over.
Madam Chair, uh, from the Senate
with such strong bipartisan
support shows confidence in her
uh in her department's
leadership. Uh, the one area
that I've been really um
I'll, I'll share is that over
the last 3 years as we've
transitioned into the healthcare
authority transitioned employee
health benefits from GST over to
HCA. We've had, uh, very large
deficits.
Because we're not submitting
actuarly sound uh employee
insurance um request each year
and there were a few years where
uh there were, there was no
increase in those premiums.
We're fixing those benefits
here, doing it in a way that's
saving the general fund money
very soon, uh, providing a
better healthcare coverage for
our employees in line with other
states, um, and providing more
options. Uh, so I think, Madam
Chair, really pleased to be here
today. Again, appreciate the
secretary's leadership, uh, and,
um, with that we would stand for
questions. Thank you.
Representative Chairman and
secretary.
Now we will go to the audience,
those who wish to speak in
support of the bill, please
raise your hands. Hey, let's do
one minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Brigadier General Nate Carper,
New Mexican National Guard
Deputy Adjutant General. Uh
thank you this morning for your
time and consideration of this,
of this legislation. We consider
this legislation imperative for
the National Guard. This
increases our readiness to
respond when our communities,
our neighbors, our state and our
nation needs us. We have a
number of uninsured, um, service
members within our ranks. This
helps close that gap to make
sure that they have the
coverage, the
be able to receive the care that
they need in between the orders
that when we bring them on to
respond to our communities, uh,
in the natural disasters that
we've experienced here recently,
as well as our federal mission.
Thank you for your support, we
appreciate your continued, uh,
consideration of this
legislation are membership
supports this and our
associations from the officer
and list associations also
supported.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, madam chair and
representatives. My name is uh
Sergeant Jack Smith with the New
Mexican Army National Guard and
graduate of the Mexico National
Guard Youth Challenge Academy.
I'm in support of this bill, um,
to help support.
Um, our soldiers.
To help them get them all
covered for this insurance. A
lot of the soldiers have
civilians, uh, jobs.
Other than the military that are
not covered under insurance, and
that inherits the soldier in
case if they get any injuries to
not be mission ready for what
our tasks entails.
Um
Excuse me.
And as well with this bill, it
can lead to clarity for their
families to know that their
soldiers are covered and taken
care of, um, under any
circumstances.
Um
And also as well happened with
me. I was on orders. I was
covered. I don't have any
insurance. I got off and I had
to get an operation on myself. I
had to pay out of pocket and it
I have a little immobile for a
couple of days, but
Sorry.
I supported this bill. Thank
you.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is uh Randall
Bates. I'm the vice president of
the New Mexico National Guard
Association. So I represent over
180 New Mexico National Guard
officers and senior leaders, key
leaders of the New Mexico
National Guard. We fully support
this bill as a Sergeant Smith
spoke about.
Our soldiers and airmen require
security clearances. So when
they get hurt,
The civilian job potentially
without insurance, they can
incur debt. When they incur that
debt, that could be an issue
down the road and cause them to
lose their status as a soldier.
There's a lot of great reasons
recruiting retention, all the
things that General mentioned,
but we, we appreciate your
support. Thank you.
Any further comments and
support?
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
and thank you for, to the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward. My name is Lindsay
Hurst. I'm currently serving as
the executive vice president of
CWA Local 7076. Our union
represents state employees at 13
state agencies, about 2700
positions, 27% of which are
vacant. We respectfully ask that
you pass Senate Bill 376, every
year when the legislative salary
increase hits our paychecks,
many of our union members end up
With a pay cut to take home pay
because they are bumped into the
next insurance tier.
Removing the tiered system from
the state employee insurance
system will support our low and
middle income state workers and
their families. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Erica Sanchez. I'm with New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. I'm also here on behalf
of New Mexico Together for
Healthcare, a statewide
coalition that is working to
expand access to quality
affordable healthcare for all
New Mexicans. We stand in
support of Senate Bill 376.
We've seen firsthand the impact
that the current system has on
employees and it's unaffordable.
100.
of people, including our
teachers and public employees
have been sent into debt and
collections because of the high
out of pocket costs that come
with this insurance. In
addition, the Healthcare
Affordability Fund has had a
significant impact on thousands
of New Mexicans by bringing down
the costs for individuals. So we
support expanding the use of the
fund to increase access by also
subsidizing premiums for public
employees under 250.
of the federal poverty level and
the National Guard. Thank you.
Let's go online. Let's take 22
comments.
One minute, please. Uh, first we
have
Angela Romero.
Go ahead, Angela.
Angela, if you can unmute
yourself.
Ms. Romero.
Next we have a Clausen.
I I'm chairing others. I would
just really hope that you guys
would uh support this bill. I am
a state employee. I'm also the
vice president of Local 3320
with Ask me, and I'm one of the
employees that I did get a pay
raise. I jumped into the 6040
and thinking I was going to
bring home this great paycheck.
I actually got into a deficit
and actually made less money by
taking a
promotion and a change in jobs,
and I know a lot of people got
affected when they did the comp
ratio, um, pay raise a couple of
years ago, it jumped a lot of
people into that 6040, and some
of us are at the very low end of
the polls at work and we were
having to pay the same insurance
premiums as directors. So this
way it would just allow
everybody to be able to look for
promotions and jobs and not have
to worry about
losing money while trying to
gain um
Better access to jobs and
earning more.
It would be fair and equitable
for all state employees.
So, thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you. See if we could take
one more and then.
Um
Ann Keller.
Right, and if you can unmute my,
my apologies. Good morning,
chair and committee members. My
name is Ann Keller, and I'm 11
year state employee and the
treasurer of the CWA Local 7076,
and I'm here in my union
capacity. I stand in support of
this bill and request your
support as well. Again, I'm like
to prior individual 5 years ago
when my gross salary crossed
over $60,000 which is the
threshold um due to the
legislative cola increase, I
began bringing home about $50
less per paycheck than I had
made before the cola race. It
was difficult for those two
years trying to make ends meet
at home due to this
unintentional pay cut.
Ultimately, I had to change
positions to get a pay increase,
to reverse effects of crossing
over that salary threshold. I
respectfully request that you
support and pass Senate Bill
376. Thank you for your time and
for listening.
OK, thank you. Let's stay
online. Are there any comments
in opposition.
And we'll go to the audience.
Any
The audience. Do we have any
comments in opposition?
Seeing non-committee members.
Represented a block.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass.
Motion for due pass by
Representative Block is seconded
by representative ona Nonu, do
we have any opposition?
Seeing
How would you pass.
Thank you.
To
Senate Bill 290.
Hey, Senator, any time you wish
to begin. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you members of the
committee. I'm sorry that I'm
just a little bit late, um, so.
Let me take my breath.
I was running.
Send a Senate Bill 290 just is
very simple. It raises the
licensing fees for getting
married.
And
I know.
I've, I,
I have been told that it may
prohibit people from getting
married, but I think if, if an
extra $30 is in the way that you
may have bigger problems.
So really, what it,
so it raises it up to $55 and
what it does is provides um the
county, my breath.
The county general fund will
continue to get $15. The
children's trust fund will get
$20 and the county clerks will
get $20. In the past, county
clerks have gotten nothing, and
they've had to depend upon the
county general fund to do things
like preserve their records. And
many of the records in county
clerk's offices throughout the
state are getting very old, and
we truly need to dedicate
funding to preserve those.
records. And so this is a bill
that is supported by the county
clerks Association, as well as
the county's association. Um,
and we've got the Children's
Trust Fund, that if you buy a
license plate, it goes towards
the Children's Trust Fund, and
if you get married and get a
marriage license, money goes
towards the Children's Trust
Fund. That trust fund is used to
help programs that um
Provide services for abused
children, provide services to
prevent abuse of children and
provides medical and
psychological mental health care
for victims of abuse, children,
and for their families. And with
that, Madam Chair, I stand for.
You, do we have anyone in the
audience?
Who wishes to speak and support
just the three of you.
Let's go online.
Uh, Rose Angela Ortiz.
Go ahead.
Good morning. This is um uh good
morning chair, members of the
committee, Rose Angela Ortiz,
Santa Fe County deputy clerk,
chair of the New Mexico Clerks
affiliate. Uh, we stand in
support of this bill. Uh, this
is actually um a bill that was
initiated by the clerk's
affiliate, and we think Senator
Trujillo for carrying this, uh,
New Mexico clerks.
Uh, are also in support and so
we hope that, um, you know, this
bill continues to move on. Thank
you.
You will stay online. I don't
see anyone, uh, that looks like
they wish to speak in
opposition.
And back to the audience, uh,
committee members,
Representative Luhan. Madam
Chair, uh,
I would make the motion, but I
wanted just to say thank you
first and uh this is a great
bill. This is, this is
wonderful, and I do know the,
the
The, the issues with our clerks,
my, my county clerk, uh,
Katherine Clark. She's a, she is
really amazing and has been a
part of like reforming a lot of
the county clerks, um, and, and
uh across the state and their
issues and bringing them forward
to us. So I, um, Rose Angela,
thank you. She's online too for
bringing this forward. Um, and
all the support from all of our
clerks. I think this is just a
well, a way of managing um all
the work that our clerks do. I
don't think we understand.
The, the heavy load that they
carry, I mean, especially now as
um we're moving into, you know,
or every election cycle and the
changes and everything that
they've done. I just want to say
thank you, thank you, Senator,
for bringing this forward. This
is wonderful.
Before I call on my next
colleagues, I was reading the
FIR and it says should part of
the marriage license fee be
applied?
I thought it said should a
part-time marriage license.
Madam Chair, um, what I was
asked on the Senate floor was
whether or not marriage licenses
expire, and I'm happy to report
that they do not.
OK, Vice Chair Little and
representative Zamora.
Madam Trey, we would do pass.
for Du pass and a second any
opposition.
Represented block.
Do you have a question? OK, roll
call.
Representative Earno, yes.
Representative block, a quick
explanation.
Representative Borigo.
Representative Lu Han. Yes.
Representative Mejia, yes.
floor leader.
Representative Zamora? Yes.
Vice chair.
Chairwoman?
Yes.
With a vote of 7 to 1, we have a
due pass. Represent a block to
explain. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Senator. I, I
like your bill. I just usually
am against raising fees, and I
don't think it would be a
stumbling block for people to
pay 30 bucks more, but I, I
would love to maybe find another
creative way to do this, but
since this probably will pass,
good luck on the floor. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Senator.
Thank you and uh Senator Wirth
voted no too because he doesn't
like being raised. You have a
pass.
Hey, committee members, thank
you. Have a good day. We are
adjourned. All right.
Yeah, I, I didn't, um, we'll
hear House Memorial 57 on
Monday and then uh we'll
continue Senate Bill 85 on the
agenda until we hear.
