Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Chandler I'm
gonna go ahead marker is here
she's just on the phone.
Representative Scott.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Stansbury.
And chairman the queen.
Here we have a quorum.
Okay
this is a good morning everyone
the the attendee list is
So which is great
so a little housekeeping first
off and I'll try to answer is
begin with so currently the
attendees can't join in order to
make the web in our lives so
right when we start there's a
lot of the public on.
To our bills we schedule for
bills for today to them have
been rules the two bills we will
not hear art house bill two
sixty two energy storage system
tax credit and house bill two
sixty five natural resources you
know action.
We will here for bills but this
we can.
And we're going to need on
Sunday instead.
Okay we need.
Okay server you meet Sunday
so Saturday with what's
happening is because we're doing
it the four sessions you know in
the in the week and it's it's
been hard to committee meetings
on some days or a not all.
So all the committees want to
meet on Saturday.
and then House Appropriations
to.
We don't want anyone meeting
what we're meeting which is a
Saturday morning and so that
puts all the committees back
into Saturday late morning or
afternoon us all the committees
meet once a year was on two
committees and it's just kind of
a giant traffic jam inserts so
to make it a little less frantic
for all of us on two committees
and for those of us presenting
bills and other committees we're
gonna meet Sunday morning.
I'd like to start at nine.
if that's okay with people so we
started ninety we get out at a
reasonable time.
any.
I see Representative Strickler
and meeting yeah I would love to
be later than that are you know
I liked it I like to go to
church on Sunday mornings if if
if that's okay with you
In all I'm such a big center is
but I'll go I'm I'm I'm feeling
pretty bad so if you can push
at two eleven or noon at that
would be better for me but.
so what you can do is if we
pushed it to content that.
Ten ten would work okay.
Well we do ten that.
And I don't the gentle yet but
we we have the you know this to
build your all hopefully they'll
be ready for Sunday.
You know we have a couple other
bills and we'll see what more we
can get
there's a limited floor session
today we might get some
committee reports are some
Senate bill introduction and
that's a good point
today is the last day for bill
introductions so if you have the
bill I need to members you need
to get to the clerk
pretty much now not later I
think they're asking for those
by a lot.
Okay all right any other
questions in the committee
announcements on in the store
housekeeping matters.
Okay so seeing that we're we're
gonna go to our first bill which
is a bill we've heard before.
Thank you back and revise
important because we've heard
the bill before we're not going
to do of public comment on this
bill because we are taking
public comment we the if if they
attend we will hear from the
office of the state engineer to
get their input on on their
committee sub.
But first we're gonna get to
Representative Romero and once
again just because I see more
and more people logging on which
is great we appreciate you being
here I want to announce again
that house bill two sixty two
energy storage system tax credit
will be heard on Sunday and
hassle to sixty five.
Natural resources and lands
protection will also be heard on
Sunday chairman thank you your
date is house bill ninety five
and house joint memorial three
Representative Montoya yes Mr
chairman we roll to bills.
on all overdoing is this bill
and and Morial it's seems like
there is that that the bill is
changed substantially I'm not
sure if we do if there I mean it
does seem like at the time
constraint if we want to let.
Public comment because once
again seem substantially
different.
Then before.
I appreciate that it is
substantially different mostly
in things that have been taken
out.
In one one difficult to face the
committee says is that the
public hasn't seen the committee
so.
So we can largely get public
comment on provisions there are
no longer in the bill.
so I mean we heard loud public
comment I I think I agree that
we're not as pressed for time as
we usually are so I think we can
have a request the committee
discussion on the bill.
And with that we'll go to Mr
chairman I would like to concur
with the if I may Mr Chairman
this bill has to change of state
Ashley we've got a lot of
feedback on these changes in the
industry is still very
interested and.
And this bill and
I would love for have some
public comment again with the
time time limit that you have
set a even posed
I think it would help the
process.
Think that would be the right
thing to do okay so let's do
this we're going to the the the
public poll.
Let's let's do do the Paul we'll
see how many people are here
yeah I don't wanna spend an hour
on public comment I think we've
already done.
Well we can certainly limited to
thirty minutes if that's
appropriate.
very good so we'll do the Paul
and and I'll make a decision
that.
Representative Romero whenever
you're ready if you could
present your bill and you might
read the committee substitute
thank you Mr chair thank you are
members of the committee good
morning
we are back on house bill ninety
five this substance to added to
one line number is two one nine
four three three point six okay
and let me interrupt you right
there can with some of the
committee substitute for
discussion.
Some of it with the committee
sets to print to session.
Is there any objection that
gazing none so we're Mr Chairman
would you give me a would you
please restate the the two oh
two number I think I've got a
long bill is ever Mero.
Two one nine four three three
point six I got it thank you.
Okay so we're on the committee
substitute.
Representative Romero sergeant
eruption but take it away.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee we marked the
halfway point in our.
She's in our legislative session
as we wander into the wilderness
for the Catholics out there
Mr chair this is a bill that has
been substantially revised based
on a lot of the committee that
we have
in the previous hearing and
thank you for bearing with on on
a lot of the feedback in the
time that we've taken so you're
really thoughtfully but our
efforts into revising this so
what we what you'll see in this
bill this version is reflective
of what we heard from you know
as a committee in particular on
the railing of standing on and
what we removed from this bill
and I should say Dr David Cutler
is in the attendees use my
expert for today
it's it focuses more directly on
what we're actually trying to
accomplish here which is in fact
ensuring that the office of the
state engineer takes a climate
science into account app on as a
rationale for why.
A permit is approved or denied
and that that that that
application approval or denial
is posted on the on a website or
in in some manner shape or form
for the public to understand
transparently why that decision
was made in addition to our
public welfare which we
basically lay out it not only
from what we've learned from
this committee but of course
many different case law and and
sort of fines here and what that
means so the public knows and
understands how these decisions
are being made which are already
I basically the forces of
government that are we're just
putting into statute those are
already mandates is if you read
the OSCE's front page of our
website which really right out
there states that their job is
to ensure that water is
protected for future generations
that's the climate change Ingle
and then of course that they
have the authority over the
supervision measurement
appropriation distribution of
all surface and ground water in
New Mexico and that's the
transparency angle on
understanding why these permits
are approved or denied so are we
really feel like we're following
you know what what they're what
we're asking them to do but
giving them a bit more structure
on on shall we see that
playing out
Mr chair and members of the
committee so that's what we've
done is we've really tighten up
the language that's where on a
point six version of this to
make sure that we got the the
structure of this right with
lots of input from different
parties and so with that Mr
chair I will again introduced my
expert Dr David got slurred is a
climate science expert and to
help inform some of the
questions that we all have and
then at.
He has an comments now.
In the four as well Mr chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you Representative Romero
doctor Kessler.
Of thank you Mr chair
Representative Romero and
members of the committee
the
in here speaking personally not
as the representative of the
university of New Mexico again
and I think for it to save time
rather than go down the list of
what.
Repeating from scratch what's in
the bill let me just state that
as Representative Romero stated
there have been some of
deletions from the bill with
regard to the issue of standing
with regard to climate change
and implementing consideration
of climate change
impacts on water resources the
language has been
changed to be less prescriptive
about how that will be done and
of
deferring back to the section
that.
has that that mandates of the
state engineer develop some
climate change impact rules
based on the best available
science
Over the next couple of years
Let me add one more thing before
yield the floor and that is that
in just a few weeks since this
bill was heard previously by
this committee
there is Alice's of climate
change impacts on New Mexico
water resources that's been
initiated by the Interstate
Stream Commission.
Of which has provided some
support to the New Mexico bureau
of geology part of New Mexico
tech which formerly was the New
Mexico school of mines
of with a a timetable of issuing
a report back to the I. S. C. by
summer of this year which I hope
could be leveraged as input to
the development of a robust and
science based climate change
assessment that could be used
operationally by the state
engineers office so we have
that.
Go up on going
independently of this bill
so with that I'll
and my comments but I'm
available for questions of from
any of the committee members
with my thanks for the
opportunity to appear here
again.
Okay thank you for that
C. let's
Is here from the office of the
state engineer.
I don't.
To see Craig Ridgley with off
the same chair in the attendees
I don't see John the Antonio.
John if you're there can you
raise your hand other areas.
Getting can you find out the.
John gray.
Yes the panelists for rural
allow them to speak that they
are to be a palace I'll go ahead
and just allow them to speak
John should be allowed to speak
now okay.
John have you seen the the
committee so Mister the
internet.
Yes Mr chairman we have received
a copy I want to thank
Representative Romero for
setting it up yesterday we did
look at it and I'm I have some
speaking points that I'd like to
address both the you and
Representative.
Romero if that's possible now so
I would like to hear from you
not at it too long lines but the
please cover the points that you
feel important.
Okay thank you Representative
Romero chairman of queen for
addressing some of the major
concerns we had with this bill
is initially introduced it
amended the committee substitute
before you today's improvement
on house bill ninety five we
still have some concerns with it
we've heard your perspectives
would like to work together a
preference preferably during the
interim with all affected
stakeholders to address some of
the main interests that our in
house bill ninety five of those
interests include addressing
climate change more transparency
and also defining criteria for
the conservation of public
welfare determinations of first
on climate change obviously
it'll affect our water supply in
addressing it is a priority for
the governor and for the state
engineer Interstate Stream
Commission our climate change
will affect New Mexico and our
stream systems on a broad scale
and so the best way to address
it is on a statewide or stream
system bases and how we plan on
doing that is again funding
research through through the on
the impacts of climate change
that include the governor's
fifty year state water plan of
the basin closures we have the
the ability to create critical
management areas or other
regional limits on new
appropriations and transfers
we're gonna continue the
implementation of our active
water resource management
strategy to address drought
conditions and surface water
shortages that's how we that's
that's how we really put the
mechanism and administrative
mechanism in place to deal with
shortages which is really the
true answer I think to the
climate variability which is
imposed on climate change and
then of course we'll update our
base and models to ensure that
impairment and water supply
analysis incorporate the best
available science on the impacts
of climate change of the
proposed approach in a house
bill ninety five addressing
climate change on a case by case
basis under the conservation
factor would become more about
box.
Checking exercise and and that's
not going to address climate
change in a meaningful way so in
section nine of Hospital ninety
five the rule making requirement
is still problematic for the
reasons we explain to you before
it's an unfunded mandate
scientific findings as to
climate change impacts should be
provided and technical reports
that can be updated over time
not in regulations that are
difficult and costly to update.
The hospital nine contain some
requirements for agency action
on climate and overlap or
conflict with the rulemaking
requirements by house bill
ninety five so assuming that
there's a funding and the
language for hospital line to
better starting point for
directing the agency US action
on climate change in the current
language in house bill ninety
five second on the transparency
issue we're open to a more
narrowly targeted bill that
would require the state engineer
to publish findings on contested
applications third the factors
for the state engineers
conservation and public welfare
determinations we're open to
refining that the state engineer
should consider of to consider
those determinations however
those determinations are
critically important in any
changes or additional
information or requirements
should be carefully vetted
during the interim with
stakeholder groups for
conservation determination was
initially required to enable the
state engineer to consider
whether water should be used in
New Mexico or outside the state
we don't want to lose that and
there are constitutional
implications and interstate
compact implications which
changing or refining this
language so we need to be very
careful.
With the interstate so lawsuits
that were under that are with
that are happening right now of
public welfare the purpose a
list of the of the proposal that
omits some important factors and
include some factors that are
bank for example we want to make
sure that permits doesn't
undermine our ability to meet
New Mexico's interstate compact
obligations there other
important interests that we also
want to consider like economic
development again the language
is critically important and that
means that any amendment should
be carefully vetted with all
stakeholders before altering
statutes that will affect to the
applications across New Mexico
some of the other concerns and
Representative Romero G.
mentioned issue took standing
out of this but there's you know
when we look at it and you do a
critical re the committee sub
drops
provisions in those earlier
versions but the but when we
look at it is really up.
Somewhat of a backdoor process
based on of the the new criteria
that set out of in the committee
so would still open it up to
losing the standing requirements
and in other words all those
items that are listed.
They could be challenge and as
of the way the language reads
that the the state engineer
shall consider impacts on health
safety recreational cultural and
environmental interests that's
that really opens the door I
feel for other challenges which
in effect would give everybody
standing based on on the way the
bills written so that's a
concern of mine we did mention
resource unfunded mandates to be
there's a recurring expense on
permit application findings for
probably two hundred thousand
dollars a year the rule making
process is another of that's a
one time fee of probably a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and then just other unforeseen
consequences that will be vetted
during the interim stakeholder
process so Mr chairman I'll stop
there but I really can't
overemphasize the affected we
need all stakeholders together
to make sure that we're we're
able to put a good classes
together to address everybody's
needs and to pass good the
legislation so thank you Mr
chairman and Representative
Romero.
Thank you Mr the Antonio
now we're gonna do our whole so
we have.
Fifty seven people at the
tending of the meeting ever
gonna run the ball us order
opposition proselyte I.
All will be up for thirty
seconds and then we'll announce
the results of Shelby whenever
you're ready.
The ten more seconds.
So.
Thank you so the results are
opposition fifty nine percent
support forty one percent and
that's a of a total of thirty
nine participants in the fall.
So about sixty forty in
opposition.
The request the by the members
to do to public comment
I.
My review the bill is that the
things that people object to
most have been removed
so I don't want to spend a lot
of time on public comment
because we are done public
comment.
but given the request
and we'll go ahead and do some I
will do with the opposition
first
show me if you can do it the two
minute timer on each participant
and we're not gonna be more than
ten minutes on each side.
So if you would like to speak.
In opposition to this bill
please raise your hand now
you're on the phone you can
raise your hand by pressing star
nine.
so first we're gonna do
opposition.
And first of all it's like we
have Alan Roemer.
Ellen you are muted I'm here
and.
There you go.
I would be in support of this
bill not in opposition okay so
if you put your hand down and
then raise it when we do support
that would be great so
opposition Matt Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members my
name's Matt Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for Apache
corporation.
The change in protests language
in house bill ninety five the
committee so will reduce the
burden on applicants but not
enough to facilitate development
of new sources this will still
create substantial hurdles for
water appropriation without
substantial change in staffing
or budgeting increase to
facilitate the large consulting
influx the O. S. C. will not be
able to adapt to the demands of
placing all technical analysis
requirements analyses office
especially when no baseline
model programs in place they're
placing an indirect regulatory
ban on the future permitting via
delay most states place The
impetus on the applicant to
justify the feasibility of the
permit in the OSCE acts to
review and validate the
assumptions and analysis even if
this level of review permit
times can be ninety days to six
months the obligations imposed
on the state engineer are
overwhelming this will bog down
the process considerably and
raise costs of administrating
applications for these reasons
we're still oppose to HB ninety
five thank you for your time.
We have Liz Taylor.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee Representative
Romero I'm Liz Taylor I'm in of
a water all year and then water
all year for about twenty nine
years in New Mexico and today
I'm representing the San Juan
water commission in
in San Juan County northwest New
Mexico and select energy
services in southeast New Mexico
of the select energy services
provides water to the oil and
gas industry to highway
construction in the the county
of Eddy County and in other
industries down there.
I do agree that the changes
responded to the comments
particularly on the standing
issue but the changes do not
address a couple of very
significant issues as Mr de
Antonio said the public welfare
criteria gives a list of what
you should what the state
engineer shall addressed it does
not include economic development
or of local land use decisions
as you may know the Intel
decision many years ago Lee
Martinez said that public
welfare of equated to what local
governments have decided the
land you should be for a
particular piece of land and if
the water was going to use for
that was going to be used for
that purpose of then admit
public welfare and that's
missing as Mr Dantonio said the
other issue is a water lawyer
I'd like to point out is that
the bill provides that the state
engineer must provide written
legal and factual con
conclusions and reasons for
decision on every application
not just the protest
applications I've been involved
in many cases that are initially
or pro tested but the protesters
settled the case is remanded to
the Water rice Division and
decided if you add the
requirement to have decisions
written out for that that will
create a huge backlog on the
state engineer and will delay
the process of getting permits
which is very important to New
Mexico and will really slow down
business and slow down the
movement of water which is very
important for economic
development.
In I think this is a big change
that that they will have
unintended consequences and harm
of the public in New Mexico so
please defeat the bill thank you
very much.
Except we have Patrick Killen.
Good morning chairman the queen
members of the committee my name
is Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron and I'm
also speaking today in my
capacity as co chair for the
legislative affairs committee
for the New Mexico oil and gas
association I just want to start
by again thanking the bill
sponsor Representative Romero
for having an open door to new
movies concerns throughout this
process we do appreciate some of
the changes that been made by
Representative Romero and chase
committee substitute that being
said I knew motor shares the
concerns of its member companies
testifying in opposition today
as well as earlier on February
fourth and we remain opposed to
the bill we continue to be
concerned about the proposed
sweeping definitions and
language around public welfare
and conservation and believe
that these areas could be more
productively examined and
addressed during the interim
legislative period.
you know as currently proposed
the definitions we feel are
still too open ended and
excessively broad and
unfortunately will only serve to
enlighten litigation over there
meaning for these reasons
another reason stated by members
memo that we respectfully ask
the committee vote now on house
bill ninety five thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Valerie were to.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is not a
work number registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau I stand before
you in opposition of HB ninety
five New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau supports the
same shitty of private rights as
defined by state law and
individuals legitimate privilege
to utilize these ladies with
undue interference from the
government the proposed
legislation before you today is
a bill that continues to be
modified and again has not been
vetted or properly worked
through the interim process.
Any legislation that looks to
address such a critical topic
like water must be heavily
analyzed and work to work to
ensure all those affected I've
had the opportunity to Weiss and
discuss their issues and
concerns the bill is a major
unfunded mandate that would
continue to hamper the ability
of the state engineers office to
do the important work for which
they are responsible the
legislation looks to require
that each application is
accompanied by a report findings
which is unnecessary and will be
burdensome on the office
requiring additional time and
resources for each application
this will lead to additional
delays in processing application
additionally we have concerns
with the language in section
sixty G. and elsewhere which
states in making the detrimental
detriment defamation as to
whether to approve would be
detrimental to the public's
welfare of the state the state
engineer shall consider the
impacts of health safety
recreation culture and
environmental interests this
language is extremely vague and
could be widely interpreted and
vote for the education with with
we respectfully request that you
vote in opposition at H. B.
ninety five.
Thank you next up we have Jim
Winchester.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico representing three
hundred fifty members
independent oil and gas
producer's just a few quick
comments the the bill as
originally introduced was a
major major overhaul on state
water policy and now we see that
the main original provision that
opened up water right objections
to the public has been taken out
so that does bring up the
question of why we are now
moving forward on this some
bills it seems to us that it is
just remaining bill that wants
to include climate change
provisions in water rights in we
argue that it's already in place
in existing decision making in
the state engineers office I
think the state engineer said it
best that this remaining sub
bills really only accomplishes a
check of the box related to
water and climate change and
existing existing state water
strategy already doesn't
cooperate a climate change in
place it's been well that it to
include the voices of all
parties at the table
we do feel that this bill is now
essentially just a an additional
bureaucratic layer that is
really unnecessary what does
making necessary yet another
layer of burden for the state
engineer and finally and perhaps
most importantly it slows down
water appropriation specifically
to industries such as Ag and oil
and gas and you know we fear
that the real true intention of
this bill is to slow that down
as introduced today so for that
and for many other reasons we do
stand opposed thank you.
Okay we're at ten then so we
will hear from one more person
and that is Missy Currier.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is misty
Currier and I'm a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixty representing our clients
Occidental petroleum and planes
we respectfully ask you to
oppose house bill ninety five we
echo the concerns mentioned by
our fellow opposition during
this economically difficult time
and always New Mexico businesses
have the right to operate in
good faith in an environment
that does not create undue
burden or hindrance on any
public or private entity and
built opportunities for moving
New Mexico forward thank you for
the opportunity to testify
today.
Okay thank you for that never
gonna go to supporters of the
bill so if you want to speak in
opposition your hand down if you
would like to speak in support
please put your hands up.
Okay so first we're gonna go to
a team that Christodoulou.
Committee chairman members.
My name's Tina Christodoulou and
I'm an environmental engineer
the political director for
Adelante progressive caucus and
a mother as an engineer I say
check boxes are best because
this thoroughness and does not
leave this subjected to under
the table dealings.
Second as Adelante this is for
social justice we need to make
sure that we are thinking of
future generations and that
brings me to as a mother what we
do now and I'm gonna say it now
again what we do now thanks to
generations to come and the data
is clear what we are doing in
the Permian basin in taking away
water and stealing it from
future generations as well as
emitting methane in sloppy oil
and gas extraction is going to.
Questions over the edge.
I vote no I'm in opposition and
I request that the committee do
so as well.
Thank you for that next up we
have Dr Michael John.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members I'm that medical check
on I'm a lawyer and registered
lobbyists The New Mexico
environmental law center we've
been involved in a number of.
Very significant water rights
cases and one of the
frustrations in those cases is
that the quite the requirements
concerning public welfare and
conservation of water are
completely and totally without
criteria for the state engineer
to make those determinations
this bill would.
Put in place criteria for making
those determinations and
importantly would include in the
criteria for conservation of
water the issues of drought and
climate change which are
critical to New Mexico's water
supply.
The bill also would require the
state engineer to publish
findings to support an approval
or denial of an application
which would make future
applications and.
Proceedings on them much more
predict predictable which would
be a benefit both to the
appropriate so would be
appropriators and to those
people who are protesting
proposed appropriations of water
we urge you to support the bill
thank you very much for your
attention and we think the
sponsor for bringing this
forward.
Thank you for that we have steep
ways for.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you so much for
your service and the legislature
I just like to note that New
Mexico is the most vulnerable US
state in the nation as respect
to water and climate change has
pushed us in of what it would
have been a moderate drought
into the second worst drought in
twelve hundred years so it seems
kind of crazy to not put our
water choices into the context
of climate change it seems like
a very logical thing to do so I
urge you to please pass H. P.
ninety five I live in an area
where water is very precarious
and there are people who cannot
afford to drill new wells and
they have to have all their
wonder tracked in so please this
seems like the most logical
decision to make thank you very
much.
Thank you next up we have Louise
Guerrero.
Hello good morning chair members
of the committee.
of the legislative and political
organizer for the Sierra Club
Rio Grande it's chapter I wasn't
initially going to comment on
this bill but I just wanted to
just express our support over
thirty five thousand members all
throughout New Mexico I'm not
really going to going to a lot
of details I feel like there's
been a lot of really good
comments already but we do live
in a state where we know that
water is precious the water is
life so I'm asking you to
support this bill today thank
you.
Thank you for that and with that
we're gonna close public
comment.
yeah we're good to the
committee.
Any discussion from the
committee recessed Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you Representative
Romero
Thank you and and thank you Mr
chairman for allowing some some
public comments
Think that was important and and
the bill has changed quite a bit
from its original state and and
also appreciate you to.
Allowing
the state engineer to to say a
few words as well and this bill
still has some some issues stand
and
It's interesting that the the
opponents
you know water rag have a
business and industry you know a
proper right Representative have
to stay in terms of employees
and and the and an interest in
in that regard
I always appreciate the numbers
that are Representative by other
other organizations
I think we need to can kind of
focus on that so that there's a
great deal of concern for this
bill.
H. inmates more some more input
I believe.
It's a major departure from a
current.
Kurt Wilson and rags and the I
don't know for Representative
Romero can can actually is for
baby maybe state engineer can
but
you know we've been in a draft
recommendation for a number
years we can we continue to
suffer from drought and undergo
that the state engineer has to
to build Dawlat in their
analysis which is a climate
change very poor climate change
issue
the state engineer does not
control the watershed management
on on the force lance.
I lancer state lands and the
watershed management is really I
think a key component to climate
change if we can can somehow
restore forced back to health
we I think we wouldn't be
suffering so so deeply on the
straps of tuition so
Representative Romero can can
you add anything to that on on
or track conditions and how the
state engineer is currently
handling those issues.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Strickler I will
defer to my expert Dr David
Kessler who actively knows and
has experienced as all of us
have the drought and and what we
project moving forward and how
it's managed.
Thank you Representative Romero
and representative Strickland
in my experience
the long term effects of climate
change on water resources have
been applied very unevenly from
one state engineer to the next
to the next
and so what I view I I'm in
agreement with their current
state engineer on the importance
of considering the effects of
climate change on the long term
risk to water availability for
the state
In my view what this bill does
is simply codify what many
people we've heard from what
agree with which is that we
would be putting of perhaps the
most precious resource in the
state that is water at risk if
we do not try to codify and make
the treatment of climate change
considerations of consistent
over the long term in fairness
both to all applicants for new
water rates and for future
generations that need access and
and need to be assured by the
actions we take now that water
will be available over the long
term.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you to.
The gentleman we we we
definitely have to take care of
our water resources no the San
Juan basin
you know we have a San Juan
river.
And then the Navajo dam area and
that's that dam was built and
and constructed in the nineteen
sixties to provide water for the
Navajo Nation and
and we we use about to the
Navajo.
Important system forms about
sixty thousand acres
you know a lot of corn lot of
alfalfa a lot of potatoes
Karia amazing operation and I
use about ninety thousand acre
feet of water years it's it's a
property appropriated they have
the right to to to use those
resources in the city of and
just to give you a comparison
City of Albuquerque uses about
ninety thousand acre feet of
water for their municipal you so
we've got a lot of the interests
out there that we need to
protect
culture uses quite a bit of
water naturally we're denture
state and high aired State we're
blessed water gauge and
the lower Rio Grande Valley or
Qanbar Marcia I think they're
the number one.
Reducer pecans in the nation our
number two I think they're
number one George's either as
number two and they they need
water to.
Provide sufficient moisture for
the those tree so the state
engineers got a big job.
There's no there's no doubt
about it and
We just wanna make sure any rule
changes done slow down there
their efforts yeah I'm afraid
this bill does that whether it's
intentional or not it's going to
it's going to slow things down
and
no San Juan we we we're blessed
with your creation in our in our
County we're we produce a lot of
for alfalfa in in our area
in addition to the on private
lands and
And even in town we have
irrigation
that to.
Helps small.
Small landowners to provide
water for their further the
little little gardens and and
things of that nature so it's a
big complex issue and
I just want to you surge
cautioned that any major changes
nation a lot of good input from
all the interest overshot just
wish we had the legislature Mr
chairman and and a
Representative Romero that we
could do a better job on the
force management watershed in
San Juan we've got a terrible
problem with the with Russian
olim since all cedars and I
think they suck up a lot of
water that's not just I mean
it's not just a unique problem
for us statewide and and the.
We we gotta try to address that
to others there's a there's a
lot of factors here that would
help restore water our water
table and and makes in better
shape so reversion stranger
being choked out unfortunately
so Mr chairman and and
Representative Meryl.
Thank you.
Bring this forward and
Appreciate your comments.
Thank you Mr chair maybe just
response at the rulemaking
because there's might be a bit
of confusion that I would like
to clear up week we give two
years of for understanding the
climate change impacts as to if
you repeat page eighteen section
nine so when we talk about
assessing the impacts of drought
and climate we absolutely did
not want to impose on any
immediate action that we were
asking of the LFC we give till
July first twenty twenty three.
Adopt those rules and identify
that process so you know we
really felt like we gave plenty
time in the inner through an
additional session and and
moving forward as to how we felt
it would be really important to
to structure that a reliable
scientific projection and data
reliably thank you thank you
thank you madam chairman thank
thank you Representative for
that clarification and and I and
I appreciate that but I also
have to be very sensitive to the
state engineer having serious
problems with this
and that that helps a little bit
but overall I think it's it's
problematic so.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next up we have
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative.
Mr Chris.
Thank you.
Four one one the bill.
We.
We.
Right.
What was your shall consider the
impacts of drought climate
change.
Resonates throughout the entire.
Language in the bill I guess my
first question would be.
What.
Right.
What the.
Projections with respect to
drought climate change we're
looking at one or two years
fifty years.
Here's a thousand years could
you.
Shed a little light on how far
out in the future these
projections will.
Need to go.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Scott as I was
well corrected by Dr got slur
perpetual drought is something
we've we can say it's we've
experience but we also have to
manage it accordingly that's
actually an oxymoron as I
understand but all of defer to
doctor got slur on to understand
how long those projections last.
Mr chair at Representative
Scott.
Yes thank you Representative
Romero Representative Scott
of the bill as currently written
simply mandates that the effects
of climate change and drought.
be considered pursuant to this
two year study period
that is is is now in the bill
what always has been in the bill
so the current bill does not
mandate any particular specified
time frame for consideration of
climate change
however as I mentioned in my
opening comments
the governor has requested a
fifty year water plan and the
Lee had analysis that will be
the first phase of that that
that will generate a report that
feeds into that water plan.
Is based on an assumption of a
fifty year study period however
the the particular time scale
for assessment by the state
engineer would be determined
over this two year period when
the rules are are considered and
assessed.
Mr chair representative Custer.
Which model are you planning to
use.
One.
Projects you will serve the
next.
Fifty years maybe a to create
change.
What projects thank you so.
I'll just step in and an address
that if I could thank you for
that question
you are correct in alluding to
a wide range of of possible
scenarios that or incorporated
by a modern climate change
assessments so the way we
address this in a scientific
basis is to consider a risk
management approach in which we
consider a wide range of
possible futures and assess the
overall risk to water resources.
Over of a range of possible
futures
that's an analysis that include
some uncertainty but the state
engineer is quite familiar with
just dealing with Water
availability concerns on a
probabilistic basis because
there are plenty of other
uncertainties and those
assessments as well so we will
we the state
will I'm sure consider a
substantial range of possible
futures and incorporate that
into a risk assessment for
future water resource
availability.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
chair what would be the
consequences of that risk
assessment change like that
would be a wide variability
available.
With respect to public policy
depending on which end of that
risk spectrum.
Your thanks.
Projections.
What the.
In general in this part of the
world the quantitative change in
climate and water resources
contains a fair amount of
uncertainty unfortunately for
the most part the direction of
that as water resource
availability is pretty clear
from of modern climate change
assessment and that's downward
and so once again I don't wish
to pre judge of any sort of
quantitative assessment for a
particular regions but we have
the tools in hand and they have
been put to use already to make
actionable assessments that are
not.
Deterministic like weather
forecasts but are based on a
range of possible futures that
still are definitive enough to
allow for a policy to be
determined on.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Mr Chris
actionable assessments is an
interesting.
Resting talk so let me just give
you a for example.
Where is.
What your to.
Maybe call it.
Eighty five percent if you will
where is the.
Ask majority of water.
The state by which.
Streets you will.
Mr chair representative so I'm
trying to follow how that
affects the bill and and what
what the listening is in your
question so that we can respond
to what Mr chairman.
Representative yes well the
answer to my question.
Obviously is our culture.
For example.
The culture below the helpful
you recipe for grows.
Most K..
Well let me back up.
It's.
Crops that require credible
Water.
Particularly.
With respect to the desert.
So.
What.
All of the.
Would we developed given
agriculture uses.
Eighty five percent of the water
in the state.
What public policy based on
change would we develop to for
example approach.
Or or.
The.
Plant.
Production of those very water
thirsty crops in the state.
Use changes of that policy.
Representative Scott I would not
presume to develop agricultural
water policy as a climate
scientist I'm simply in the
hydrologic reality the business
and I would assert that we would
be grossly irresponsible if we
ignore the high likelihood that
water availability will be
diminished in coming.
And we need to face that and
manage it and the sooner the
better because if we do not then
my opinion we will be setting
ourselves up for a much worse
problems if we don't manage our
for our water resources in a
very forward looking way but
it's not up to humble climate
scientist to determine what's
the best management practices
will be for a a a resources that
is limited and likely to be
diminished and in the future.
Mr chair with Senator chair.
Mr could slow you would agree
with me this this conversation
all.
Without the over well thankfully
major concern.
Of water in the state which you
could which you have to agree
with.
Mr chair representative I think
when we talk about what we're
asking of the LFC in regards to
all of our water use this is you
know when we look at how the act
meant water management resources
have been have been managed so
far and and seeing the
leadership of the office of the
state engineer so far in working
with that and managing our
streams and that way you're
absolutely right when we're
looking at are major consumers
there needs to be programs in
place to provide not only
voluntary following and helping
farmers transition and we've
been working in a practice that
has been in a lot of ways just
disregarding that climate change
element that we've been seeing
is an overlay in the way that
we're managing our resources
currently Mr speaker as Mr chair
representative and so this is
one other tool for that
management for us to understand
what that resource is were not
prescribing how we're meant to
deal with that as far as farmers
go we know that we've been
dealing with it
you know in a way that our
management structure has not
taken that into account at this
point.
Two four zero I don't see
agriculture we're in.
This piece of legislation.
Is.
To be a critical component.
Water management decisions that
would be maybe going forward
climate change would you not
agree.
Mr speaker I'm sorry Mr chair
representative we're not
targeting anyone industry we're
just targeting the management of
our water resources the reality
of what we're looking at is
recognizing that climate change
is real and that we should be
managing the resource and that
way we're you know with that
comes many many many other
programs that are not only
currently in place but
continuing to grow as far as how
we manage our our following and
and helping farmers transition
in this in the in the in where
we are with drought and where we
are with climate change so at Mr
chair Representative Scott this
is a this is absolutely a
broader discussion that affects
every industry that has been
subject to what we've all been
experiencing in our Clemente.
Mr Chairman representative west
co chair.
Significant problems the
overseas toppers.
With respect to ground water
issues.
Would.
Fifty years be an appropriate
time frame.
For a climate change
projections.
With respect to ground water.
Representative Scott it it it
could be depending on the
particular circumstances and the
hydrologic
The information pertinent to a
particular application shin so
I'm not sure there is a blanket
response to your question but.
But there are.
Certainly watersheds and
hydrologic situations where
fifty years could be highly
relevant.
Okay.
Representative Mr Kunstler for
example the Ogallala aquifer in
the eastern part of the state
would there be
any.
Cool.
All aquifer.
Consequence of climate change
that would not be the only
aquifer in the state.
Would.
I thank you.
Sure but go ahead.
Representative Scott with all
due respect I I would prefer to
drive your question for the
simple reason that I'm not
prepared to number one I'm not a
groundwater hydrologists and let
me just.
Right up front about that
I am aware that pumping is
rapidly depleting
that particular aquifer but I am
not the right person to make off
the cuff assessment of the
hydrologic balance of the
Ogallala aquifer I would say
that the of HB ninety five does
not yes Sir.
That climate change is the
overwhelming primary
consideration in water resource
vulnerability everywhere in
every circumstance it simply
adds climate change to the list
of considerations and codifies
that that should be among the
list of considerations in the
state engineers decisions.
Mr Chairman representative to
Christmas I guess goes to the
heart of.
Objections with the this piece
of legislation that changed over
the next fifty years.
Will be in
my whole.
When you compare it to.
Yes
If you legislation.
The economic benefits that
accrue to that utilization and
the public policy that
restricts or encourage.
Thank you Liz.
Without without putting your
culture.
All of this makes will.
Without including with stroll
right scored underground
aquifers into the middle of this
mix will
change to other primary
consideration we are.
Doing so state to service Mr
chair.
Mr chair.
Thank you very much for your
answers that's all I have.
Stansbury did you have something
on that point yes please Mr
chairman thank you Mr chairman
thank you to the Sanchez and and
thank you to Representative
Scott I think it be helpful just
to help them find a little bit
of science and to explain and
the last discussion and just to
help answer the question so Mr
chairman our state has many
different kinds of aquifer's and
I know that we have some folks
even who served on our committee
who are in the oil business so
you're very familiar with ground
water geology and you understand
there's different kinds of
formations that hold oil and
petroleum as well so it can't be
answered the question that was
asked a few minutes ago can't be
answered with a blanket
statement there are aquifer's
that are very shallow that are
hydrologically connected to the
actual base flow of our rivers
so a case in point Mr Chairman
is actually the elephant Butte
irrigation district down on the
lower Rio Grande in the hatch
and and Los crucis valley the
groundwater table there is very
hydrologically connected to the
river and as a result climate
change and impacts of climate
change and lower snow pack lower
run off will absolutely affect
the aquifer immediately and will
have impacts on our ability to
meet compact compliance an
agricultural deliveries so in
that case the answer is yes
absolutely and we're not talking
about eighty fifty year time
frame we're talking about today
that's happening today and that
is actually at the overview of
and the Rio Grande compact
compliance lawsuit that is
happening that it was happening
in the courts this year in other
aquifer's where you have deep
aquifer is that were created in
previous geologic times that are
actually not hydrologically
connected to the surface water
no you're not going to see an
immediate climb impact this year
or in fifty years so it's
important to just under.
And the science here this bill
is about permitting taking into
consideration the impacts of
climate change on the hydrology
at the moment that the permanent
is being made so Mister chairman
and and Sanchez I just wanted to
kind of answer some of the
science here so that people
could kind of understand how
that was interfacing with the
permitting process sees thanks.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury richness got to do you
have anything further.
Representative Scott is.
Mr Chairman hi.
Thank you thank you for that
Scott next up we have
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr chair and the thank you
Representative Romero for
bringing this bill back
Good to see you again.
I have a question about process
Mr chair and Representative so
this is an application for a
change in use so could you give
me an example of the kinds of
requests that come through for
change of uses.
I'm just trying to get some
contacts Mr chair
Mr chair representative I guess
that would be a good question
for the office of the state
engineer how that how we
currently operates where when we
see the response on applications
they're inconsistent as far as
how that what the hell the
decisions are made and that's
what we're asking them to do is
to just clarify that so I don't
know if there's somebody in the
audience that wants to talk
about the process.
Mr Dantonio would you care to
address that.
Absolutely and I.
Agree with that characterization
where we are very consistent on
how we address it says change in
place and purpose of use is
where we're going to see most of
this I and I think Mr Chairman
Representative Romero and
Representative Chandler I think
I think we're focused on the
wrong issue here climate change
we all are the same at page
opinion that water water
supplies are reducing where
we're going you know what we're
having to deal with reduce water
but but to focus on climate
change on individual
applications and something that
even representative Stansbury
just said at the moment the
transfers being made we consider
we consider climate change of
that's because of I think the
lack of understanding of how
water administration works in a
prior corporation State and so
we're focused we're focusing on
climate change in this
discussion but we should be
focusing on is water
administration in a prior
appropriation state which means
that when there's a change in
place and purpose of use that
file we you know we make
assessments
the so the water rights is.
Either educated or we've we've
established beneficial use with
permits have been filed within
state engineers office so let's
let's let's look at a typical
change in place and purpose of
use from say an agricultural use
to maybe meniscal industry use
or something along those lines
those applications are you
evaluated for impairment the
move from location to the move
to location we have the option
of also considering public
welfare and conservation which
we can help define and it helps
us with that flexibility if we
need to impose those in our
decision making the point being
is that we only transfer in that
example the consumptive use
amounts that agriculture would
you reporter use would use to
the new use so we're preserving
the supply the priority date and
how and how this all comes out
so if you have if you're you're
making that determination we're
not looking at climate change
we're looking at the adjudicated
right how much is how much is
there and what it's going to
transfer to the new place of use
in any sort of impairment at the
move from where the move to a
location where the the rep comes
and and it's and it's we manage
to the supply in any given year
so we are in this example.
Part.
Mr Dantonio I think we've
strayed beyond the question I
think the question was a
mechanical question about the
nature of the transfer is that
is that fair resent Chandler
yes Mr chairman if you saw those
facial expressions indicating
frustration that is what my
question was I'm really I I
really would just I really would
like simple answers to light
what I hope is a simple question
so could I just get an example
of a change of use an example.
So the.
Representative Chandler I think
I think one changing is the.
Mr Dantonio suggested was Ag to
have enough discipline investor.
That.
That what you're looking for
something more detail yes thank
you Mr chair so another question
if I may Mister Mr chair and
hopefully I can get is a simple
answer to this one too who has
the burden to establish that the
permit should be issued.
So.
Mr Chairman is that address to
me I'm assuming I can.
For that that would be
appreciated okay well I'll.
I was trying to to answer a
question just as simply as
possible earlier but yes the
when when there's an application
that's filed.
We we look at obviously the
efficacy and we we go through
those yes we look at impairments
we look at whether or not it's
contrary to conservation within
state in New Mexico or
detrimental to the public
welfare so we make the analysis
typically what happens is most
change applications are always
protest it so that we updated
this eventually would go into a
hearing unit scenario unless the
parties can get together and
and.
And agree to the you know all.
With respect to the application
that's being filed the virgin is
on state engineers office look
at impairments if it's called
tested and we take it to a
hearing then there's a K. that's
that's developed in front of a
hearing officer so that both the
protest and then the
applications can present their
case and every single decision
that I make a state engineer is
appealable to District Court on
it in a done noble of process
which means it starts brand new
they don't take any of the
administrative director so the
matter Mr chairman and and
Representative Chandler of you
know I hope that answers your
question but that the example
I'm using here is a change in
place and purpose of use from
agriculture minus plant Bill use
if when we transfer that right
it's only the consumptive use
portion of that water rights so
that we keep the water in
balance with respect to of the
pool of water that's available
so it's not an additional
depletion to the system and and
that's how we that's how we do
the moves the new move from
location to move to a location.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chairman Mr the Antonio so let
me reflect what I think I heard
Mr chair
hopefully succinctly and that is
what I think I heard the state
engineer say is the burden is on
the state engineer to establish
that the permanent the permit
application is appropriate to be
approved and then the burden is
not on the applicant to
establish that that I get that
correct Mr chair and anyone
else.
Mr Chairman
Representative Chandler the
weather burdens to the the
burdens on state engineer to and
R. hydrology folks to look at it
for those tests it becomes it
becomes when it gets protest it
it becomes the applicant's
burden in front of the caring
unit process to present their
hydrology and their case if they
differ obviously of the I think
the application should be
approved to there's protections
that think that it should be and
that's how we work it out to the
administrative process which
again is appealable to District
Court.
Yeah so having heard those
answers and I'm open to
persuasion this is what my
concern is Mr chair and
Representative Romero is there
are this small agricultural
people farm owners who make
these applications and there are
small agricultural persons that
appeal and protest these
applications and my concern is
what is the costs going to be if
one of the elements that day
those small individual
agricultural people perhaps
others but I'm focusing on that
right now Mr chair
representative if they had now
have to introduce in evidence on
climate change impacts and if
you have a answer for me that
say they don't have to deal with
that issue I I'm I'd like to
understand that better thank you
Mr chairman Representative.
Mr chair representative Chandler
so again what we're asking the
state engineer to do in the
management of the resource is to
consider drought and climate
change the burden is not on the
small producer to do that we're
saying that in the management of
that resource right when he had
talked about only the
consumptive use portion is
what's currently being
considered we know that in many
of our offers that that.
Resources is diminishing so if
we're not considering it on
future use or the change of use
Mr chair representative that's
what we're asking the office of
the state engineer to consider
it current which is not
currently as far as the public
understands is a consideration
that's explicitly part of their
determination.
Okay I'm I'm still just very
confused about what the roll in
of the protest and is.
Mr chair sorry.
Chair Mister chair
representative so I I guess I'm
I'm trying to understand too
because with their I mean every
application is already of
possibly being pro tested every
single day and for different
reasons and.
You know as far as who that is
and where that's coming from we
don't know you know would that
we took standing out of the out
of this bill in order so that
this would not be left up to
anyone to chance you still have
to be able to prove why they're
protesting as far as detrimental
Stanton standing right we did we
took that out to to open it up
to anything so
Matt Mr chair representative I
guess I'm confused as to what
what I'm gonna do is that your
question as well as to where the
the sort of the challenges what
that is art not already current
in currently in place.
So when we try to help clarify
Mr chair and representative.
There's a little farmer in the
Honda valley they want to change
they want
to transfer some water rights to
someone else for different use
they have to apply to do that in
their application do they have
to address the issue of climate
change in their application.
No no.
Not by this designation not
within the statute no.
Okay and there's a protest Mr
chair
The state engineer issues of
finding that approves the permit
there's a protest Mr Chairman
representative who then needs to
address the issue of climate
change the state engineer or the
applicant.
Or the protesters.
Mr chair representative the
state engineer House only rest
in in the decision that they
make whether they approve or
deny an application.
Mr chair and
Representative.
Who is responsible for
establishing the evidentiary
base for bond pond which the
state engineer makes that
determination.
The state engineer Mr chair
representative.
You can.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative
Chandler next up we have
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
and Representative Romero
F. as I listened earlier it
appears as if
a few items have been addressed
that were substantial problems.
But it will as I listen to the
state engineer I go through his
last at the beginning of this
committee hearing I he will he
went through a whole list of
items that are still bit
concerns including
the ability to be able to do its
job timely manner see here's the
unfunded mandate concerns that
interstate lawsuit issues.
It would hamper his ability to
deal with those lawsuits
potentially this could get in
the way of that
his interstate compact remains
madam as well that were already
in with this somehow supersede
those
And then that although the
language of expanding was taken
out of of this substitute.
But the.
I heard about the the the.
State and in engineers to say
was that standing was put place
is still in there for.
People beyond those who are
directly affected by what can be
protest it that that by the mere
fact that certain items can be
protested it gives standing
based on the issue to who might
be able to protest.
and then just the overall cost
implement.
Not being addressed
I guess I just have one
question.
and that is between.
When we heard this bill last and
today.
What interaction has there been
with the office of the state
engineer because it doesn't
appear as if he's.
Comfortable at all with this
legislation.
Mr chair representative as we
worked through and heard the
feedback we send those sub for
Committee to the office of the
state engineer yesterday again
oil and gas has been of you know
received any piece of every
piece of what we've revised and
we've heard nothing back as far
as any substantial changes that
need to be made and have been
open to that
Mr chair representative.
Okay but you didn't reach out
other than receiving what we
received which was.
The information that's what was
being planned to be introduced
today.
I think most folks think that
their time to comment on the
receive something that is going
to be introduced is like it was
today during committee rather
than reaching out to state
engineers office in advance and
saying how can we fix these
problems and it appears that
certain problems were addressed.
And and obviously certain.
Items were not addressed and I
and I.
I believe one of the our
admissions or or preferences
mentioned by members of this
committee were to have.
The the sponsor yourself work
with the state engineers office
to address these issues and and
that doesn't hear that that
happened.
and I just don't know what it
will is there some reason for
reluctance to just work with the
state engineer to try to address
these problems in advance.
Rather than just informing state
engineers office what the plans.
Mr chair representative there
was no reluctance whatsoever.
Okay just once again it just
appears to me the state engineer
CSEA seems to fill.
Walked out of this process this
particular bill other than just
being informed so I guess that's
more of a statement than a
question just seems as if the
person who's going to have to
administer this and I'm not
seeing that happen during.
The entire rest of the
Legislature usually when
something district medically
affects an apartment within the
administration.
That it's usually a a a a a
governor's bill or a department
bill on this appears to be the
exact opposite so it just it for
some reason that is wearing Lee
this so
so I hear the the the
administration's a.
Be more supportive of this scene
that they're gonna have to
administer it and and and
obviously there's a big.
Cost to this it it appears gonna
take many many more FTEs to
administer this
Yeah.
The side with the administration
on this.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative I just
want to clarify this is
absolutely in our in response to
our community members coming
forward on and the lack of
transparency and of course the
lack of understanding within the
decisions that are being made at
the OSCE in regards to climate
change very specifically that is
what we're seeking to do so as
far as what we've heard from
many many case laws from you
know from history starting in
nineteen eighty five we're
trying to put this into statutes
of what decisions have been made
the end so we're not leaving it
up to chance as far as how are
resources managed Mr chair
representative.
So the thank you Representative
Romero I I will remind
Representative Romero and check
there but members of the
committee and this comes up on
the floor we've been talking
about it.
It is there's a statement made
and someone yield the floor.
Appropriate to respond to that
statement if you haven't been
invited to ask us the questions
that just.
Keep that in mind.
is there any further
discussion from the committee.
Okay so I I don't see any
further discussion I think we
are missing Representative
Ferrary.
Who is presenting a bill in we
are going to hold the vote for
her to come back.
All right
let me see if I can't reach her.
So as.
As a make clear to begin the
year in the US policy the
committee we're not gonna try to
we're gonna try to avoid those.
Where the outcome of the vote
will be different when people
are.
Away from the committee
presenting a bill.
yeah I think that's the case
that could be the case with this
bill so we're gonna try to reach
Representative Ferrary.
Mr chair.
Four million dollars per year
back.
New Mexico was what will
is health related.
Move to table Mr speaker Mr
chairman.
Second the motion to table and
the second is there a substitute
motion.
Chairman over the past.
Mr Chairman a motion tabled.
Avails.
I
believe the substitute motion
prevails now Mr.
The motion it prevails you don't
need a second either.
Okay so I see Representative
Chandler shaking her head that
in affirmation so.
Show me to take a vote on the
tabling motion so this is the
motion to table.
Absolutely Representative
Chandler no.
Representative Dixon.
Now.
Representative Ferrary.
No to table.
Representative Montoya.
Yes to table.
Representative Ortez no.
Representative Sarinana no to
table.
Representative Scott yes ma'am.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend yes the
table.
Vice chair Stansbury.
No to table.
Chairman McQueen no.
and the motion to table it fails
with a vote of seven to four.
The like to make another motion.
Mr chairman I moved to pass we
do passed motion is their
second.
Representative Stansbury did you
second that yes.
I'm sure we can take the on the
motion on the well actually
let's a lot so we need a motion
do not pass on the bill if you
pass on the committee sets to.
Representative Sarinana is that
your motion yes Mr chairman it
just stands for is that your
second.
Yes.
Show the to take the on the you
the on that motion thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler.
No and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Sorry.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Townsend no.
Representative Ferrary.
Well done right away for her but
she.
The districts could you meet
yourself please.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes chair reserve very what's
your vote on the bill yes thank
you.
Thank you vice chair Stansbury
yes.
And chairman the queen yes.
And that is a two passed with a
vote of six to five.
Representative Chandler yes
later vote.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
am very sympathetic with the
idea that the state engineer
must issue findings that there
must be specific parameters by
which he must issue those
findings but my concern is I did
not get adequate answers frankly
as to how this affects the
little guy in these kinds of
operating in these kinds of
protests and application
process these so I better
understand that I can't support
that can't could not support the
bill and maybe when it comes to
the floor and I have a better
appreciation for what's going on
I will be able to support it but
that's the rationale for money
at this point voting against
bill thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative
Chandler of that Romero you have
it to pass.
You for your time thank you Mr
chair thank you committee.
Next up we have house joint
memorial three wave oil and gas
current ban on federal lands.
Representative Townsend has.
Representative Townsend are you
presenting at the memorial.
Strickler it's tomorrow
Mr chairman Representative Scott
is I have another issue after go
dress up if you would allow him
to I would appreciate it
certainly Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committees Joint Memorial
for simply.
Requests ministration.
Ministration president are
states to waive his suspension
of New Orleans leasing and
drilling permit she on federal
lands and she.
Sure that everyone is aware.
The.
Economic activity in southeast
New Mexico that is generating
our.
Budget surplus.
He is current on federal lands.
Hey moratorium leasing.
Approval of drilling.
Hi.
Our long way program.
Will perhaps not short term.
But certainly long term.
That activity and with sure I
will stand for questions.
Representative Scott you many
experts with you today you're
you're good.
Mr chair hi suppose I could have
an expert but I doubt he would.
Watch for the now would about
this issue.
Thank you Representative Scott
so we're gonna do a whole.
so the poll is support this
memorial poses Memorial and
actually whenever you're ready
we're we'll put that up for
thirty seconds.
Ten seconds.
Okay and we have a fifteen in
opposition and fourteen and
support so fifty two forty
eight.
Will do us support for this
memorial first if you would like
to speak in support of the
memorial please raise your hands
you're on the phone you can
reach your hand of by pressing
star nine.
You'll be given two minutes to
speak
that's a maximum not a minimum I
encourage everyone to keep their
comments brief first up we have
Gabrielle Care Holt.
Good morning chairman the queen
Committee members and Gabrielle
Care holes with COG operating
which is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Kanako Phillips
and I am here in support of
house joint memorial three this
morning as Representative Scott
so clearly stated great amount
of revenue for the state comes
from federal lands and more so
than that well there may be a
number of companies with permits
to drill what we're seeing a
lack of our approved right of
ways and approved other sundry
notices which allow for
operators to expand their
facility sites or get pipeline
to wells as the state of New
Mexico has been working towards
implementing strong methane
regulations in the industry has
been working with them on that
key to that is getting right of
ways in place and without these
approvals wells will potentially
be shut and so that flaring
continues to be reduced and
finally I would like to direct
your attention to the letter
that cabinet secretary Sir
control probes since the
administration when asking for
clarification highlighting the
point that rigs are already
moving to Texas we want to see
those rigs active here in New
Mexico thank you very much for
your time this morning.
Thank you for that next step we
have Carlos contact.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Carla
Sonntag's president of the New
Mexico business coalition in N.
B. C. represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans our focus is to make
New Mexico a better place to do
business.
So that our people have jobs and
can provide for their families.
We fully support H. J. M. three.
When not president Biden issued
the executive order banning oil
and gas permits for sixty days
on federal lands I was a direct
assaults against New Mexico's
economy and the well being of
our people that industry
provides thirty five percent or
more of our state's revenue.
It is the primary frontier our
our schools it's imperative that
this industry be allowed to
continue operating.
Not just for that industry but
for every New Mexico we need
that industry to provide good
paying jobs that it does and to
provide for budgeted for our
schools and for that reason we
stand very strongly in support
HM three and I hope committee
members will supported as well
thank you.
Thank you next up with Patrick
Callan.
I thank you chairman the queen
and members of the committee I'm
Patrick killing registered
lobbyist for chevron.
Eking today in my capacity as co
chair of the legislative affairs
committee for the New Mexico oil
and gas association new motor
strongly supports house joint
memorial three and we think the
Sanchez for bring it forward
this Joint Memorial sends a
clear signal from the state
legislature to president Biden
interior secretary designate
hall and and members of Congress
about the impacts of the
interior department's sixty day
suspension on permitting
secretary order three three nine
five as well as the federal
leasing ban enacted by the by
demonstration oil and gas
development on federal lands New
Mexico represent a critical part
of our state's economy both
directly with forty percent
royalties paid on federal lands
being returned to the state of
New Mexico in addition to other
direct economic benefits and
jobs arrived from development on
federal lands also indirectly
through various tax revenues
paid and use jobs created
because of industry activity as
the Joint Memorial notes
restricting energy development
on federal lands are stable risk
the loss more than sixty
thousand jobs in the hundred
million dollars in support of
our public schools first
responders and health care
services new motor shares the by
demonstrations commitment to
reducing emissions and we've
worked collaboratively with
governor Lujan Grisham on these
issues at the state level
particularly on methane but we
will not make progress by
sacrificing the economic
livelihood of our state which we
believe the federal permit them
will do so for those reasons
respectfully ask the committee
to vote yes on how strong
memorial three thank you.
Thank you for that.
Jerry fanning.
That gentleman with many
veterans during all public and
government affairs but
Following aspen elemental
federal land in the Mexico I'll
point the from the bank Mexico
we asked the committee voted in
favor of this memorial page and
that their budget the credible.
Of the.
Working for the good of New
Mexico.
The on the you have on a.
One
of our state
Support.
One.
Right thank you for all.
Thank you for that except we
have ten Winchester.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico strongly supports SJM
three as an association of
members who are directly
impacted by these federal orders
we do greatly appreciate the
bill sponsors for bringing this
forward I just want to let the
committee know that we've
already seen our members face
the immediate impacts of the
hold of development of federal
lands
oil and gas service companies I.
E. the drillers I have already
left New Mexico to take drilling
contracts in Texas on private
lands in state lands and they
have taken those in advance of
already contracted services for
federal lands in New Mexico.
There is so much uncertainty
created by the bein
administration's orders on
federal lands that are operators
are losing out on the chance to
develop here in New Mexico it's
very real it's happened since
this order was issued in it does
represent the immediate loss of
millions of dollars of state
revenue right now
so for this along with all the
environmental considerations
surrounding the delays right now
for right of ways we do stand in
strong support of this bill and
for the sake of New Mexico the
state could be environment we
ask that the committee support
this more thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Michael Miller.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Michael Miller I am a
representative Permian basin
petroleum association and we
stand in strong support of HJM
three
you've heard.
The effects of this man on the
economy of New Mexico and the
revenues to the state of New
Mexico I would just like to
remind the committee that the
this also has a strong impact on
the local communities.
In southeast New Mexico the
industry supports our local
schools sports are health
clinics it supports our
hospitals and all of this is is
going to be affected as well as
our local businesses by the loss
of jobs in the movement of this
industry to the state of Texas
for those reasons Mr chairman
and many others it's been
already articulated we stand in
strong support of H. M. three
thank you.
Thank you for that next up in
support of this memorial with
Oscar since Simpson.
Thank you very much Oscar
Simpson native New Mexican.
I've been in New Mexico looking
at the only.
I witnessed person personally I
affects oil and gas development
we need this back we need a band
we I the I propose the small
moral because we need to assess
the impact on our water
resources are air quality in the
public health thank you much.
Thank you for that is there
anyone else you'd like to speak
in support of this moral.
Okay is there if you would like
to speak in opposition to this
moral please raise your.
So we've never hands going up
Year two minutes err on the last
two minutes you don't have to
use the whole two minutes I
encourage you to be pre first up
we have earth works.
Hello my name is Nadia steins
I'm a policy analyst with earth
works oil and gas accountability
project chairman the queen and
members the committee thank you
for the opportunity to speak we
stand in opposition to house
Joint Memorial Bill three
because it is based on
inaccurate assumptions and
reflects on the stranglehold of
the oil and gas industry in
state politics funding the
central services to the people
of New Mexico is a fundamental
responsibility for elected
leaders but we believe that so
is the protecting the health of
New Mexicans and the climate
from the harmful impacts of oil
and gas pollution.
Brianna Bivens oil and gas
leasing moratorium aims to
ensure people are put before the
interests of polluters the move
will not immediately impact
revenue in the state budget as
both the US department of the
interior and New Mexico state
officials have made very clear
repeatedly in the last couple of
weeks yet industry keeps
claiming that most of federal
available lands will be off
limits when it is actually
already leased and industry
already sitting on over six
thousand permits that New Mexico
operators have yet to used for
drilling.
The president's moratorium and
promised to craft a government
wide climate action plan
actually echo commitments made
by New Mexico's governor Lujan
Grisham to swiftly and carefully
transition to a healthier just
and more equitable energy future
for New Mexico we call on that
kind of leadership and not house
joint memorial built three thank
you for your time.
Thank you for that next up we
have our so called.
I think we lost her.
Somehow we lost the next speaker
is if you would like to log back
on to raise your hand again we
will recognize you.
There are K. there you go.
Sorry there is a issue with the
new button good morning chair
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Sobel I work for
WildEarth guardians I support
the comments previously made by
earth works I want to add that
this memorial is nothing more
than a distraction and theatrics
to continue having our state
drag its feet well the federal
government is making meaningful
efforts on climate change in
rating in oil and gas it's a
fallacy straight flat out that
any oil and gas operators are
moving to Texas where there's
frankly more regulation than
there is in New Mexico the truth
is that oil and gas as an
industry is on its way out but
because it's not profitable and
because it's destroying the
climate and is in a secure
source of energy I'm what I'll
add is that New Mexico's but in
oil and gas producing state for
decades but where's that gotten
us were ranked at the bottom for
fiscal stability for economy and
for education the truth is that
we cannot keep making sacrifices
to prop up the oil and gas
industry and expect our quality
of life and economic
opportunities for New Mexico to
improve I strongly urge the
committee to vote and
against this memorial and in
general against distractions
that would move from the
governor's intention of having
New Mexico state and in accord
with the one point five degree
world thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Nathan Smith.
Smith here muted on here and.
There you go.
Hello my name's Nathan Smith
our.
Welcome R. thank you for taking
the time to hear me I'm a
private citizen I don't
represent any of the
organization but I urge you to
oppose this resolution
We need to transition our
economy to a sustainable economy
and to get away from our over
reliance on oil and gas which is
contributing to our climate
change crisis thank you.
For that except with my aching
clarity.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I am I can clarity
but this year you're going
Grundy chapter and be happy on
on behalf of our thirty five
thousand members the propose
have straight memorial three
president Joe Biden's claim
executive order deposit new oil
and gas leasing and drilling on
federal lands isn't jeopardizing
jobs revenue it's giving time
and resources to the current
administration to do critical
planning an overview of current
oil and gas leasing programs
that do contribute to climate
change and affect many health
and according to data New Mexico
industry has over six thousand
approved drilling permits they
have stockpiled and can be used
as part of the sixty day because
it's estimate there are at least
seven hundred wells that have
been abandoned by oil and gas
operators New Mexico that will
cost around twenty million tax
dollars to plug their mediate
the true cost and impacts of not
transitioning pausing for oil
and gas we felt their
communities and their
environment New Mexico should
lead the way to renewable energy
sources and stop relying on a
volatile industry to fund our
state thank you.
Thank you for that Schlenker
Goodrich Goodrich.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Erik
Schlenker Goodrich executive
director of the western
environmental law center I stand
in opposition the house memorial
couple quick points first the
sky isn't falling the oil and
gas industry has sixty thousand
oil and gas wells already in New
Mexico of that amount thirty one
thousand plus are already on
federal public lands it is
several commenters have already
stated industry has stockpiled
six thousand plus federal
drilling permits none of these
permits or appropriations are
affected by the body to
ministrations climate actions
second I want to note that the
memorial as written is
inaccurate as a matter of law it
mentions that it bans are pro it
it's to further permitting this
is simply not the case what it
does is suspend permitting
are subject to Department ensure
leadership so new permits rights
of way can in fact be improved
it simply has to be vetted
through department of the
interior leadership in
Washington DC what divided
administration has done is
initiated a comprehensive review
of the oil and gas program pause
on the scene does not add
provides an opportunity for all
stakeholders to participate in
that the future of the oil and
gas public lands program or put
simply sizing following the oil
and gas program is broken given
all of the board access to trump
administration did and so what
about ministration those down is
a good thing so we stand in
opposition to this morning thank
you.
Thank you for that next step we
have Lucas Herndon.
Yes hello thank you chair thank
you committee my name's Lucas
Hernandez progress now New
Mexico.
I stand in opposition to this
Joint Memorial for the reasons
stated earlier by everybody who
spoken specifically to the
falsities espoused by the oil
and gas industry lobbyists about
the inability for the industry
to continue operating in the
state
without repeating what has
already been said I will add
that the.
the behavior of oil and gas to
threaten to you know take their
ball and go home is at best the
actions of a child a spoiled
child and.
Could you tell the tale please.
Yes Mister chair I will
apologize thank you madam I will
I will then simply add that it's
it is a.
Relying on those falsities for
their claims is unbecoming of an
industry that then also claims
to be so at.
It it tied in an important to
our state if they care so much
for our state I would hope that
they would continue to work with
us rather than threatening to
abandon us when things get rough
thank you.
Thank you for that.
Saying no further public debate.
Members of the committee.
Representative sent.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott for
bringing this bill I sorry this
memorial I was wondering if you
could talk about with the.
Goal of this legislation is
seeing as how this is a federal.
Our action thank you.
Mr Chairman representative six.
Oriel I think she's very simply
encourages the president to
change course.
And that is.
The.
More for Taurus please stay
sixty day review permit
applications cost level.
Well not immediately inhibiting
activity in the southeast corner
of the state will in fairly
short order.
Start.
Particularly yes yes
why and power line right of way.
I can't not the.
To go with.
Growing per match that.
There are many already approved.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative Scott
I.
appreciate the information
that's in the memorial in the
text of the memorial and what I
just wanted to do is say that I
don't think the memorial is the.
Most effective.
Way to address this but I
appreciate the concerns being
brought forward and
I wanted to just acknowledge
that I am very concerned about
of both the short and long term
effects of a potential ban on
drilling on federal lands for
the state of New Mexico
I think that you know the impact
would be tremendous on our
state's budget jobs in New
Mexico and just our economy
overall and so what I would
really like to see is a
concerted effort by everyone in
the legislature as well as the
the governor's office to really
work to diversify our economy so
that we're not as reliant on up
just this one industry
So I wanted to knowledge the
information you're providing and
let you know that I appreciate
it but I don't think that it's
the most effective tool that we
have so thank you very much Mr
chairman and representative
Scott.
Thank you Representative Dixon
except we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative
I think we we heard a a budget
forecast from
from LFC
on the.
Impact of only gassed your
budget and I believe when this
when this moratorium came out of
that report indicated fifty four
percent of all gas revenues come
from federal lands is is that
your understanding in.
a gentleman and and Mister
speaker I mean it Mr chairman Mr
chairman Representative
Strickler that is accurate.
In the southeast and now I'm in
the northwest so most of our
most of the lands in our country
or federal and we're big gas
producer and we're we're put
we're producing at full blast to
provide an age.
For
the two point one million people
live in New Mexico and we're
doing a pretty good job what I
understand and make sure that.
our hope you're being hated but
in the southeast but what I
think or or make up about eighty
five percent appear so we're
kind of disproportionate.
Force federal lands but in your
country I think it's one third
federal one third state and one
third short private lance's is
is that about right gentleman.
Mr speaker Representative
Strickler well that may be
correct the vast majority of the
development activities the
current now is for shelter
questions well we have the
counties where federal lands
predominate.
So that's why that's why the
overall production profile is
fifty four percent statewide.
And yeah my concern working with
the regulatory departments the
various companies yes they do
have a they do have a a backlog
of of drilling permits but what
they don't have
or or write a waste pipeline
right away is that are critical
to hook up these wells because
in your country Mr Mr chairman
and and gentleman
here primarily oil and and and
southeast but they still produce
about thirty percent of their
rid of their.
Production stream is is gas up
here it's
But maybe sixty forty on the on
the the old projects we have up
here in San Juan it's about
sixty percent all in forty
percent gas I think you're a
little richer and and all and
and we still a those guests pop
on right away.
Mr chair Representative
Strickler.
Very typical gas oil ratio for
for our development that is
current would be one two three
CS per barrel of oil produced so
given the histories so.
Hello.
Camps in the last couple of
years to capture every cubic
foot of methane which is the
current administration's
policies we cannot produce oil
with gas pipelines to move that
gas market.
In many cases these wells after
short period of time when they
when they cease to flow some
sort of motive power must must
be applied to
your subsurface electrical.
Or surface pumping unit and that
requires electricity so.
Lines are also a big factor.
We want to what we Fund.
The project yes please right
of way cannot be acquired.
Mr chairman and and and
gentleman from Lee
That that's that's something I
can left out is you need you
need
Electrical power right wise as
well I guess I focus on on
pipeline right away but that's
in the other another key
component so we don't want to
say as as as a state engine as
a.
The or you know with the
normally flow business we need
to have
maybe not drilling permits so
much but we definitely need to
the pop on right away and the
power walk right away to keep
keep business following is that
Roger elements.
Mr Chairman Representative
Strickler attention support.
These applications don't occur
overnight it takes weeks to the
trench planning to put these
together so.
Any delays in approval process
can extend that.
Timing to the point where you
you could realistically
Development.
Mr chairman and and gentleman
from lady you don't have a
bottleneck so the regulatory
process is very very laborious
very very strict specially on
federal and state lands.
A private land support or are
have its own set of issues
and so you need to keep keep
these rigs operating it you have
to have a.
Quite a bit of of backlog as of
now a drilling permit spent up
on right away send letter right
a way to keep keep that
production up and Benjamin they
the and Mr chairman the
production profile the source
all wells
the decline is pretty rapid the
first year is it about seventy
percent in in your your area I
know that's kind of what it is
up here in San Juan.
Representative Strickler is
accurate initial decline rates
for first six to twelve months
of production on one of these
our all completions very stiff
and can run from forty to
seventy percent of the initial
potential.
So that's why that's why it's a
kind of a treadmill affected in
and you have to in order to keep
the one rig drilling rig
operational you need about
thirty permits or or maybe maybe
less than that twenty permits to
keep ahead of that one right is
is that about right Mr chairman
and gentleman from lady Mr
chairman.
Representative.
The.
Most of the companies are
continuously.
We'll have a long term.
Contracts in place with very
strong contractors to provide
for not only the best price get
will stroll but.
Orderly progression from one.
Well the next.
And and Mr gentleman so you need
in a about twenty permits to
stay had a one right over year
period time or or pretty need
more more permits than that Mr
Chairman representative twenty
would probably be a of
reasonable average depending on
the depth of the well could be
more could be less.
So it takes about fifteen
fifteen to days to to drill
drill at a well
let's say fifteen thousand fate.
Generally speaking the drilling
top on a on a twenty thousand
four our goal would be longer
than that I would say
approaching thirty days.
Okay.
So the bottom line is you know
it's pretty complicated industry
you know the
the engineer said to to that
take care of a jury of drilling
race schedule have to juggle a
lot of balls and and and the and
the elements unit you major
drilling permit you need your
pop on right away primarily you
need your logical and they've
got it but I've got a.
And over of their schedule the
the state had of let's say ten
rig said that particular company
is running so it's pretty pretty
important that the the flow of
the sperm answer wrong going
the leasing moratorium is not a
problem but thank you for
bringing this up and and
appropriate your your answers
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for late.
Thank you Representative
Strickler except waivers
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative stop for
presenting this today very
quickly
the comments that I have for the
and I I didn't hear of very many
of them
I just want to expand on as
Representative get some mention.
The diversification of our
economy is is a requirement.
in in the process of.
Our staycation.
If you want stability you have
to do it in an orderly fashion
shedding one all whatever it is
and and hoping for the other
would rebound but slate is in
this instance I think
We just have a lot through the
meeting on the.
Within the renewable cycle
it's a great industry that needs
to continue to be developed and
the first of five but presently
it does very little for the
state coffers there needs to be
a balance that right now
The the employment.
The severance.
What education in the well being
of the state is in my in my
opinion is being jeopardized
because we're not doing it in a.
Well orderly and sis and
systematic message and I would
just the I I think what.
Yes memorial will do what show
are present administration that
we have concerns that it is a
significant part of our.
Income.
and that the it needs to be re
looked at and so I would I would
ask that
People think about it from that
manner it's not.
And efforts to kill Warner or
camp for another one it it is in
the best interest of the state
or Mexico so again
Representative stock thank you
Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Scott.
I am the co sponsor on this
memorial and and that's all this
is a memorial there there's
there's no teeth to this in
reality this is just a request.
the request isn't that.
Every the
Permit be granted or that the
permitting process somehow be
bypassed the the the permitting
process would not change
whatsoever with the passage of
this memorial is that correct
Representative.
Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya that is absolutely
correct.
Where.
Your letters from.
Hello to use.
Counties in.
Southeast New Mexico that are
written.
Very similar concerns through
the federal administration.
All this memorial which is the
voice of the legislature that.
Letters of concern.
Thank you for that
Mr Chairman representative.
I can't speak to anyone help for
anyone else's motivation for
this this was not a couple years
ago I I try to get a memorial
pastor basically said thank you.
To the oil and gas industry for
our revenues that we rely on for
our budget to pay for every
other program.
We are we are literally
subsidizing other industries.
Quite frankly incubators to
energy production from the oil
and gas industry we are
literally I think we had.
We for maybe three already list
of bills of some sort of subsidy
or another there are more on
their way to subsidize.
Placement of this industry
but in the meantime and they've
not been in this industry not
been replaced.
Not only has this industry not
been replaced it is still.
Directly.
Nearly forty percent of the
state's budget indirectly I with
after you have all the people
are employees who are employed
property tax from homes that
these folks pay property tax on
the V.
Gross receipts tax from all of
the folks who work in this
industry.
I I think really always same
here and that's what my intent
is looking at how much.
New Mexico.
Every department of government.
All the way from state
government all the way down to
our local counties and
municipalities.
All we're saying and and this
is.
Don't cut off our funds don't
cut off for money.
My purpose in this don't.
Don't hurt our budget the that
the federal government cannot
continue to write checks and
keep this fantasy economy that
we're living in right now flow I
mean if if if if the federal
dollars would not not come in
this last year while every
business small business were
shut down.
Bind with the dollars that we
got from oil and gas producing
our.
To our state budget we'd be in
big trouble and and if you have
a a lack of however long the
the.
Federal interruption of of
permitting takes place at we'll
have that lack of new projects
getting off the ground and you
know how how long that remains
is a potentially that's gonna be
the hit over time since a as
Representative Strickler
mentioned
the the real money that comes
into the state coffers is one of
new well is drilled and that
first production is huge that
first year production is huge.
The if if I think there's a
there's a
Misconception that if all we did
was just shut everything else
down that we could survive on
current production levels are
that are out there but those are
decreasing levels could you
explain that briefly
Representative Scott.
Representative Lujan Tara L.
presume that you're referring to
the natural declined.
That is secured with.
In a productive twelve new or
old.
Once.
In the early stages of the life
of a.
Completion.
The fluids flowing into the well
bore are flowing from very near
the well.
And this pressure disturbance
propagates out into the rest of
for those fluids have to flow
for parents for their through
much lower permeable.
Then currently in the process of
permeability the raptors to sign
what the fluid has for her to
travel through the material so.
The pressure drop production.
In the early stages of these
projects yes.
Once.
Pressure disturbances propagated
to the limits of the completion
to climb stabilize each
for all something as low as
three to ten percent per year
for the first year all forty to
seventy percent and that that.
Exponential curve.
It reduces down to much lower
value and what else will
ultimately produce for many many
years what makes projects
economic and what keeps moving
forward to state coffers at the
rate of the last two years is
the.
Yes completely functional.
Which a new completion.
Because we've increased
production.
I some five million barrels
each.
All.
What we had prior to the
development of this new
technology.
Thanks for the answer
Representative Scott
There is a and an open.
Mentioned by some to to just do
away with the industry
completely.
That that as we know is is
currently state budget dollars
actual dollars.
Is about fifty percent of our
budget once once those jobs go
away once the industry goes away
once the severance tax goes away
once the property tax.
Every time that value goes up
once a property tax increase
goes away.
Simultaneously what we're trying
to replace it with.
We are continuing to subsidize
we are continuing to.
Find ways to give money to that
other industries and and even
remove tax burden.
I mean I I we're gonna end up in
a situation as it was stated
recently in one of our meetings
that oil and gas could be done
with the New Mexico and I ten
fifteen year there's in five ten
fifteen years
this green energy economy is
supposed to be what replaces it.
And.
We are currently still handing
out dollars even when we mandate
that that.
Any new projects have to be
green energy we're still
subsidizing what we're mandate
which which doesn't make any
sense if they have to do it.
Then then we should be further
eliminating that tax base that
tax base does not have the work
force.
It does not and it doesn't have
the
severance tax dollars associated
with it source our our our seven
star Fund service tax refund
will just dry up.
The last we're gonna have is
going to be what we heard which
is a further.
Redistribution of taxes to those
other folks who are here.
property values once once the
people who lose their jobs and
there's no jobs replace some
start leaving there's gonna be a
lot of housing on the market.
People.
Bankruptcies the I mean we're
headed down that road it would
be one thing if we had something
replaced with today the idea of
looking for a.
Drilling moratorium on fracking
ban all of those things but if
we do all that today we are
talking fifty percent of our
budget.
obviously it would not be that.
We.
Reduction because are we do
have.
The current production of
current wells but that is much
much lower than than the new
wells
but those jobs that go away and
that the gross receipts tax
property tax they pay.
It's just me.
Irresponsible the one thing that
we have to do.
Legislators we have to balance
our budget every year.
And to me the only reason
signing on to this is to say.
As a responsible legislator.
And it continue going forward
next year the next year the next
year we have to balance our
budget.
And
and worry.
In a way from being able to
bring and dollars into the
coffers to do that.
And we have an opportunity just
to suggest to the president
United States.
Yeah you might be doing this in
other states but we are still
heavily reliant today that this
ban is in place.
We are so reliant on these
dollars right now it's this
we're heading to a different
direction in the future all
right now we need this money.
And.
It was easy to sign on to this
memorial just because.
That's what it does it just says
don't shut off don't shut off
our or our own dollars to us
right now we were in the process
of doing it to ourselves over
time but don't do that to us
today when we need to balance
our budget this year and next
and and next year so thank you
Mr chairman I and and
Representative I fully of the
forty supporting this.
Thank you is there any further
debate from the committee.
Mr chair spoke with one of the
statistics appear to go what I'd
like to do is correct two
thousand and ten.
New Mexico is mostly poor
production was about.
Plus or minus five million
barrels.
Yes one eight twenty one.
Just like it's wrong and about
thirty one million barrels so
that is the increased that's
occurred over the last ten years
and I would like to close it for
good Sir.
Reasons that we're still on the
bait.
Sh.
Made from the committee hi.
Hands up for all all jobs.
Like to make myself and then
I'll give you an opportunity to
close.
So
You know I appreciate the
concern about the oil and gas
industry it's a sixty day pause
it's not a ban on drilling as
was stated by some of the public
testimony we're twenty days into
a sixty day because it's a Joint
Memorial by the time it gets
passed through both chambers if
possible chambers.
Our proximity fifty Senator
sixty eight also my math is
correct.
and we're talking about the
federal government.
So I'd rather not spend anymore
time on this for so
Representative Scott to close.
Mr Chairman representative.
There is no question that there
is.
What I love hate relationship
with the petroleum industry.
We love to revenue.
The activity.
Perspective affects my health on
the clock but nonetheless.
The industry is so important we
are under water.
Yes drilling activity.
Ceases or declines.
In the southeast portion of the
state.
And this is so important to our
believe through the force of the
legislature needs to be added to
the forces already expressing
concern in the southeast part of
the state to the new federal
policies that's all I have
Mister.
We're thank you Scott what's the
will the committee.
Chairman I move to table we have
a motion to table their second a
second.
Shelby Q. take a vote on the
second all.
Representative Chandler.
Is this a motion to table chair
yes
yes the table.
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table.
Representative Ferrary.
All.
Representative month late.
Yes the table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Ortez.
Yes able.
Representative Sariñana yes to
table.
Representative.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Townsend no to
table.
Thanks Stansbury yes to table
and I'd like to explain my vote.
And chairman the queen.
Yes table.
And that is a do table with a
vote of to to the to three I
apologies the memorial has been
tabled Representative Montoya to
explains vote.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
thanks for explanation of the
timeline I voted to table
because I think you're right
this needs immediate action so
I'll be getting a letter
together for anyone who wants to
sign on to send to the president
very similar to what the the
chairman of Senate finance has
done so I think this needs
immediate action so we'll start
working on that letter right
away thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr moto yeah Representative
Stansbury.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to make one note which is
that it is completely normal for
the incoming executive
administration to take a pause
on the actions that were taken
by the previous administration
it was done and I president
trump it was done by president
Obama it was done by every
president previously it's part
of the transition of power that
happens as the administration
turns over and it's very normal
for both agencies and the
executive branch at the at the
highest levels to review the
last actions that happened
including around especially
public lands actions that affect
I'm not only our state coffers
but the federal coffers so am I
a recognize that and you know
the industry is concerned about
the long term outlook of leasing
on federal lands as a result of
these this temporary pause and
look and that is something that
we have to take seriously and
and seriously consider but given
the time line given the complete
normalcy of reviewing federal
actions to ensure that the
decisions are congruent with
federal policy is completely
normal so I just wanted to add
that to the conversation and I
appreciate the time thanks so
much.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury that concludes our
work for the day we as a we'll
reconvene this committee at ten
o'clock on Sunday thank you very
much Mr chair.
