Presented here.
Representative.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
As a representative madam chair
reached upon.
The latest update.
Eight.
Well first of all madam chair in
response to a homework
assignment nineteen nineteen
forty eight.
In Arizona.
So same deal it's just
shockingly horrible so for the
for the public the question that
the share asked was when did
native Americans have the right
to vote in Arizona nineteen
forty eight so and also as a
result of a lawsuit just like in
New Mexico and probably a
veteran of World War two but I
don't know that.
so with respect to bring the
committee up today as you can
see we've had lots of
conversations.
the thing that I would say and
I'm speaking directly madam
chair to Representative Zamora
is that Representative Zamora
has real concerns to the last
minute testimony the other day.
I will tell Representative or
somewhere madam chair that I
share those concerns on and that
I am going I am committing.
That as we walk through what I'm
going to ask the committee do
which is to were to give house
bill eight a do pass.
That if there are any changes.
Before we discuss it in
Judiciary.
Representative Zamora is going
to have the knowledge of what it
is we're doing he and his
lawyers and legislators lawyers
are going to be able to be in
the room.
To discuss with the fully and
completely what it is it's
happening and why and whether
there are solutions but I don't
what I'm what I asked
representatives more and he I
think is graciously agreed to do
is to date the holders questions
to see if we do have concerns
and that's where we're at in I.
E. in reluctant to have any
further conversation on the
record about that kind of
discussion until I know if
there's a problem and we just I
want to get into the details of
it because there may not be a
problem but we need to know that
before we move forward but I
want to show Representative
Zamora that I work with him and
he will be fully priced in any
of his other colleagues that
want to be in the room including
I know the minority whip has
been involved Representative
Montoya and he certainly is
invited to as well so with that
insurance we are not madam chair
members the committee going to
be calling the wires up here I
think they're very disappointed
they really wanted to talk but
they will yes I'm not too today
teasing I don't know if they
really wanted to talk on but I
have brought to technical staff
here
Mr Santorum Mr sharp to answer
questions about
House Bill Page we will I will
not be asking the committee to
pass out any of the other House
Bill they were simply there for
informational purposes both the
committee and for the public to
review so they could see kind of
the progression of how we got to
house bill eight and with that
madam chair I'll turn it back to
you.
Okay so you're done with your
presentation we can go to the
committee now because we've
already taken public comment
yesterday correct okay
Representative Zamora Madam and
with all due respect the
representative declined.
Madam chair with all due respect
to Representative Eli in the
process that is taking place.
I'd like to make a statement on
that this is this won't be a
question.
my concerns.
About the redistricting to date
aren't the same as they were
yesterday.
For the simple reason that we
were taking public comment
yesterday and all of a sudden it
changed.
From public comment the an
introduction of a change of the
bill.
That was the public comment.
None of us were able to debate
according to the rules.
But the rules were changed.
And now we're being told.
That.
There will be no changes the HD
eight.
But there will be changes the H.
B. eight.
And we're being told that we're
doing the best we can.
But we're not being given any
information as to what the
changes will be.
So the best we can do.
Is what we're doing.
It's not very good.
And why do we take it to the
last minute.
And then try to change it.
In a way.
That is.
The state full to everybody is
trying to work together and make
things right and not have these
big argument that we get into.
And I understand we're all doing
our job.
Maybe there's nothing political
about it.
But this is a political place.
And
this minute I'm not happy with
being blind sided at the last
minute.
With what happened yesterday.
The district was designed for
the spinal the representative.
You also is elected.
I represent my people.
Just like the native Americans
are proud to represent the
people that's the way I'm proud
to represent my people.
L..
Is it because I'm not the kind
of Hispano.
The the majorities looking for.
That's what the question is in
my heart.
Why did it happen the way it
happened.
Why the last minute why in the
committee that was just supposed
to take testimony from the
public.
And that's why it turns into a
debate.
That's all I have to say thank
you madam chair.
Thank Representative.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ely.
Just for clarification now we we
don't have a committee self
ready for discussion today is
that correct madam chair the the
plan going forward is that house
bill eight will remain House
Bill eight
through the process but.
If they are going to be changes
made and frankly as a sponsor my
hope would be there won't be but
if there are changes made to
that they would be made after.
With that we spoke with hope
that it passes out of this
committee with a do pass and
that there would be a Judiciary
Committee substitute if that was
necessary.
But it wouldn't happen here so
there's no substitute today
that's correct.
That's a little long winded
answer to no no substitute today
no substitute to date and.
Sure Representative Eli no
substitute is contemplated for
state government elections in
Indian Affairs correct for this
measure correct okay so that
Okay thank you very much the.
Looking ahead thank you.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and just
to clarify we're not going to
get any further
Overview by the experts right
now we're in questioning.
That's correct of the server for
technical success so believe.
To answer any questions is that
correct yes okay
My first question Representative
madam chair and representative
is
Yesterday my discussions with Mr
center off I requested a map and
I think I am out of the house
bill eight Matt
and I was hoping to get the.
Similar data that was available
to us from the redistricting
commission and if if that's
available at I'd like to go.
Paper copies if it's available
to us but I'd probably get
through a lot of my questions
with without that information.
the first thing in the the
strikes me when I when I look at
house bill eight.
And the maps.
Is.
The number of communities
particularly small communities
around our state.
That are split between multiple
districts and and so
some of them are are quite well
yes in terms of New Mexico maybe
not quite small but in terms of
population not not a lot of
people
And.
My my question would be.
Why are we.
Creating multiple districts and
so many small towns that have.
Maybe less than five or ten
thousand population.
Madam chair.
Representative diver.
You know.
The situation is that as you
know the state law requires.
That each district for the house
have approximately thirty
thousand people.
Plus or minus a few a few
percentage points that you're
aware of.
And so as you meander through
the State Building districts
inevitably small towns to get
split.
Different concepts often times
have different towns being
split.
Sometimes Carlsbad remain on
hold sometimes will be split
three ways you know I'm thinking
then more of the Senate but
basically
and so you will see some
concepts were different towns
are split and other concepts
where they're not and it creates
a ripple effect throughout the
map.
Well district madam chair and
and the Mr chair dress Mr
Senator off directly
Representative.
Yes I'm sorry yes madam chairman
Mr center off.
It just strikes me when when we
look at some some of the smaller
communities in the state that
some of them have two three
maybe even four districts that
come into those smaller
communities not understandable
Kirk the Los crucis Santa Fe
even
Rossell and Hobbs you know the
the the bigger towns in the
state that it it just strikes me
as audit for trying to.
I guess that's how you define
communities of interest but if
we're trying to find
representation within this
building for community.
How we get to splitting some of
the smaller towns and the
multiple districts and and and
that's one thing that just
surprise me to to see some of
the smaller communities and
but I looked at it right Los
Alamos of maybe it's more the
county than the town itself but
it's split three different ways
and that's not fair great
populations of Sapporo has a
couple through the consequences
has a couple.
In order to roast a closer to my
district has to representatives
within to a roasted Tularosa is
not a very large town I don't
know what the precise population
is but it's not certainly under
five thousand people service of
that just struck me as as kind
on how how that occurred.
And I guess if that's you know
just somebody drawn lines funded
for.
It makes it the somewhat
problematic the with with those
folks knowing well my
representative so and so and
somebody cross town says will.
I don't I don't know who money
is or you know whatever it's not
well well defined
So I think that creates some
some confusion and some of the
smaller towns expected in
Albuquerque expected even
Rossell you don't expected in.
A town of two thousand or
whatever.
let me go through some of the
Some of the districts and and
talk a little bit about the
deviation for.
Because the.
The registration I guess us a
question like this madam chair
and Mr center of.
The redistricting commission.
Was granted.
A.
Or given a charge to come up
with districts with no more than
ten percent deviation is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes and when when we say
ten percent that means that if
you have in our case almost
seven percent deviation at one
and you can only have a three
percent deviation at the other
factor ten percent.
Representative yes and it does
not mean ten percent over ten
percent after.
M. F. madam chairman and Mr
center of.
And your prior
Efforts in redistricting
New Mexico and it may extend
back to to close to the time
when we're at UNM
Okay what has been the deviation
that primarily the Senate and
the house of looked at and
trying to prescribe their
districts.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
The.
That I recall but the
Legislative Council set certain
guidelines for which they
recommended the legislature
follow.
And in those guidelines the last
two decades and perhaps Kate's
line still within the no more
than ten percent but it was
recommended that plus or minus
five percent.
Some so no district could be
greater than five percent and no
district could be less than five
percent of the optimum number
for that particular destructive
our house or
I guess body.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes we call it the ideal
population of the district which
is the population of the state
divided by the number of
districts of the state has two
point one million people of
their seventy house seats to the
idea population will be in
approximately thirty thousand
people that plus or minus that
leeway and madam chair Mister
center office in the case of the
house and we're looking at the
house map that number is what
just a little over thirty
thousand people perceive thirty
thousand what two hundred and
fifty two hundred fifty so
thirty thousand.
Two hundred and fifty is the
optimum number for each point
three but thirty thousand two
hundred fifty point three don't
have any idea who who's a point
three but just.
So
for for purposes of our
discussion of issues thirty
thousand that's okay the madam
chair and Mr center of focus
each each of the health district
should be thirty thousand people
if it were up to.
so.
Right they were all that this
body passed charging the
redistricting commission allow
the ten percent deviation which
is what they did on their maps.
In the past.
Both the house and the Senate
had guidelines.
That.
Said the map so we should come
up with should be within no more
than five percent deviation up
or down.
Madam chair representative David
correct plus or minus five
percent for the ideal
population.
And so I didn't do the math on
thirty thousand two hundred
fifty but I suspect that number
what about the.
Maybe a thousand.
Maybe a thousand people up with
thousand people down.
I could do it real quick ten
fifteen hundred fifteen hundred
eighteen hundred okay
If we if we
What my confusion is.
One of the five percent came
from.
Was that five percent.
Just drawn out of a hat or was
it based on.
Experiences either within the
state or with other states
around the nation is that
something that has been tested
within the courts and shown to
be
a reasonable deviation when
applying these redistricting
principles.
Madam chair representative David
I think the legislature side as
a matter of convenience that if
you set up hello that everybody
was trying maps would stick
within a certain.
ranger and I think it was a
matter of convenience the
been doing this for forty years
and in the case of insane
requirements for plus or minus
five the case was pretty clear
about that the difference in
population deviation between the
smallest district in the largest
districts stay within ten
percent there's nothing concrete
in in the statutes that say that
plus or minus five.
So.
Madam chair and Mr Senator for
the if I understand your
testimony correctly there is
case law that has a firm that is
ten percent deviation between
the top of the bottom is meets.
Whatever federal or other state
guidelines that were employees.
Yes.
Also warrants that there's no
safe harbor you should still use
it
in the dressing traditional
districting principles.
And those redistricting
principles ultimately and I
presume that the the overarching
principle is is trying to obtain
that one person one vote is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
with that is that possible in
part one of the primary
objective of testing is to test
the boundaries to account for
population shifts.
Well I would madam chair I would
I would assert that that the.
True goal of redistricting is to
achieve that one person one vote
that we all within the state
have equal representation at and
that's the I think the one
overarching criteria and then
you have a lot of other criteria
that you try to try to deal with
that it seems to me I may be
wrong with it seems to me that
the the real goal of
redistricting is to try to
ensure that a person in this
place and a person in that place
have in essence people people
funding streams.
Madam chair and representative
I think you I think that's right
and I will tell you front as a
personal matter the Supreme
Court case that decided that was
bigger versus car the only
reason I mention that is because
the case was supposed to be
bigger verses Ely.
My father was involved in that
and went to the US Supreme Court
on that very principle and so it
just as you were talking about
one person one vote it reminded
me of my father and the fact
that he was involved in that
very litigation so that's
correct.
Okay and madam chair and
Representative thank you for for
that information and certainly I
think everything we do in this
redistricting contacts needs to
be
With the ideal that we are
making our best effort.
To accomplish that goal.
Recognizing that there are some
other things that come into it
county lines.
Communities of interest
natural monuments there's things
that that that makes sense to to
redistrict and maybe have some
deviation but our overarching
goal is to to recognize one
person one vote.
Madam chair representative I
think that it Madam.
Well I I that Madam chair
representative
one of the things that has come
up of course is in the native
American population to
meticulous Navajo Nation is the
undercount.
And so that's something that
we're talking about terms of
proving but historically that
has been true and that in some
measure and I'm not saying that
said accounts for the latitude
that our legislature again on a
bipartisan basis to do these
deviations plus or minus that
ten percent so that as you've
described it but it was I think
from a political point of view
was driven by the fact that
number one.
Tribal interests particularly in
these remote areas on the Navajo
Nation are undercounted and you
have the overlay which we knew
about as we were doing it of the
pandemic which increase the
problem of the census so we
anticipated that there would be
a problem.
Madam chair representative if
you bring up an interesting
issue that is the other count
and I think a lot of.
Lot of communities in the state.
Including my own would argue
that there's a tremendous
undercount in the twenty twenty
census and maybe the twenty ten
census in the two thousand
census but
we would all you and our
community that there was a
significant under cal
due to a variety of factors the
water usage and other criteria
that one could measure
population I and so you know al
can see there may be another
count in that area but I'm not
sure that that issue does not
exist.
In other communities or even
statewide in the state of New
Mexico one of the things that
you should that are madam chair
and representative the you
should know is the citizens
redistricting committee was
pretty careful about that and
the you know recognize that all
the communities were going to be
impacted by it by the pandemic
but so that you know they
specifically took testimony
there was testimony on the
Navajo Nation with the census
showed for example that there
was nobody in a particular and
they would have photographs
showing that there were cars and
people and houses in that area
to demonstrate to the public in
support of the record that there
was an undercount with respect
to the Navajo Nation but I I
don't think you're wrong to say
that it affects everybody on but
not just rural communities but
urban communities as well people
were for anybody's walked door
to door most of us do you know
how difficult it is to get
people even open the door and so
I think it was it was a real
problem across the state but it
was demonstrated on the Navajo
Nation with evidence that the
Navajo Nation provided to the
citizens redistricting committee
I want to keep saying commission
but it's committee.
Thank you for the information as
well to of.
Those.
In our no doubt the
I don't know how we factor those
things in because the the the
the thrust of our effort is to
use the actual data that was
provided by the U. S. Census
department and those numbers are
what they are whether we agree
or disagree with them but
it seems to me that our goal
now.
Is to use their numbers and to
try to come up with
redistricting plans that
ultimately tries to achieve that
one person one vote type idea.
so so let's let me spend a
little time and go through
Through the districts and and
and I want to focus on the
deviation of I think of I may
have gotten these numbers.
From.
Concept the one which I believe
is very similar to house bill
eight there may be some changes
of a.
I don't
I I can't say that changes on on
the map it looks very similar to
the one with my observation
madam chair and representative
Mr etcetera all the
pretty close.
In that regard.
Madam chair Representative
Nibert yes.
So they these numbers may be a
little different than the actual
for house bill eight but I think
I think you'll agree that they
do their their clothes so so.
So madam chairman Mr center
office if if I look at the at
the districts
We have.
District one.
It's a.
Deviation is minus nineteen
hundred fourteen people.
would that be different in house
bill eight.
Madam chair representative
Nibert it be slightly different.
Do we have that number.
Representative Nibert the
information is included on the
left side of your looking online
for her and it also includes the
data.
Was that I think it's been there
for a couple of days you just
have to we went over to the
have.
For paper yesterday.
Though funding will.
The woman from.
Of these here you okay good.
Do you want me to.
Good.
I.
You are reassessing I go to look
for a few hours.
I don't think you want to do
that Representative Madam chair
representative you want this.
This is house bill eight thank
yeah that I think that's what I
ask for yesterday because it's
do we all.
These are the these the effort
to make shopping so that for
every.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Okay
well let me go on a few other
questions that I had regarding
House Bill.
They.
They
House Bill right madam chair and
representative was was just a
plan that was developed by the
redistricting commission.
For.
Committee.
Madam chair representative
Nibert no okay and was this a
plan that was developed by
pulling and associates your.
Your
company.
Madam chair representative
Nibert no.
And madam chair and and Mr sent
off you know who came up with
house bill eight.
For the the map that we see on
house bill right.
I think a lot of I I think
that's a better question for
Representative Daymon Ely okay
yeah I I Madam chair
representative you're asking to
make sure by the way I was just
confirming
with Patty Williams is an
attorney in this area about just
so you know about the ten
percent deviation
a number of cases that a those
that deviation is constitutional
the one I'm familiar with a
Shelby County versus holder
because as Representative your
call that's the case that
of where the Supreme Court
eliminated the pre compliance
requirements the voting rights
act under sections four and five
of the nineteen sixty five
voting rights act we no longer
have the complaints not a
decision I'm particularly happy
with but one I'm familiar with
an answer to your question house
bill eight is a composite.
Of the tribal interests as we
heard about them yesterday the
consensus that was reached on
the all pueblo council
governments the Navajo Nation
hickory of Mescaleros and
changes that happened as a
result of that and so I can't
tell you all of the changes that
happened but I can tell you
there were changes made to the
map as a result of that and
particularly changes in the
northwest quadrant that's what I
understood a good catch and
potentially changes in the
northwest quadrant obviously
there may be others if there are
I'll get them to you but that's
what I know currently is the
intention of house bill eight
was to take the one.
Because that was the only map
that did not start with a bias
either for the all council all
Pueblo council governments or
the Navajo Navajo Nation so we
try to do is start with
something that was different
than that as a baseline and then
graft on the deal I'm not saying
there aren't any other changes
I'm just saying that's what I
understand the changes are made
as a result of that putting
those two things together
fanfare thank you.
And madam chair representative
and since the one was the faces
I understand it.
Who developed that Matt was at a
redistricting.
Committee Matt or was it
developed by another group and
then adopted by the
redistricting commission so
madam chair and representative
the answer to that question I
think was provided yesterday in
on the floor.
By one of the commissioners Lisa
Curtis and I think a number of
questions were asked about that
history unfortunately I was only
in the room for a little bit of
it because I was working on this
presentation so I don't really
know the answer I of course
heard that there was a group
that come forward but I have to
tell you regardless that it's
not like they rubber stamped it
it was very clear to me that the
citizens redistricting
commission to their work
incredibly seriously and did
things with a with a and
understanding that that's going
to have their name on it and
yeah I think that was the kind
of the conclusion of what
commissioner Curtis's testimony
was was that they look at all
these carefully but I don't know
that because I I wasn't in the
room when she was testing but I
did hear there were questions
related to that history.
And madam chairman and
Representative I believe that
if I recall what was said
correctly this particular map
was not a map that originated
with research and polling for
the committee there was a map
that originated from
a group that submitted the map
and and then I think maybe the
chair of the committee made of
dense modifications to and what
have you but the it was not a
map that originated with the
committee but it was one that
the majority of the committee
members did adopt if I recall
the testimony correct madam
chair and representative I think
that's correct I think you
stated Kirk.
The the
But Madam chair representative
just so you know we do have some
information on that and I'll
I'll I'll let Mr chair talked to
this.
Madam chair representative
Representative Nibert.
Yeah I think you just.
I don't think.
Well it's it's a total I think
madam chair.
Representative Nibert just to
clarify that I think the house
concept E. one was submitted
through the CRC's of public
comment portal on October
fourteenth of this year.
And the so that the official
Senators name is Paula Garcia
October fourteenth as a plan
idea of P. fifty six fifty six.
And.
The reason why madam chair I I
asked that question is so then I
think I think we all need to
know what the genesis of of some
of these plants were because it
does have.
Some unusual things yeah and I'm
only going to speak to to my
part of the the state for
southeast portion of the state
which which.
Is a bit unusual
As I find the house district
fifty for for instance.
Early Representative bye
Jim Townsend from our teacher.
He was an art teacher.
That district goes basically
from Artesia.
All the way to go to white sands
missile range part of it and
actually
Corporates Holloman Air Force
base and have the national
monument or national park now
and and wrapped around a pretty
good swap the country
the existing districts in that
area would have Alamogordo
representation for Holloman Air
Force base.
it just seems to me to be
Something that is it's important
to people my part of the world
why you would to something that
originates in artesian stretches
all the way to.
White sands missile range
that's kind of a stretch for us
then you have house district
sixty six which is currently
represented by Representative of
Phelps Anderson in Russell and
that districts has always been
somewhat unusual because of the
population it took and it
basically was a Roosevelt County
centerstate bank the.
I recall the numbers there were
about seven thousand voters and
Roosevelt County about five
thousand voters in Travis county
and maybe seven hundred voters
of Lee County that that district
has been vastly changed to
again be part of also gives up
Roosevelt County completely dead
now picks up a bigger portion of
of we County particularly in the
Lovington area and then wraps
around and gets in Artesia and
and not only that goes down into
Carlsbad and loving
It's a it's an oddly configured
district now and certainly is
much different than than its
current thing and and it just
the it just seems to be a little
bit different my district house
district fifty nine and I'm not
complaining for the house
district fifty nine goes from a
very large district
geographically
being from Russell and then goes
all the way.
Gets most of Lincoln County
except for the populated areas
of Lincoln County.
M..
Well it's only a Travis county
district very compact so I go
from a very large district a
very compact districts good I'm
not complaining I'm just to
start saying what I observe set
district fifty six
district which are which which
by he picks up basically all of
Lincoln County so.
And in southeast New Mexico we
see some some.
Some changing of ones that were
made with respect to population
shifts there were huge
population shifts and Eddy and
Lea counties I mean I grew in
population what about eighteen
thousand or something
and so there had to be some some
of the ships those large we move
to the south and the sos lines
that but hello they were
configured just strikes people
from southeast New Mexico is
being a little on this just so
that I'll.
Now that we have of the profile
nine members were based on the
other side these numbers are
actually greater than.
As I see the than what I have on
my computer but
health district one has a
deviation of two thousand eighty
eight people six point nine
percent.
I assume that that's the the
biggest deviation analyst
house district to two thousand
thirteen thousand district three
nineteen hundred twenty seven
house district for two thousand
and two.
House district I one thousand
six hundred nineteen house
district six two thousand sixty
five.
So we have the the
What would what would hello we
characterize the house districts
one through six in terms of
their geographical location.
Madam chair and Mr center of
thank you Sir.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
the.
Audley the northwest quadrant
one two and three for the
Farmington Aztec and Bloomfield
area and four five six more than
that native American majority
districts.
And then if we if we go down and
look at some more northwest
districts I think the next one
maybe district nine that serve
two thousand fifty five
deviation.
Of.
You want to throw in it is that.
House district sixty five which
is the also in the west.
That have the deviation of sixty
one thousand seven hundred
ninety two.
And house district sixty nine
two thousand forty four.
With those we all the districts
in the northwest corner of the
state madam chair and and Mr
center of Madam chair
representative divert yes.
F. I have the old members run I
don't have a new number for but
do you have a total deviation
for the northwest corner of the
state those particular districts
Madam chair representative
divert no I haven't I haven't
run those the cumulative
deviations okay well it's going
to be greater than the number
I'm going to give you because
these numbers are greater than
the numbers I have on my
spreadsheet but that's six on
the one it was sixteen thousand
three hundred forty eight people
in those northwest.
Districts is a deviation of
minus sixteen thousand three
hundred forty eight on the one
it's going to be.
Over that because we went from
nineteen hundred over two
thousand so committees several
hundred more
In actuality Law all have those
numbers for you and your vision
for
So if we have.
Minus sixteen minus seventeen
thousand people in those
districts that comprise the
north west corner how do you
make up for that deviation madam
chair and Mr Senator.
Well the northwest region madam
chair Representative Nibert as
you suggested had did not keep
pace with population growth.
We're talking about nine house
districts here.
And in order to maintain those
nine house districts
under this plan.
there's two ways of going about
it one is to try to expand your
boundaries a little to add some
more population to maintain this
land districts and also to keep
the population deviations of the
high end of the negative percent
in order to maintain those nine
districts those with the the two
ways of going about maintaining
representation.
M. and madam chairman Mr center
of and in order to to make up
the negative deviation.
Other districts within the other
three quadrants of the state
have to.
Make up that difference today
not.
Because ultimately up to get to
zero.
Right
Madam chair representative
Nibert it's so if.
The maximum negative deviation
let's call as minus seven to
round it off will provide that
throughout the state the maximum
positive deviation will not
exceed plus three percent.
In order to stay within the plus
or minus the the the the the
great in order to stay with not
exceeding a ten percent total
deviation.
And so basically workers and
what you do for a living is that
you have to then reapportioned
that population to other
districts within the state that
would have a.
Greater number of people than
the optimum number two account
for the seven let's call
seventeen thousand people that
are short in the northwest
corner of the state.
Well and as we adjusted the
state.
To account for
these types of plans if we had a
district that let's say was that
plus or minus that plus four
percent we'd have to bring it
down to plus three percent to
stay within a plus or minus ten
so there had to be adjustments
made in some districts are
Madam chair representative
office and that's basically what
we see on the schedule is about
we see that if you go to
district outside the northwest
quarter.
Well there are some.
In the.
Right number are plus two
percent plus one and a half
point three
three percent to the committee
that.
Deficient population in the
northwest corner that's maybe
an awful language but that's how
I see it.
Yes some districts that were on
the high end of the deviation
had to be brought within the
plus up to to the plus three to
stay within the no greater
deviation than ten percent.
At and so.
But as I see deviations and I
understand why we need
deviations.
But I don't understand why we
need a quarter of the state to
have such a great deviation from
the rest of the state is there
an explanation for that madam
chair the Mr Senator.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
My views are not that important
I can report to what others have
said
and.
The justification is that the
north western region of New
Mexico although they have not
kept pace with population.
Includes a substantial native
American population and that the
native American tribal
governments were very concerned
about maintaining the same
numbers of major native American
districts.
The to accomplish that they were
willing to go beyond their
boundaries to pick up some
population as well as keep high
negative deviations and some of
the districts.
And they felt the justification
of it not being regional
protectionism they felt the
justification was under the fact
that the voting rights act
protects certain language to
minority groups including native
Americans Hispanics and African
Americans and because of that
they felt the the justification
existed to maintain these a
negative deviations because as
compared to having a negative
deviation like that in
Albuquerque that there's a
special reason here to protect
the representation of native
American districts the same
districts that they held a
currently and and that was the
reason that various groups
started coming in with plans
that had deviations that were
different than the plus or minus
five percent.
Well.
Madam chair and representative
that that's a thing that that
Concerns right the the the the
big deviation in not just one or
two districts but an entire
quarter of the state and and so
there's significant regional
disparity.
the that's being brought forward
an in house bill eight which
which.
Maybe they broke in the
northwest quarter is worth more
than a vote in the.
Other parts of the state because
of that deviation and that's my
overarching concern with the
with with this particular bill
on and I think all study these
numbers a little more and maybe
have more when we go to
Representative Chasey is
Committee probably later this
week.
Trying to prognosticators.
district office
Probably it was posted today but
I doubt that will be ready to.
So maybe maybe later this week
with the off have an opportunity
for that but all over new
numbers and have more actors the
numbers for you there.
madam chair and representative
thank you for bringing it
forward as I understand it we're
not going to discuss any of the
other plans so that's fine.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I.
Right.
Thank you madam chair and I know
that I really have questions but
a of comments that I'd like to
share with you so
looking at it house bill eight
and looking at my district there
and.
In fairness go ahead and say
that
the comments I have for my
district are not unique.
We need to house bill eight.
It also covers in one and I the
other maps that we see.
One of the students that we have
as community of interest keeping
them together.
So looking at my district.
We're going to take part of
higher denser and part of C. M.
D. heights yeah we're going to
send those over the back to
Representative Stephanie report.
Who basically has Representative
and will represent mostly a
rural district.
I think it's best to try to keep
those neighborhood associations.
The with one legislators.
And I understand that we've got
a plan with the magic number of
the thirty thousand to fifty
three.
And there's going to be given
taking corners.
On my district also
Representative tier amante is
going over the mountain to us
definitely more now it is up to
our military is more of a root
out the county districts of
that's fairly.
Stephanie is also going to take
part
Our food is.
And there's another one so you
take hi desert for hills those
are the.
To.
Thirty years and they're going
to be
a small number of precincts that
are representative chief
representative for Albuquerque.
Senator I think that's a
consideration.
The.
They were consideration that
I've heard.
Fram
Republican women is that five of
them feeling that have been
targeted
you know to go ahead and remove
them.
obviously congresswomen
heritage.
Have that has been in the news
but I'm gonna take my office
mate
Representative Rep Jane E.
Powdrell Culbert.
So let's look at her district
with Matt eight.
And she is now move to.
House district twenty three.
And house district twenty three.
Sep twenty three or at her for
her current district number is.
I am house district twenty three
okay.
Look at the federal.
Which is.
The district.
that is issues very well written
and cheese and twenty three
however most of the constituents
that she Representative
previously are you forty four.
And the other thing that we see
taking the high desert state of
the arts Representative do you
do when they need Septimus and
contact me.
And you're in for the for the
need to be contacting
Representative ponder and clear
to then once in twenty three.
Right I'm glad that we managed
to work on these maps
But I wanted to give the kind of
explanation as to requirement of
them against it.
And so that it's understood.
And when we get to have Sturgis
Yuri the some of these issues
can be resolved thank you madam
chair I'm sure if I coach Justin
response just so the
representative was aware under
the new house bill eight the one
that you all have that I'm
asking you guys a.
Representative Powdrell lives in
district forty four as it is
identified in the map just so
the representative knows.
Okay then I'm misspelled on
internet I.
Madam chair representative it's
you know the due to it is a
complicated process what she is
and just so you're aware she is
in house district forty four I
actually lost money so I no
longer live in house district
twenty three if this map was
approved I would live in house
district forty four as well
that's why were paired okay okay
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that clarification.
We were discussing one of the
other massive
The staff of paper but thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you that I have a
question about
about what happened in twenty
ten with our native indigenous
communities and under count in
the census then and undercounts
the census in twenty twenty and
if any of the testimony from the
C. and and from the C. R. C.
over the last couple of months
address these issues and it has
many that we heard yesterday how
that relates with with these
under counts
thank you madam chair.
That maybe for Mr Senator.
Yeah madam chair and
representative would you mind
because we were trying to think
about how to formulate would you
state your question again I want
to make sure that we get an
answer your question.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ely I'd like to
understand about the frontier
accounts in the native American
population the changes in those
under accounts from twenty ten
where there were under counts I
believe right and in twenty
twenty in the twenty twenty
census.
Madam chair
Representative Ortez.
at the census bureau actually
came out with the report after
the twenty ten census and they
estimated what areas they
thought were most undercounted
demographically and one of the
largest under counts according
to the census bureau after they
completed their twenty ten
census was native American areas
particularly on reservations so
there was that documentation
from the census bureau
acknowledging that.
Rural communities in general
Hispanic rural communities were
also under counted according to
what the census bureau
acknowledged this time to my
knowledge they haven't put out
released a report yet to say
what they estimate the
undercount was by demographic
region so what we'll have to
wait on that during the C. R. C.
meetings we not only heard
compelling testimony about
undercounts in native American
areas but we also heard about it
and Lara and Rio Arriba and
Thomas counties her testimony
about
people not getting their census
questionnaires because they
didn't have identifiable
addresses of so it wasn't just
native American areas we also
heard a lot about rural Hispanic
areas that were subject to that
under can.
We haven't received those yet to
the census bureau report
documenting where they think the
under cat was highest but
my gut feeling also is that
there was a significant under
cat I was surprised about the
Hispanic member particularly as
well as the native American
number and it did come in lower
than what the census bureau had
estimated it was going to be
thank you madam chair
representative Ely Mr center of
do you feel like the what we
have range beef HB eight Sir.
Representative that undercount
and tries to counter Act
undercount.
I think that the hi negative
deviations in the native
American areas
Will mitigate perhaps some of
that undertale.
In the Hispanic districts.
More careful in the once
protected by the voting rights
act just to make sure that we
had.
Solid hi Hispanic.
Percentages there the plus or
minus deviations weren't as big
of a factor.
But
chair representative of I can
add to that in a in terms of the
native American populations of
the northwest quadrant to be
clear.
Every Here she map had hi
deviation numbers for just that
reason because there was both
historically as we saw going
back decades there's been under
counts and also there was
testimony from
in front of this committee I'm
not not just committee but the
citizens redistricting committee
about the undercount the reasons
for those undercount proof of
the undercount even in the
census and of course that's why
every map took that into account
and the deviation numbers were
high for those six districts
that Representative line for
talked about for that reason
thank you thank thank you madam
chair thank Representative Eli
I'm looking at and H. B. eight
the maps here
do we know who Representative
the average.
The absolute average deviation
is for HB eight compared to the
other maps of the State Garcia
recommended.
Madam chair representative to
this.
The report.
The.
Third edition.
That the.
Average deviation.
On the third page of the report
toward the bottom that the
average deviation for district
was two point four percent and.
Mediation which is sort of them
the middle house district was
one point one percent and so
those are low deviations.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Ely Mr center of.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Yes thank you madam chair and
Representative and Senator
district.
Following with Representative
Ortez is line of questioning.
I believe you told us a story
this will research center off of
the the test to move.
one of this year's see moody's.
Our members from the Navajo
Nation showed photographs of
actual population in areas that
The Simpsons had reported to be.
Completely unoccupied is that
correct madam chair that is
correct.
So.
To put percent deviation.
Actually be considerably lower
than that.
Madam chair representative K.
chasing.
In fact the more native
Americans in these areas and.
It appears that but yes we're
but were forced to use the
census data.
This is.
Right but it seems to be madam
chair.
Representative Eli that.
You can do research.
Issues numbers.
But really good research also
has a qualitative element to it.
Where you try to figure out why
some things occurred and I know
we can't rely on the qualitative
but the qualitative care
informed decisions based on the
number.
Yes it seems to me
Madam chair representative Ely
that given the abysmal record
with regard to the native
American vote with fast air on
the side of.
inclusion.
Here rather than saying oh we
have to be we can't have any
further deviation here so we
have and some other
Area of the state the that's the
view of this and I'm wondering
if you want to comment
Representative Ely that would be
great yep madam chair R.
Representative also madam chair
I as as proof of what you just
said.
The sessions redistricting
committee.
For example comparing our food.
One yeah I'd go back through
each of these maps but compare
anyone to HB
eight and what you'll see this
is the numbers that came out of
numbers that have been talked
about are pretty consistent.
never mind scratch that I'm
looking on the I know they are
consistent but I'm looking at
different numbers so I will get
back to you Representative at
Judiciary when your chair sorry
about that.
Okay thank you I guess the state
then madam chair with regard to
this this line of inquiry I
support the the greater
deviation.
And I will vote in favor of this
bill with the expectation that
we will see committee substitute
in house bill is Kristin House
Judiciary.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Johnson.
That's what I was looking at I
actually got a lot.
Thank you madam chair and
colleagues and thank you
Representative Eli Mr chair been
Mr Sander off thank you for all
your work and everyone I move a
to pass on house bill eight
thank you.
Eight so we have a date passed
on house bill eight and a second
Representative Ortiz so we have
further discussion
Representative Zamora.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and have a
question for.
Mr standard all.
So.
Looking at the deviations across
the state that's that's one of
the first things that raised by
a barrel when I looked at the
map and look at the.
all the information we've been
handed.
Would it be fair to say.
If this is.
In helping to comply with the
voting rights act for the
minorities.
Would it be fair to say.
That.
If the Hispano us.
Had their fair share of the
higher deviation they would they
would be better Representative.
Madam chair.
Representative Zamora.
If the this does have more
flexibility of the higher
deviations as a result of the hi
negative deviations was I just
wanna make sure I understand
your question.
And see if they.
If some of the higher populated
Hispano communities.
Would have higher deviation.
In their community.
Would they be better
represented.
I'm.
That's a tricky question when
we.
Are looking at native American
districts are Hispano districts.
We're looking more as it relates
to the voting rights act making
sure that certain districts that
are protected based on the the
law the case law.
Are effective.
And.
So let's say
House district fifty eight
Russell.
I don't think we needed a higher
deviation
in order to make the district
for effective.
The in fact we.
More effective or not we with
the Joshua this plan but
actually staying on the low end
of the deviation that way this
one point six percent
sometimes there aren't enough to
spot of those to make an
effective district just like in
the native American areas and so
sometimes even in some of the
Hispanic districts you want to
stay on the lower end as well to
not bring in a known Hispanic
population it really varies
district by district
District sixty one which is
another sensitive district
deviations only went up to one
point eight percent so it wasn't
necessary to get up beyond plus
three percent to make those
sensitive districts more
effective.
House district spent and so.
as it relates to the voting
rights act we didn't see a
problem with the Hispanic
districts when what we were
limited to a plus three.
The latest six point nine of the
native American districts.
Thank you thank you for that
answer and thank you madam chair
and.
Madam chair and and Mr center
off so.
In trying to understand this if
my district.
I
left people in it.
And to not move the boundaries.
And get outside the boundaries
of my people.
With the higher deviation that
would be a plus for my district.
Do I understand that right madam
chair Mr Steiner madam chair
representative of our each
district is different in the
geography is different so in
some places it's better to stay
in the low into the deviation to
create a high Hispanic or high
native American district because
there aren't enough Hispanics
are native Americans in other
cases you might enjoy a hired
positive deviation if you're
trying to include a particular
neighborhood that you're
splitting so I would say it's a
case by case basis and madam
chair Mister stand off so then
apply.
Is it so important hard was it
seek out so much to have the
higher deviation in the
northwestern quadrant of the
State.
Madam chair representative so.
Is there a couple of reasons and
if you look at and what I was
doing was it's funny because it
gives an opportunity correct as
I start to respond to
Representative Chasey the C. R.
C. at some type of sentence so
we miss read it but if you look
at each one of them apps.
Not just the one but you look at
hi you look at J. all of these
maps that this seven percent
committee the commission studied
had testimony on took documented
evidence on each one of these
maps you will see the northwest
quadrant consistently.
And pretty close both in terms
of cumulative for the entire
state and also for each one of
these districts have high
deviation so you're asking why.
Because there undercounted
historically and in this sense
we know that we're not to guess
about it we can see it.
And then there was evidence
presented by those communities.
To say in the census it's really
gonna be a problem.
To address.
And so that's what the C. R. C.
did not just with respect to
the E. one map but also the I am
J. map I just looked at.
And here's the question Madam
chair representative.
We all voted.
Under Senate bill three oh four.
To send this process to a
bipartisan commission that would
make this determination.
And so now it's coming back and
we have their conclusions and
then members that don't like it
I get it.
But it's a process we all bought
into because the whole idea was
to take the partisanship out of
the process which we did and
that's why this may these are
these are five point two inch
one of these maps not just the
ones that are being criticized
as being brought by some other
group but because each one of
these maps the citizens
redistricting commission looked
at it and said one person one
vote.
The native Americans in
particular Navajo Nation have
been historically undercounted
it has led to not one person one
vote they effectively get less
than about.
And so we're going to make up
for that by having a large
deviation number that's what
happened so madam chair and
Representative Eli.
I'm not dissatisfied with the
process I'm not dissatisfied
with the bill.
That a lot of a lot of us voted
on I'm perfectly content with
it.
But there are questions that
come up as we progress into.
Finishing up this process.
And in the testimony today.
We talked about the undercount
of the Hispano Americans.
If the deviation.
It's for the undercount.
Why is all the deviation said
non the northwestern quadrant of
the state and why it it's for
the for the undercounted area
and we just had done testimony
that the Hispano communities
have some undercount problems.
For whatever reasons sure
there's a lot of factors that go
into that.
Why are those deviations all sit
in the northwestern quadrant of
the state and if they weren't.
Does it help.
Can it help the undercount of
the Hispano community.
Percent.
Madam chair representative are.
The reason for that.
The site under code.
In the voting rights act where
we speak of protecting the
native Americans and Hispanic
districts to give them an
opportunity to elect a candidate
of their choice the courts have
made it clear that based on past
testimony and evidence not only
in New Mexico but throughout the
nation that native Americans
voter participation levels are
much lower that Hispanics are
Anglos and so what the courts
have said and goals of the
tribal governments here in New
Mexico have been for the native
American districts for them to
be effective.
In possibly having the
opportunity to elect a candidate
of choice the four districts.
Sixty two percent
Voting age native American or
higher to be effective and allow
them an opportunity to elect a
candidate of their choice.
So there's a higher level that
we're seeking of native American
voting age population in the
native American majority
districts.
And that's a reason why the
native Americans felt that it
was appropriate under the voting
rights act state of the higher
into the negative deviations to
create effective.
Which are the native American
districts and thank you thank
you for that answer and.
Madam chair and and the.
Mr Senator off does.
The deviation.
In in northwestern New Mexico.
Does that have anything to do
with the native community
wanting to be represented.
In by more than one.
Representative
Congressperson.
All right does that make them a
lot more areas so that they can
go.
Further south and have more
representation have to
congresspeople representing them
instead of one.
Madam chair the.
Representative Zamora.
That's a separate issue the
native Americans recognize that
they can't have a majority of
native Americans in one
congressional district because
and we only have three
congressional districts so
there's no way of telling a
congressional district where a
majority with Representative the
date of Americans so some native
American tribes have made a
strategic decision thank you to
have a voice in two different
congressional districts for
example as expressed that
Mescaleros expressed that desire
so they're they're not trying to
create a major native American
yes check they can't so why
don't we just try to have
influence of voice and have an
opportunity to go to different
members of Congress and
intentionally split our tribal
boundaries so if it's a
definition of because they can't
get a major the simple if only
ten percent of state native
Americans I can't job internet
the of American congressional
district but you can draw six
major native American house
districts.
K. and and thank you for those
answers as as we proceed forward
we learned a lot we learned a
lot about.
The strings the politics and and
how people
To be represented and rightfully
so and with all respect to the
people of the state of New
Mexico the reason the debates
and the questions are to try to
make it fair and get equal
representation throughout the
state not that we're trying to
put down.
A certain part of the state or
or any community or any.
Different culture or anything in
the state we're just trying to
understand all the factors that
go into this and it's it's very
interesting as we go along and
and we all learn and and try to
do a good job for everybody is
just to get the representation
the way.
They they would like it or we
see that it's try to be a state
fair to everybody and and thank
you for your answers it's it's
it's a great time good time to
be a good committee the ex.
Thank you Representative is
there further discussion.
Okay
and so I just want to thank you
again I'm glad that we're able
to have you here to reiterate
some of those clients especially
about you know having
Thanks being able to elect their
representatives of Tories I
think that's really important
because I know that voting
especially
Is very sacred and I want to
ensure that everyone has that
opportunity to elect their
candidate of choice so thanks to
the CRC for all of their hard
hardware to APC APC G. ad hoc
committee for all of the work
all these folks you know or
taking the time out of their
lives and the lives of their
families status
voluntarily so I think that says
a lot about their dedication and
yeah we thank them the state of
New Mexico thanks them so do you
have anything to close with the
representative Ely if not we're
ready to take this about madam
chair I do not okay great the
clerk to call the roll place.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
And if there is yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
By a vote of.
Six three we have a day pass on
house bill eight thank you.
Thank you thank you for done.
So just for the purposes of the
committee we will be meeting
tomorrow at seven thirty eight
AM room.
Zero seven
we're discussing how to spend
six seven and nine what are the
Public Education Commission that
we are so
I look forward to seeing
everyone tomorrow at ten A. M.
because.
Is going.
She sits in third.
I'm sure it's hard to see the
shocked look on my face.
The current thank you everyone.
