we love we we lander for
branding.
So without further ado that
allow me to introduce our to
committee
staff for this legislative
session I'll begin with Taylor's
Thank you so please.
Yes my name is Taylor Moran I am
a student at UNM I took the
semester off keep you on.
A couple internships and jobs
and I'm here session as a
committee assisted with
Representative Lamptey I'm here
for any questions if you need
any.
is buying a hello to
representative Representative co
chair I know but.
I didn't recognize you with your
man.
Oh my gosh.
Thank you Taylor and and again
any questions comments of she
will then reach out to the rest
of us today with with her of
phone number and email SCG we
have any questions or comments
and she will also share that
with your legs provided
assistance as well.
The next we have Donna Griffin.
An attorney that I've known for
quite some time she was our
committee analysts last year as
well as social job is to provide
us with the objective analysis
of the bill that will be
presented in our committee Donna
you would please.
Good morning representatives in
chair Donna Griffin a retired
attorney background in
regulation extractive industries
and
law environmental law and in
water law and so I'm really
excited again to be with this
committee I just in my
undergraduate degree is
agriculture so I'm excited to be
back for this committee thank
you.
Thank you Donna and and and
again as well Donna will likely
have her contact information to
it was shared with with well so
that we can be in constant
communication with them and then
it looks like you have Mr seems
to see it you were an analyst as
well.
I'm cert I work with the at
major
I'm in and I actually your
analyst is backed by well but
she has another committee and so
her nice soda tax payments and
I've enjoyed sitting in so I'm
from Las Cruces New Mexico I've
been with your committee now I
think a couple years the best is
the one that does the analyst
for the majority and that and I
look forward to working with you
all again thank you thank you Mr
Garcia and and Taylor did reach
out or attempt to reach up to
the money minority analyst as
well but we have.
All.
Number Representative is.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I just texted Representative
Brandon Representative Zamora
and Representative branded not
get an invitation for plushie
seven problems with her computer
as well and I have not heard
back from Martin some more from
Representative the more yet
sadhana.
Very good okay we we we will get
them to any information that is
sure to be.
Thank you thank you and so
that's that's the New Mexico
down the list just introduce
folks the comedian and mind you
that we are being broadcast live
as well so we have at this point
looks like twenty one attendees
from the public and we
appreciate all of you for the
public joining us.
For reference down the list.
In order thanks committee.
With.
Representative Anthony Allison
malice.
Good morning thank you Mr chair.
I am intermediaries I represent
district for that's in the
northwest corner I
Representative six Navajo
chapters and the small
communities of program water
flow Kirkland in a small slice
in Farmington.
I enjoy being on this committee
so that's why I I'm retired for
another couple years.
And the hopefully very soon I
will be going back into full
retirement so happy to be on
this committee looking forward
to great session Mr chair thank
you.
I can hear you Representative
Allison thank you very much for
coming back to our committee we
we are happy to have you once
again to be a great insight and
so with that knowing that brown.
You Mr.
Very very well sure let's go
back to Representative well.
Ranking member of the Republican
Party.
And.
Farmer in the house of
representatives.
That correct.
Thank you very much can I ask.
Michael.
Please you.
Thank you you okay.
Are there we go thank you Mr
chairman yes I am can be spent
to sell on the fifth generation
new Mexican.
Raised on the family farm down
there north of our teaches self
of.
West of LA like are there I've
been involved in agriculture my
whole life either through
farming or through ranching.
And right now above
Water is critical to the state
of New Mexico and one size as
far as any water laws goes
doesn't work one size does not
fit all in our state because
there was a bill that was passed
a couple years ago that
I have already the state
engineer has been in contact
with me that we do need to
revisit this bill because it is
detrimental for farmers to be
able to finish out the crop year
if they run short on water and
we have to be ever mindful even
though you.
Representative one area of the
state that we see what is going
to have the virtual affect
throughout the state of.
Being involved in agriculture Mr
chairman and members of this
committee
Our wide open spaces also have
to support our state's wildlife.
And with the drought conditions
extraordinary drought conditions
that we are faced with down
there in the southeastern corner
of state right now it also puts
the state's wildlife in dire
dire straits look forward to
working with everybody and we
need to use some common sense in
that correct Mr chairman.
All right thank you all very
much.
Thank you Representative good to
have you back again you begin
your your your insight and
institutional knowledge on
practical matters of AG are
really invaluable I appreciate
you for all you bring to the
committee let's move them down
to one of our newer our newest
members would be Representative
Dan hop in the hill
Representative Hochman Vigil
good morning good morning Mr
chair thanks so much for having
me I'm very excited to be
serving on this committee for
the first time I'm
Representative a day and Hochman
Vigil but everybody knows me as
day hi it's just a lot simpler
for everybody who thanks my name
is is Diane it's it's not but
they it's just easier for
everybody to remember so I am
from Albuquerque represent house
district fifteen which is the
north valley northeast heights
in one precinct on the west side
of Albuquerque and again excited
to be here serving on this most
important committee looking
forward to making new friends
and getting to know some of you
a lot better.
Thank you representative with
good to have you we appreciate
you let's then move down to the
next do committee member we have
is more Representative Marian
Matthews David Matthews.
Good morning and Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
very excited to be on this
committee to
I represent a district in the
far northeast size of
Albuquerque where most of the
water comes out of a tap unless
it comes at one of my right
barrels and where we don't
exactly have a lot of
agriculture but
On the nevertheless as your
passions of mine I was very
lucky when I was a deputy AG to
represent the state of New
Mexico in oral argument before
the U. S. Supreme Court on a
water case involving the
Canadian river and I don't claim
to be a water lawyer by any
means but I got very interested
in
water law and
water is life in New Mexico I
lived in southern New Mexico for
a period of time and I know how
critical water is and really
really excited about being able
to work on these issues
And then in terms of agriculture
I'm a training is a master
gardener my agriculture's my
backyard which is not very much
but I love to grow things
dispatched years been impossible
because seventy campaign and
everything but looking forward
to planning the tomatoes again
and I'm a docent at the.
Yes.
Did the tentacle gardens in
Albuquerque which I hope
everybody's had a chance to
enjoy so really interested also
in the in the agriculture and
water as it relates to our
economic development
particularly in rural New Mexico
so those are part of the reasons
why I requested to be on this
committee and I'm very glad to
be here thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews we're so happy to have
you with this and you bring up a
wealth of insight and I know
that you probably a more humble
and you use in use but yeah I I
hear your you're a quick
knowledgeable Water Turnier or
at least have some knowledge in
that as well so I'm happy to
have you it looks like the the
last two one of the other new
members on our committee
Representative and small it is
not with us again that was not
what this this morning with and
also a returning member
Representative Martin's a more
is is having some perhaps and
technical difficulties as well
so we will revisit those folks
should be join us if not we look
for to having them in our
committee as well so without
further ado I want to also allow
for our vice chairwoman an
opportunity to.
Introduce yourself so
Representative vice chair.
You're on mute vice chair.
We can hear you now okay.
Oh my gosh so many computer
problems lying and I hate the
capitol so that I could make
sure with everything would be
working so I apologize to our
committee members.
On to serve on this
I I appeared before you last
year and I was really impressed
with her membership on this
committee and I'm looking
forward to serving our thank you
small agriculture is very and
I'm from the I'm in the forty
first district in the north so I
represent the counties of Rio
Rico small parted Santa Fe.
Four precincts and tap but small
and is really an important part
of my district and brings and
twenty million in revenue to Rio
Arriba county and state and I
have a few bills and bringing to
this committee wants on water
infrastructure which is
committee passed last year were
kind of realigning that seeing
we can do a better job and
presenting the bill and getting
more and more now be talking a
little bit about
Our movie times in the north and
doing a study on so I'm very
grateful to be on this committee
and I really look forward to.
Working with all the membership
and I think it's going to be a
great year thank you never get
my computer working thank you.
Thank you vice chair with that's
great to have you great to have
your insight and knowledge as
well it looks like
Representative Matthews and
Representative still have your
hands up and I will get to you
it here here in a quick second
unless you have an update on on
where perhaps Representative
brown and what are but if not
did allow me to quickly
introduce myself I'm I'm
representative Lente and the
chair person for this committee
this is my second term being the
chair of for agriculture and
water resources something that's
near and dear to my heart as I
do practice agriculture and and
farming and ranching as a daily
lifestyle and I probably do so
something in regards to the
committee itself though is that
you know it's one that I believe
has a is one of the most
important committees in the
house simply because it deals
with something that has so much
implications with everything
that we do in the state a
specific the water and as we
know that as the as the as the
saying goes water is life so
want to make sure that we can do
everything and anything that we
can to make sure that we're
protecting the quantity and
quality of the water within our
state as well as agriculture
keeping that alive in our state
because it keeps so many other
people live and business so that
being said we're we will run the
committee like we did last year
I I do want to make sure that I
am I am explicit in saying that
I want I will make sure that
every single member has an
opportunity to speak so that if
you have anything to say the
floor is yours and obviously
we did a great job last year
making sure that that no one
takes up to much of the time and
this that and the other but at
the same time I respect each and
everyone of you and your
opinions and the way that you
represent your districts.
To the same point that those
folks that zoom in with us this
year just as they came to our
committee room last year is that
they will have
the utmost respect and the time
provided for them to provide
public comment because there is
no other reason why we should
not be available for public
comment I wanna make sure it's
open and they have the all the
accessibility to our committee
to all of us that the need so
that being said are legislative
assistant understand and know
that she will watch the
attendees and and provide them
the opportunity to speak as we
see fit
and so that being said I want to
make sure that we focus as the
as the committee on the notion
of transparency so just know
that we will publish every
agenda twenty four hours in
advance and so if it's not on
the agenda it will be her and so
I don't want there to be any
surprises
at because I I don't think it's
fair especially now knowing that
we are not in person and and we
can do things on the fly in
person we are going to be at the
will of of technology and so
that being said that will be
very important to us again this
year I I see some of the
comments and and there was a
real concern.
In in the chat asking if there
was an agenda and and there's
not much and other than we're
just gonna introduce ourselves
and kind of format for the for
the committee this year so that
being said thank you all of you
for for joining us today thank
you all of you for
representatives for getting up
with us we will be starting our
our committee meetings and and
Taylor please correct me if I'm
wrong at eight thirty.
In the morning on Tuesdays and
Thursdays and so as I understand
Taylor will open up zoom meeting
by eight if you want to zoom in
beforehand to get yourself set
up and then we will be in the
gallery by eight thirty in
beginning our our meetings and
just as last year I like to keep
a very timely improper meeting
so meeting that when we say we
start eight thirty we started
eight thirty and so we will call
local eight thirty and then we
will get straight to business
because I think that's the most
important thing to do to make
sure that we are giving those
pieces of legislation the apple
time they need to be presented
in our committee so with that
being said I will I I will
likely think of other things but
I think for the most part having
Taylor's.
contact information as well as
our committee analysts contact
information readily available so
that anyone of us have any any
questions or comments we can
reach out to them as I
understand it our Canadian books
are Committee folders will be
provided to us electronically so
that we will be able to
reference those bills you'll be
able to reference those FY ours
is gonna be different to be
weird but will we'll have to
make a go of it and I think
really the way I see it is that
if you have a another laptop
with you have I can't that's
going to be a way to to be able
to reference your your bills why
you're interacting with the
camera so without further ado
Representative is out with your
hand up.
The floor is yours ma'am.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I guess my concern he is we are
on the house agriculture
committee they have taken one of
one important aspect out of the
name of our committee.
And they have moved it to house
energy and natural resources and
water.
I am very very concerned and
very alarmed whenever health Ag
does not get the water bills
like we should and I what I
would like to know what kind of
input you have to ensure that
water which is the livelihood of
our agricultural sector of the
state of New Mexico that feeds
the world wide those bills are
not coming to our committee.
Representative is L.
your comments are are news to me
because I look at that at the
website as and as I've seen
everything you still
Representative as house
agriculture and water resources.
If you also look at your energy
Canadian title you'll see that
it includes water and most of
these water bills especially
last year they all went to House
Energy I've got concerns there
Mr chairman especially whenever
we have all the issues that we
do as far as getting the
compacts go at.
All the stuff that goes on over
on the western side of the state
and I think that it's.
Being disrespectful to members
of this committee not to be
included in what is the
livelihood for farmers and
ranchers and those involved in
agriculture thank you very much.
Thank you representatives L. I
will I will note your concerns
and and it is to the concern of
mine and so if in fact we are
the have the house agriculture
and water resources committee by
all means we need to be able to
see those types of bills because
I will bring it up with our
speaker I will make sure that if
they are referred to a committee
that debate maybe I passed us
and we need to review that that
we be able to do that as well so
point well taken I appreciate
that and with the next hand up
Representative Matthews and I
guess I'm learning as we go but
once you ask a question if you
can put your hand back down
Representative is element
Representative Matthews your
hand up is next.
Thank can you hear me yeah okay
I'm.
yeah I I was not aware of the of
of the information that
Representative is now just
shared and and I just want to
share my concern and
because I really thought that
this was the primary water
committee and.
maybe we can get that clarified
it and as you indicated you
would I just wanted to chime in
that I think that's a very
important thing to straighten
out.
Absolutely thank you for the
common Representative Matthews
give additional comment.
Now okay thank you this then we
want to vice chairwoman headed
up I just you.
You're on mute vice chair.
Okay Mr chair thank you I too
would echo I like to echo
Representative the sales
concerns I think this is the
nature committee for water and
that's one of the reasons I
wanted to serve on this I have
the most a sec yes in the most
mutual domestic water systems in
my district in the state so
water is the number one issue I
I told a group of legislators
when I came on when I came into
the to the house I thought I'd
really be working on education
and the you know early and
things that I have I realize the
number one issue in my district
and I spend sixty percent of my
time on water issues so I think
that's one reason I want to
wanted to serve on this
committee it is the most
important issue I think in New
Mexico thank you for checking
with the chair on that it's
deeply appreciated and and I
just wanted to show that there
is deep bipartisan concern on.
Thank you.
Thank you vice chairwoman
Preciado your your comments
again once you finished
commenting I think to avoid any
mistakes make sure to meet
yourself so that and just in
case you have to jump on a call
so Representative Matthews going
to mute yourself United.
I think it at this point that's
really all I I wanted to cover
other than knowing what will be
upcoming for our our committee
so next Tuesday we will not be
meeting as a committee
and we will then resume
committee meetings on Thursday
of next week so Thursday the
twenty eight we will have a
meeting and what I normally do
is I will invite the state
engineer as well as the
Interstate Stream Commission to
come to our committee to provide
us in an overview of water
issues within our state.
And so for all of our
Representative for the reference
of all the attendees that's a
great one on one session that's
a great overview session so that
we can do a quicker sales
associate ourselves with what's
going on and once that is done
then I planned to then start
calling bills on February the
second which will be the first
Tuesday of February so that we
can begin our business hearing
legislation then and so by then
hopefully technologically
speaking will have figure all
the kings of the zoom stuff and
and we'll be able to to make
sure that were on point and and
on time so is there any are
there any other questions
comments from any of the
committee members at this point
in time.
Representative is out.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I'll be brief I have two things
I hope the committee members can
see this picture right here I'm
waving my hand over it.
That our right there.
We can see you in.
Can everybody recognize that
works right there.
No.
Thank.
That is mine that bird.
He won the Kentucky Derby in
nineteen oh ballasting when was
it.
Maybe the second.
Two thousand and nine at fifty
to one he lives in my district
by the way these by lender block
and mark Allen and
You set records fifty to one I'm
pretty proud of that little our.
But Mr chairman whenever you're
talking about our meetings being
Tuesday morning whenever I was
visiting with the.
The state engineer you said
they're kind of put a quandary
because I think it was kind of
intentional that the house
energy and natural resources and
water committee is held the same
time are particularly meeting is
it they do have to split up
teams and state engineer says he
has to sit one committee with
two.
Two computers running and
directing people to go here and
there I really hope that we are
able to resolve this issue
because everybody that is on
this particular.
Zoom right now they do have.
Water
we do have the right to be able
to hear them if we're
representing Ag sector which is
the second highest.
Taxpayer in the state of New
Mexico with the oil and gas
being number one.
So that's all I have thank you
Mr speaker.
Mr chair I'm sorry sorry for
that folk pop Mr chairman of the
budget committee that there's
gonna bait thank you all right
thank you representative I would
appreciate that and and note
your your comments are noted and
with well appreciated I also
want to make sure that and
perhaps this is a comment or a
question for Taylor I I got to
receive a text message asking
how to announce how the public
plans to participate so when
when the attendees want to make
comment in public comment do
they register this is something
that will work out I mean I want
to do it but the public saying
like this but the something will
work out do they register prior
to provide comment on the bill
or how that will work out so
If any Rivera please do allow us
time to figure that much out
because I know that we want to
make sure that
we are are doing everything we
can to make sure that these
beings addition and that their
productive at the same time so
allow us to figure that out and
we will will provide comment of
publicly when we do know that
unless Taylor you already know.
Okay.
Madam is gonna work zoom.
Once chair on Representative
nineteen announces for public
comment that we will on.
We will have you are raising
your hand you're putting your
questions and comments in the.
type box right here.
And then I will go in order I
yes from what has your hand
raise on our side of the screen
and working that.
Okay very good so you will not
need to register you would just
simply need to attend the
meeting and then in the
attendees box raise your hand or
but the come in the chat box and
then we will call on you
accordingly just working down
the list and it does look like
we have a couple of members of
the public we appreciate
secretary of the New Mexico
department of agriculture Jeff
we for joining us this morning
his contact information is in
the chat box he is a great
resource and likely we will also
invite him to provide as an
overview of perhaps and one of
one or agricultural issues in
our state at a certain point of
time as well and then we also
have another one join Jonas
Moira who is the executive
director of the Mexico Canada
rewards Association preview
being here as well as contact
information is in the chat box
as well so with with that being
said folks again really
appreciate all of you being here
with us this morning look
forward to this committee again
feel that still yet one of the
very most important committees
to be on in the house of
representatives you will bring a
wealth of knowledge and
information so please do so and
I look forward to serving with
all of you for this session so
with that being said thank you
all very much and at this point
we can all log off from the zoom
in the committee so that means
that we'll see everybody next
Thursday eight thirty for the
Water one oh one from the state
engineer and Interstate Stream
Commission thank you all see if.
Representative sal to your
question we won't be able to see
only because it's a weapon are.
I was just kind of curious I
didn't know if they would be
