Um, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
you know, I just, I just have
one question, um.
I, I love again, as mentioned,
the healing powers of the
outdoors, um, but it, it was
noted in the scal analysis about
the loss of revenue to the state
parks. Um, is there any plans on
to maybe how to maybe recoup
those costs or maybe request um
allowances uh for the
possibility of influx into those
parks, um, to where we're able
to have, you know, both make
sure that the state parks are
able to meet their budgets, um,
as well as expand this um.
This path to to make it broader
for, for veterans. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
Years ago when we passed the
original bill, there was
questions on the loss of revenue
to the state parks.
Um,
but I, I
I don't think there was a
drastic impact.
Um, and now since there's,
there's a, uh
High number of veterans that are
already taking advantage of
this. I don't see that um it'll
be.
Uh, a figure that's not able to
be recouped either in House Bill
2 or through
additional revenues at the park
as more people
Um, spend time out there. I do
know that.
Getting veterans, especially
those veterans who may be
suffering from PTS or other um
Mental health issues.
It is extremely, extremely
therapeutic to get them out into
the open into the fresh air.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. No, fully in
support of this legislation. Um,
just wanting to know, you know,
overnight guests, just, just the
wear and tear, you know, on the
parks and just looking to see
how maybe as a thought or future
thought is to also support the,
the parks that are housing this
incoming fluctuation, if it is
deemed that they're.
Represented Mason.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'd like to
move for a do pass. I suck it.
There's a motion for a due pass,
uh, and a second by
Representative Mason and a
second by ranking member Lord.
I'm going to actually, I believe
that Representative Cullen had
some uh question as well. So I'm
gonna,
no, no, if we can do to further
debate for a little longer, I
think that's worth it. And then
you do.
Good.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
only question that I really had,
and I'll just.
Put this out there. We already
received this benefit to my
husband's disabled veteran. We
don't camp because my husband
doesn't like camping after you
camped enough.
In Kuwait. So, um, but the
question that I have is, um,
cause it's automatically mailed
to us, and I see that there was
a question in reference to,
like, could it be issued upon
request of the veteran and not
automatically generated so that
it would save dollars for the
department on their postage.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm sure that's
something that could be
addressed.
Um, by rule within the
department, I know this.
Uh, I saw this as a way to cut
down on some of the bureaucracy
that they have to go through now
since everybody's gonna qualify
for it.
Um, but yeah, that, that is
something that could be taken up
and rule.
All right, thank you.
There is a motion on the table.
Uh, let's go and do a roll call.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you.
There's a motion for a
I'm gonna like let's do it guys.
Let's just go.
Thursday. All right, there is a
a motion for do pass on HB 161
by Representative Mason. Uh,
let's go and do a roll call.
Thank you.
Representative Cullen.
Yes
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Ranking member Lord, yes.
Representative Mason.
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Madam Chair, Serrado
Madam Chair, Serrao
6. You have a due pass in HB
161. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the.
Thank you. All right, next up we
have uh HB 1 or 265 creative
industries fund.
We have Suansky or Wuhan here.
Since we don't have those
members here, uh, can we go to
HB 273, uh, certain natural gas
is renewable energy.
Yeah
Nice
Yeah, so please, no, you're
good, you're good. So we had
some movement.
So we have HB 273, uh, certain
natural gas is renewable energy,
present a pedigree.
that.
House Bill 273 is a pretty
straightforward simple bill.
It amends the rural Electric
Cooperative Act and the
Renewable Energy Act to include
natural gas using combined cycle
technology.
Madam Chair and committee.
The purpose of this bill, its
purpose is to provide clean, a
clean additional source of.
Of input for generation of
affordable electricity.
Use of combined cycle
technology.
As a proven has has a proven
numbers of reducing carbon
emissions by 60%. Pollution it's
a solution-based approach that
will allow flexibility to the
resources that are approved is
clean.
And can improve grid reliability
at lower costs to consumers.
While simultaneously protecting
the environment and air quality.
Madam Chair and committee, it
creates a balance between energy
security and environmental
security.
There is a need to focus on
capacity when talking about
renewable energy and actual
generation.
The reality is in numbers,
US energy consumption is 33%
natural gas.
Natural gas consumption is
replaced reliance on coal over
the last 10 years.
While more than 4 trillion has
been spent on renewable energy
over the last 13 years with a
market share of less than 9% on
consumption and reliability.
But alternatives what
alternatives exist if this
legislation is not passed, Madam
Chair and committee.
the status quo.
That's the alternative.
Continue to increases on taxes
to subsidize alternate energy.
With a very low ROI.
Madam Chair and committee.
This solution provides er.
As no cost to government and no
cost to taxpayers.
private investment in this
technology will fund the
legislated.
The legislation creating a
win-win scenario.
Low-cost energy generation for
the taxpayer, higher GRT and
other taxes, i.e., severance
tax.
And a reliable source.
Madam Chair, in the uh FIR and
from Mnerd as well. They both
identify that there is no fiscal
impact.
One of the concerns inside.
Agency analysis.
Mimard and from New Mexico
Attorney general, is that
there's no clear definition on
combined cycles, Madam Chair,
committee.
The mind cycle is very clearly
defined by the US Energy
Information Administration.
With in-depth analysis by the
National Renewable Energy
Laboratory.
Which you can find that
information that in REL.gov.
Mine cycle, power plants
employed two combustion turbines
with 1 steam turbine.
In 2020, the US power sector
added an additional 5.8
gigawatts of combined cycle
generating capacity, bringing
the total US.
NGCC capacity.
Almost 260.
Gigawatts.
As US generation mix has shifted
away from coal and towards
natural gas.
And renewables
Utilization rate.
of the US NGCC fleet has risen
steadily from an average of 35%
in 2005 to more than 57% in
2020.
Natural gas is the most
prevalent energy source used for
electricity generation in the
United States.
I'm not gonna read all this.
So with that, Madam Chair and
committee, I would stand for
questions. I have more
information and I think they're
probably gonna come with
questions, so.
Thank you. Uh, let's go ahead
and ask the folks online if you
are in favor of this bill,
please raise your hand.
And we'll go to the folks in the
room as well if you're in favor,
please raise your hand of HB
273.
We do have someone online, uh,
Rebecca Hammer.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rebecca Hammer, a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association,
NOGA represents more than 200
member companies. We stand in
support of this bill, and we
want to thank the sponsors for
their work. The bill allows for
an affordable, reliable, and
sustainable energy source to
support grid monetization, steps
toward further electrification
and the support of other energy
sources like wind and solar.
This bill allows for an all of
the above approach as we work
toward an energy transition.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, if you are
opposed to this bill, please
raise your hand online.
If you're opposed this bill, can
you please raise your hand in
the room?
Uh, would you like to speak?
And we have the attendant bring
the microphone.
OK
It's OK. I think they're
Somebody just called him out.
It's a do you
thank you. Thank you.
Thanks again.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Jacqueline Walsh. I'm
representing the Sierra Cla Rio
Grande chapter. We stand in
strong opposition to the
inclusion of combined
cyclomethane gas as a renewable
energy, methane gas is a
non-renewable fossil fuel that
when extracted, vented, flared,
leaked, combusted, damages our
air, land, water, climate, and
health. It doesn't matter where
or how you burn fossil fuels or
how many cycles a power plant
has. It relies on a
non-renewable fuel. It's not
renewable.
And while combined cycle is more
efficient than simple cycle
technology, it tends to need to
run more to achieve that
efficiency. It undermines the
purpose of the renewable Energy
Act, which is to ramp down
climate pollution, not add more
polluting facilities. We
strongly oppose this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, I believe we're
gonna go ahead and go to the
committee, uh, ranking member
Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. I have some
questions. Let's start with the
obvious question is, can you
explain to me when you talk
about natural gas, with this
combined cycle.
Madam Chair, committee, uh, I
think, uh, Representative Lord,
thank you for the question. Um,
the simplest way to put it is,
is there's, it's a two cycle
system.
That uses natural gas with
water, it creates steam goes
through a system. And actually,
Madam Chair, if you want, I have
a 3-minute video that kind of
describes this very clearly.
We can hold on that, but if
you'd like more information
later, is that OK if you, if you
send it to the committee
afterwards?
That'd be great. Thank you. I'm
here to answer questions. I was
just gonna let the video do it
for me, um, but so, so it
combines um several cycles, um,
Utilizes uh a Breton cycle and
ranking cycle.
And I'm not gonna get into the
technology behind that.
Ultimately, it uh combines those
two cycles of natural and normal
natural gas facility.
As a higher emission rate on the
methane gas that one of our uh
Um,
Constituents just talked about.
With this one, we actually
reduced that by over 60%. This
is one of natural gasses,
clearly the second most cleanest
fuel.
that we have in the world.
When we look at it from an
energy consumption standpoint.
Hopefully that helps you and
answers your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Yeah, I was
looking right here about, um,
The gas consumption and how
there's a transit us. So with
this bill that you have,
and, um, can you tell me what
did it go through another
committee? Which committee did
this come from? Madam Chair and,
and Representative Lord. Now,
this is my first committee. OK,
so then I have some more
questions for you.
Um
So Madam Chair and
Representative, can you tell me
what is the purpose of this
bill? What do you see the
advantage of this bill?
Adam Chair and Representative
Lord.
The purpose of this is to, as,
as I stated in my opening
comments provide a clean
additional source of input for
generation of affordable
electricity.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lord.
We're in a, in a com
In a complete shift.
With respect to energy
generation right now.
And as I talked about Madam
Chair and rep.
Um
With over the last decade,
almost decade and a half.
More than $4 trillion has been
spent on
Renewable energy with less than
a 9% return on investment.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lord, when we look at the
renewable energies that we have
out there.
It needs to be clearly
understood.
That the greenhouse gasses that
are
Created
Manufacture those.
Wind farms, solar.
Biofuel.
Any of those items.
Greenhouse gasses are not
counted.
In the construction and the
making of those do of those.
Different uses.
And greenhouse gasses are only
started to count once that is in
the is supplying electricity to
the grid.
The purpose of this?
Is to supply a solution. There's
no government.
Involvement with respect to
this. Obviously, there can be
rulemaking, all those different
things. There is no physical
impact. This will be done and
has been done worldwide.
Uh, by private investment.
We're supplying energy to
the grid.
Madam Chair, I can give example
after example from Tennessee
Valley Authority across the
country on, on combined cycle
fuel.
There's a reduction in, in uh
greenhouse gasses.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord, this is
also a solution for uh temporary
solution to get to the 2050
complete transition from
California's perspective.
Thank you, ma'am Chairman
Representative, and, and that's
the thing, there really is
absolutely nothing that is
really clean energy. That's the
thing that you're right, the
transportation of those big
blades that come are not
considered with the greenhouse
effect. We hardly ever take into
effect things that are shipped
over in these giant ships and I
didn't know that ships are one
of the leading cause of
depleting the ozone. That's
where we get all our organic
food, so I feel horrible and I
go by organic food from another
country. I'm like, oh, I'm
depleting the, the ozone. It's
I'm eating my organic fruit.
Madam Chair and represented by
by my organic food from the
farmer down the street. I, I, I
tried, yeah, I try to as well,
um.
Mo Sha Representative how hard
to get pairs and peaches and
other things that like year
round. Um, but there really
isn't cause there was a big
issue with uh the solar because
I'm in radioactive waste, uh,
and there was a big issue with
what do we do with this, our
solar panels because there's
nowhere to put them because
they're toxic.
And there's also they're coated
with peass, which is forever
chemical. And then the wind
turbines are covered with peavis
and use oil, I mean, there's,
there's nothing, there's the,
the whole thing about completely
clean energy it is false.
Everybody's got something. So
when I look at this, I think if
we did consider all the
transportation and everything
else, and it would kind of
balance out to where gas is, and
I see where you're going because
you're trying to make that equal
to the solar and wind, which
have
Equal problems, to be honest.
Um, like I said before, we, we
have no idea what to do with the
solar panels when they're done,
because we can't just throw them
in the.
Landfill and when the wind
turbines are now sitting up in
Wyoming because we don't know
what to do with them either, so.
It was, I support your bill. I
just had a few questions on
that. I'll probably, I'll get
the video from you and watch it
later to get Madam Chair, if I
can respond to that, well,
sorry, there was no question he
can respond on the next
question. That's fine.
So uh representative. I like to
keep it uh with the questions
back and forth. So the next one
up is actually representative
Gonzalez, and you can respond to
that as well. Thank you. I
appreciate it.
Um, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, thank you so
much, uh Mr. Representative. Um,
so no, I just have, you know,
just some questions and I, I, I
do applaud the the new
technology, you know, um, trying
to keep gas alive over longer
periods of time. Um, but you did
mention the analysis
specifically from EMNRD um from
the
Attorney General, um, but by, by
purely definition, you know,
this is not a renewable energy
resource. And so, um, you know,
my concern, besides it by
definition, just not being a
renewable resource. Um, I know
the question was already asked,
but maybe the goals were, but
um,
You know, besides giving a
little bit of leeway, you know,
in the renewable portfolio that
is now the requirement to be
met. Um, can you maybe add some
insight or do you have any
thoughts maybe on this opening
the doors to future
technologies, um, that may not
be, you know, as clean, um, you
know, allowing cycling, allowing
kind of opening the door, um,
you know, that was also noted
here in the analysis that um
leaving open the possibility
that a non-renewable and
potentially carbon emitting
technology would
enshrined in legislation for
future years. Um, you know, kind
of by, can you maybe give some
thought onto that and maybe
future technologies that this
could open the doors to that,
you know, are not aligning with
the intent of the original
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, I
appreciate the question.
Here, here's the thing, when we
look at the definitions inside.
Uh, the, the, uh,
Rural Electric Cooperative Act
and renewable Energy Act.
Those definitions came from
somebody.
They came from somebody with an
intent.
To
It a certain target.
Does that mean, Madam Chair and
Representative that that should
all, that should be everything
inside of here. When we look,
Madam Chair and Representative,
that some of the things that are
generated inside of here when we
talk about biomass, um,
So many different aspects of of
what is inside of this. They all
admit.
CO2
So when do they emit CO2?
Depends on when you start to
look at them.
As we talk about in the
renewable Act, um,
We don't consider.
The amount of energy it takes to
build some of the things that
we're building.
Madam Chair and committee, I'm
gonna be crystal clear. I have
no issue with alternative
sources of energy.
If I did, I probably wouldn't be
carrying this.
Um
We do need to increase our
portfolio if we're going to get
to to the goals.
By 2050.
Those portfolios are gonna have
to take the place.
are, are some of our renewable
sources right now. Let's just
talk about wind and and solar,
create their own problems with
respect to weather patterns.
Um
And have become.
Unreliable. We all dealt with
the polar vortex from 2 years
ago.
And, and where.
The costs of
Because the way the energy grid
is defined the way that power.
Was defined in the percentages
that the Western co-ops.
Had to put inside of there when
everything froze up.
Natural gas peaked.
Because it wasn't supposed to be
a source and to make all the
changeovers created its own set
of problems and costs to all of
us. And, and, uh, once again, I
don't have a problem with that.
Uh, in answer to one of the
statements made by the questions
from the previous
representative.
Um
We do put our solar panels.
We do get rid of them and they
go in our landfills right now.
Our solar panels.
Have 7 of the most toxic
chemicals in the world in them,
and they are going into our
landfills.
We have solar farms in New
Mexico that were built 5 to 7
years ago that had never been
connected to the grid.
We need other solutions.
To get us through 2050 and the
transition that that's being put
out there. This is a good
solution.
This reduces our our carbon
emissions.
We look at the clean fuel tax
from last year.
That didn't really solve a
problem for us in New Mexico.
What it did.
was create an opportunity.
Or businesses.
Make money on carbon credits.
Which those carbon credits, the
people that sell the fuel have
to buy the carbon credits and
then turn around and take credit
and and to offset.
The fact that we can't clean the
fuel to the, to the standard
that's in there. It is not a
cost-effective solution.
This is a cost-effective
solution to the state.
And to the taxpayers.
And it's a cost, and it's a
revenue generator for the state.
Further further solutions with
respect to clean energy.
I think those are going to
continue to come through. The
wonderful thing about industry.
is a 3 left to do it.
And they're given a set of
rules, they're gonna find a way
to live within the set of rules.
And create a more effective,
efficient, and cleaner energy.
This one already exists, and it
is used worldwide.
And is replacing, we're
replacing coal with natural gas
combined cycle all across the
world right now. We're replacing
nuclear, which is the
Crazy is the cleanest burning
fuel we have.
The cleanest generator of energy
that we have will replacing with
the second cleanest generator of
energy.
Hopefully that answers your
question.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative, uh,
no, it does, and, and I do
applaud the efforts of this
emerging technology. I think
that's what's going to get us
through. I think.
Every day, new technology comes
out, you know, for whatever
reason that may be, um, and I do
also agree with the sentiment
that energy leaves a footprint.
I mean, there is no doubt that
all energy leaves a footprint.
Um, I just do have hesitancy
with changing the definition,
renewable, um, is I don't know
if this meets the standards
quite yet. Um, I do appreciate
the technology and, and you are
very right that this is
technology being used worldwide
as, you know, getting there.
Like, I think this is, um,
You know, not a renewable
resource, you know, natural gas
is a finite resource. And so
this is a way to extend the life
of that longer, but um I do have
to respectfully, um, be in
opposition to that just by
purely definition as I do think
that this does open the doors,
um, to maybe technology or other
sources that were not intended
by the original.
legislation. But do thank you
for your input. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh.
Does this not
uh we, we are trying to change
get natural gas into the
renewable resource.
Technology, but in the
Opening statement in your bill
it says include natural gas
using.
This technology.
Does not say use natural gas for
anything it's only, you're only
trying to get it changed to use
this.
New technology, is that right,
Representative?
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question and
the way that you clarify that.
We are not defining natural gas
as a renewable.
We're just adding it to the
portfolio.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair.
Can I request I've seen that
video. It is amazing and I
request that we show the video
on this new technology.
I heard not, uh, representative
if that's OK if we can send it
to the committee, I think that
would be very valuable. Um, but
at the same time, I, it should
be in the presentation as
opposed to beforehand. So that
that's all right if we can do
it.
For me it's a game changer.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
Uh.
Who, who is going to represent,
who's gonna benefit from this.
Energy, new energy source.
Adam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
the beneficiaries of this will
be the New Mexico taxpayers.
New Mexico ratepayers.
This will provide this
technology does exist. This
technology will
Be cheaper
Less expensive to generate.
To the grid
In the technologies we have
right now.
The cost will not affect.
The, the rate, the ratepayers.
The revenue will go straight to
the state's bottom line.
So this is a complete win-win.
Opportunity for the state of New
Mexico.
Madam chair and Representative
one of, one of the concerns
stated earlier was that, you
know, we have a finite resource,
Madam Chair committee, let me be
crystal clear.
In Southeast New Mexico, our
reserves.
At the production rate that we
have.
We have 7 shells that we haven't
even touched yet.
Our reserves extend beyond 200
years at the production rate we
have today.
Thank you thank you
Representative Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Chair Representative.
Do, do you have?
Mm
Now
How much deficit do we have in
our grid now with the new
technology of inherent madam
Chair Representative of the new
technology that's coming about
on our.
Electronics and stuff is gonna
be a
Very strong but I understand the
very strong pull on our energy
grid.
And as I understand it, and
maybe representative has some
figures on that.
Our energy grid.
is insufficient today, is that
true, Representative?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would, I would say yes, our
energy, our, our grid is
insufficient right now. Um, and
I'm gonna give you an example
because Madam Chair and
committee, I don't have those
numbers, but I will tell you
this in southeast New Mexico, if
we want to put
a new well on, on uh.
Power up a new well we're doing,
we're using on-site generators.
The suppliers
With the exception of Lee County
Electric.
The suppliers down there don't
have the capacity to add to the
power.
We look, Madam Chair, with the,
the changes that we're, we're
gonna go through with AI and
electric vehicles and some of
the other stuff, none of which I
say I, I'm not saying any of
it's a bad thing.
The Madam Chair and
Representative, I will say that
we do not have.
The source to do that and you
actually, madam chair and
represented a committee, you
have an expert in the room
sitting, sitting right to your
left, madam chair. They can give
you complete definitions with
where we stand on the grid. I
can just tell you what's
happening in southeast New
Mexico. If we want to power
something out in the oil field,
it's not because we can't take
the power line to it because we
can't get the energy from the
power source.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh
Also, uh,
Well, you answered my question.
This.
Madam Chair represents this is.
Completely
A privately funded project, no
state funds will go into
developing this new techno
technology, is that right,
representative Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, and I do
want to reiterate this
technology is consistently
improving, but it is not a new
technology, and um the FIR M
nerd.
The analysis that you have in
front of you today are very
crystal clear there is no fiscal
impact to the state.
From a cost perspective like
representative Madam Chair.
One last observation, I guess,
madam chair that I.
And in
And I'll again reiterate we're.
Narrowly
Trying to define the change in
this, but.
Madam Chair Representative.
On page 5 of the bill starting
with.
Line 15.
And it gives
Variances to the
Renewable energy that are
already in in.
In effect,
Uh
We're on or we just adding to
this list.
Representative
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. We
are adding to the list.
And I don't want to mislead in
any way. This
Under subsection 8.
Item one, it does add natural
gas using combined cycle
technology to a renewable energy
resource as a renewable energy
resource.
It is adding.
A resource to the solutions.
Inside of the eye.
Thank you, uh, representative
Madam Chair.
Uh, I think that's all the
questions I have today.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair and move a do pass. We
have a motion for a do pass by
representative, uh, a ranking
member Lord, we have a second
from Representative Mason. We
have one more piece of debate,
and then we'll come back to the
motion, uh, Representative
Sanchez, I'm sorry, uh, Vice
Chair Sanchez.
Madam, I just had a quick
question. Have any other states
passed
Similar type bill?
Madam Chair, um,
California added.
Natural gas combined cycle to
their renewable resources list
several years back. Madam Chair,
I tried to pull together the
references for that. I will get
those to the committee. My only
question.
Now that brief comment, uh,
truly we'd love to get the video
sent to Barbara afterwards. So
if we can make sure we connect,
that'd be wonderful. Thank you.
Uh, so we do have a motion for a
do pass on HB 273 by ranking
member Lord. Uh, let's go ahead
and take a roll call vote.
of colon? Yes.
Representative Gonzalez. No.
Representative or ranking member
Lord yes.
Representative Mason, yes. By
Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado.
No
4 to 2 by a vote of 4 to 2, you
have a due pass on House Bill
273. Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee. If there
are any suggestions, any
thoughts about how we can make
this legislation better as we
move it forward, please contact
me. Thank you.
Next up we have uh HB 265, a
creative industries fund.
Good, good morning, Madam Chair,
uh, and members. I'm here to
present House Bill 265, which uh
proposes an investment into the
creative industries Fund for FY
2026 of $4 million and uh uh in
include subsequent years, um,
and basically what we're trying
to do here is continue the very
successful track record of the
creative industries division at
the Economic.
Development department, that
division was established in 2023
by the legislature and in its
first year, um, with its initial
investment of 1.8 million, they
were able to grant 18 awards
across the state.
Which created 82 partnerships
with community organizations,
industry associations,
educational institutions and
other agencies. Um, and I'm very
pleased to report that um since
it's founding creative
industries division has assisted
1,158 entrepreneurs and small
businesses and supported 34
creative programs statewide. Um,
and Madam Chair and members, I
brought a copy of the awesome.
Native industries division study
that was completed, um,
Uh, it took a, a, a bit over 6
months to get this study
complete and it is really an
awesome catalog of all of the
different creative industries
around the state, all of the
potential for expansion of
creative industries, um, and
just to proposed recommendations
for how to expand this program,
what strategic direction, this
division could take, um, and
It's worth noting, Madam Chair,
that um,
When the grants were first
released, they, local
governments only had a few weeks
to respond. They had basically 5
weeks, um, and there were twice
as many applications submitted
in that time as there was
funding available. So, um, over
36 projects, uh, were in the
queue, 18 of those were funded,
so we are coming back to
basically expand this program
and create these local
government grants to support
creative industries around the
state. And with that, I would
Stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Leader. Um, if
anyone online is in favor of
this bill, please raise your
hand. Is there anyone in the
room in favor of this bill?
Uh, we'll go and have the
attended, take it around and
hold the microphone if possible,
uh, and we'll keep it about a
minute each. Thank you,
everyone.
I'm president of uh Creative New
Mexico and uh we've definitely
support this to help the arts
and culture for our state.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lisa
Corey, and I am an artist and
musician, and before I settled
in New Mexico 8 years ago, I
traveled the world as a
professional artist. And I just
thought that maybe, you know,
that would give me a little bit
of a unique perspective to
share, um, I know firsthand the
benefits of institutional
cultural, cultural support, you
know, having worked in New York
City, Portugal, Italy, and I
believe that HB 265 could be
incredibly empowering here, um,
from training.
And hands-on experience and
fabrication, design, and
crafting, meeting artists from
other places and cultures,
learning how to work and think
and interdisciplinary ways, um,
just seeing colleagues from
different disciplines meet at
artists residencies and then
launch small businesses, um, I
know that the life experiences
and career paths that cultural
funding can augment can be
incredibly fulfilling. So, thank
you for your time.
Thank you. Oh, sorry.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Sabrina Pratt. Um, I was
involved in the advocacy to get
the division established, and I
think that the first round of
funding really proved that there
are projects that need the
support across the state and the
beauty of this division is that
it's about economic development
and furthering creative
industries in microeconomies,
it, it benefits small
communities, large communities,
and has the potential to really
connect all of us up across the
state with these small
industries.
That are happening, but they,
you know, we don't know about
each other. Uh, there's so much
that more that can happen with
the help of experts from the
economic development department
and the simple um connecting of
people within counties, cities,
tribal governments, and then
expanding out into other circles
where we're making connections
like between Dona Anna County
and uh Roswell.
And um
Tribal communities throughout
the.
Uh, state that are maybe uh
keyed in to say Gallup. So it's,
it's a really wonderful thing
that was some investment with
the legislature can grow and
foster even more interaction,
more economic exchange
throughout our state. Thank you.
It looks like there are folks
online, uh, we'll go to go to
Travis.
Hello
Uh, my name is Travis Dale. I am
a native New Mexican artist, um,
and I am in favor of this bill
specifically because it's going
to support our local economy,
um, I know that I've read or uh
ran and led uh city
beautification projects across
the country and funding like
this is really critical to
getting our youth and our adults
engaged in our creative
industries, um.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we have Anne
Green Ronig.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um, I
am the former director of policy
at the Department of Cultural
Affairs and was there for about
20 years to 30 years actually.
Um, and the creative industries
have been shown to have the
potential for huge economic
impact to local communities and
we are so excited about this
program at the Economic
Development Department because
they have the expertise to
promote business development,
and we look forward to seeing
what happens out of this. So I
think it's wonderful.
Thank you.
Uh, are there, is there anyone
online that's opposed, please
raise your hand. Is there anyone
in the room that's opposed?
Please raise your hand.
Seeing no opposition will come
to the committee for questions
and debate. I will start with
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this forward. Just a few
questions here. You mentioned, I
believe, the 1st 1.8 million
investment do you have any
figures what that relates to
what economic impact that had.
To the state
Dollar for dollar.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason. So, um,
actually, each project.
Um
Was individually evaluated. And
so what I can tell you is I got
a few statistics here and then
we've got this big study that
sort of went through each of the
18 projects. So, um, the 18
awards created 82 partnerships
with community organizations,
industry associations,
educational institutions. I
mentioned that uh 1,158
entrepreneurs and small
businesses.
s were uh supported through
these grants.
And um if you, I believe you all
have a copy of this handout,
which is uh the outcomes report
or the grantees and so if you go
through each of these projects,
the, um, for example, this first
project with the City of Gallup,
the return on investment was
$4.24 per dollar. And
the very first one on page 3,
City of Gallup.
And so if you go to the column
that says returns on investment
slash significant outcomes.
You'll see um a number of
statistics that each program
submitted.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
Yet I didn't.
We didn't have this beforehand
so I didn't have.
figures.
Uh
Is there, Madam Chair, is there
any mandatory reporting.
From the recipients of this back
to the
Miss
And where do we find those
reports?
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason in the
enabling legislation for the
creative industries division. It
specifically describes the
purposes that the grants could
be utilized for and those are
the reporting measures that
grantees then report back to
economic development. So it is
things like return on
investment, number of users, um,
if it is a uh physical uh
improvement, for example, like a
maker space or a market.
it, you know, really tracking
how many individuals used that
space, how many hours it was in
use, so it's pretty
comprehensive in terms of what
the grantees report back on.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, just a couple more, uh.
Who are the
Right, they're another person
presentation, you know.
Eyes from Southeast New Mexico,
look at it, uh, who, who are the
beneficiaries, the major
beneficiaries of this, you know,
of this statewide it.
It's more of the money spent.
One place, one place, one place,
one place.
Or is everybody getting access
to this money?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair and
representative, so the enabling
legislation specifically
prioritized rural communities,
um, and if you flip through the
handout, you'll see that the
projects that were initially
funded, so they were all the
same amount, $100,000 each, 18
projects, and they do span um
the entire state, so, uh, places
like the village of Cloudcroft,
City of Berlin, village of
Magdalena, New Mexico Tech.
Um, Pablo Santa Ana, there,
there were projects spread
around, I think, um, uh, and
there were uh many projects that
didn't get funded in the first
round because there just wasn't
enough funding, so that's why
we've come back with this larger
request.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair,
it, uh
11 or 2 more questions, uh.
The uh
This
Will this grow our public
sector.
At a private.
Private sector expense will the
creative industry entities that
seek.
will not seek traditional loans
they'll sit, I mean, looks like
it's kind of a conflicting, we
don't want people to get used to
coming for grants. We need some,
some of these projects to be.
As they used to be, standalone
projects within cities, within
counties, within.
Private industry.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason great question, so this is
actually the, the whole uh
rationale for this is really
harnessing public investment to
accelerate private development.
So you might have someone who
is um uh ceramicist, for
example, but they don't, they
need some assistance with
business planning to get their
goods to market and really
expand maybe how to build a
website, how to do the account
piece, how to pay their taxes
and, and how to set up a
business, um, with the business
coaching, um, aspect of the
creative industries division.
We're hoping to provide that uh
information to those
entrepreneurs so that they can
go out and build their
businesses, so it's not really
creating a publicly funded
stream of creative industries,
that's sort of giving that
business planning and support so
that our artists and creatives
can actually develop the
business side.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair. I guess that's all for me
today. Thank you.
Is that a Mason, we have
representative, I'm sorry,
ranking member Lord.
We only call on you when you're
mid sick. That's the rule in
this committee, like when they
come when you're eating food and
they say how is it? And you're
like, oh give me a minute. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Representatives. So I do have
some questions. Um, so there was
previous funding for this
before. Can you tell me how much
funding was appropriated to
creative industry funds and how
much was unused.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative,
so the of the 1.8 million that
was appropriated in FY 24, um,
for the grant fund.
Um, I believe that all of that,
well, all of that was certainly
obligated in grants. So all of
that money went out.
In FY 25, um, there was an
additional appropriation for
staff. So the year that the
creative industries division was
established, there were no
staff. There was $200,000 for
consultants that uh led to uh
consultants who helped get the
grants out and then who also
created this, um, comprehensive
study.
So I, um, although I don't have
a fiscal report, so I, I don't
wanna, um,
Misspeak, um, I'm not aware of
any, any significant balance
with those, the division now has
the two staff people that they
were funded for. Those are not
vacant positions.
So, Madam Chair and
representatives, so
Sorry. Time's up.
Turkey stone, um, mentor, so the
book that you have there, is it
more detailed than the ROIs you
have in here because these are
very vague and they're not
telling me.
I mean, I, I see that 4 people
got hired in Taos, and there was
some participants from something
on an event, but do you have
more details in that book. Does
it have the details of who got
the grants and how the grants
were given out and what they
were given for. Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, and I'd be
happy to get a copy or leave you
with this copy, um, so that you
can see sort of the wealth of
resource, but there are, um,
deliverables, achievements,
metrics.
on the entire creative
industries, uh, in New Mexico as
well as the specific grants, um,
and then the last part is a
strategic plan, so it's looking
at um given these metrics, but
you can see, um,
Here, there's a, there's a whole
metric of success, um, matrix
right in the middle of the
report, but it's pretty, it's
pretty lengthy because they went
through in detail and all of the
um
Communities were also
interviewed, so people that were
not funded, also got interviewed
about the needs in their
communities.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, I would
like to look at that. Um, does
it include, cause I'm looking
at, I'm just gonna take it then
mentor representative, you're
highlighting.
Certain projects in here with
success, but that's not
everything, is that correct?
Madam Chair and Representative,
these are all of the projects
that were initially funded in
your handout. OK. So, Madam
Chair Representative, are you
trying to expand out to other
communities or what's the end
goal for this? Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, because
there were twice as num uh twice
as many applicants from local
governments, um, then what was
available in the first grant
round, this, this would be
represented expansion.
Because it Madam Chair, does
this also include the film
industry?
Madam, Madam Chair and
representative, uh, film is
specifically excluded from the
creative industries division.
OK, Ma's was, so that's not in
here, that must be on.
Something previous that was
passed that excluded the film
industry, man represented.
That's correct, Madam Chair, the
enabling legislation, um, House
Bill 8 in 2023, um, did, uh,
specifically exclude the film
industry because we already have
a different division that that
works on that and they reserve
desire to make sure there was no
overlap.
OK, so Moun chair and
represented, um, so this goes
to, when I was looking at the
projects, it's a very different
projects, but it would also go
to specific artists, correct? a
specific artist wants to do some
sort of work and then they would
get a grant out of this 4
million. Is that correct, Madam
Chair?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, actually all of
the grants have to go to uh a
local government or an Indian
tribe, nation or Pueblo because
of the anti-donation clause and
being mindful of that now, it's
what happens is that you do have
local governments that might
have, for example, a business
planning workshop for creatives.
And so the individual artists
could access that workshop, um,
but the grant money does not go
to the individual artists to
grant money, go.
to the uh county or municipal
government or a Pueblo triber
nation.
Amanitarian representative, but
they could get that money goes
to the local government, and
they could commission an artist
to do a mural, let's say.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
absolutely if that was part of
their economic development plan,
so if you're building a market
and you wanted a mural to be
part of that market design, that
would be an example of how you
could achieve that.
OK, Madam Chair, I'm probably
gonna be a no voter because I'm
not opposed to it. I'm going to
be a no vote because it's a lot
of money and he needs some more
questions. And when I was in
college, one of our biggest
discussions in my philosophy
class was um funding artists and
at the time it was Robert
Mapplethorpe, who was extremely
controversial, which I can't
imagine anybody.
I don't know if anybody knows
who that person is or about this
who did the guitar lesson. Those
are two very controversial arts
that I can't imagine anybody
saying I want this on a mural,
but I do have reservations on
that because that was such an
intense controversial
conversation, but I will get
with you, um, some more about
this to see how this breaks
down. Thank you, Madam Chair
Russo.
Thank you remember, um, I
believe, uh, I'm the last one
with questions. Are there other
questions in the committee?
Uh, so thank you for the bill,
uh, Madam Leader. Uh, there's a
couple things, I think, uh, rep
Lord kind of regular Lord got to
one of my questions earlier. Um,
there, you mentioned the jobs
that are created in here and
Getting to what private industry
is able to continue to fund and
maintain, right, one year of a
grant, you hope the blossom into
something that's long term. Um,
what I appreciate it was at
least the visible, the visual on
page 4 where the, the business
of art boot camp that was
available to students in in in
Gallup, um, you know, again, how
do we continue to help them
proliferate on their own? How do
we, you know, teach them about a
fish in a sense, get them off
the ground and keep moving. Uh,
are such a critical part of Mex
Mexo's history and Mexo's
future. So it makes a lot of
sense. Um, you mentioned that
You have this report, you have
that works uh comprehensive
report. My presumption is all of
this is on online on NEDD's
website.
Yes, madam Chair, uh, the
creative industries division
does have a web page on the
economic development department
website and so these reports are
there also. Thank you, Madam
Leader. I think that's a really
important thing for all of us to
continuously make sure that, you
know, any programs we're
supporting we're, we're seeing
the results and the fruit of
their labor, and it is good to
see this. Um, it's wonderful to
see that you're doing outreach
across the state, um.
Part of my question also is
that, what is the outreach to
for folks in small towns, and I,
and the thing about New Mexico
that's so tricky is that we have
these teeny tiny towns. Uh, my
husband was on the road
yesterday. He works with high
schools. He's at a high school
with two juniors in it, and, and
he and House New Mexico, and
that's it, right? And so I, it's
such a tricky thing how you
reach these extremely small
towns. I'm curious if you guys
have had any successful
outreaches in that way, if
there's any successes you can
come to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
such an important question. Um,
The advocacy that established
the creative industries division
did include creatives and
artists from all over the state,
and that was um partly an
organic kind of very uh local
word of mouth driven effort, so
we had a lot of individual folks
coming in that then have
continued to carry the message,
but we also have Creative New
Mexico. We have other statewide
arts organizations, whether it
be music, dance, etc. that also
get outreach.
from the creative industries
division and um creative
industries division held its
first creative industries weak
this past year, and so you
actually had hundreds of people,
um, virtually and in person with
events all around the state,
talking about creative
industries as an economic
development strategy and it was
an entire week of programming.
It was super successful. Um, it
went hand in hand with the
release of this big report. So,
um,
The final thing I will just say
is that there are many of the
sort of small to medium
municipalities that have arts
councils, and so they are also
on the distribution list and
getting all that information and
they're made up of local people
that are interested in
supporting creativity in the
local governments.
You, um, and so just one thing I
want to also put out to the
committee as well, whatever, we
should always try to remember to
ask how folks are actually
reaching out some of these
communities. Word of mouth is
such a critical piece of that,
which is so hard to quantify in
a lot of ways. Online is
obviously an ongoing thing. So
that's, that's great. Um, those
are my questions. What is the
will of the committee?
Um, Madam Chair, I make a motion
to do pass.
We have a motion for a due pass
on house built when I lose it a
motion for do pass and House
Bill 265 by Representative
Gonzalez, seconded by Vice Chair
Sanchez. Uh, let's go to do a
roll call vote.
Representative Cullen? No.
Representative Gonzalez.
Yes.
Ranking member Lord, no.
Representative Mason? No.
Sanchez.
Madame Chair Serato? Yes.
You have Tae Bo 3 to 3. Madam
Lee, you have a tie boat at 3 to
3. Um, so if anything changes
with your conversations with
folks in the committee, please
feel free to come back at a
later date. Thank you. Thank
you.
That is, uh, our next one, our
next one up is House Bill 288,
the Chaparral local governance
study, uh, with Representative
Silva.
She has been patiently waiting.
So I'm gonna give her a minute
to get here. She's been really
great about that, yeah,
um.
Reparilla, it's your, uh, you're
on board.
Representative Silva, whenever
you're ready on 288. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. Um, my name is
Representative Sarah Silva, and
I am introducing
Let me see. Sorry, it's been a
rushed a little bit of a
morning.
And I'm introducing a House Bill
288 that would appropriate
$100,000 for a feasibility study
for chaparral, New Mexico, which
is in House District 53, uh, the
feasibility study would, um,
basically fund an economic, uh,
study of the assets and
resources of the largest
unincorporated community in the
state of New Mexico. Um, so that
they have the information and
data they need so that they can
decide whether they want to
incorporate as a city.
Incorporate as a county, uh, or
be annexed by one county or
another because it's split
between Donana and Otero County
currently.
Um, and so in this community is
growing. There's about 15 people
that moved to Chaparral every
week. And so, um, really want to
give them the information they
need to make decisions about
their future. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
are there folks online in favor
of this bill, please raise your
hand. Other folks in the room in
favor of this bill, please raise
your hand.
And are there folks online
opposed to this bill, HB 288.
Please raise your hand.
And are there folks in the room
opposed.
Seeing no comments from the,
the, uh, public, we'll move to
the committee that we have
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Representative. Um, I
do want to make a note on a
couple of things. Um, one, as,
as an area, as a district that
has multiple unincorporated
communities. Um, I do applaud
your efforts as there is that
that limbo, um, to as to where
you have
Certain laws apply to you,
certain benefits apply to you,
um, just by term of
unincorporated community. So I
think this is an important step.
Um, also, I just want to make
personal note that I have um
quite a lot of experience with
the students and residents of
Chaparral, and I know it is a
growing economic region, um,
it's, it's, um, the students
there and you are entirely right
in your assessment that I think
they're.
You know, I, I, I support this
bill. I support this initiative,
as you said, giving the
residents in the, in the
citizens the opportunity to make
that informed decision for
themselves, um, but giving them
the tools to do so. So thank you
for that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, seeing no further
debate, what is the will of the
committee? Moved to do pass, I'm
sure we have a motion for a due
passed by ranking member Lords,
seconded by Vice Chair uh
Sanchez, uh, on House Bill 288.
Um, if there is no one to, is
there any opposition to this
bill?
Yeah
No,
no.
You, I love that you looked
defended at that, so there's no
opposition, seeing no
opposition, you have a due pass
with unanimous support on House
288. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Appreciate it.
Next up, we have uh the Lowrider
Museum, which I'm excited for.
I'm not and I'm not alone.
We have decorum when it comes.
House Bill 239, the Espanola
Lowrider Museum. Uh, we're going
to give our sponsor a moment to,
to come over and, uh, and
We're getting closer to the
time, but I think we should have
time. So we'll take a, maybe a
Three minute little break and
then when she, when she gets
here, we'll go to get started.
Welcome Representative Herndon.
Uh, we are on your bill, uh, 2
sorry, 239.
Right.
Holy cow, sorry, what a morning
it's been. I apologize. Thank
you. Good morning,
Representative Herrera. Please
introduce your bill. House Bill
239. Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry, we all start running
around these days. Uh, I'm, I'm
pleased to be before this
committee, and I thank you very
much, uh, for hearing this bill.
It's kind of one of my favorite
bills and um.
This is to establish a low rated
museum in the city of Espanola.
And I'll, I'll just give you
some background. We've been
trying to work on this for a
couple of years. It's not a new
idea, but I realized I was
watching 60 Minutes and I don't
know if anybody saw that
program, and they devoted 10
minutes. I couldn't believe it.
10 minutes of time talking about
low riders in uh Espanola on
Good Friday, having their kind
of annual, you know, um, get
together or competitions and
races.
and all the things that they do,
it's pretty fun.
And I sat there and I said, oh
my gosh, we've been expecting
low riders to really establish a
regime and do this, and I
thought we need to bring in the
experts, you know, we need to
bring in the cultural affairs
department to do a first class.
Beautiful museum that will be an
attraction, I think for the
world over, uh, people know that
Espanola is kind of the low
rider capital of the world, and
um and I just said, you know,
we're, we're doing this the
wrong way. We can't expect a
county that has a lot of things
to do and it's a poor real
counting to also build a
first-class museum. Um, so what
this is is a feasibility study
to bring in the cultural affairs
department and so they can
gather everybody together.
So they can look at it, so they
can figure out how much it would
cost, what it would look like,
what the design would be like,
um, all the things they do in a
feasibility study. It will also
be, I think, in a great economic
development, uh, project for
the, for the town of Espanola,
and I think it will.
It's just a matter of pride in
the North, and, and so, uh,
that's why I'm bringing this uh
bill forward and um.
I, uh, actually, actually, Madam
Chair, I, I wanted to see if we
could strip the appropriations
because it's only 100,000 in Leo
Jaramillo and I are putting in
our capital outlay, uh, to cover
this cost, so there really won't
be any cost to the, to the
general fund on this because we
can do this with capital outlay
funding and, and we agreed to
and if I thought about it
sooner, I would have done it
sooner. So I, I would actually
see if we could do that
amendment here, uh.
If you would accept that.
Thank you. So there's an
amendment up to just go ahead
and strip section, well.
Well, that it includes the other
piece of this as well. The
appropriation is kind of
embedded into the bill itself.
Oh
And you're going next to
appropriations either way. Is
that right, Representative Era?
Is it OK if we leave it intact
with the understanding that it
will be stripped and
appropriations and that you're
just going to do that. I just
think that the language is, if
it was just the section for
that. Yeah, it's more awkward
than I would. I prefer that.
They, I appreciate that
representative. Thank you.
And uh um with that, I, I'm
gonna introduce.
A Michelle Gallagher Roberts.
I'm the deputy cabinet secretary
for the Department of Cultural
Affairs.
And she's the one that really
has done feasibility studies for
the cultural affairs department
over a series of years. So, um,
if you want to add anything
about why that how you do that
and how it works. Sure, um,
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, um, so the Department
of Cultural Affairs has done a
number of um feasibility
studies, um, we put out an RFP
um for museum specialists, um,
to apply to conduct these
feasibility studies, the
department does not do the
feasibility.
them ourselves, um, primarily
feasibility studies look at um
whether or not uh governance
structures, what makes sense for
a particular institution,
funding opportunities, what is
the economic, what is the uh
economic impact as well as um
what is the uh support, um,
which I know is very high in
this community, um, but what is
the support both financial
support and um kind of community
support that surrounds an
institution or a potential.
And Madam Chair, uh, with that I
rest and, uh, stand for
questions.
Um, I'm gonna actually start
with, uh, is there anyone
opposed to this bill online.
Please raise your hand, and is
there anyone opposed to this
bill in person?
Not seeing opposition online or
in person. Is there anyone in
support online, please raise
your hand, support of HB 239,
the Lowrider Museum, um,
feasibility study, and is there
anyone in person that is in
support of this bill?
If you'd like to speak, uh,
we'll go ahead and bring the
microphone around. The
attendant's gonna hold on to the
microphone for you. Um, and just
keep it about a minute. That's
all right. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Anthony Allarud, and I
would like to stand in support
of this bill.
I think it's long overdue and uh
I look forward to projects such
as this coming to fruition.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is
Patricia Trujillo. I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
New Mexico Higher Education
department. Um, as far as the
department goes, we're happy to
provide technical support, uh,
with our sister agency of
cultural affairs, as well as to
be a liaison to higher education
institutions. I'm gonna take off
my hat and switch it as a
citizen and a daughter of the
Espanola Valley and a professor
of Chicana and Chicano studies.
I can't help but believe that
this will be an amazing uh
institution to introduce into
our community, um,
Prior to leaving northern New
Mexico College, I used to teach
an oral histories course with a
subtopic of lowriders, and I
just saw how much that engaged
students, how it engaged
community, uh, folks from the
community like kind of just
organically joined our
conversations, and I know that
there's such a desire for this
amazing story to be told in our
community. So, um, as a citizen,
I stand in support of this bill.
This is so exciting to even hear
again, um, we've been waiting
for this for years and years and
years, and I'm a lowrider
enthusiast. I'm Joanne Medina
and we do a lot of um lowrider
projects, lowrider like um
events, all kinds of stuff in
Espanola, pop-ups, anything to
help our valley, and especially
our youth. I just saw creative
industries here a while ago.
They helped us and the kids just
loved it, so I would love to hit
it. I mean, see this happen. I
can hardly wait.
until it happens and thank you
all for your support and
Cavallo's lowriders.
Uh
My name is Arthur Angel Lolo
Medina and uh I am very, very
thankful that this is taking
place and the, the way I look at
it is that uh we were, we start
where we left off.
And I'm very proud that we um
This is taking place because it
is very, very important because
uh the low rider capital.
Of our world is known through
the whole world.
And the name is there.
And it's always gonna be there.
It's never gonna change.
And the way I look at it, that
this is something that will
really help out the community as
well in the
Oh
It will bring a lot of people
from all over the world that
come here to, to look at it. Uh,
it's been many years that this
been put into the plow and uh I
am very thankful to the Lord
because everything is coming in
place in the right way that it
needs to be and uh I look at it
as a fruitful harvest that is
coming to hand, and there's a
lot of more things that are
supposed to take place with
what's going on.
And I, I mean, proud of
everything.
Thank you guys. Um, yeah.
Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you. My name is Andreas
Valdez, event promoter, 15
years.
Uh, been involved with low r 30
years, been drawn to it 40 years
and I, I'm in support of this
bill, this bill very much. It'd
be a great opportunity if this
is passed, you have a boost in
our economy.
As an event promoter, we, we've
hosted cars from California to
New York to
Uh, Nebraska, Florida.
Uh, Chicago people from all over
the the country I've came to
show their cars here in
Espanola.
People are
Come from all over the world to
look for low riders here in
Espanola and
We need something to, to show
it.
There's um
Tourists have come from all over
the world and
They happened to run into low
riders or a car show and they
see that's the best attraction
that they actually saw visiting
northern New Mexico and, and I
think it'd be a great
opportunity. I hope this bill
passes and it's gonna be a a
great future if it does.
Yeah, uh, lowriders in Espanola
have been around for, for
decades. I mean, it's part of
the culture there. It's
something that I've been doing
for the last 45 years. I've been
building and driving and uh
representing the valley by
showing my cars nationally and
that it's something that, you
know, Espanol is known for, and
I mean a lot of people ask, you
know what, they wanna come here
and they wanna see low riders
and they don't really see that
much because, you know, we're
all busy working. We gotta do
what we gotta do, but it'd be
nice to have a place for them to
be able to experience the
culture.
to be able to see the writers
and, and what we've been doing
for, for decades in the valley.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, my name is Eric
Montoya, and I'm in support of
this bill, uh, our valley has a
lot of
Wealth and richness, richness
with our heritage and our
culture, so I'm in support of
it. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone. Thank you
for your help, also attendant.
And uh, I'm going to go to
online. It looks like uh Jeremy
Martinez.
Uh, we're gonna go ahead and
unmute you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I just wanted
to take some time to hop on and
support this bill. Um, I've
grown up in northern New Mexico,
as are the,
and I'm just extremely excited
to see that they will be able to
continue this tradition for
future generations to come and
um that's all I want to say.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you.
Uh, with a clicks so those are
the comments from the community
will go to the um the committee,
uh, we will start with ranking
member Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. So I'm
gonna tell you why I'm excited
about this bill. Um, so I grew
up in Los Angeles. I was adopted
my one mom was a Chavez, very
much a Chicana household,
believe it or not, um.
And in Los Angeles, we had a
very strong lowrider community
or not nowhere near Espanola.
That's the best. We gotta just
say that right off the bat,
right?
And the first lowrider ever rode
in, I think it was 11, it was a
white pinstripe, 1964 Impala.
And I just thought that was the
coolest thing cause I, I love
cars, but low rate of cars, more
park cars, all the older cars I
just love. I think it's super
important because I had the
opportunity to actually write in
low rider cars when I was in
Espanola. I think it was a
license plate day when we were
up there and, and that was just
fantastic. So, I'm a very strong
supporter of this bill. I'm very
happy to see it come forward,
and I'm hoping that writers,
when you guys come here to
celebrate the passing of this
bill when we ride around in
circles around the, uh,
roundhouse and that.
That's all I have to say. Thank
you, ma'am Cher.
ranking member Lord uh
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, representatives. Um,
nothing more than emphatic and
enthusiastic support for this
spill and um we it's journey
well on the way through the
process, but an emphatic yes,
emphatic supporter. Not yet.
Thank you, Rep Gonzalez, uh,
Representative Mason.
Madam chair, uh.
Really, I just had a what are we
voting I I kind of got lost at
the first of this thing. Are we
good? is it still an
appropriation, Madam Chair, or
what is the bill now? Yeah, so
this is for the feasibility,
this is the bill that is in
front of you. We're not amending
it here. She will, the
representative will remove the
appropriation request in
appropriations later, but when
you look at the language, it's
really um tangled in there with
the purpose of it, which is the
feasibility study itself. Thank
you. I was just a little
confused whether we were given,
I heard her say.
to that lay no amendments and
good, no, no, we.
It's a, it's a study I support
this bill.
Mason, and thank you for
clarifying. I'm sure there are
folks online that were trying to
keep up as well. I ranking them
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
just want to say hello to all my
friends and classmates in the,
the crowd, uh.
I grew up, I have an older
brother Harold, who
Put together a lowrider. I
remember being a, I was probably
like 4 years old and
He, uh, built a '52 Chevy truck
candy Apple red and deans and,
uh, my other brother still has
that truck and my other brother
Lawrence has a couple.
All these as well, um.
And I know Albuquerque uh likes
to uh say they stop, but they'll
never take that title from us
Espanola is the capital of the
world. But I, I'd also like to
mention I, I want to thank Susan
Herrera for this. Uh, I know in
the past.
I put a significant amount of
money uh towards the county to
do this and so did a former
Senator Richard Martinez and
Former Senator uh Carlos
Cisneros, something close to a
million dollars, and I think
they did upgrades on the
building, but it never went
anywhere, so I'm glad to see
potentially the
The museums take this over. Uh,
it is truly going to be a real
museum, so that's where it
belongs.
Uh, and I look forward to, uh,
during the interim, help you
find the, the funding to
To make this happen. Uh, so
thank you for bringing this.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Um, I had
a, a quick question as well.
I've seen other questions in the
committee, um, so I, uh, my, my
cousin I was really close to and
so he is a lowrider and he's
going to get all souped up when
I got married. He's all excited
and he didn't hit it. Well, he
didn't get get it finished. He
showed up, and it just had that
base white on it. And he goes,
I'm so sorry. I was like, it's
perfect. It's my wedding. It's a
white lowrider. Like that's
nuts. So all these pictures, you
know, on my wedding day, so it
was really cool. My husband and
I are really excited. Um, but I
see this is really being
important, you know, at the one
of the state museums, they had
an exhibit on lowrider.
And it was, you know, I took my
dad, and he was just like, felt,
you know, you just remembered it
was really beautiful and it's
wonderful that we share that
with our kids and it keeps
going. My question, and I don't
know if you can answer this
sponsor or um but in something
if someone tell me later, I'd be
curious about, but a lot
lowriders are based so much and,
you know, those classic cars,
you know, that you can name the
years of, but now that that
every year we get further and
further away from that and how
you upgrade that, and I'm kind
of curious, will the museum have
or what is the anticipation that
what it will have is how
the keeping lowriders going
today, how it's a living
tradition. Will there be an
aspect of that in the museum? Is
that expected?
Um, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, that's certainly
the idea. How, how do we, how do
we celebrate and, and how do we,
how do we, um, how do we teach
how this has evolved over the
years. So I, I see it, I see it
as a museum where we involve the
community, they're doing car
shows, they're having
international car shows in the
future, I, I see it a huge,
maybe 35 acre project. I see a.
Museum in the future, I'm sure
we can raise a lot of private
money for this. I'm sure uh
every car company in in the
United States would contribute a
big sum of money because this is
people know about this, people
love it and um yeah, I, I think
it's how, how part of the
feasibility study will be. How
do we bring the community
together? How do we solve it?
How do we partner with Northern
so that it becomes kind of an
academic so that you have that
combination of, of, you know.
People working on cars at the
college understanding the
history, understanding all the
all that's involved in the in
the cultural aspects of, of the
low rider kind of way of life
that, um, what is the will of
the committee?
Over do past
A 2nd.
We have a motion for a due pass
on House Bill 239 motioned by
Vice Chair Sanchez and seconded
by ranking member Lord. Um,
let's go do a call. Thank you.
Representative Cullen? Yes.
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Ranking member Lord.
Yes
Representative Mason.
Yes.
I share Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado, yes, unanimous
with unanimous support, you have
a due pass on House Bill 239.
Um, everyone had a couple quick
announcements for the committee.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and committee. Of course, thank
you so much, Representative
Herrera. Um, so we'll be meeting
again on Tuesday. Uh, we're
gonna go and close up today. We
will roll over a House bill. I
apologize, she said that before.
Yeah, we will have, and we also
have a committee coming up. So
we're gonna go ahead and roll
House Bill 135 till Tuesday. Um,
we have a floor coming up pretty
soon here as well. And I just
want to mention, you should be
getting information on committee
dinner, uh, to your offices. Uh,
it will be next on, on February
19th. That's uh one of our
cookie dinners, so thank you
everyone. Have a great day.
We'll see you soon. We we we
that we adjourn.
6 o'clock
On the right.
Just my nieces. It's she calls
it penny. It's comfort.
I like
kids get into it nowadays, dude.
That thing is about
Just my nieces. It's she calls
it penny. It's comfort.
I like
kids get into it nowadays, dude.
That thing is
660. Thank you. Have a good day.
That's
so cute.
No, I didn't get it I figured we
didn't have it. I know I was and
I was like was 16 or how long
the video 3 years you're like
Yeah
