I wanted to let everybody know
the changes first.
And uh
I think we're ready. Oh wait,
we're gonna call the roll.
And then we'll start.
Morning, everyone. We can call
roll.
Uh, Representative Herrera.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Here.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio here.
Ranking members Amora.
Madam Vice Chair Kate.
Madam Chair Ortiz, here, OK,
thank you so much. We're gonna
get started, uh, Representative
Dao, are you ready with 2:29.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am,
and what you have before you is
the approved supplier program,
what we're asking for is a
recurring appropriation so that
we can continue to grow this
program. This program
facilitates helping folks become
an approved provider and then
connecting them with the
approved farm to table folks. So
it's
relatively new. It's growing
exponentially, and these folks
are the middlemen that are
helping with producer support,
buyer support, and assuring food
quality. And I do have with me
Elaine Pisano, who is my expert
witness and works with the
program if you want to add
anything to that. Absolutely.
Thank you, Representative. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members. My
name's Elena Paisano. I'm from
the Pueblo of Laguna and
enrolled member of the San
Carlos Apache Nation. I serve as
the approved supplier program
director, um, with the New
Mexico Farmers Marketing Asso
So as representative Doo said we
are the pathway for farmers,
ranchers and food producers
looking to sell to schools,
senior centers, early childhood
education sites, food banks, and
community programs serving, um,
our, our community members from
what we say, cradle to crane
through all through the
lifespan, um, we are a food
quality assurance program. So we
work with over 275 food
producers all across the state
in over 24 counties, so we're
all over the place.
It's not just along the Rio
Grande corridor. Um, and what we
do is we help them to ensure
that they're meeting food safety
standards and grow their
business in a way that makes
sense for them around food
safety. So if they want to start
working with grocery stores, we
help them with those
certifications. Um, the whole
program is no cost to the
producers, which is why we're
here asking for public support
$430,000 to keep our staff
functioning and keep boots on
the ground. We get out there on
the farms. We send um
contractors and
what we have community
cultivators, a robust network of
community members actually out
there doing this work with us,
um, and I'm happy to answer any
additional questions. I don't
want to take too much time. I
know you guys have a big agenda
today, but this program, the
last thing I'll say is it is
protecting our agricultural
futures. It's protecting and
building livelihoods and ag for
young people, which I think we
all see an investment in and
it's protecting our resources
and advancing our food
sovereignty as a state.
Thank you.
You ready? That will stand for
questions. Thank you,
Representative Dao. OK, we're
going to go to the audience. If
you are in favor of this bill,
please raise your hand.
OK? If you oppose this bill,
raise your hand.
OK. Um, I wanna get folks ready
on the Zoom if you're in favor,
raise your hand and we're gonna
go to um support for the bill.
In the room first, you've got a
minute to, if you want to speak,
you don't have to, but we're
gonna.
Walk over there with our mic.
The attendant will hold the mic.
And you've got a minute to uh
yeah, raise your hand. We'll
start with with whatever.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Abby O'Connor, and I'm a
5th generation rancher, and I
represent the New Mexico Cattle
Girs Association. Uh, my family
is actually approved supplier
through this program and I
cannot commend this program
enough, not only does it give us
another stream of revenue to
sell our quality beef to our
local schools and community
centers and the senior centers,
um, but it also benefits the
children and all the people.
receive this quality product
from local producers, um, I
cannot say how many compliments
we get from the students that
are just so happy to have
actually good tasting beef on
their plates, so, um, and the
program is run very, very well,
so, um, we fully support the New
Mexico grown supplier program
and urge you to vote yes. Good
morning ladies and gentlemen. My
name is Andrew Nah. I'm owner of
Desert Verde Farm here in Santa
Fe, where New Mexico's only
indoor.
Aquaponics farm and 98% of our
product goes out to underserved
communities through the New
Mexico grown Program.
This program is our lifeblood.
It's the classic trickle-down
economics, if you will, um, the
buyers can pass, uh, through
receiving the grant money can
afford to purchase from local
producers such as ourselves, um,
we are highly sustainable
enterprise. Last year we
produced 35 tons of fresh green
produce that went to food banks,
senior centers, daycare centers
and the New Mexico grown um.
Organization keeps us legal, it
keeps us safe, it keeps us,
gives us access because as a as
a provider, we need to meet
certain food safety standards,
and that means we can then get
the product out to people most
in need. Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee on
Candy Sweetzer with New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, and
we stand in strong support of
this recurring funding. We thank
the sponsor for bringing the
bill forward.
This is an important program for
our state's farmers and ranchers
to be able to sell directly to
consumers and outlets who
utilize the products that they
raise and grow. And so, again,
we thank the sponsor and we, we
ask you to consider voting yes.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Susan Welker. I'm here
today representing Farm to
table, where in strong support
of this bill, um, you can see
from the extraordinary growth
over the last 5 years. How
important it is for both the
buyers and the producers on a
personal note, I helped develop
the Frontier Food hub, which
worked with about 20 producers
about 10 years ago, so we knew,
know what it's like to struggle
to try and navigate the system
prior to this.
program coming on board, so
we're in full support of of this
bill, and hope that you
supported as well. Good, good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Sergio
Mata Cisneros, and I work for
the food.
Here in Santa Fe, but we also
administer the regional farm to
Food program, which uses the
approval supplier program to buy
from local producers and then we
distribute that food that we
purchased to families in need
throughout the state and the 5
food banks in the state are
recipients of this food, um, and
without this program, we
wouldn't be able to purchase
local food at market price from
these producers. So we stand in
fully support of this bill.
and then make sure that it
becomes recurring funding.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Denise Miller. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Farmers Marketing
Association, and we have run
this program on behalf of the
state since 2017, 2019, I
believe, our food safety
training started in 2017. The
program grew in 2019 from
support within the public
education department and has
since expanded across the state
agencies.
That, that are on your sheet in
front of you, and I just want
to, um,
Highlight that one of the
important things, not only is
the food that is going to the
communities served by um by the
program, senior centers,
students, preschoolers, um, food
bank recipients, the money flows
through for the food, the money
flows through each of the state
agencies. Um, it is separate
from this funding, which is for
the operations of the program
and so I just wanted to make
that clear and you, yes.
Great.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Ralph Vihi.
I'm a small organic farmer in
pecosonermolino de la Ila
Organics, um, I'm also vice
president of the Mexico Farmers
Marketing Association and
approved supplier.
Ah, never mind it being
cultivator. Sorry, I'll try to
run off things. I'm also on a
separate, former chairman of the
New MexicoseCA Commission and um
this program's really helped my
sales increase double. That's
really helped me keep my water
on my land, um, I see this as an
entire circle system of keeping
our agricultural lands in
production, helping our small
farmers, um, keep our
communities healthy, our kids
know where our food's coming
from, so it's an entire for um.
Circle, so, um, without it, many
of us small farmers wouldn't be
able to to do this, so it's
important that this become
recurring and stay recurring so
that we could continue this in
the state. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico Farm and Livestock. We
stand. Thank you so much. Anyone
else in the room? Oh, here we
go. My name's Dusty Hunt on
behalf of the New Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts, we would like to
support House Bill 229, soil and
water districts have been part
of New Mexico since 1939, and we
have always supported.
Thank you so much. Anyone else
in the room?
OK.
Uh, we're gonna go to Zoom.
First off, we have Jason. Uh,
good morning. Am I able to be
heard.
All right. Uh, my name is Jason
Riggs. I'm director of advocacy
and public policy for Roadrunner
Food Bank. Uh, Roadrunner
Foodbank respectfully requests
your consideration for state
investment in this critical
infrastructure for New Mexico
agriculture. New Mexico's 5 food
banks strive to provide as much
nutritious and culturally
appropriate food to people. We
serve as possible. Programs like
Regional Farm to Food Bank, give
us the opportunity to accomplish
this goal. The approved supplier
program strengthens local food
systems while connecting New
Mexicans who
experience food insecurity to
fresh, healthy, and New Mexico
grown food.
Um, as food bankers and as
citizens of our great state, we
are never more proud than when
product that is made for by and
with New Mexican farms and
ranches comes through our
warehouse, gets loaded on our
trucks, distributed at our food
pantry sites and served at
kitchen tables throughout our
state. Thank you very much.
Denise?
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Denise
King. I'm the aging Network
division director at the
department and um we implement
the New Mexico growing program
across the state with our senior
centers. We're proud to say that
163 of our senior centers
implement in Mexico grown and I
work closely with the New Mexico
Farmers Market Association and
of course the farmers and
ranchers, and we stand in
support of House Bill 229. Thank
you.
OK, that's it for Zoom. If you
are on the Zoom in opposition.
No, OK.
Uh, with the sponsor like to
address any of the comments?
If there's any questions from
the committee.
I'll have, I like, I can address
it that way. There are some
committee questions. First up is
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters for the
bill. Um, out of respect for our
caucus chair.
I've only got about 2 hours'
worth of questions.
Seriously, um,
I have some informational
questions that I have for you.
Madam Chair, my first question
is, how do you become an
improved supplier on this.
Thanks for the question,
Representative. So to become an
approved supplier, uh, there's a
couple of requirements. The
first one is that we work with
you to receive food safety
training, that's usually on farm
or we also offer it online for
accessibility around the state.
So it's a two-part food safety
training. It takes a few hours.
We call it tier 1, tier 2.
Through that you develop an
understanding of the
requirements that are
market-driven, so we call that
good agricultural practices and
an alignment with FISMA, which
is federal regulation for
on-farm food safety. So it's all
aligned to the
standards after you attend your
training, then you submit an
application through our online
portal. It's a very quick one
stop. You go in, use an
automatic form. And then we
assign it to a, a desk review.
So we have a network of food
safety experts that review these
from all around the state. Um,
and ideally we match it to
someone in your region that
understands the products you're
growing, the contexts that
you're producing in, that if
you're a new grower, we come to
your farm. We ask you to tell us
the story of your farm. We
understand how we can help you
invest in
Food safety, if you need a
little help. And if not, we
approve you, and then you're
good to go. We publish you on
our list, which is on New
Mexicogrown.org. You can find a
list of all of the vendors and
the buyers there as a backbone
entity, we support the ongoing
maintenance of that list, and we
accept applications year round
till October 31st, and that's
simply because that's how much
time it takes to be able to get
out on a farm before we flip
into a new calendar year. So we
like to say that it takes us 45
days to approve a new
application.
And that that is in regards, of
course, to fruits and
vegetables, the process for meat
would be USDA approved, which is
why we're also working on
getting in-state USDA approval.
And I believe the same is true
of any sort of dairy product.
They must be USDA approved, it's
a little bit more complicated
for those products that have a
higher risk.
Yeah, I can address that. Thank
you, Representative Doo. Um,
yes, for meat producers, it's
even easier. So we do require
because of the national school
lunch program.
Oh, I'm so sorry. Um, so we do
require um that folks go through
a USDA certified meat processing
facility. That's a federal
regulation, not something we've
imposed. Um, and then just fill
out some paperwork and provide
us with your product liability
insurance. It's a very quick
application for our ranchers.
Um, dairy products are not
currently allowable, and that's
because we need to be able to
verify that every penny of this
appropriation is spent on New
Mexico produced food.
And Darius fluid and it's
sometimes hard to trace to
ensure it didn't go over that
stage. Thank you. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
answer. I would ask, Madam
Chair, that.
Somebody sent me.
So I can pass that information
out. Um.
Let him chair my next question
is.
Madam Chair, that's been
Funded
For year, for a few years now.
Y4
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
think that's a fair question,
and this is the way that the
bill sponsor. I don't think
they're going to revert anything
first of all, but, uh, just to
show the capacity to grow and to
get it into reoccurring.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for that
answer. So.
How many years has this been
funded?
Madam Chair Representative. It
has been funded since 2019 at a
very small rate of $200,000
appropriation and as we've
mentioned, the program has grown
at least 6 times. Um, we started
with 20 producers. We're now
over 275 and working with all
the food hubs in the state. So
we've scrapped 5 for many years,
but now we're here to ask for
the full cost of operating the
program sustainably moving
forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer. Um,
Madam Chair, the, according to
the bill and the FIR.
The effective date of this if it
were to pass, would be June 20th
of 25.
I assume that means you have
until June.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK.
Madam Chair, my next question
would be, is the Madam Chair and
Representative, it's, it's not
reoccurring in the budget.
So the goal is to move it to.
Madam chair and representative.
I don't see that language.
In the bill Madam Chair
Representative, it's in the
executive recommendation. It's
not an LFC recommendation.
Thank you very much for that
clarification.
Madam Chair, um,
Of, of
He
Different pieces of the
testimony.
I would like to dive just a
little bit the effort.
And how this combines with
everything else we're hearing in
appropriations on food farm to
table, so many different
aspects.
How do you work in conjunction
with all of that.
With getting to Mexico farm and
beef into two specific areas for
me today into our schools and
our senior centers, and Madam
Chair, I heard that right now we
have, we're able to provide into
153 centers. So how do we chair
would be, how do we expand?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think there's
a lot of initiatives. I'm, I'm
here because I believe in this
program, when it, when it first,
when farm to table, farm to
school first came out, schools
were the only ones.
we were launching our, our local
grown produce in our farmers'
market was growing. We had
gotten USDA funding and truth or
consequences for a community
kitchen that was USDA, but our
producers were so small, they
didn't have enough quantity to
supply directly to the school.
So I would say that part of this
has been adding, you know, if
you're, if you're a mushroom
producer, and you've got a
seasonal crop, and there's a
childcare center, senior mal
site in your community. You can,
you can support their menu plan,
but that, not enough mushrooms
for the public school. So, so
adding more, more uh qualifying
farm to table recipients is
definitely been a key. I, I
would say that some of these um
programs that have, have lifted
up the average farmer in New
Mexico is over 60 years old.
We have a declining ag
production. So for us to bring
in the next generation to me,
this is the most key thing that
we can do because this, this
supports the small farmer. This
supports the small producer, and
what I hear from folks in my
community is, I don't, I don't
have to spend, I don't have to
farm 24 hours a day and then
spend my entire Saturday at the
farmer's market. They have a
supply chain. So this is, this
is connecting the producer to
the, to the buyer. But also the
USDA meat inspection is
critically important. Um, I
think that the, um, oh, the bill
that Stefani.
I think Carri did a couple of
years ago while I wasn't here,
that it didn't require uh
necessarily a commercial kitchen
for everything if it was not
something that was we're, we're
removing a lot of barriers and
this, this is part of it. As far
as barriers not related to this
grant, I do still think it's
with our USDA inspected, uh,
Processing plants because I
think we have, and I could be
wrong, but I know that uh a
representative from NMDA is
here. I think we have, uh, 4
federal inspectors that are
provided to our state, and we
have about 1.2 million head of
cattle, then when you add in
poultry, you add in swine, you
add in others. If we want food
that's meat that's grown in New
Mexico to be consumed in New
Mexico. That's where we have a
gap right now.
Um, and we have a lot, I think
we have 6.
Uh, USDA meat inspectors or
processing plants coming online
that intend to sell in state and
they've got some barriers.
So there's some other bills to
help them meet their climate
smart practices and and be able
to to process more than one type
of meat.
And there may be more that you
want to add, but I, I think this
one helps the small guys get
started up so it's
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
absolutely. So I'm, I have the
pleasure of seeing every new
person that comes through the
program and touching their
application personally, we've
seen many new farms start up and
also this program is leveraging
other state investment like the
Healthy Food Financing Act and
Federal Investment, um, in the
RFSI Regional Food System
Infrastructure grants. So we're
actually layering these pieces.
This is market access, those are
production support, and then we
help with regulation,
demystifying based on the
products as representative was
sharing.
that you're looking to market.
Um, it also is the backbone for
all of the New Mexico grown
programming, which includes
healthy universal school meals,
um, and the goal to increase
local food on those plates. And
so, um, you know, that we now
have about over $5 million
within those grant programs and
simply put these suppliers are
where that gets um expended. And
so it is very critical to invest
without the program. Other
states in the nation run similar
farm to school programs, and
they require very high level
ific ations that are
market-driven and frankly aren't
the scale of our small
producers. Majority of our
producers over at 72% are on
less than 20 acres. So we're
talking our friends and
neighbors that are trying to
keep this lifestyle alive. Um,
and so this program is unique.
It supports people and holds
hands all the way through. We
also help folks grow. So it's
not like you're on the list and
it's over, then you're part of
our community and we help to
support you to grow into other
markets, as I described earlier.
So it is a backbone for the
other state investment at
leverages federal and state
investment for agriculture and
it's growing new farmers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much for that answer.
Um,
That Madam Chair, that's the end
of my questions.
I would offer up a suggestion
for a committee, um,
Amendment to this.
That
We strike starting at any online
19.
Thr
The end of the line 2.
Is it a friendly amendment?
Madam Chair, I mean, we can work
offline and work on that for the
next committee, if that's all
right with you. That would be
thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, might you just
repeat that one more time so
that it was thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, my proposed
amendment on this.
would be starting on page 1 line
19.
Starting at the word any.
And striking all language
through the end of line 21.
Mm
Striking all language from any
sort on line 19 all the way
through the end of line 21.
Representative Peter Rice, I, I
think you guys should work this
out. Well, that's not expend any
air time right now.
Um, is that the end of your
questions, Representative
Pettigrew?
That's fine. We can move on,
move on. We have a few more
questions, Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and,
and currently benefiting from
this program, how many, um, are
there total of senior state if
you know, but I'm just curious
in terms of what, how much more
we would need to be able to
fund, cause I know there's a lot
of senior centers in rural
areas. I know my parents attend
the one, participate in the one
in Lake Arthur, and so I'm just
curious how, how, how do these
senior centers benefit? I mean,
how did, cause I love it. I love
the bill. I think it's great.
And so,
I'm just trying to think about
how, how we can actually expand
it versus um just
Well, like I'm all about going
all all in, so, um, yeah, I was
just curious about the senior
centers.
Man representative, I'm gonna
try to be brief. Um, Ms. King
from Aging and Long Term
Services did um speak on behalf
of the bill. There are 174
centers involved, and I believe
there's right around 200. So
aging and long-term services is
doing an excellent job of
Of their centers.
Madam Chair and represented. The
only thing that I would add to
that is that because of these
other programs that are also
being applied for and being
developed, my senior meal sites
when I walk in, there are
baskets of fresh produce for
seniors to.
Represent Zamora. That's it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My, my
question is also
In line with, with the recurring
and non-recurring funds and
returning.
Uh, whatever's left to the
general fund.
I, I think
That I understand this enough
now that
What's going on is, is the
university's not asking.
For this in their budget.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, am I correct?
Madam Chair and Representative,
this has been a non-reoccurring
budget this year, it's in the
executive and not the LFC.
Madam Chair, I think what you,
what needs to be done with this
program is, is we need to go to
the board of Regents.
And asked them to put it in
their budget for the, for the
university. And then that way
it's a recurring money that we
don't have to be bringing this
bill up all the time.
Now
Now, I don't guess that's been
done?
And, and that's why we keep
running this bill.
All time and time again.
And, and we heard, we heard
testimony from the audience.
That it would be nice for this
to be recurring, and I agree
with it. And then if we make it
recurring, well, then the, the
money doesn't have to go back to
the.
To the, to the general fund.
So I, I think there's some work
to be done there.
Uh, I just
I just ask for you to, to kind
of look into it and and see if
If that's what needs to be done,
uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, representative, does this,
does this program bring in any
federal dollars to the state of
New Mexico?
Madam Chair, Representative, not
directly, um, if they're, if
there was an opportunity for
federal dollars, it could be
counted as a match because it's
state dollars. It brings in.
It's, that's not the primary
purpose of this.
OK.
and any proposal we would
submit. And then in in one of my
analysis, I have, uh, it says
that there are 2 food banks
listed as buyers.
Uh
Is there just two food banks in
the state that are that are
buying through this program,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
it's actually the entire food
bank system working in a
network. It's just there's two
entities that procure, um, so
they then distribute throughout,
um, all the food banks around
the state that Madam Chair, I
would, I would
I would assume that Road Runner
Food Bank is one of them. Is
that right? Yes, Madam Chair
Representative Roadrunner of
Food Bank and the Food Depot
here in Santa Fe. OK, and Madam
Chair, and, and Representative,
there has been some issues with
With uh produce that Road Runner
Food Bank has been distributing
through the state.
They made a promise to correct
that.
Problem that they had.
Uh, I hope that's not coming
through, through this bill.
Uh, I think some of their issues
might have been, might have been
produce they were buying from
outside the country, coming from
south, probably Mexico.
But uh I don't have all the
details on that.
But hopefully that this
program's being run good enough
that we're not, we're not
sending.
Uh
Produce that's, that's not in
very good shape to our food
banks.
Absolutely, um, that, that is
the main function of our program
to ensure high quality product
going out consistently. Um, so
we offer technical support there
and track product that's going.
I have a lot of confidence in,
in that, in that, that this is
going on with this program. So,
thank you, Madam Chair. That
concludes my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Herera.
Uh, madam.
Second
They do pass, uh, in a second on
the table with the committee's
permission. Uh, do we feel like
we can all vote yes OK.
unanimous vote on House Bill 229
and Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
quickly, I also.
Um
I'm surprised when we see bills
like this come forward, not the
content, not the purpose, I'm
with you. But as we know, that's
not how the appropriations
process works in New Mexico.
You're either in the executive
budget, the LFC budget, you make
it into HB2 or not.
So, yeah, I keep asking myself
like, how are we interacting
with constituents when we
sponsor bills like this sort of
the budgetary process and not
how we move money in New
Mexico's budget. So as far as I
understand, members of
appropriation when bills like
this arrive at appropriations,
they're still tabled.
Right? So I think we should say
that out to symbolize our
support and backing for this
funding.
Um, but that doesn't mean that
this bill will make it through
the legislature and come become
law. You all point towards
getting this money in the state
budget, irregardless of this
bill, so that part.
I don't know why we do it. Why
we confuse ourselves and
constituents with this, but
thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
either, but um I'm glad that you
explained it and we'll likely
have to explain it over and over
again as you do almost every
committee, uh, hearing in tax
and Rev. So, um,
congratulations, you have a pass
and we're going to move on to
the next one, Madam Chair, I
didn't understand.
Well, we're gonna do that
offline representative Samora.
All right. Next up is a house
built.
You can start whenever you're
ready.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for uh
letting me present this bill
today. HB 206 is actually, I
think one of my favorite meals
that I kind of present every
year. This is another bill that
I tried to just kind of a do
pass every year, but I was
blocked in the Senate, so, um,
so we too are presenting this
bill every year. This is the uh
is the annual water project fund
projects authorization bill, and
every year communities
throughout New Mexico go to the
water trust board.
Uh, they, uh, apply for funding
to to really straighten out
water issues in their, in their,
um, in their districts and um in
the dreams of cities and rural
communities for improving water
quality and water access, and um
what you should know is that on
October 29th, 2024. The water
trusts board met to approve a
list of projects the
recommendation follows a
thorough evaluation of all
applications uh.
by 7 agency review team, the
final list of projects includes
84 projects whose application a
total of approximately 256.4
million. The 84 applications are
made up of projects from 4
categories. We have 13 flood
prevention projects. We have 6
water conservation or treatment,
recycling, or reuse projects, we
have 62 water storage can only
have 3 watershed restoration and
to introduce my expert.
witness Marquita Russell, who
heads up the NMFA and uh with
that uh we stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. The only thing
I would note is that this is not
an appropriation bill. There's a
standing appropriation that's
been 20 plus years to the water
project fund. This is
authorization to use that on the
projects that have applied this
year and OK, uh, we're going to
go to public comments. Anyone in
the audience in support of this
bill that would like to speak,
raise your hand, OK? And uh get
ready for folks on Zoom as well
if you are in support of this,
get a minute.
My name's Dusty Hunt on behalf
of the Association of
Conservation Districts, we would
like to support these
recommendations, I believe 5
different soil and water
districts will be recipients of
these dollars and we support
those districts. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is
Elizabeth Anderson and I'm the
state engineer designate, and I
wanted to speak my voice in
support of this as well. Thank
you.
Madam Chair,
Committee members, this is
Sharon Argenbright.
I've been recycling my home
water for more than 20 years. I
have a lot. I support this bill.
Nathan Dale, mayor of Etania,
uh, please fully fund this bill
currently a stature is asking
for $5 million in this bill, 2.5
million for a new well, 2.5
million to connect the new well
to the old system, and this is
due to in the last year, the
city has the town has asked the
residents to
Conserve water at least 3 times
due to our current system, not
being able to sustain the needs
of the community, so please.
On this bill fully. Thank you.
Hey, anyone on the Zoom?
Hello?
My name is Jean Logsdon. Uh,
good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I
represent the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. The league
strongly supports this bill
because we believe that water is
an essential uh focus for at
least the next 50 years or so if
New Mexico is going to thrive.
We appreciate the careful
examination of the various
projects and therefore we
believe that this is a
meritorious bill. Thank you.
Hey, um, anyone in opposition
to.
In the room. Anyone on Zoom?
OK, we're going to go to
questions from the committee.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
the bill. I have a few questions
for you.
Um, Madam Chair and
representatives in your, uh,
witness's explanation I
understand correctly, the 200
need have to be, have to sell
current.
Or will we have to sell
severance tax?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
the money that's in there, the
money that's directed to it is a
percentage of the severance tax
bonds. So there is an amount
that's coming forward from
either this, however.
Severance tax bonds proceeds
typically last couple of years,
there have been substitutes, but
the amount is equal to 9% of the
senior severance tax bond
capacity. Um, and so that isn't
in one way or the other.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer.
Madam Chair,
With respect to the entities,
the political sub, the ones
listed right now.
And
Um
Have any issues with their
state, Madam Chair, um, I think
the answer with that is probably
likely. I, I can't tell you
right now with some certainty,
but I can tell you that is the
second part of this um
application sponsor mentioned
begins in the summer and ends in
the summer again of this year.
We go through a process, anyone
not in compliance with their
state audit may not move forward
with funding. That is part of
the executive order and since it
is a severance tax funded uh
program, we can't move.
forward with them regardless.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer.
So with that, if we end up with
a few that are in noncompliance.
Madam Chair, I would note that
there are $265 million on this
authorization bill, that's the
requested amount, the initial
amount was actually much higher
than that as well. But there's
only $165 million expected to
come into the fund.
So there is a process set out
that in the order in which
they're prioritized, we ensure
that they've got adequate water
rights that they're in
compliance with state
regulations relative to their
water system, and that they're
in if they don't meet that,
those three things, then the
next project moves up in the
queue. So they are bypassed or
regulatory compliance, if in
fact they haven't met that. So,
Madam Chair, at this point, we
have more project request.
Thank you very much.
with respect to determines
priority.
No.
Thank
you, policies
that provide by category
criteria for
uh evaluating and
and
and ranking these projects and
project, but it's typically
deals with um urgency,
emergency issues
are sets of criteria for each of
the types.
Thank you for that I understand
it correctly, there's a process
which evaluates.
And, and put a number or a
letter, whatever it is to
And, and put a number or a
letter, whatever it is 2
complies with 5 categories and
that's the basis or what happens
if project projects.
Uh,
the same evaluation
and then make the determination
which has, um, let me just back
up a little bit so there's there
are the 5 sets of criteria
corresponding to the types of
projects.
The evaluation that the
applications
using that valuation criteria.
Um, they're prioritizing based
on the.
um
and then there are ties that
will come out
in the in the spring. So that's
the point at which that may be
it's possible that all of them
if not, you know, the likelihood
that maybe one of them gets sed
back looked to fund
these projects. So we do not
want to fund a portion of the
phase
and we are ensuring that the
money will go to fund a
complete.
Please.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that
answer. So
I just received
7 different agencies that are
part of this review.
Are there any private?
Um
Is there anybody besides agency
review we have uh
members,
you know, with the board is
appointed.
We have private members industry
members.
You're bureaucracy that makes
this determination.
cabinet secretaries of the
Navajo
Nation,
it also has the disc
from uh an irrigation
or
irrigation district.
of stakeholders across the
state, including, um, the Indian
uh state agencies.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for helping me down
the rabbit hole and back up
Thank you for helping me down
the rabbit hole and back out
Thank you for helping me down
the rabbit hole and back outing
and understanding the process.
Is using server to do this.
We are in a state that has
influx.
Right now,
LLC redefined.
Um, and we're
We, we lost and then that
definition was $3.6 billion
in money and authorization and
transportation
and madam, we have like that
we're selling a bond.
we have the ability.
the
nonrecurring makes no
sense. I am not voting against
we're putting
the
money to use
based
on new money.
And I appreciate very much the
helping me through this. I
understood most of it I have
people have people listening in
that may not understand the
whole process
was my question. Thank you.
Thank you.
I moved.
Hey, we will
call unless everybody is.
Supportive, looking around
affirmation.
You have a.
Unanimous.
Thank you. I think you should
just stay there.
He likes to stand up for a
second and get a glass of water.
that we get to stay there.
Oh my goodness,
right.
OK, but before we start here,
um.
We are going to hear from the
sponsor.
About the changes in this and
then we will take public
comments very quick.
Uh
No
more than I'm gonna be
ruthless about about that time
and then we will go to
questions.
And it's just on the so you're
listening to the who are going
to be making comments.
Please,
you restrict your comment to
the committee
that the committee members as
well.
um.
Respectfully.
We did not
We were not able to finalize the
on 137 on on the previous
version.
Her Holiness to the community.
on the
to
the proposed that's what we're
gonna
focus on the committee.
over 26 pages, right? We are
going to uh only focus our
questions and
our
questions and on the
proposed.
of us didn't get.
37.
And
changed
And
has changed.
So that is what we're limiting
but it's the,
they're going to explain what
the committee sub.
Differences are, perhaps I will
use that word instead. So,
sponsor.
Please explain the committee sub
and the differences
we need to introduce a committee
Madam Chair, I moved to, to
introduce committee subpoint
230329.4 for discussion.
Moved and seconded. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee,
um.
This is the 3rd substitute that
I was the 22nd substitute, first
bill, I wanna say.
That we really did listen to
this committee.
I mean, uh, it was a, it was a
great debate. And I totally
appreciated the, the questions,
the knowledge in the room, um,
and, and we really did go back
and um and try, try to
accommodate valid.
And, and so I, I, I wanna say at
the first go around, uh.
We really put in some
environmental.
And we put in some environmental
clauses in the first substitute,
and that was recommended by
really um Chairman Ortiz and
Andrea Romero, who, who really
strongly believe that we should,
we should put more environmental
um
Um, to really protect.
Uh, this time around, what we've
done.
Is, is, uh, again, we listen to
people and we went back.
And um we have the 75 million is
just for brackish water now and
communities throughout New
Mexico really need this brackish
water treatment they're
struggling, uh, to, to produce
water right now that they can
use in their communities and so
we have allowed the 75 million
to just, uh, we've put a um uh
lowered the tax rate to 3 cents.
On the produced water, and then
we move the date back on
produced water. We had a long
discussion we moved that date
back, uh, and so that we would
have the rules, um,
Set before the entire community,
so those are kind of the major
changes and uh I just want you
to know that we uh spent a lot
of time, um, listening and, and,
and hopefully I've come up with
a better bill for you to
consider today. And with that,
I'm gonna turn the uh mic over
to
Thank you, Madam Chair, members,
uh, good morning. Thank you to
our sponsor. Um, Madam Chair,
would you like any more
specific, uh, articulation or
walkthrough of the differences
line by line, page by page. I
could, I'm happy to do that. Um,
yeah, I think that would be best
for this committee to understand
and for those in the audience
who may not have been able to
print it out. Thank you.
Wonderful. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members. Um,
so the, uh, bill before you,
again, the 202 number is 0.2.
30329.
Or
Um, there is the first change is
on.
Page one in the act title line
20 you'll see that it says
imposing a 3 cents fee.
It was previously a 5.
Then I am going.
On page 22.
Line 25.
Beginning on the first day of
the month.
And then continuing on to page
23, the 1st 4 lines there.
This is language.
Here in section 10 of the bill
that is different, that changes
the start date of the 3 cents
fee on produced water.
To be 90 days after.
The, uh
Contingency in section 13, um,
takes effect, which we'll look
at in a moment. So, um, this
language changed it used to say
January 1st, 2026 is when the
fee would start, and then it
would last for 10 years through
January 1st.
2036. Now it says the start of
the fee is tied to water quality
control commission rules for
produced water reuse being in
effect and the sunset is 10
years after it takes effect. So
that's the difference on page 22
onto the top of page 23.
The next change is on page 25.
Lines 14. This is the paragraph
for the $75 million general fund
appropriation.
Now includes language in lines
14 and 15 that says for only
those eligible projects
involving deep brackish water.
Next, on to page.
Lines 9 through 20.
The entirety of section 13 is
new.
Since last Thursday.
That section again is the
contingency language that ties
the initiation of the produced
water fee to rules being in
effect.
Just to editorial lights for a
moment, Madam Chair, sort of the
combined, uh,
Uh, impact of these changes is
that by limiting $75 million
general fund appropriation to
Brackish and excluding the
opportunity for those dollars to
be used for produced water.
Combined with delaying the fee
revenue that will eventually be
a revenue stream into the fund
that could pay for produced
water projects. We have
essentially eliminated the
availability of money in the
strategic water supply fund to
go toward produced water
products until
Produce water reuse rules are in
effect through the water quality
Control Commission pursuant to
the Water Quality Act.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, ready for public
comment.
OK. If you are in support of
this bill, and you're in the
room, raise your hand.
You have a minute.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, my name is Jason
Kosuga. I'm the CEO and chief
engineer for the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District. As
you know, uh, one of our
missions is to deliver surface
water to irrigators and in the
times that we're facing um
waters scarce, uh, and we should
be researching and looking at
anything that can help balance
the water equation. Um, we know
that fresh water supply is
diminishing, and while this is
not a silver bullet, it should
be added to the equation, and we
should do it in a sensible way.
For that reason, MRGCD supports
House Bill 137.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Shots
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Bernalo County water
utility Authority. We stand in
support of this legislation, we
believe that it incentivizes the
production of water produces
another water source which the
state desperately needs and
provides outside technical
research and evaluation with.
Anybody else in the room in
support?
Um, we're having some troubles
with Zoom, so I don't know if
you're gonna, we're gonna be
able to hear you, but we'll call
out your name if you are in
support, raise your hand.
We'll give it a try.
We'll also call out your name so
that the committee.
And
HB 37, we have Gene.
Anyone else?
OK.
I'm not going to postpone this
hearing because of the Zoom.
Madam Chair, let me, this
webcast working.
Yes is working, which is why
we're still, we're still going.
It's the zoom that, um, it's.
Madam Chair, uh, uh, we are in
full moment in the room.
Madam chair for, so we want to
say that it's OK for
Any rough million people that
want to have public comment on
this, but do not get the
opportunity to have.
Representative Pettigrew, we are
in compliance. The webcast must
be on so that we can have our
meeting, uh, the Zoom is.
Uh, is optional.
We are allowing people to raise
their hands and reading out
their name if they're in support
or in opposition to this bill.
OK.
Man. I also want to acknowledge
that.
Great. Thank you. We're gonna
move to opposition.
Those in this room who are who
are opposed, you have one
minute.
If we're able to get the zoom
on.
Um, at some point in this
hearing, we will go back to
those who are on the Zoom so
that they can, they can speak.
But that's not going to happen
at this very second. Go ahead.
Let's do opposition.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino and I
represent the Pueblo Acama.
We're opposed to.
Um, HP 137 for one primary
reason the A of my ass had a
great deal of experience in
aquifers and testing and
Geologic and hydrologic as well
and
Based on a 4242 year old lawsuit
that was filed, it's still
unresolved against a mining
company and other parties, and
there's a great deal of testing
that was done along the San
Andreas Glorieta.
Aquifer and also fractures
within the saga.
Um
And based on our experience, we
believe the definition needs to
be worked on, uh, presently it's
not a workable definition and
really needs to be more
explicit.
Um
The bracket of the state is
seeking um needs to be
contained.
It needs to be confined with no
hydrological connection to other
Waifers or surface water and so
for those reasons
are opposed I mean the idea is
fine, it's just this time.
thanks.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Jim
Winchester. I represent the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. Thank
you for the opportunity. Um, our
main concern of this bill
continues to be the now 3 cents
per barrel tax on produced
brackish water to be disposed,
um, for small operators, the
math on this kills any chance of
breaking even on marginal wells
and so named because they run on
thin economic margins. After all
of the strategic water
discussions
summer, the whole idea of
charging per barrel was never
discussed and came out of left
field to the industry. We feel
that any tax per barrel is not
only an appropriate, we'd argue
that it's statutorily illegal.
We stand in respectful
opposition. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies.
Nimoga's membership supports
water reuse and recycling and
the science that proves treated,
produced water may be utilized
in appropriate settings after
meeting stringent standards. We
would like to thank the sponsor
for the updates to the committee
sub. However, we are still
opposed, even in, even though
the new proposed tax would not
be imposed until after
rulemakings are completed,
Nimoga cannot support attacks
without full understanding of
reuse and recycling
opportunities and evolving
science that supports those
opportunities.
The practice of reuse and
recycling is important to
Namoga, uh, but the state
continues to withhold
opportunities for freshwater
conservation until appropriate
standards are set. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the Mike Miller Permian Basin
Petroleum Association. You've
heard some of our concerns, the
3 cents, even though that sounds
minimal, uh, based on the amount
of barrels of oil that the uh
industry produced that could
that could reach up to nearly
$82 million a year. Also, we
don't feel like the uh the water
strategic supply program fund,
uh, lacks, um,
Direction as to how the fund
will directly benefit the
industry and uh
We've already invested millions
of dollars in water treatment
and recycling efforts and the
fee seems to be a double
taxation. Finally, uh, as may be
mentioned by previous comment,
uh, we, we questioned the
constitutionality of the tax and
how it's directed directly to a
single industry. So for those
and other reasons we oppose,
thank you.
Uh, hi, my name is Danger Roros
with uh Defend NM Water. I'm
really concerned about the fee
situation, um, the, the, um,
strategic water supply was
already like a handout just with
the
Original uh structure and now
with a reduction fee from 5 to
3% like a even more of a
handout, um.
And I agree that the science is
not there. I agree that we don't
have the proper data to prove
that produced water is safe for
treatment and reuse, and I
understand that this will be for
brackish water now, but later on
after decisions are made, uh, it
could be used for produced water
and we could end up putting the
cart before the horse and
unsafely exposing our water to
dangerous radioactive and toxic
contamination, the radioactive
components also a
in just brackish water. There
are norms naturally occurring
radioactive materials in that
deep water. Do we have any proof
that we can clear out all that
salt. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, Marilyn
Lenassi, I wrote to you all. I
will not repeat that. I'm very
concerned that there's
scientific standards are not in
place, um, and that that will be
a problem that will affect our
public health and the
environment, but I'm also
particularly concerned about
this bill and I call your
attention to section 12 letter
A. I think that it is
extraordinarily confusing,
poorly worded, and does not
state that this money will only
be used for brackish water,
which we also echo the comments
and concerns of Mr. Chino as
well as other scientists. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you. My name is Colin
Cox uh with the Center for
Biological Diversity. We've also
already commented and, and we'll
repeat ourselves, but we remain
opposed to the bill, highly
concerned, um, about the lack of
scientific standards, lack of
radiation standards, um, and
also concerned about the
lowering of the fee, um, again
echoing prior commenters, this
is already a subsidy uh for the
oil and gas industry, and now
even more of the burden is on
the taxpayer, and for these
reasons, we continue to oppose
the bill. Thank you.
Anyone else in the room?
in opposition, OK, we're going
to go to Zoom.
Opposition, raise your hand if
you oppose uh the committee sub
and we're gonna read out your
name if you are in opposition,
and hopefully we'll be able to
get back to you at another
point. I will take a break,
representative Pettigrew, so
that we can hear back up. OK.
Thank you. Um, Carla Sontag, uh,
I believe that you had
previously had your hand in
support, but leave it Gwendolyn.
Eric
Flanker Goodrich?
Norm, Normgam.
Amigos Bravos.
And in Taos.
CJ Holden.
Deirdre Velasquez.
Any
Hanna?
Sandy Stolberg.
Melissa Trotman.
And thank you all for raising
your hand.
Uh, I'm going to lower all of
your hands. Thank you very much.
OK, um, with the sponsor like to
respond to any of the public
comment.
That
Uh, yeah, uh, uh, yes, Madam
Chair, I think we'd like to
respond to the bracketwatter
comment.
Definition
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Um, yeah, I
just want to clarify that in
section water, um, that has
3 key components to it. The
first is the depth of the
aquifer, the depth of the well,
um, 2500 ft or more below the
surface of the ground. The
second component of the
definition has to do with the
salinity of the water, not less
than 1000 parts per million.
Of dissolved solids, and the
third component is that it is
not produced water. So very
clearly distinguishing it from
produced water. So I wanted to
clarify that definition, is
there, um, really quickly, Madam
Mature, I also wanted to clarify
that um the uh bill before the
committee today does not provide
for any public funding going
toward oil and gas including
treatment of produced water.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you for that. We have
one more person on the Zoom. I
didn't want to acknowledge
record. Thank you.
Yes, and that is an opposition.
OK, thank you. um, thank you for
that. Thank you um and we're
going to go to committee now.
Uh, first, we have
Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you representatives and experts,
um, I appreciate all of the
updates that you all made on, on
the bill. Um, I do have some
questions regard well, one
specific question and, and I'll
just leave it at that is, um,
The clarification on the
brackish, um, and you all shared
a little bit about what one of
the comments was made, um, I
still have questions, uh, a
question regarding the
clarification around brackish as
it pertains to the water rights
piece.
Um
The way that I understand it is
that the shallower groundwater
and surface water.
Um
So the 25.
And, and excuse me, because I'm,
I'm no expert on this issue. So
the 2500 number that's been
stated, this step is current,
this step is currently not
regulated, correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct, not
appropriated.
OK, Water.
And so the state in um let's
see, sorry, I'm, I'm, I have
really bad handwriting and so I
can't even read my own, um,
since, um, so my question is, I
guess is that since deep
brackish that as it's defined,
isn't regulated like our surface
water and the shallower
groundwater does this sub as
it's written right now, um, does
it risk allowing private
companies to exploit our limited
deep a.
resources without proper
oversight.
That's the way that I'm reading
it and, and so I guess the
question is, should we be adding
extra safeguards to protect
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Rubio, uh, that's
a really critical uh concern
that we made sure to prevent in
how we crafted this bill. So I
want to draw your attention to
um a section of the bill that
was was before you last Thursday
as well, unchanged and um.
The right 5. Thank you. Page 25.
So in section 11, which starts
on page 24. I'll let folks get
there.
Section 11.
is amending part of our existing
water code.
And the amendment is underlined
on page 25.
And it's essentially adding
additional rigor to the review
that the Office of the State
Engineer will do on any well
that is proposed to the Office
of State Engineer to be drilled
that is 2500 ft or deeper. So
any well that would be tied to a
brackish water project.
In the strategic water supply
program would have to go through
a regulatory process with the
state engineer. This is the
section that covers part of what
that process looks like and the
change in HB 137, um, requires
that the state engineer must
determine that the use of the
water stated in the notice of
the proposed driller will not
impair existing water rights, be
contrary to the conservation of
water within the.
State or be detrimental to the
public welfare. And so that
Uh,
Permission to drill such a well
cannot proceed until the state
engineer has made that
determination. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Rubio.
Thank you, um, thank you all,
um.
Yeah, I mean, I um.
Representative, I, I, I, I
appreciate all of the work that
you all have done to improve the
legislation.
Um
And I guess it, I mean, I think
I just need to be clear and, and
about this issue specifically
around produced water and um,
and some of the mechanisms
within the bill itself is that.
And, and I used to serve on
energy and so I, I've heard this
bill or a versions of bills like
this in my last 8 years, and,
and I guess that's, I think I
just need to be very clear that.
I'm just fundamentally opposed
to the process of produced
water.
Um, I think that as.
A party, a Democratic Party
itself, um, which I'm a member
of. We have been very explicit
about our support for protecting
communities and for protecting
our, our water and our, and um
our air and.
Bills like this that we are told
to vote for or, or are, are um
were recommended to vote for as
a party. I think goes against my
values, um, and so that's why I
can't support it, but I, I
understand where you're coming
from. I understand how grounded
you are in your own community
and why these and I love the
Awkward for Peace, the, the
mapping.
If it was a standalone, I would
support it 100%, but I think
this is the part of why I, I,
it's so challenging for me to
serve in this body is because we
are having to attach bills that
I don't believe in.
Um, we're having to attach
issues that I don't believe in
with things that are good and
um.
And so just fundamentally from a
principle, from a principal
standpoint or from a moral
standpoint, um, everything
outside of the aquifer piece is
just, it's, it's, it's something
that I fundamentally oppose, and
I don't know.
How much you can fix this bill.
That it will get my support
because again, I just, I'm
fundamentally opposed. I believe
we should be moving away from
oil and gas and the extraction
of oil and gas, and our
dependence on it and this.
Legislation makes it so that we
continue.
Um
This relationship with the
industry that I just can't
continue to support. So, um,
with that, Madam Chair,
Representative, that's all I
have to say. Thank you.
Thank you Madam
Quickly, please. Uh yeah, I
just, I just want to vote here.
And, and by not, if I didn't
respect your vote, that would
mean I didn't respect the
community she represents, of
course.
And, and I, I've never really
pressured members on a vote.
It's not my style.
You know, I, I, I get that
you're going to vote for what
you believe in, uh, having
There's no snow on the
mountains.
And I think I, I really think we
are working yet for different
uses. I get it. It's for
different uses, and it should be
for different uses, and that's
only for our state, but for the
entire chair.
Thank you, sponsor. We're going
to move to Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I will say, well, Representative
Rubio and I disagree on the
reasons.
Uh, for the, my colleagues on
both sides of our uh.
Oh
Where to start?
Yeah.
Where to start? Um,
Madam Chair, my, my first
question.
Really um
Ability to answer and I'm really
truly hoping somebody from the
different departments are here
to.
The
What is EM
Em nerds, um, vision.
Of the rules that they would
promulgate and how would that
If you could give me your
crystal ball ball version, Madam
Chair of
Your conversations with the
department.
How they perceive. Um, I, as you
know, I represent the governor's
office, not, uh, but I'll give a
brief answer, and I do have a,
an expert from the oil concert
uh conservation division, it
wasn't able to be here with us.
He's listening on Zoom and I can
get clarification from him, um,
on my phone if we need it. Um,
so, so we'll, we'll make it work
as best we can. Uh, I can answer
it briefly, um, the rulemaking,
um, pursuant to the the new fee
that would be collected. Uh,
would build on
Existing water use reports that
industry, the oil and gas
industry is already submitting
under existing rules. So there,
um, they're objective as I've
discussed with the agency is to
uh use the existing reporting
frameworks that have been in
place for several years and draw
information out of those
existing reports on the
frequency and cadence and um
with the veracity.
that is needed in order to uh
form the basis of whatever fee
amount is owed in a particular.
chair and, and, uh, Rebecca, I'm
sorry. I'm, I'm terrible.
With respect to that, um.
I feel like I just received
100,000 because in so many times
in so many places, we
And it becomes more onerous than
the bills.
And that concerns me, Madam
Chair, I continue to push.
For rule-making capability body.
That concerns me significantly,
um.
Madam Chair and and.
Representative
Rebecca
Can you give me a perspective on
A project
Just
Find the whole if you would
please, madam chair.
Madame Cherups and Pettigrew,
I'd be happy to. I think that um
is uh a great opportunity. So,
uh, I'm going to give an example
out of section 4, given your
interest in the produced water
side of this. I'll give a
produced water example, but
roughly the same could be true
with the brackish water project.
Um, so at the point in time at
which per this bill and the
change in fee revenue, uh, when
the, when the fee kicks in, once
there's money in the fund
available for produced water
projects and the authority under
the bill for one of our um uh
designated agencies to support a
produced water project through
the strategic water supply. Here
is essentially what might
happen.
That agency, let's say it's the
New Mexico Environment
Department would issue a request
for proposals through a
procurement process. And in that
request for proposals,
essentially invite companies in
New Mexico who are in the
business of treating produced
water.
And to.
Make a proposal for entering
into a contract with the state
under the strategic water
supply. That request for
proposals would adhere to all
the provisions that are outlined
in section 4 of this bill for
what needs to be considered and
uh and it would adhere to the
procurement process with the
exception of what we have in
this bill, which is the
contracts could last longer
under the strategic water supply
than the, the typical
procurement code. Um, but
otherwise, um, they'd be
casting.
The net with a request for
proposals to see who in the
state is in the business of
treating produced water and has
a proposal to make for a lining
up that treated produced water
with
Customers, and the customers
that the environment department
in this example would be seeking
through the request for proposal
process would be customers that
align with state, tribal, or
local economic development
goals.
That could mean, um, advanced
manufacturing projects. It could
mean other industrial projects,
um, it would be limited by
whatever is allowed under the
water quality rules that are to
be in a, put into effect, um,
that would already have to be in
effect by the time we're in this
hypothetical scenario. So, um,
and uses would be limited by
rules and the um target
customers would be driven by
state economic development
priorities.
As well as um projects that
would reduce reliance on fresh
water for those economic. So if
it's a um solar parts
manufacturer that wants to come
in to a community, let's say,
um, in Leorette County, and they
have the need for a certain
volume of water to make their
widgets, um, they could partner
up with one of these treatment
companies as a um as a customer,
essentially, and the
contract process through the
Environment department would
then evaluate that proposal for
all of the purposes that are in
this bill.
And if ultimately they enter
into a contract, the Environment
Department and the water
treatment company that contract
will delineate exactly what the
terms are in terms and how
funding in the strategic water
supply fund is being put to use.
But the crux of it, in part
beyond meeting those economic
development priorities and
adhering is truly to get jobs
coming into our state, grow,
grow businesses without further
sucking up our
freshwater resources that are
already, so, um, depleted. So we
leave the fresh water for people
and for crops and for nature,
and we use this water for the
manufacturing and other and the
contract would lay out how that
would, the specifics of how that
would work. I can elaborate on
certain elements of that
further, but I'll pause. Madam
Chair Rebecca I appreciate your
answer and your depth on that.
And I'm sure I may be confused,
which is always hard.
To do with me. Um.
My understanding with the
changes and in committee
substitute for that.
Example you just gave is no
longer allowed.
Um, Madam Chair, Represented
Pettigrew, the example I just
gave would not be allowed
immediately upon enactment of
the strategic water supply. The
example I just gave would be
allowed at the point in time in
the future, that water quality
rules are in effect.
At which point, those types of
produced water projects are
eligible, and the fee revenue
starts to flow that would fund
those projects. Um, I could have
given you a brackish water
example, which would have been
essentially the same components
that would be allowed to move
forward, um, right as soon as
the bill takes effect. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer. So,
and I think, Madam Chair, that's
The concern from some of the
NGOs that we heard from.
Last week and, and again this
week with respect to being able
to use, produce water. We
disagree on, on.
Whether the sciences uh on, on
some points with respect to
this.
Madam Chair, so.
That's a very pointed question.
The intent
This bill
Just to tax and industry.
To create other industries with
those tax dollars on the tax
industry.
And the example you just gave
was, was amazing to me here.
We're gonna, we're gonna
increase your tax.
We're gonna tax the example.
Uh
So
Just get to the
Madam Chair Representative
I want to add one key component
to the way you just, um,
characterize that example, and
that is that the um
The
Contracting process that I
described as an example, would
at its core involve a new
Pathway, regulations and
protections for produced water
generated by the oil and gas
industry to be utilized. So the
crux of this for the oil and gas
industry, who you're right,
where we're proposing they pay a
fee to build up this fund and
make these projects, um,
possible. The benefit for the
oil and gas industry is that
this is um moving.
The state forward as soon as
rules are in place for produced
water reuse outside of oil and
gas to open up new opportunities
and align the produced water
generator in the oil and gas
industry with the treatment
company, whether it's that same
oil and gas company or or a
partner company that treats
water with custom produced
water. So the reality is today
produce producers and oil and
gas have very few options for
what they can do with all the
produced water.
that they're generating and as
we heard from our expert, um,
Deputy Ben Shelton from Enerd
last week. It is sometimes a
limiting factor for oil and gas.
The difficulties in legally
managing and responsibly
managing the produced water they
generate. So this is an
opportunity for us as a state
working with industry to move us
forward in accordance with the
Produced Water Act of 2019 in
accordance with water quality
rules, um, to be
est ab li sh ed to create more
of a market for
Treated, produced water beyond
what is available today.
Madam Chair, one of the, one of
the concepts that
Concerned me with this, and
actually, Madam Chair, before I
go to that, Madam Chair, is
there an
Total amount of funds from
implementation to sensor.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
with the amendment of 5 cents to
3 cents based on 2023 produced
water volumes as are multiplier
for um for making estimates, we
expect roughly $50 million of
revenue a year from the 3 cents
fee over 10 years, that's 500
million, um, with a number of
caveats that we do expect this
fee once in effect.
To incense more recycling of
produced water by oil and gas
for oil and gas and all of those
volumes are subtracted before
they pay the fee. So the more
they recycle and field, the less
they pay and if we're correct
that this fee in cents more of
that in-field recycling of
produced water, then we'll see
that revenue drop from the 50
million a year estimate. Also,
we don't know how production
levels will flex. I'm not an
expert on
oil and gas industry
productions, um, I know you know
more if it stayed roughly 50
million a year, um, that's where
we're getting the revenue. Thank
you.
Thank you for that.
Um
Madam Chair
So if we looked at this from
just a
Big picture.
Yeah, I can give you an example.
Just grow money spending this
year.
Every one of those projects,
Madam Chair, has no guard rails
whatsoever.
We could easily put a half a
billion dollars to a fund right
now.
And give you that half a billion
dollars right out of the excess.
And not impose this on.
So I don't understand the
concept.
Being attacked, Madam Chair, and
this is, this is one of my
thoughts and this isn't, didn't
really even go with my life. The
very industry.
So we want to, I don't have this
number and I wish I'd have
thought of this question
yesterday cause I could have
gotten it.
From, um, our independence uh on
how much of an intake.
In A in Mexico.
On their own.
That required supporting being
the key spot in different
regions, how much money these
organizations give to.
I'm not what comes from
apartments. I'm talking about.
Giving above and beyond. I would
venture to guess.
It gets pretty close and it
exceeds.
The 50 million a year, Madam
Chair, and my question is, is if
we can.
How much I can pay my employees?
Depends on how
How I or how I am.
them
For cost of living.
Depends on how much revenue I
can receives.
Continue
Our small company.
Madam Chair, probably our, our
team members.
Donate time.
Their personal money and our
corporate money to over a dozen.
Nonprofit.
When we take that money away.
We take that ability away.
The 50 million that we can tax
you annually is more important.
And I think, Madam Chung.
Because our industry that we're
looking to tax.
puts more
In the state of New Mexico and
that.
Now we're gonna reduce that
ability.
To do that.
Is the state ready? And I'm,
that's not a conversation I
continue to be taxed.
Thing about most of our or the
art and they say ours because
I'm from.
Is that the heart's
Madam Chair, with that.
I am curious.
And this was touched on briefly
last Thursday.
What other states.
Have in place existing laws
similar to this.
Not in process but existing
representative,
I'm gonna see if my um,
I'm expert can uh let me know
about that and as, as I'm
answering or commenting on your
last point. I just want to note
that um the role that the oil
and gas industry plays in our
communities is incredibly
important, as you note, um, and
our uh economics analysis that
we've done related to this
proposed fee, is that
Generally speaking across some
of the oil and gas companies'
revenue and profit margins that
we've looked at, the 3 cents fee
on produced water, um, minus
the, the volumes put to use in
the oil and gas industry, we're
talking about between 0.7 and 3%
of the typical profit margin. So
we've designed this, we believe
our intent is to not, um,
Impede on the corporate giving
programs and other good work
that companies do in our
communities, uh, in terms of
where other states are, um, that
have a feed like this, none that
we know of, uh, and there are
different fees, not this is a
fee, not a tax as it's written
in the bill. Um, despite the
role of the taxation revenue
Department collecting it. It is
very much a fee. Um, we are
aware of a number of other oil
and gas states that have a range
of fees and and
Uh, on oil and gas, but none
that exact. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that,
um.
So we are back to calling this a
fee.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
from our perspective and and the
bill sponsor's perspective.
Madam Chair, and uh presenters.
It establishes a 3 cents fee.
On produced water.
In the bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna have to
leave that up to somebody else
to pull that up, but I, I
believe that it is referred in
the bill.
And in places as a fee and other
places as a tax, and that was
why I was asking clarification
on it.
Madam Chair, I can, I can, I
can.
tell you this with utmost
certainty.
There's one producer in this
state.
That this will impact their
bottom line.
As much as $8 million a year.
Just one
That's a lot of money.
And I understand, Madam Chair,
when we look at, at, at the
amount of money we're throwing
away around this year, um, with
continuing.
5 years ago.
Um
And, and we heard testimony and,
and one thing by.
EFA and House Appropriation
Appropriations between the
DFA analysts and the LSC
analysts saying that we're only
separated by 97 million.
That's a lot of money.
And so when we look at what
we're doing here.
It, it, it creates.
Big concern and I want to be
crystal clear again.
My line of questioning that just
happened.
Was outside of any discussion,
effective, and I am not
suggesting in any way industry
would, would, would look at it
that way.
That was just my perspective on
where we're at.
You know, I look at this, Madam
Chair.
My family came to New Mexico in
the late 1800s.
Foreman civil engineer with
water and wastewater.
And so, I understand.
Some of the aspects of what's
going on here. But
Madam Chair, I'm concerned that
what we're really doing is
From a state's perspective that
is flush with money right now.
Taking advantage of an industry.
That has created that flesh
money.
tax them
To
Now, because we all know the ETA
is in, in
5 years.
Before that flush of money comes
out, we want to tax that
industry as much as possible.
To continue projects.
That were not created by that
industry. And I say that very
clearly because
Madam Chair and presenters.
question for you.
Where does the oil and gas
industry rank in the use of
fresh water.
In the state of New Mexico
against all of.
Sorry, I missed the the last
question the conversation go
back and forth. I, I saw that
one coming. I saw that one
coming, Madam Chair, presenters,
um.
By the numbers, where does with
the use of fresh water.
Compared
To the other just pick top 5 in.
That's exactly what we were
talking about.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee and
representative, um, it takes 4
to 6 barrels of clean water to
produce one barrel of oil.
That's, that's why we're here.
Um, and I'm gonna let uh.
And Madam Chair, Representative,
just to clarify, um, the, the
water ratio that Representative
Hutter I was just talking about
is um when you're uh drilling or
producing oil for every barrel
of oil you, uh, you get, you're
generating 4 to 6 barrels of
produced water. Um, so that's,
that's what we call an industry
the water cut, um, and, and so
that's essentially gets at the
volume of produced water.
That we're talking about in the
state of New Mexico as, as we
talk about the um rate of oil
and gas production,
um, but represent pedigree to
get back to your question, uh,
the oil and gas industry as a
As a consumer of fresh water as
compared to other industries and
sectors in the state, I think
was your question. Um, oil and
gas uses small amount of fresh
water as compared to many other
industries and um municipalities
and consumers, certainly, um,
we, I think, are well aware,
especially in an ag committee,
that the agricultural industry
uses um the majority of water by
sector in, in the
state of New Mexico. Um, I would
also note that the, um, since
the Produced Water Act was went
into effect in 2019, that
created more opportunities and
incentives for the oil and gas
industry to recycle or reuse
more produced water for their
own operations, and we've seen
the trend go um up quite a bit
over the last 5 or 6 years such
that last numbers I heard was 60
to 65% of all water that's going
down the hole in the oil and
gas.
industry is recycled, reus
produced water, meaning they're
using a much smaller amount of
fresh water today than they were
6 years ago, um, thanks in part
to legislature and the governor.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer. Yeah, the
first answer, um, um, thank you
for clarifying that.
The, the reason I asked that and
and this was a debate that came
up 4 years ago with respect to
freshwater.
There was a time when our oil
and gas industry was actually
using less fresh water.
Now, since then, Intel has
changed the way and that's
changed dramatically and bravo
to them for doing that just very
much like what oil and gas
industry has done under the
Produce Water Act.
We continue to to do that.
Um
creating a fund, Madam Chair,
that helps us.
Resolve issues with um.
Not in the format that it's
done.
Again, we're taxing one user.
To
Create other, create other
economic development and I'm,
I'm just, that's, that's where I
have my big rub on the of of
this equation.
Um
Madam Chair, it's gonna be a
long day.
Uh, represented Pettigrew on the
Senate side, some committee
chairs limit questions for 5
minutes. So I just, I'm not
limiting it to 5 minutes, but.
We do have to get to the floor
pretty soon and there's a long
list of folks.
Thank goodness, our chair.
Is more civil than that.
The Senate chairs.
With respect to that. And I
think this is huge with Adam
Chair on page 4.
Clearly, it states in here, item
3 clearly demonstrate how the
project will advance state
travel, da da da da da da da.
I'm curious, Madam Chair, uh,
presenters.
Um,
Is there any concept in
rulemaking?
That's gonna give
Carbon credits.
for this because we're looking
at, I mean, part of the
requirements in these projects
is that
I'm curious, is there a backdoor
plan, not necessarily from the
presenters.
Definitely not from that
standpoint, is there a concept
here that we're gonna create
another way.
Just like the clean fuels, Madam
Chair Representative, no, not
that I'm aware of.
I love Madam Char to get that in
writing from the department.
Um
And on page 6 item I.
Can you talk
About the items under item I and
how you envision or what you
think's gonna be envisioned with
respect to guard rs with respect
to the
No strategic water supply
program contract shall be
provided for Suva. What guard
rails besides what's in items
12, and 3, you.
You see rulemaking make have
been.
With this bill and this
development of this program and
I'm not nothing else is coming
to mind to me outside that are
referenced in uh subparagraph
one under subsection I, um, that
has to do with rulemaking
associated with the
strategic water supply program,
other than the fee that we
already talked about earlier and
the rulemaking that the oil
conservation division would do,
um, to, uh, stand up that feat.
Madam Chair, I do get concerned
when we make legislation so that
concerns me with respect.
Madam Chair and presenters.
I've been in conversation with
Thaksin Rev over language inside
of this. My specific question
was
Do we allow
The do our current statues
allow.
TRD to disclose confidential or
Let me say what I said again.
Are there any instances where
TRD.
Reports noncompliance of
personal income tax or corporate
income tax to other state
agencies for regulation.
Penalty not a tax
expert, to my knowledge. Section
7 of this bill that starts on
page 12.
Is a Monday.
Um
7-1-8.
8
Of the Mexico statutes.
The title of that section is
Information that may be
revealed.
taxation and revenue Department
to other state and legislative
agencies.
My understanding and my
experience is that the um
provisions that appear in that
section.
Lay out the existing authority
of the taxation and revenue
department or what tax
information.
And under what basis? And that
is in this bill.
That amendment to that section
appears in this bill, so as to
give taxation revenue Department
the opportunity to share
information with Mner Oil
Conservation Division related to
the produced water fee.
And so it's adding it to the
list and you can see the
letters, um, go through.
Onto page 17 all the way up to
letter U of the alphabet, and
we're modifying letter S, which
already exists.
In-law as limited uh information
that taxation and revenue
Department versus department.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's my concern, you know. We
have section 7-1-8.8.
Of of the of the law and then
We also reference the section
70-13-6.
Uh, which
Um
Here's my concern.
Taxpayers that are delinquent or
noncompliant in payment of
produced water fee.
And other language inside this
bill can talk.
And it makes it very clear that
that information.
It's gonna be used, that
concerns me that we are
providing
Personal
Or corporate department that can
then turn and use that as
information to to assess
penalties too.
That are not defined inside this
bill, but will be left up to M
nerd.
rulemaking.
And I
Assessing
This whole
Madam Chair represented
Pentigrew.
I believe I understand your
question, and I apologize, I
don't have a clear answer for
you at the moment. Uh, I'm gonna
see if, if you have any further
questions, um, I may have an
answer from our OCD expert on,
on your last question in a
moment.
Sorry, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Um,
That just seems to be a concern
and I referenced this, the, the.
When I sent this this request
over for information. I did
reference the part where it said
department can assess penalties.
So, and that's where I'm gather.
What should be considered
private information, sending it
to another department.
They can use that information.
Then assess penalties.
And I'm not sure statutorily
we're allowed to do that.
Mountain
Sorry, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I, my
understanding is, so we're in a
section of the existing law that
lays out authorities of the oil
conservation division, one of
their long agency is to enforce
the law in the oil and gas
industry, and so, yes, they can
enforce, and yes, they have
penalty authority as prescribed
by statute, and um I, to my
knowledge, the
Information shared from taxation
to revenue to oil conservation
division about the fee
collection on produced water.
Um, would not necessarily be
giving the regulatory agency,
OCD new information or more
information that would um beyond
what they would typically have
for their general
Um, day to day oversight and
thank you Madam Chair and
presenters, I, I hear what
you're saying.
But when I look at either a
personal or a corporate LLC or
something like that, that
defines the business and what it
is and what they're paying, that
information can be disclosed to
MR Mner can pull that back and
use that if, if for whatever
reason, at whatever point in
time they're
Enner considers them to be
delinquent in something. And so
it it that it's very concerning
to me. And, and with respect to
that, we are creating a new
statute that already exists
acquired.
To report monthly produced water
volumes.
The OCD
So
Again
We are duplicate being
duplicative.
It's probably the right word to
use with respect to what is
being asked inside of this.
We follow why we need to
continue to do those things.
Madam Chair, I could go on for 3
hours. Um, I've asked some
questions you're going to, my,
my concern.
My concerns, uh, several of my
concerns are addressed.
I, I have, and I will continue
to do this. I will close with
this. I appreciate the
Comments from Thursday's public
comment from our past uh
interstate stream commissioner
and the rocket scientist from
Sandia Lab.
It taught very specifically
about
The negative pieces inside this
legislation.
And to me, Madam Chair, that
means that we didn't truly go
back.
In putting this legislation
together.
And discuss with all the
stakeholder holders, these
stakeholders, the experts.
We're not consulted. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for your time, for
your patience with me. Thank you
for your patience with me.
Madam, I moved to table.
Uh, representative Samoa, there
are still questions, um, from
the committee, so I will,
Matthews, you're up.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will
sit down. Thank you, thank you
for um.
None of the other stuff is
really gonna matter, so I have
some questions so.
The budget
That it has been presented is 75
million, another.
28.7.
So if I round that.
Madam Chair. Uh, Madam Chair,
I'm curious that.
Um, a change is made in the
fairly a substantial change is
made in.
Bill in that we're not going to
be doing the, but there's no
change.
Projected budget.
So, uh, $75 million and the
changes that we brought forward
this morning. Now limit that $75
million appropriation to use on
brackish, deep brackish water
projects and, uh, so I hear your
question of if we've limited the
scope of what the funds could be
used for, um, uh, should we
still be asking for the same
amount of money is maybe am I
understanding your question
rights representative again, is
your question, um
why have we left the dollar
amount the same while reducing
the scope of what it can be used
for, um, and I'm sure, yeah,
yes. OK, thank you. Um, so,
here's, here's the reason. I
mean, is members of this body
know when the governor first
announced the strategic water
supply, we were talking about a
program with a with a budget in
the range of $250 to $500
million. Um, we believe there
are significant demand out there
for
s t rate g ic water supply
funding to advance these
treatment projects, and we
believe that $75 million is an
amount that is needed and for
which there will be significant
demand, even with the now
limited scope to only brackish
water, um, as one example we
heard the other day in committee
from the mayor of Cuba about a
brackish water desalination
treatment project that they're
working on there, um, that
project is upwards of $37
million.
For one project. Um, we have the
potential and we've been talking
to folks across the state in a
number of different communities.
Excuse me, who are interested in
advancing brackish water.
And so between the grant program
that's created in this bill and
the ability for contracts to, to
um enter into contracts with
Brackish water treatment
companies, um, we think $75
million is honestly still a
modest amount for both the need
and the opportunity to move
brackish water treatment forward
in the state.
Uh, thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Um
Are you, are you
Let me think how I wanna ask,
ask this question, um, let me go
back to, let me ask you about
the aquifers first, OK?
So early recently in the past
year, we appropriated some money
to map what they hope.
So I'm wondering.
I
That appropriation, uh, in
addition to the money mapping.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, yes. Madam Chair, uh,
how long?
Is there a difference in the
scope.
Sorry, Madam Chair, is there a
difference in the scope of what
we're going to be doing under.
This bill, if it passes versus
what we were going to be doing.
Under the prior approach
this is.
This is a big improvement. I can
tell you that. But we also have,
I, I'd like to recognize Stacy
Timmons, who heads the New
Mexico, uh, tech Bureau of
Minerals and geology and Water
Resources.
So the expert, I gave.
Uh, Capital Outlay and grow
money to her to map the idea
what we had, you know, the
middle Rio.
Uh,
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Ready? Um, and, and
representative, so I believe
you're referring to previous
appropriation IM. Yes, so the
aquifer mapping program has now
been funded to the total of 900.
Or staffing and software and
what that covers, um, Madam
Chair, the, the appropriation
that's discussed in this bill,
and that is also discussed in
House Bill 2, is more focused on
the new data collection. So,
non-recurring funding that is
needed to fill in the gaps where
we've already identified places
that we don't have enough
information about our deep
brackish water, about our
shallow brackish water, about
our
Shallow freshwater resources. So
drilling wells, um.
techniques and mapping to really
fill in with modern.
Um, mapping techniques that we
can better understand what these
resources look like.
Madam Chair, if I'm
understanding, um.
I see your, your testimony then
we're actually going to invest,
correct? Yeah, Madam Chair, yes,
that would be funding for and,
and I, I also just kind of want
to add that the um drilling of
wells to characterize what
Madam, how long, um,
Do you anticipate that it is
going to do the mapping and the
analysis provided for in this
bill.
Uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, the estimate that we have is
actually a 12 to 15 year project
is a start, uh, the effort
started in regions need to work
towards.
Uh, fully
Is this
Understand and improve and.
Hopefully, um.
Make it possible for
Madam Chair, is the best use of
the fund they have in New Mexico
for long-term water supply. I
believe that there's we need to
look at options for desal
projects now so that we've been
talking about this kind of work.
I think it's time that we start
looking in that direction, and I
think it is, um,
A large amount of money, but
it's, uh, um, Madam Chair.
Um, again, thank you for your
answer is.
You just described.
Um
It wouldn't be enough money in
this.
To do
Would it be, Madam Chair, would
it be better to.
Other kinds of projects you're
talking about, then doing the.
Um
Activities that are described.
Um, Madam Chair, may I?
OK, thank you and thank you,
Representative Matthews. Um,
just gonna tag back in for my,
my colleague there, um, what,
uh, is in this bill and the
combination of those three
appropriations is our proposal
as the right size and right
apportionment of funding to
advance um these particular
types of water programs and
priorities. It mirrors, it's a,
it's an appropriation breakdown
that complements or mirrors.
The relevant provisions in the
governor's 50-year water action
plan issued a year ago. So this
demonstrates that we need to
fund and invest in multiple
water programs and projects and
priorities at the same time, at
the rate at at the quickest rate
we think we can move, and the
appropriation in this bill for
the aquifer monitoring and
mapping program is directly
informed by what the Bureau of
Geology and developed as the
first big tranche.
of increased funding to allow
them to supersize their program
for the next couple of years. So
that is what's reflected here.
We think this is the best
combination of funding, you
know, gearing up at $28 million.
Um, thank you, thank you,
presenters for those answers and
Madam Chair, I, part of the
reason I'm.
Kind of curious about this
question is because before um
produced water and they're
pulled out of the spill.
We were going to spend this
roughly half of it was going to
go to, I think I'm in
understanding the bill more or
less correctly.
You tell me if I'm not.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would like to, to clarify that.
There was nothing in the bill
prior to today's changes that
delineated um that half of the
funding from the $75 million
would go to produce water
projects and half would go to
brackish. On the contrary, we
were looking for the
appropriation right away to see
to seed the fund of the
strategic water supply fund and
even before today, the bill we
brought before you last week was
Um, going to delay opportunities
for produce water projects to be
funded through the strategic
water supply until rules were in
effect. That's still true today.
So, um, essentially, there's not
that big of a difference in
terms of the near term demand
and opportunities for projects
to get funding from the
strategic water supply by virtue
of removing produced water
projects from the $75 million
appropriation. What it does
it ensures that we're not going
to spend any of those general
fund dollars on produced water
projects. So that's clear, um,
and the demand, as I said to you
earlier, is, um, we believe the
demand for brackish water grants
and contracts is going to be
pretty significant once we stay
on this program up and all of
the work that was done during
the NRA in 2024, um, reinforces
that for us. So we think that
there is a need for this money
and again, if anything, it
a conservative amount of funding
to set aside to invest in deep
brackish water.
It's the Sakia marching.
Uh,
Madam Chair and.
Rebecca, I, when I'm, when I'm
trying to understand is there's
lots of water needs in the
state. There's lots of different
ways that we can.
We can approach water issues.
were the were the priorities in
this bill.
The rackish water.
And the the conversion of
brackish water and produce water
to to.
Usable water, even drink um,
was, was that, did that come
from?
Water
The people, where did the
decision come from that the
strategic water.
Things that could be done
that more conservation. Is this
the best use I thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Actually, the
plan is much bigger.
It's, it's 270 million that
we're, that the governor is
asking for, to take you down all
of the things that they have
tried to do. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and this is an issue of
when we're looking at one bill
in um and on its own, right? Is
that we sometimes can lose track
of the bigger picture. I know I
did in, in your prior
questioning. So, um, in the
executive recommendation for the
budget for this year, um, the
governor put forward $270
million.
Of non-recurring funding
requests to implement various
pieces of the 50 year water
action plan. The 3
appropriations in HB 137 are a
slice of that bigger pot, and we
have um our uh three of our
natural resource agencies, the
Office of State Engineer,
Environment Department and ARD
all have their house finance
budget hearings today. Um,
they'll be sharing a fact sheet
with house finance members. I
will make sure every member of
this committee who
interested, gets a copy of that
as well. That essentially lays
out what that $270 million new
investment in 50 year water
plan, how it breaks out. So, is,
is the appropriations and
approach in the strategic water
supply bill, the full of what we
are planning to do and needing
to do in the state, absolutely
not, but it is one big important
piece of the puzzle, both in
terms of the policy and the
appropriations. That's our view.
And it is part of that bigger
overall request for the 50-year
plan. Thank you.
Uh manner share that room for
that answer. So there's another.
Generally, Madam Chair, um,
representative will be talking
about House Bill 2. You're what
these are um non-recurring
requests that have been
submitted by our agencies and
our under review um by uh
legislative finance committees.
Uh, Madam Chair, would it be
fair?
Didn't pass, we would still be
investing amount of money into
water projects and.
Preparing us as.
Madam Chair and Representative.
We certainly hope so. Um,
there's quite a big difference
between the LFC recommendation
and the governor's
recommendation, um, around all
of those various water funding
priorities, but our hope would
be that no matter what happens
with the strategic water supply
bill that this, this state
continues to make big strides
and big investments in water. We
certainly believe that the
strategic water supply is a
really key piece of that puzzle
for the state. Thank you.
And Madam Chair, that brings me
to my final question.
Um
We're looking at projects.
Mountain Chair representative,
um, some of them will, yes, on
the brackish water grant Program
Authority that is created in the
bill in Section 4, some of those
projects could potentially be
smaller and and um shorter
timelines, but you could
certainly have um
This is the governor's term is
gonna be up.
Um, what?
What
Is it, is it, it certainly would
be possible, which is.
Wood was made in the relatively
short, how much real progress
Doing
This how much progress are we
really if a new governor came in
and said,
Um
You know, it's, none of us can.
I think it does need to be and
and.
And I think
I can't imagine any because
everybody has an opinion on it,
so, um,
I, I just see a, you just have
passed a bill for the water
trust board for 279. Can we get
more in there in in preparation
so they can do all of those
projects. I mean, all of these
questions are revolving, but
I'll turn that it over to
Rebecca very briefly, Madam
Chair, Representative Matthews,
um, I certainly appreciate the
question, given that I work
directly for the governor and um
our goal is to make as much
progress as quickly as we can,
but as safely as we can. On the
brackish water side, um.
I the, the conversations we're
having, the data that we have,
the, um, people who participated
in the feasibility study and
strategic water supply outreach
work over the past year have
showed us that there is, there
are brackish water desalination
projects, potential projects
across the state that are um
held back by lack of funding
first and foremost. This
gets that issue out of the way
for them, and in a really
significant way. Again, it's not
enough money for everybody's
brackish project everywhere in
the state, but it can make a big
difference. We think that we
will have um 2 years from now
if, if the legislature enacts
this bill, um, we will have real
meaningful forward progress on
this area of new water supplies
and other key programs um under
the 50-year water plan in the
next 2 years.
Uh, thank you for that answer
and uh.
Uh, Madam Chair, are we
modeling?
Any of the
Things were
Doing or we're we're funding and
so forth, successful projects
are, are we looking worldwide,
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we are, and I am always in awe
of the work that our uh experts
at our New Mexico universities
are doing and how connected they
are with other experts and
colleagues both around the
country and around the world and
um we've had conversations just
within the last few weeks with a
BRCA desalination treatment
company from Israel.
to learn more about their
technology and their treatments
and opportunities to learn and
grow from that here in New
Mexico. Thank you. There are
more questions. Representative
Lara Cadena.
Or movement you all have.
to the public. Um, so I'll say
that again. Here, Madam Chair, I
express, and then I had a follow
up conversation support.
You've made a um, today, I just
want to share brackish water, if
I forget how you all have it
here. Is that some and whether
or not you all may be amenable
to.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, speaking for myself and my
colleague, the state engineer
designate, uh, I believe that
was news to us, what we heard
from the Pueblo of Acama today,
um, we would be happy as the
bill moves forward to have OK,
Madam Chair, should the bill
move this Madam Chair, sponsor,
I see you nodding, they may
present, that would be a.
Um
I think Madam Chair, with that,
I would just wrap with saying
what's happened here today, I
believe is, um, I think in a
committee like this, it'd be
deliberative. We should answer
questions, we should um push and
debate, um, of course, we'll
keep moving through this
committee process because of the
momentum you've made, because of
your willing uh moving forward.
I'd say, Madam Chair, in
closing, that doesn't mean
across the state, but appreciate
that in the sub, you've made it
clear that then the projects
will not move until we have
rules that we're all waiting
for. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much
for this, uh, very detailed uh
conversation.
Um, I just want to clarify some
things we've already gone over
some simple S yes 75 million for
brackish water. We are not um uh
funding, uh, uh.
other projects with that 75
million with the produced water,
um, you had and and this also
includes um aquafor for mapping,
uh, correct.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you. You
had said earlier that, um.
For every barrel of oil you can
produce 4 or 5 barrels of
produced water. I understand
that this is kind of a broad
question, but how many barrels
of fresh water are used in
typical oil and gas production.
Um, madam and Vice Chair, I
don't have that at my
fingertips, um, but, uh,
Hold on.
In 2023, the oil and gas
industry in the state of New
Mexico used 856 million gallons
of fresh water in their
production activities. Thank you
very much. So in this proposed
bill you have approximately 150
million or 500 million over 10
years that could be produced
with the 3 cents fee per
barrels, but that is reduced if
the oil and gas industry.
is using that produce uh water
rather than the 856 million
gallons of fresh water, correct?
Yes.
Thank you. You said you're not
going to enact the fee or until
everything goes into effect and
it's going into effect from the
uh water quality control
commission, um, what are the
general members that are made up
of the water control.
Quality commission, please.
Um, madam, the membership of the
Water Quality Control Commission
is set forth in statute in the
Water Quality Act, there are,
um, secretaries or their
designees of a number of our
state agencies, um, including
the obvious ones, environment
department, state engineer's
office, and, and Amner, but we
also have Department of Health
representative. There's a, um,
New Mexico Tech Bureau of
Geology representative and
Interstate stream Commission
representative and um there's
several
Large numbers as well who sit on
that committee who are
appointed.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. Are
there any other, so they are
from governmental agencies,
appointment of the governors,
are there any other members of
that commission?
That are outside of government
agencies.
Um, Representative.
Fair enough. I'll, I'll, I'll
wait for that. So thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
Representative. Just let me know
when you get that, but for
timing, I'm gonna continue. So
um last we spoke on Thursday, I
asked how is this produced water
going to be stored, um, we have,
we have, uh, what I have found
out is there are um a small
amount of fixed pipes, there are
flat lined pipes that are used a
lot.
We have open pits and we have a
trucks and barrels we have
permitted disposal wells that
are federally and state
regulated, and the open pits are
regulated and lined as well. Are
all these.
Um, all these.
Devices of moving and storing
produced water.
Currently being used now.
And Madam Chair,
Generally speaking, yes, I think
the list that you just um
provided are is the range of um
options that the oil and gas
industry is using in the state,
both to store produced water for
any period of time, and then the
disposal is sort of a final
destination in those permitted
deep disposal wells. So that's,
that's the range of things
generally that are being doing
that that are being used.
There's no um legal permitted
uses of produced water today.
in the state outside of oil and
gas industry. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative, so.
The
The open pits that we have as
well, they are lined and what is
evaporating from the open pits.
Madam Chair representative, uh.
Uh, not as necessarily your
technical expert on the oil and
gas industry, um, generally
speaking, what's evaporating is
the water.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. So,
um, other elements that create
the water to be produced.
Um, they are remaining inside
the pit, is that what you're
saying? They are not part of the
evaporation.
Yes, representative, that's
correct. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I have an answer to your
earlier question about the
makeup, OK.
Um, so the water quality control
commission includes, um,
It'll be easier if I just
environment department secretary
designee, Department of Health.
Department of Game and Fish,
State Engineer.
Chair of the Oil Conservation
Commission, or a member of the
chair's staff.
The director of the state parks
division of Energy Minerals. The
director of the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture or
designee, the chair of the soil
and Water Conservation
Commission, or a soil and water
conservation district
supervisor.
Uh, the director of the Bureau
of Geology and Mental Resources.
Or county government
representative that is not um
selected and appointed by the
governor. That's just, um,
among, among them, I think
usually the municipal League or
association of counties, um,
works to fill that seat. And
lastly, 4 representatives of the
public to be appointed by the
governor.
The terms of 4 years. Um, and
At least one member appointed by
the governor shall be a member
of a New Mexico Indian tribe.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for um that
wonderfully detailed answer. Um,
so, and uh the this is the
group, the commission that will
be forming rules before this is
implemented and I'm assuming
that part of their rulemaking
involves public comment as well.
Uh, Madam Chair, Vice Chair,
yes, and on the rulemaking that
is pending final action, the
public participation during 2024
in both written comments, verbal
comments, and participation in
the hearings was um quite
robust.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will
in my questions there as we all
need to get to the floor. Thank
you.
Represent a warrant. Do you have
a question, madam.
And do you withdraw your tabling
motion so that you can ask that
question.
The rules are pretty clear that
you cannot ask a question and
then move to table. You've
already made a motion to table.
Madam Chair, I will withdraw the
motion then.
Thank, thank you for reminding
me what the rules.
Madam, Madam Chair, and, and
presenters.
Let's, let's follow the water.
So, so say this.
This project goes forward and,
and we drill a well.
So then
How does this water's gonna be
higher priced water.
Then first
Madam Chair, our my.
Thoughts on that correct, or I'm
sure.
Mountain Chair representative,
um, the feasibility study that
we uh that the environment
department developed last year
and with public input, um, kind
of bears that out, that at least
in um for most brackish water
desalination projects and
produce water treatment
projects, at least in the near
term close in time to upfront
capital investments, not to
mention the technology that has
to be utilized and maintained to
treat the water, you are likely
talking about a finished.
Treated water product that is
more expensive than the water at
your local water utility, and
that is precisely where the
strategic water supply program
comes into play. The idea is
that we're putting money in this
fund to make these sources of
treated water, more cost
competitive to those customers,
so that if we have a um ABC
manufacturing plant that's
coming into your community that
needs to use water. They're
obvious.
choice would be to connect to
the local water utility. Maybe
they'd be paying 12 cents a
gallon, but there's this water
treatment company in town that's
treating water at 20 cents a
gallon.
Can we get ABC Manufacturing to
buy the 20 cents a gallon
treated brackish water that's
not competing with fresh water
supplies by using the strategic
water supply to help offset that
cost differential and make sure
these alternative sources of
water are getting to customers
in a cost competitive way, and
shifting the um status quo right
now as to how dependent we are
on our precious freshwater
resources. I hope that helps,
Madam Chan.
representative.
Madam Chair, and it, it does
help.
And, and I guess we won't know
those figures till we
Complete a project.
And, and, and that's
That's kind of scary that
That we won't know that, but
But, but we won't. I, I, or do
you agree with that?
Madam Chair Representative,
generally, yes, I think these,
these are going to be very
site-specific case-specific
projects under the strategic
water supply. So each one, that
is evaluated by an agency and
ultimately moves forward, will
have its own, um, cost analysis
and um considerations and and
specific details in those
contracts
I have great concerns with that,
that people, that, that this
won't conserve water, fresh
water.
At the end of the day. And, and
we'll go forward from there. So,
so then this water gets to the
end user.
The, uh, and, and this water is
restricted on use.
And apparently it's restricted
on use because, because
It's not suitable.
To drink or or to use for
agricultural purposes.
And, and I believe there are
some other issues with it or
other limitations on it.
So
Now the end user uses and he's
done with it.
And it becomes wastewater, thin
with the water. Where does it
go? Where is it stored? How do
we keep it safe from, from not
contaminating.
Our fresh groundwater.
Where, where's this water gonna
go now? Where are the
contaminants gonna go?
That
Might be in a pond that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, two-part
answer, depending on whether or
not the project involves
brackish water or produced water
cause the answer to your
question of what happens at the
end, uh, is, is different. For
brackish water, um, generally
speaking, the, uh, end user
would have a permit issued under
our state Water Quality Act and
our um discharge.
Uh, protections, and that permit
would delineate what they can or
cannot do and how they have to
manage the any essentially water
they can no longer use at that,
at that, um, facility, whether
it's a manufacturing facility or
something else. So there would
be a permit for the brackish
water, treated brackish water
projects and customers for how
they're what the actual final
destination is, and how clean it
is and what standards it would
have to meet to be um to put
different, to be put different
places.
In produced water, um, as, uh,
the rules that are permission
right now would dictate that any
treated produced water that is
essentially left over or wasted
at the end of some process of
cooling water, and eventually
they have some volume they
cannot continue to use. That
would be disposed of back
disposal.
The short answer, as short as I
can make it to a complex
question. Thank you.
Madam, and Ms. Ruth. So then,
What you're saying is, is those
rules are in place already for
the oil fields.
But, but we're not going to be
dealing with.
Reused water here, right?
Madam
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, the bill before you as uh as
revised includes the authority
for strategic water supply
projects that involve treated
produced water at such time that
produce water reuse rules are in
effect.
Under the water Quality Act as
adopted by the Water Quality
Control Commission. So,
The authority in this bill
creates the the possibility of
produced water projects under
the strategic water supply
program, but there's that
contingency in there that none
of that will happen in the
strategic water supply.
And, and Madam Chan and Ms.
Ruth, can you point out in the
bill where, where that is
because I was under the
understanding that that was
thrown out, and now we were just
dealing with
Brackish water not produced
water.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
the only change to uh
applicability of produced water
in the changes before you today
is with respect to the general
fund $75 million appropriation
that is included in section 12.
That now that appropriation is
limited to BRCA only. Um, the
provisions in Section 4, so if
you look at section 4 page.
3, it starts on there's a lot of
discussion and section 4 around
how the strategic water supply
program is created to include
both treated deep brackish water
projects and treated produced
water projects.
And
In that same section.
On page 6.
Some
There's language there in lines
13 through 16.
Let's say that there cannot be a
strategic water supply contract.
For produced water.
Except for uses that are in
accordance with rules adopted by
the Water Quality Control
Commission. So that's one
contingency, um, and also I'll
take you one more point, Madam
Chair, in section.
3
Uh, page 3 that clarifies that
the only produced water we're
talking about in the strategic
water supply program is produced
water that's under the
jurisdiction, and that's a
delineation um clarified by the
legislature.
So Madam Chair and Ms. Ruth, the
only thing that was changed in
the building.
Would it be safe to say just
the, the 5 cents to 3 cents.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Zamora, the 3 changes from last
Thursday to this morning
includes 5 cents to 3 cents.
Delaying collection of that
produced water fee until rules
are in effect as opposed to
having the fee kick in January
1st of 2026, and then amending
the $75 million appropriation
language to be limited to deep
brackish water projects. Those
are the three changes, Madam
Chair. Thank you for those
answers and thank you, Madam
Chair. That concludes my
questions.
Thank you. I have some questions
and comments myself, um.
Can you, uh, very briefly speak
to the constitutionality of that
3.
be, um, I, I don't know if it
was asked and answered, please.
If it was, just let me know
briefly.
The constitutionality of taking
that fee that was a comment that
was made by several.
Um
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, in working
directly with the sponsor and
directly with the bill drafter,
that issue has never come up,
including in our conversations
with the taxation and revenue
Department about their role in
collecting the fee. So I'm
unfamiliar with the basis of
those arguments.
OK, thanks for that. Um.
In a former life I was uh
observation coalition. We met.
Every month to talk about how to
invest in sort of the new water
of conservation, um, we talked a
lot about the cost per acre foot
of various options and including
desal, um,
Lots of different options and
always.
Always water conservation at
every level,
residential, commercial was
always the cheapest form of
water. So I want to
I want to ask you about the
amount of money that we've
invested in the state on water
conservation at every level,
residential, commercial,
agricultural, and if you don't
know, briefly speak to that.
Um, Madam Chair,
I, I, I really appreciate the
question. I do not have those
high level numbers of what our
past investments have been. I
will tell you from my so
personal work, um, and
experience working on water
issues in the state, um,
particularly over the last 6
years, it's not been anywhere
near enough, um, but we'll get
back to you on the numbers.
Thank you. Um, I mean, do we
think we've invested more than
75 million.
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I cannot
answer that question today.
OK, um, yeah, I mean, this, this
is really my many people on this
committee have heard me say over
and over again in various
interims, you know, that we need
to really focus on.
On conservation, I think that is
where our, our new water is, and
I, I just, I have a lot of
Agita about this bill.
While I am deeply appreciative
of the changes that you've made,
uh, to, you know, to move, uh,
to move this along, I have lots
of questions around brackish,
like, and this is a question I I
would love for you to answer,
like, do we, do we think those
brackish projects are ready to
go, like.
You know, in the next 3 months.
Madam Chair members, yes, we
believe there are some brackish
projects at various stages that
are ready to take advantage of
the strategic water supply in a
period of months.
OK. Um, thank you for that. I, I
appreciate it. Um.
The money for the aquifer
mapping, not enough.
From what we understand, right?
Like if, if we were to take the
75 million and add it to 28.5
million, we probably get close
to what I've heard we need and
get the data that we need.
Is that right?
Um, Madam Chair, uh, I would say
for right now it, it, it's also
staffing up.
these things. I mean, you know,
we have limited staff, there's
gonna be training. I think this
is what the uh New Mexico tech
thought they could do.
In this point in time. It's,
it's kind of like with
everything else that we do, but
we're talking scaling up, it's
do we have the staff ready to go
and budget appropriate. I think
this is OK, you know, you've
heard a lot of my concerns, you
know, I think.
This is so far from a perfect
wholeheartedly can champion it.
You know, I've got some
questions, I'm grateful for the
changes again that that you've
made, I think to ease the
biggest concern I have around
the produced water, I don't like
to put the cart before the
horse. I don't like to even, you
know,
Reference it
At all, until we're done with
the rulemaking. Um, that's
really the biggest concern that.
But I am glad that we have taken
up the pot that could be used
for grants or contracts, so that
really concludes my questions.
And so what's the will of the
community. There's a tabling
motion second, um, on this.
OK. Representative Herrera.
Representative Lara Kadena.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio.
Yes to table.
Ranking members of Mora.
Yes
Madamba Cherokeats.
Go to table.
Madam Chair Ortiz.
No a table, and I'm going to
explain.
I'm gonna explain, no, I don't
like, I don't like it. I don't
like to spill. I like some some
components of the spill. And I'd
like for it to get better, um,
so move a little bit further.
The, um, the motion would be a
do not pass on house.
Do not pass, no on house built
on House Bill 137, and he do
pass.
On house appropriation and how
to.
Agriculture.
It would not be. It is, it is,
it is as I've stated.
Read it out for you. It is a do
not pass on House Bill 137.
And they do pass on how
agriculture, asea.
And water resources Committee.
Can I get a second.
Representative Herrera.
a dope house.
I know, yes, I'm sorry, we're
voting. OK. Oh yes, excuse me. I
don't.
I'm sorry.
Madam Jui confirms that
everybody who all the members,
we are for the committee
substitute.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Representative Matthews.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Moya.
No.
Representative Pettigrew.
No, and I would like to.
My
Representative Rubio.
Uh, no.
Ranking members of Mora.
Madam Vice Cha Keats.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam Cha Ortiz.
Yes.
You have a do not pass on
Hospital 137 and uh we have a
folk, a couple of folks who want
to explain their vote, uh,
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair, and
again, thank you to the.
Um, a lot of the, the criticism
that uh I was hearing.
From constituents and others on
this bill originally was that
this was a.
Bill that would, uh, use state
tax money to.
To, to, um, um.
Relieve oil and gas from their
obligation.
For having.
Hating our water.
Um, and I think as we've
proceeded.
I know that there are those who
think what's really happening is
there's a tax being imposed on
them that will be paying for it
that's going to be.
Don
And not include the produced
water, so.
Um, I think that was a good
change, um.
And though I am concerned about
the um I also in.
Somehow conservation.
In various ways, um, isn't more
focused or isn't.
More part of this.
Um
I can't, I look at bills as to I
try to decide whether they'll do
more good as almost all bills do
some harm, and I think there's
been improvements. I'm still not
100% convinced.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I do not believe that we should,
that so many people understand.
As so many problems to it.
I do not believe, Madam Chair,
and the Nancy Pelosi philosophy
that we have to pass it to fix
it.
And that, Madam Chair, concerns
me.
Thank you. And Representative
Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for bringing this
forward and for all your work in
detail on it. I do very much
appreciate uh the
A philosophy and the initiative,
um, we have to do some, we have
to do many different innovative
approaches to deal with our
water shortage in the future.
Um, I do think I agree with my
chair that this is not a perfect
bill yet.
I am going to continue to listen
to the data, so I support you
here in this committee. I don't
want you to count on it for the
floor and cause things can
change, but I wanna thank you
for your initiative. Thank you.
Hey, thanks, everybody. This
meeting is adjourned.
Thank you committee.
