Representative Hochman the hill
here.
Representative Matthews.
I'm here.
Representative small.
It's just multiple.
Representative Zamora here.
Thanks chair.
Year
twenty year.
And I just moved over small
areas.
Mr by small.
Been reached okay thank thank
you madam secretary good morning
everybody and and that we do a
little chit chat before folks
log on and and again it's still
too early to talk about Super
Bowl yet still so we believe
that maybe next next week.
With that being said we have
right the agenda they know that
we do have a four session that's
planned for eleven so without
further ado let's get to work
and this is a a bill that we've
had
had to reschedule because of a
of a committee substitute so
with that being said it appeared
we bring over Representative Dow
representative Armstrong and I
do believe a best cosponsored
responses are with you as well
Representative
The rest of Meryl and more big
also if anyone's region manager
I'd be brought into the palace
discussion please do so.
And Mr chairman it should be
Belinda the livestock bureau at
Jeff we hopefully he's here I
see Jack Chatfield on.
Okay so couple of producers on
stand by in case you have any
questions to be answered both
that folder and looking at a
processing plant very good I'm
looking for secretary would be I
don't see him in the attendees
list.
They are.
See you snuck in.
All right welcome secretary
welcome representatives welcome
everybody to the first bill of
this Tuesday session this is
house bill thirty three
livestock were beaten sections
of last week you recall last
Thursday we had everything have
been meet this today week we're
gonna have a continuation of at
least beginning with me so that
being said Representative doubt
the floor is yours.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee I am very honored to
be presenting the house bill
thirty three livestock for meat
inspections at this bill has
been growing a lot of support
over the last couple years and I
think with COVID it definitely
highlighted the need for us to
expand our in state meat
processing and selling director
New Mexicans I do have a
substitute move I've never moved
a substitute Committee before my
third sixty day so Mister
Chairman how have procedurally
how do we do that because I do
have a substitute to move okay
Mr Chairman but I would like to
make the substitute motion as
the substitute bill for house
bill thirty three for discussion
please very well and is other
second second second by
Representative it up
Representative Dow can you
please be that two one nine
number from that the committee
substitute.
I do not have it Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman is it two one nine
two six eight point three.
Okay that is what I have yes
ma'am.
Okay so if we all have that two
one nine number please
Representative Representative
now talk to us but the
substitute.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this
legislation is working towards
enhancing New Mexico's value
added beef industry at at at
industry in general Peter.
Sorry any effort would be the
first of many toward developing
value added meat components for
New Mexico agriculture it keeps
New Mexico dollars in state of
what we have learned from
studies since two thousand
fourteen that ninety nine
percent of New Mexico cattle are
sent out of state for processing
and that leaves the state at our
New Mexicans without consuming
local B. and the state can we
import more than four billion
dollars in food products
annually according to the most
recent study so this provides
New Mexico agriculture commodity
it the second highest in cash
receipts last year the cattle
industry reported nine hundred
and ninety three million almost
a billion dollars in sales and
so this provides additional
opportunities in markets for New
Mexico producers by allowing
them the opportunity to sell
their product in state increased
profit margins for our producers
it allows producers to access
the New Mexico retail market and
a potential for interstate
commerce and it it also what we
learning comment is that we have
a high dependency on these four
major Packers and during the
COVID they were able to sell
again are are ranchers a lower
price or even at times for
interest rate even able to
process their waiting was very
very long and yet our consumers
are going to the grocery store
and I had constituents and the
pictures of eight dollars a
pound for ground beef sixteen
dollars a pound for roast and
our ranchers are in Mexico
Rangers were not experiencing
any of those profits so every
time we were getting money
comment funding to help people
have food security we were
paying as much as three four
hundred percent mark up on that
Roadrunner food bank I was part
of the the interim committee
food security initiatives that
are going on to include hunger
our food banks and food pantries
river we're reporting three
hundred percent markup on
protein so we will control over
the processing we have no
control over because.
Cost and so the ranchers were
the losers government that was
subsidizing food costs from the
losers and our dollars went less
far New Mexico consumers have
less access to affordable to
protein they can afford so is
strengthens our food our local
food systems creates economic
opportunities for communities
increases protections for the
consumer and the details of the
bill it's when we did exemption
on food it's basically when you
are selling at a farmers market
when you're selling through a
grocery store so the key points
of the bill is exempt the direct
sale of meat to the consumer
which currently has a G. R. T.
on it it establishes the in
state me with equitable to the
state needs to the federal the
inspections and that's important
because we're going to have time
to start up costs to get this re
going but once we establish and
demonstrate to the fed's that
we're meeting their standards
which could take up to two years
they will reimburse the ongoing
cost at a minimum of fifty
percent possibly higher and it
is the meat inspector some of
the concerns with the livestock
board where the piece the law
enforcement officer so it limits
the law enforcement capacity of
the in state inspectors to
supervisors only and with that
I'll turn it over to our expert
witness Belinda with the last
October.
Very well before we go to yeah
this year eight you have your
Sanchez was making a comment oh
sure sorry about that
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
Mr chairman and and thank you
members of the committee so so
the reason why I'm signed on and
it really excited about house
bill thirty three is I represent
the far south valley in
Bernalillo county which I think
sometimes we see Albuquerque as
a big urban area however in the
far south valley in and large
parts of Albuquerque there are
small ranchers and farmers I
think certainly in the
Albuquerque area we've really
emphasize the the growth of
agriculture in having fresh
fruits and vegetables and I
think where this fits in nicely
is that we would create and
stimulate the market for fresh
protein and fresh meats I have a
particular constituent that owns
a thirty five acre
small family ranch she in the in
the far south valley and she
grows
Picks and and he's grown a
pretty large market he's had
pretty good success being in the
co op and several restaurants in
and around Albuquerque New he is
in the state in general and part
of his biggest cost is
transportation he has to drive
upwards of
sixty eighty miles away in order
to have is his animals
slaughtered for meat
and okay and I think this this
bill would certainly go a long
way in cutting the costs for
local producers are local
ranchers seen being able to
provide fresh meat like I said
is one of the things that's
really missing is is fresh
protein we have this big
movement toward fresh fruits and
vegetables and I think this is a
natural accompaniment to to that
movie it's something I'm I'm
super excited to be sponsoring
and and thank you to
Representative Dow for for all
of the the work she's put into
to make this happen and and
bring this to fruition but with
that Mr Chairman committee thank
you know you'll to to the other
co sponsors and expert thank you
Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield good morning.
Committee conocer you're on
mute.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
You're going to be on the
Thank you.
Representative Dow for bringing
this bill you know I I am I will
whether folks are going to bring
the ranchers perspective what
one of the things that some
folks might on those I have
little restaurant the number one
question people ask me when they
come into the restaurant this
year be registry on your rights
to the is it the you know this
letter was did you raise it at
at all and the I know what it
store like you do because I
really I can get a
Make an appointment to have a be
butchered your right at my home
Hey haven't what you're a year
from now because all of your
packing your custom packing as
well up for year out to just to
get a would be.
Taking care of and.
When I get back it's is not for
sale not for sale and I cannot
legally use it in my restaurant
I cannot so that when a local
grocery store and the that's
what this bill is about it's
about are only
are only.
Produce that we produce here in
New Mexico but may help the in
we know where it came from and
we know last what is been gone
through so I think it's very
important to our industry and
it's very important to the
consumers in New Mexico because
that's what they would like to
see thank you Mr thank you Mr
representative Representative
Dow that if you can call on
expert witness whichever one you
want to speak first thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and
thank you to my co sponsors who
spoke to the need at at I think
it would be best if Belinda
garland from livestock Europa's
first very well this garden good
morning welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Representative
Dow thank you very much I am
willing to garland I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico livestock board and a
fourth generation livestock
producer in the state of New
Mexico so it is my pleasure and
honor to get testimony to you
this morning on developing a
state meat inspection program.
In the interest of time I asked
reserve two minutes to present
the overview of house bill
thirty three and the regulatory
approach The New Mexico
livestock board would take on
the proposed legislative
authority I will then you'll
back to the chair for questions
from the committee so Mr
Chairman with your approval I
would like to turn off my video
feed and so my voice because of
my limited broadband I'd like to
just turn off my video so I make
sure my voice Kerry's are quite
absolutely is going to okay
thank you thank you.
Okay so thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
House bill thirty three
clarifies the legal authority
for the New Mexico livestock or
to develop regulations for a
state led meat inspection
program there are two main
aspects to consider on this bill
one is retaining economic and
regulatory activity within the
state and the second increasing
government responsiveness and
capacity to local needs.
New Mexico producers and
consumers currently depend on
federal inspections oftentimes
curry outside the state of New
Mexico.
This is to say they've grown in
New Mexico takes a detour which
means it's exported out of the
state for sometimes the beef to
be grown and then processed and
then imported back into the
state to be on the shelves at
the local grocery stores.
This is because limited
resources currently create a
situation where the federal like
regulators cannot always be
responsive enough to meet the
needs of our local producers.
The COVID nineteen pandemic has
all only made this economic
inefficiency more parent across.
Causing increased burdens and
costs to our producers and
consumers due to disruptions in
the supply and regulatory
change.
The federal government has long
recognized this issue and
accordingly provides resources
for the states to participate
and the regulation of their own
meat and poultry production.
House bill thirty three takes
advantage of these great
opportunities to partner with
our federal colleagues in
establishing and operating a
meat and poultry inspection
program.
By allowing the New Mexico
livestock board to join the
federal inspection program both
economic and regulatory value
chain are kept within the state
and allowing those dollars jobs
and resiliency stay local as a
result.
As an added bonus if the New
Mexico livestock board is
successful in establishing and
made inspection program up to
fifty percent of the operating
costs eligible for reimbursement
from the federal government.
Furthermore New Mexico has a
proud wrenching history was
valuable culture centered around
food.
Local inspectors know their
community I can work with them
to keep our traditions and local
economies vibrant and strong
while maintaining compliance
with federal oversight.
Our Brandon livestock inspectors
already provide similar
livestock services.
Entering into a meat and poultry
inspection agreement with the
USDA FSIS regulators in is a
natural step for the New Mexico
livestock board to localize our
food production and consumption.
As a long term goal of New
Mexicos could potentially enter
into an export meat and cultured
for dot products and culture
with greater ease.
In closing the bill as written
purposely gives the New Mexico
livestock or broad regulatory
parameters but this is not to
say there are not limits federal
preemption requires that for
this program to be successful
The New Mexico livestock board
must more stringent federal laws
and regulations.
There are currently twenty seven
sister states which have
successfully partnered with the
federal government they have
their own state run inspection
programs.
We have accordingly developed
relationships with our federal
and sister state colleagues to
position this program with the
know how for success.
The New Mexico livestock board
is eager to take on this program
set forth by house bill thirty
three which is going to benefit
our local economy our producers
and our consumers.
I make myself available to
answer any questions and no for
the committee that I have
letters from producers
organizations counties and
business owners demonstrating
the need for this program which
I can to send anybody in as a
request.
So I do have a long list of
supporters on this page I won't
take the time to read but I
would like to read the
organizations that support this
because they represent many of
our producers out there.
Those being the New Mexico
cattle growers association to
make New Mexico beef council New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
New Mexico will burst
Association very producers of
New Mexico northern New Mexico
stockman's Association dairy
farmers of America Grant County
calibers Association rocky
mountain farmers union
coalition of Arizona New Mexico
counties for stable economic
growth.
New Mexico Chile Association New
Mexico federal lands Council and
protect Americans now.
So with that I yield back to the
German for for questions from
the committee.
Miss garland thank you so much
for your presentation appreciate
you being here this morning with
the we then we'll go to
secretary lady if you have
anything else to add before we
go to the audience.
Chair Mister chairman thank you
and thank you to the committee
you know this is a discussion
that started several years ago
and at basically it started in
the industry with the New Mexico
livestock board when the state
again backer superseded the
inspection process back in two
thousand seven two thousand
eight there is always hope and
desire to bring it back to the
state because everybody
appreciates and loves to work
and and likes working with the
local enforcement agencies
somebody that they can see and
work within call and.
On the basis.
But a few years ago those the
discussions really started
happening in a serious way I
want to recognize Representative
small he funded through one of
his probation a couple years ago
of feasibility study that we did
through New Mexico State
University about his ability
state really laid the groundwork
to to to justify and and stand
up why this program would be
effective for the state of New
Mexico and and cost effective as
well the that study indicated
that there were you know we've
got around thirty processors in
the state but it's more than
just processing it's it's the
value added additional is the
spot to make Turkey is the
custom cutters of the grocery
stores and some of the other
places that also benefit from
local and state inspection
programs.
Our governor from day one has
said
increasing the value added
opportunities in agriculture was
a priority and and we haven't
backed off of from that gate.
Our department has been working
closely with the state economic
development department and we
have and and through the
economic development leader
programs and J. to they have
actually funded a couple of of
processing plants that have come
into the state of New Mexico and
we're talking to several others
that are looking at expanding.
That's going to increase the
capacity this bill is not a bill
to fix the ills of of yesterday
tomorrow this is a bill to build
capacity for the state of New
Mexico and bring those resources
and to send a message that that
we are in fact serious about
growing value added
opportunities especially in the
beef industry Representative
Chatfield has a as a bill to
fund the development of of the
beef industry and and from the
the rest of the last in the
process all of this is all
coupled together will make for a
package for the state of New
Mexico to really move forward in
in the beach area and it's
something that that we need to
do as a state hi ranchers export
is as Representative Dow said.
Virtually ninety seven ninety
nine percent what we produce out
of state we don't have the
capacity in state right now to
to change that overnight but
we're growing we're building to
that this bill this bill is step
one of many steps so Mr chairman
thank you and and I'll be happy
to answer questions that come
up.
Thank you Secretary with that
agency that was okay to then go
to the the public.
All yes thank you Mr chairman
very well thank you very much so
then we're going to take the
attendees that are in favor in
favor or in support of house
bill thirty three so we will
begin with the Zac withers.
That you're with us good
morning.
Lou let's see it's it's telling
me that you cannot speak because
you're using an older version of
zoom.
That so I apologize but if you
want want to update your resume.
This Madam go to Walter Bradley.
Mr Bradley good morning.
Mr Chairman good morning the
pleasure to be here and I want
to thank you and I found it I
think.
Okay sorry about that Mister
Mister president.
What are you no problem.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and Representative Dow
thanks for all your hard work on
this particular bill I
Representative the dairy farmers
of America and frankly we have a
front probably more cals a dairy
cows in the state to redo people
in the what we need places to
process of obviously is a
Representative Dow pointed out
the a pandemic really showed
what that problem is and
so it prompted us to a work with
her to get this bill before you
we're very happy and we support
it and Mr Chairman not
relinquish the time thank you
Sir Mr Bradley thank you have a
good day this Madam now move to
Howard Hutchinson.
Mr Hutchinson good morning here
with us.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on power
tensions and arms act executive
director for the coalition of
errors on the Mexico counties.
And our board has passed a
resolution in support of having
in state meet inspection.
Our our Arizona.
Counties have indicated that
they have have a successful
operation of and say maybe
inspection for a number of years
now.
And have indicated that the
value added aspects of having
meat processing have been very
beneficial to the counties and
we fully support this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr president
sent Richie being here this is
going to care and how and Miss
Vigil and.
You're not with us good morning.
You're on mute care.
This.
Chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak on this
bill I am hearing Fallon and the
number of the New Mexico federal
land haha and American now this
bill has been a primary project
for both those organizations
if we can expand capacity this
is the job still on top of
everything else that will help
ranchers but it was jobs in
local communities
and it's just a win win all
around and we do want to thank
the governor for his support of
this measure and we look forward
are working all the way through
it thank you Mr chairman of the
committee for your time.
The government today.
We're looking to go to Mr rob
black Mr that good morning.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black
and I'm of the president didn't
CEO The New Mexico chamber of
commerce I want to thank the
bill's sponsors but especially
when I think Representative Dow
last summer during the height of
the COVID meat processing
collapse Representative Dow was
busy trying to connect local
ranchers with New Mexicans who
could purchase their animals
because they couldn't sell into
processing plants was a
beneficiary of some of those
efforts I was able to connect
with a local rancher purchase
have a steer and that is some of
the best we've ever had so I
think it speaks to the quality
of what we're raising here in
New Mexico and frankly our
commitment to this issue.
As secretary would be mentioned
New Mexico has lost much of our
agriculture industry physical as
well as regulatory
infrastructure over the years
and this bill helps bring back a
key piece of a regulatory
infrastructure for protein
producers in the state restoring
our agriculture infrastructure
is a long term effort and the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
stands in strong support of this
bill and that ongoing effort
thank you thank you Mr black
let's go to Brian Moore Mr Moore
good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Brian more
would New Mexico counties
actually I'm more into hatch
today The New Mexico County
Board has voted to support house
bill thirty three we have
several counties that have
passed a resolution supporting
this bill it Mr chairman I was
in the legislature and governor
Richardson allowed the state
meat inspections to lapse and
argue with him for a long time
about that to no avail this is a
great opportunity to restart
this valuable service aligned ag
producers but also stores retail
stores restaurants grocery
stores and consumers Mr chairman
my other hat is that in my real
life when I'm not helping the
New Mexico counties my wife and
I own quite ranch market
supermarket in Union County up
in the far north eastern corner
of the state.
We're in the middle of the
pandemic crisis we saw last
spring how bad are ranchers are
getting hammered and cattle
stacked up ready to harvest we
had me in most of the commercial
packing plants were either
closed or working with have
staff or less so we were short
of being able to find need for
our consumers and our ranchers
were trying to provide me to us
and we we could make it work so
this would really help not only
the ranchers but would help our
grocery store and help our
consumers and we would love to
sell New Mexico may drugs thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
Laura they were leasing a.
They're really good morning.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee I'm definitely it's in
good executive director of dairy
producers of New Mexico we to
stand in support of this bill
and thank the representative for
bringing it forward it is a tool
that will help increase value
added agriculture and enhance
New Mexico's economy and more
than that create jobs thank you.
Thank you Beverly let's go to
Pamela Roy pan.
you are you are with us.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you so much for
the opportunity I want to thank
the sponsors for bring forth
this bill I'm here representing
the rocky mountain farmers union
is miss garlanded mentioned in
her statements that the
recommend farmers unions and
full support of this bill eighty
and the collective efforts to
see army industry really be a
much greater industry here in
New Mexico localizing that
industry as some of you know
we've also been working with
ranchers with the goal at at
some point time to see more
options for protein schools and
making that local as well as
fresh fruits and vegetables so
we really stands for this bill
and thank you so much the
Sanchez into this committee for
your support thank you let's go
to fill.
Feeler you're with us good
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee all up I stand in
support of the house bill thirty
three.
I'm I'm a rancher and and I
think we need the the meat
inspection under the New Mexico
livestock board for the health
and safety of the consumer.
At a market for the local
producers I think it's a win win
situation.
And I appreciate your support
thank you.
Thank you Sir have a great day
let's go to need a hand.
His hand good morning.
You're on mute.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and sponsors of
a twelve thirty three.
Morning my name is any to hand
my family runs a beef ranch in
catching County we are Navajo
and we are also American Indian
products certified but we cannot
sell our individual cuts of meat
to the consumers because the
meat processing plants are
backed up for months so we can't
even sell on the hook for beef.
The consumer demand where we
live is to is to be able to buy
local individual cuts of meat
and this including many families
on our reservation which is less
than thirty miles from our
ranch.
With this bill passing will be
able to sell individual cuts of
meat and with that we stand in
support of this bill and we ask
that it be passed thank.
Thank you very much thank you
for joining us this go to Becky
spindle good morning Becky.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Becky
can spend all I'm a rancher from
Stanley New Mexico and I stand
in support of this bill.
The pandemic we saw what can
happen when the supply chain is
disrupted I saw people selling
beef that had not been inspected
from their own refrigerators
which is not very safe this bill
would greatly help ease pressure
on the supply chain.
just another emergency arises
and allow for greater fuse food
security directly from New
Mexico beef producers to New
Mexico consumers also the
processes are are booked out for
months and this would make it
easier to provide brief to our
customers thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr that's good Lauren
Patterson.
Lauren good morning good morning
chairman Lente and members of
the committee our first of all
I'd like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward we've
been fortunate enough to work
with Representative Dow on this
bill and that and for three
years I've been in contact with
secretary Wendy in the need for
this program and house bill
thirty three helps us establish
that and and although it's not a
silver bullet and it will take a
couple or three years to fully
implement the program we
understand that that market
conditions have changed
consumers are wanting a verified
product from a local source and
producers want to provide that
for a so as we look forward to
to to the progress of this bill
we think this bill answers that
program
I would like to remind the
committee that the problems that
in the past associated with live
at meet inspection in New Mexico
was market driven it was a
national issue and that's why
we've ended up with four main
Packers and it was not due to
any specific state
our agency or anything like that
it was simply market driven and
so as we move forward we'd like
to provide not only our schools
and our our consumers in the
state our high quality proteins
but we would like to provide
that nationwide also and so we
think this will really help and
we appreciate the work of
Secretary witty and the all the
labeling programs we have like
case the tradition and and
continue to move forward and and
find that good product Forces
thank you thank you Mr Paterson.
We are not gonna join this
morning.
Jones good morning.
Mr chair members the committee
good morning my name is Jonas
more and executive director The
New Mexico will covers corporate
in we fully support house bill
thirty three I would like to
thank the Billsponsored for
bringing this forward to the New
Mexico livestock board for their
presentation the sheep industry
New Mexico is shrinking that
ever alarming rate we believe
this bill will help strengthen
the sheep sheep industry in New
Mexico provide them with the
opportunity to expand their
business thank you very much Mr
chair for the opportunity
comment and.
Thank you very much Mr Moya
let's go to miss Rovers Eric
Rovers I think I got that right
now.
Good morning thank you so much
for your consideration and for
allowing me to speak
good morning Mr chair commute
committee members my name's Eric
Rovers I'm here on behalf of New
Mexico first and I'm speaking in
support of house bill thirty
three
sponsored by Representative Dow
and Armstrong so last spring for
the beginning of the pandemic
New Mexico first surveyed New
Mexico ranchers and farmers
regarding the challenges that
they were facing and we were
hearing from consumers around
the state at the same time how
much they were struggling to get
food on the table and we
wondered how the other end of
the food chain was faring over
ninety producers responded to
our survey saying that they're
experiencing disruptions in the
supply chain and extreme drought
making it difficult for them we
knew that when our supply chain
is not working that people go
hungry and farmers and ranchers
struggle.
This bill helps to shorten the
supply chain increase
predictability and resilience
and our food systems
additionally have an in state me
inspections as an investment in
New Mexico selfsufficiency
during our community town hall
over three hundred ever cultural
stakeholders created a strategic
Ag plan recommending that we
increase consumer base and
market access locally interstate
and internationally from New
Mexico agriculture products and
that we research consumer
purchasing power demand and
barriers.
To meet demand.
So assets with the backing of
hundreds of producers around the
state we wholly support the
spell and we urge you to support
eight at H. B. thirty.
Thirty three excuse me thank you
so much for your time.
Thank you very much it's going
to Kevin.
Kevin good morning you with us.
Good morning chairman Wednesday
morning thank you for having me
this morning my name's Kevin
Branham I am a small beef
producer here in the state I
also have been working with
multiple large beef producers
and may put on about sixteen
thousand head of cattle that
currently go to Texas to get fed
every year so we've been working
with them to help this bill with
the bill that was presented last
week by NMDA and and Mr
Chatfield and what we're looking
at doing we.
Well during this pandemic myself
and some other beef producers
when the grocery stores shelves
were empty we were literally
selling salt beef on the hoof
and delivering be from Los
Alamos New Mexico all the way to
el Paso Texas during this
pandemic and what that did is
created opportunity for us to
actually open market because not
everyone can take a half bees
not even a quarter before the
time they need individual cuts
as we know most consumers of of
beef in New Mexico in our urban
areas simply have a small
freezer in the top of.
And they can't take that amount
to meet at a time.
So we were asked to.
That we have done so during this
pandemic we opened what we named
nineteen twelve market.
And we have since then work with
local growers producers our
livestock people and have
currently brought in products
from more than thirty producers
into our store here in grants
New Mexico we also have been
working on my wife and I along
with another couple that started
nineteen twelve piece company
with the vision of integrating
New Mexico beast from the time
it's born raised
and processed to stay in New
Mexico and provide jobs to
stimulate the economy here in
New Mexico we have a lot of
traction we have a lot of
interest there are many of
producers that are already doing
a wonderful job marketing their
products to individual consumers
however not everyone has that
know how our ability and we're
looking at putting together a
process where we can help those
producers keep a high quality
local food stores and not only
in our consumers houses but in
our restaurants in our schools
we have a vision to use New
Mexico beef throughout our
entire food system open
definitely brought.
Light on the fact that our our
food chain system is broke Care
in New Mexico most of our beef
left the state.
And when it came time for demand
we didn't get it back there the
other areas that are more
demanding got the beef before we
got it and so we want to fix
that we want to be able to find
all the beef products all the
meat products that we can we've
learned since getting into this
that our poultry producers are
lamb producers are pork
producers are still are
struggling to be able to get
their meat back on the shelves
of grocery stores in the houses
and restaurants work with the
constituent the Representative
Romero was speaking about
earlier directly getting his his
for drugs on our store shelves
so I just want to finish by
emphasizing that this is more
impactful than just supporting
producers this is supporting
jobs in an economy in New
Mexico.
For example a lot of your small
meat cutters the state
inspection program would
actually allow our per
processors to just kill and find
carcasses carcasses that can
then be further regarding caught
and packaged.
That are you wrap up your your
comments so we can continue to
move on to the COVID this year
thank you very
much.
That.
That's a and then keep in mind
that for the felt folks left and
support fees that keep your
comments brief and we will go to
Tracy government Tracy good
morning.
You're on mute out now I'm a
muted okay thank you
Mr chairman and committee for
the opportunity to speak this
morning mentioned earlier that
this bill is so beneficial so
many aspects we help reduce
sturgeon we help of the consumer
and I think something it's it's
been mentioned a little bit is
that the current system we have
a a a backlog at the per at past
the level to get animals process
this will allow those processors
to seek.
loans and and adjust their
business plans and ex be
provided with the opportunity to
expand their operations and also
possibly provide the opportunity
for New that process again thank
you Mr chairman.
I fully support this bill and I.
In capturing counties both and I
think this is a win.
Appreciate you Tracy.
Let's go to Debbie Hughes a
Debbie good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee
I also want to support this bill
as a rancher and representing my
three sons who ranches and Eddie
Lee and Jarrell County what I
want to point out is the
economics of this to help keep
ranchers on the land in in
business
when people see high prices in
the grocery store they think
ranchers are making a lot of
money as a matter of fact this
last year some of our cap prices
were what it used to be thirty
or forty years ago yet the price
of the pick up is a hundred
times what it was and people
need to realize that renters are
basically grant farmers we
harvest the grass yourselves and
thousands of acres in New Mexico
that we taking utilize which
would not get out otherwise not
be utilized and there the EDD
producers in the state or only
one to two percent of the total
population and so we need to
keep them on the land grazing
also helps our soil and makes it
healthier and healthier soil
helps produce healthier food so
thank you very much appreciate
it misused let's go to the.
John Richards which is an excuse
me Mr Richardson.
Hello chairman Lente and
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak here today
my name is Richard son my family
farms in Dona ana county near
the village of Salem we're also
cattle producers and raise them
and Sierra and Katrin counties
we raise beef this comment is
really exposed how fragile our
meat supply in processing are if
you remember New Mexico's New
Mexicans could not buy beef
along with other commodities at
their local major retailers such
as Walmart this past season
their shelves were empty this
last year we sent our cattle to
Texas to be that out when
process but one of the big four
meat processors COVID yet
there's a tremendous backlog of
cattle being preposterous it was
touch and go into a funding our
cattle were processed but a lot
of producers in feedlots here in
New Mexico but normally shipped
other states were stuck with
nowhere to go with our cattle we
still suffered a tremendous
financial loss the large
retailers in the meat Packer
said the price of beef cattle
producers are not in control of
the prices which we sell at we
are price takers not makers
price makers Mexico needs to
process our own B. not just be
but pork lamb sheep poultry here
in our great state we need
capacity I have on order a small
meat processing facility to
begin processing our own meat I
want to start small but
increased capacity to help rural
cattle producers farmers and
ranchers get more bang for the
Buck rewarding their hard work
we need state meat inspection we
need to have our own system to
keep our money here in New
Mexico instead of shipping
millions of dollars out of the
state and out of our control say
this for several reasons of ship
cattle the same Texas speed a
lot this year I've had ten have
died so far one is to maybe but
I shipped healthy cattle raised
in New Mexico to Texas it's out
of my control as to their care
these cattle died of chronic
pneumonia treated several times
we need more capacity in New
Mexico be able to process them
ourselves.
State control over cattle not
federal as a way to go the state
meat inspections would be equal
to or greater than the federal
USDA requirements we want a safe
secure system producing and
processing our own New Mexico me
to drugs thank you thank you
Representative let's go to the
niece Miller.
These good morning with us I yes
I am good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Denise
Miller and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association
and we would like to supports
from the support HB thirty three
and we while you know most of
our work focuses on fresh crops
specialty crops that are grown
across the state we also have a
number of ranchers who are
members of the association as
well as need is a really
important product that is
available to consumers at
farmers markets across the state
and bringing high quality local
food of all kinds to consumers
across the state is important to
our members and to producers so
we strongly supported for all
the reasons that you heard and I
will just say that last year
during April when we offered
grants to producers we raised
funding from the philanthropic
community and offer grants to
farmers and ranchers across the
state the stories that we heard
from ranchers were just heart
breaking you know of them having
to stay in in their herds not
having enough to keep their you
know the lights on and so we
provided quite a lot of requests
to ranchers and we just want to
make sure that the that
everything that can be done to
help the economics of the
ranching community and keeping
good food here in the state so
we strongly support this bill
thank you so much miss Miller
let's go to Molly Molly good
morning you're with us.
Hi this is Molly.
I am only months in artist and
I'm the current
Chairman of the New Mexico
livestock board and I just from
that from that perspective I
just wanted to say that at this
point the livestock board has an
extremely strong leadership team
and I appreciate all the support
for the bill and.
I just want.
People to know that that the
under the directorship of the
land of garland and our
assistant director Sean Davis
and Dr Robert Zimmerman who's
our state veterinarian we have a
good strong team and if we're.
Tasked with expanding this
This our.
Legislation that will be able to
do that.
This very well thank you.
And I have.
And not just also is here and
wants to say a word okay quickly
please.
I thank you chairman and members
of the committee I.
My wife and myself
Representative processing or
selling land we have a process
that ourselves we're we're
Representative processing about
seven hundred lambs a year we
have to go to Colorado with Joe
has worked out okay for us we.
I however have some reservations
I'm just support.
Representative built and intent
of the bill completely it's just
that.
Having been in the business for
so long and seeing these things.
Transpired I'm not sure.
How this is going to work
without the infrastructure that
we need to carry this forward we
don't have the plants and.
And I don't know anybody that.
Wants to do it well that's not
true I don't know somebody that
wants to always currently trying
to get a plant going but their
problems is.
Financing and.
Licensing and if we don't get
all these other things in place
before we start an inspection
program not sure it's going to
work all that well I mean it's
all going well and I think Mr
Paterson had a right it was
market driven when it was when
it was chased out basically and
that could happen again if we
don't have all the docks in
place before we start.
Are doing a lot of other things
I mean I support the bill we
what what in New Mexico all
right thank you for your
Madam Sir having.
All right let's go head to
finally last COVID valley of
we're the good morning Valerie.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee valley where the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
say any inspection program will
create additional economic
opportunities for many of our
communities including our rural
communities and will also
strengthen our local food system
and for all the other reasons
previously stated we're
extremely happy to be here to
support the sponsor of the
Sanchez and all the efforts and
ask you to support this piece of
legislation.
Thank you Mr W. your comment has
morning so than those in
opposition we're in trouble we
have assumed a hands the folks
in opposition this morning
it looks like there is not an
opposition thank goodness a sort
of in a three hour bill so with
that being said we have five
committee members on the list to
speak this morning the first one
being Representative small
Representative small you have
the floor Sir.
You're on mute.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative out and
Sanchez I just have a few quick
questions
Mr chair Representative Dow the
The study that and M. D. A. did
that showed as I recall seventy
percent of the current custom
exempt processors actually did
been necessarily want to say
meat inspection program was that
is that accurate.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative small almost
it asked if they take advantage
of an in state inspection and
I'll I mean I'll let that
secretary would be expand on
this but I a perfect example is
old fashioned meets that's
located in my County in Sierra
County they do mostly custom
cuts one at a time it's in their
backyard they've got a little
freezer little shop and they are
not interested in expanding in
state meeting section and they
their custom cuts keep them more
than busy there's year round
waiting right less to have a
custom cut at old fashion meet
yes you might give up John
Richards and mention that he's a
a rancher in Sierra and catching
County he needs access to in
state a large number of
processing at his feet I'm ready
so I will defer to secretary
ready to elaborate on that study
and that's okay Representative I
know I know time will be sure
really that thank.
thank you very much observed out
for that answer
Secondly Sanchez we've actually
seen a doubling of federally
inspected processing in our
state
Here within the last three or
four years correct that's with
the plan in Roswell and then the
plant up in Las Vegas that was
supported through the hundred
thousand dollar lead
appropriation.
That okay so.
And that that doubling of ends
of of processing in those
processors can sell in state and
out of state correct at the
retail level.
Okay.
Number three
New Mexico would you agree that
the success of
Growing value added industry
agricultural industry is closely
connected to growing the value
of that brand is folks have been
talking about.
The produce for instance in New
Mexico grown Chile or The New
Mexico grown onions or in this
case in New Mexico on the.
Mr Chairman representative sure
okay cool thanks
I think the within that I wonder
I just tried a couple of of
thoughts.
The New Mexico department of
agriculture seems to me the most
well positioned to grow that
brand and ultimately Mr chairman
Representative that out it seems
to me that there is going to
have to be a higher price that
whomever the consumer is is
willing to pay for New Mexico be
to grow that the the value added
in state component and so Mr
chair representative out
the fiscal impact for your
legislation
eighty yes it's
That fiscal impact employment up
here Mister chairman
it's five eight zero to five
hundred thousand for for the
current fiscal year for FY
twenty one is zero to roughly
two million for FY twenty two
and and zero assuming in FY
twenty three that the federal
government takes over a portion
drops down to zero to one point
six yes my big question in this
will be a question I think is
good for us to wrestle with
moving forward.
For the high plains facility
there was a hundred thousand
dollars a state money invested
it created twenty jobs or help
create twenty jobs and expand
access for ranchers in the
northern north central
Part of our state to access
markets.
It what is our best investment
to grow to do those same sorts
of things is that additional
Leda funding for
meat processed in is it Leda
funding for the
feedlots in places where folks
can take the calf that comes off
of a cow calf operation and add
weight to that animal before
processing it
And.
I guess the final question I
would have and and having been a
strong supporter asked by Mister
bill Szabo who course a
legendary person in the state
who asked that state meat
inspections be returned
Is this the silver bullet is
this the best use of those state
dollars to support our in state
producers in that value added
peace and.
That would be my final question
Mr chairman.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative fall
and I so appreciate all of your
effort around in state
inspection processing harvesting
the feedlot six cetera it's it's
extremely complicated and the
first thing that I think we
should note is that the northern
plant that opened is almost the
the vast majority of the the
need that their process is from
Colorado so it shows that there
is demand even from out of state
to bring their beef to New
Mexico for processing so we
created twenty jobs processing
almost the vast majority I don't
know the breakdown but it's
mostly Colorado meet that's the
process so that did not resolve
the demand issue in New Mexico
and I I wanna be brief because I
get the secretary ready to get
down to the bones of this but I
started out with the bill you
know over a year ago that also
had an NDA as that the help that
the place for this house and it
came from a perspective of
people of when it was resolved
before and it came and then in
this process came back to the
livestock board and I think
secretary we can speak to that
but I simply posted on Facebook
who need to beef our heart
ranchers are hurting who need to
be who wants to buy the and and
just organically on Facebook
connected over three hundred New
Mexicans to.
Ranchers who bought directly and
one of those were my husband co
workers in Santa Fe who had
never bought direct before and
they just bought their third
they go in together and every
couple months they're buying
beef direct so the demand is
there I think the market can
certainly grow but the market
demand is already there because
we're exporting ninety percent
of our beat and we're importing
millions of millions of dollars
worth of the that was not
produced Mexico Terry ready can
you elaborate on why livestock
bureau verses in MDA.
I think the Mr chairman members
of the committee represents
small I think there's a couple
things that it.
Built around that that topic the
last word has the already has
the legislative authority to do
livestock inspections and they
take care the animal welfare and
all the things that are built
into that New Mexico department
of agriculture we do the
marketing we do the marketing
and development.
We also regulate a number of
things but in the livestock area
the license was already has that
that bill didn't infrastructure
to and and the knowledge and the
the staff members Daniel well
for laws and all the things that
are required even including a
meat inspection program we fully
intend to help build out the and
develop the beef industry in the
state of New Mexico all the way
from from the what what as a
safety gate to the plan.
Including the renter's the lots
of the in the process you of it
you you asked Representative
small about the silver bullet
there's a lot of cartridges in
this in this case I think that
we have to consider it's a
building block when we talk to
and I think Dr Lee what maybe
out there in the background
somewheres who did the study but
when when they were talking to
some of the processors the
question came up why doesn't the
state of New Mexico have
immunization program we would
much rather deal with the the
state and the federal because
you hear constantly and and we
know what we're getting the
other thing is is we're talking
to these new folks that are
COVID such as the Mr Richardson.
They said that that legislative
meat inspection was in a
positive message that New Mexico
is ready to accept the growth in
the the processing industry so I
think that's one phase of the
building block this is the the
other building blocks are what
we already have established the
leader of funds that need to get
funds and in this under this
governor's direction the
economic development department
has been a true partner with the
department of agriculture is in
working with those interested in
expanding the in the act by
madam secretary and the
specifically in the beef
industry so we were making those
investments economic development
center a great job of doing that
we continue to talk to others.
I think there's more
opportunities and I think as
long as we keep all those tools
in the toolbox will be able to
help grow this as I said earlier
it this is not a solution that's
going to happen today or
tomorrow it's a building block
for the future and as I've
talked to others you know the
further we push this out we're
still two or three years down
the road this tomorrow if it's
the next day is next year your
two three years out from
building that us that we need in
the state Mr months not just was
exactly right we've got to
attract the capacity to help
this state grow and then we've
got to transform our our
livestock industry into up.
Into an area where they can
supply beef lamb pork.
Poultry if we grow in that area
on a year round sustainable
basis as opposed to fall and
spring type shipments so it's a
building block but I think this
is one step to get their.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative thank.
That's it for me.
Representative small of
Representative Chatfield to see
you got a hand up let's move to
some other questions will you
Sir if you don't mind just just
keep keep your comment and then
we'll get to you Sir a promise
that so let's go to
Representative or vice
chairwoman that by doing good
morning this.
You Mr chair good morning Mr
chair and thank you
Representative Dale for bringing
this bill before this committee
and I'd like to congratulate you
and the co sponsors I think this
is a highly needed
piece of legislation in this
state I I would add every
rancher and farmer in the north
to your list of supporters
I talked to ranchers who are
trying to get you know it takes
a year to get an appointment to
get the beat slaughtered and
Colorado it takes.
Ten months to get paid
slaughtered I mean it's it's a
it's a real problem and people
do want local produce they want
local so I I just want to say I
I think this is a great bill I
guess I too am worried about the
well I I I just want to know is
the is this appropriation
included in that current budget
to House Appropriations I don't
know if it is.
Chairman and members of the
committee I'm gonna go ahead and
let Representative Chatfield
answer this when he serves on
appropriation and has been
working on this okay great
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman to my
knowledge is not.
Okay.
That that was grief Mr.
Representative for a Chattfield
it is there is half a million
dollars in the livestock boards
budget and there is a one
million dollar request in the
governor's budget those have not
been finalized any of those but
that this is a bill to the
governor is supporting and we
hope to see it added course
that's up to you guys it's very
nice to see how many of you also
serve on probation and so it
hopefully it'll be the will of
this committee to get it there.
Mr chair and representative down
and Representative Chatfield we
hi it's going to I think things
are happening faster it's going
to be a tight budget of the
this year that I certainly am
supporting this I think it's
necessary I think it creates
jobs that we need in rural
communities and I think it
really serves Susan huge.
Really a problem and an
opportunity all at the same time
so I stand in support of this
bill thank you Mr chair thank
you Mr chairman that's then go
to Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative hill good morning
thank you very much Mr chair and
I'm yeah I just wanna thank the
sponsors for this bill it it
sounds like it's absolutely
something that's needed and our
beautiful little state
especially post pandemic so I
commend you for putting the work
into getting the study finished
and then also pushing for the
state program and to be
reinstated so I just have a
couple of questions Mr chair and
Representative vice chair well
then headed already touched on
this but I'm I'm sure you guys
are aware of this the the FIR
stated this program does come
with a significant cost and so I
would encourage you to work with
HSC members myself included.
To make sure that that crosses
appropriately covered because we
don't want to you know pass on
the significant unfunded mandate
to the state as part of our
budgetary process
the I guess is more of a COVID
than a question Mr chair my
apologies the other question I
have
is it looks like when I was
reading to materials that if you
were to implement the state
program that there would be the
potential of requiring a
livestock or to assume all risk
and costs associated with
processing under this the state
regulatory schemes so could if
one of the sponsors or experts
can answer that question for me
I'd I'd sure appreciate it.
Anyway the sponsors to answer
that and also I just want to for
for if Representative Armstrong
she is a co sponsor on this bill
Representative Armstrong I will
allow you to make some comments
were commission with the rest a
list of the committee members
but two of Representative
Hochman Vigil as question is
anyone that wishes to answer
that.
Thank you Mr chairman I it not
the most appropriate for Belinda
garland or Jeff would you answer
this on secretary many.
Secretary.
I'm gonna different up to Mr
Chairman was deferred above in
the first.
Okay miss garland.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee our Representative
if you could repeat that I'm not
quite sure there's I understand
what you're referring to want to
make sure I answer your question
correctly.
Thanks Mr chairman and at Mr
expert I'm sorry I didn't catch
your name but the materials that
we were given to review I in
conjunction with this bill today
they stated that one of the
risks potential risks for
instating a state regulatory
program would be that would
force livestock owners to assume
risk it risks and costs
associated with processing I
just wanted to know if that is
correct or if you had heard of
that potential
issue.
I'm gonna be honest this is the
first I've heard of that but I
think that this house bill
thirty three gives the New
Mexico livestock or the
authority to promulgate rules so
all of that could be addressed
in the rulemaking process.
I think the processing costs and
the risk.
I think it would depend on
probably the business model on
exactly how of the beef enters
the processing plant and comes
back out of it and distributed
to the consumers and all of that
probably would be addressed in a
rulemaking.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair Mister Carl and I
appreciate that answer it's good
enough for me right now the
other question I have was it
looks like there was a state
scheme before it was eliminated
and the reason for the
elimination of one of the
reasons stated for the
elimination was because of
training concerns for those
inspections do you have a plan
to alleviate those concerns if
we were to reinstate the program
a second time.
Thank you representative Mr
chairman yes actually our budget
design actually is encompassing
seventeen employees for this
made statement inspection
division and two of those
employees would be training and
compliance officers we we to
begin the program we thought one
for each half of the state would
be sufficient.
So yes we do have training
designed into that and actually
that is one of there's nine
components that must be met in
order to enter into a meeting
meat and poultry inspection
agreement with the USDA FSIS and
that is one of them that is one
of the the main factors
is training and oversight of the
inspectors.
Great thank you very much out of
that section of the questions I
have Mr chair
Representative Hochman Vigil
let's go to representatives of
representatives of the floor is
yours then thank you Mr chairman
I do appreciate that I do want
to.
With from the deepest part of my
heart thank you all for bringing
this forward as a beef producer
we have been hit hard my ranch
is rated we we went down from
full capacity to two bowls Mr
chairman it was beyond our
control that we could not keep
the mob tried feed is out of the
draft before and it doesn't work
this time I did have to sell up
and broke my heart because
that's years and years of
genetics I put into this or I
used to send steers a tool you
Texas to the.
Of of what is that called gate
to plate.
Processing over there every time
I get a report back from from
the people over there is like
why are you selling the of your
revised and stuff to your
restaurants in the state of New
Mexico well guess what folks we
can't.
Not too awful long ago my
husband went to the grocery
store with me.
And he was looking at beef
prices any saw a whole brisket.
That cost more than what we used
to sell our kids for.
Mr Chairman.
Chaves County commissioners have
has to resolution to support
this bill.
My husband does serve on the
county commission there and he
understands the importance of it
as well as the other
commissioners because of the
agricultural sector in the state
of New Mexico because we not
only have Russell livestock
auction there we have the dairy
option there as well all of
these.
Beef and.
A.
Milk cows that are being sold
for processing do have to go out
of state for many many years I
have worked with Pam rural way
of getting proteins in our
school for the home grown part
of it for the New Mexico grow.
It really does chat me whenever
my daughter's restaurant cannot
sell the beef I have raised
because it does grade prime.
But before she can do that it
has to go out of state to be
processed.
Mr Chairman.
I can remember a time that we
sold our kids for nineteen cents
a pound.
Because we didn't have any place
to go with them.
We always support our four H.
and FFA kids during our county
fairs and of the set the eastern
New Mexico state fair and the
New Mexico state fair.
But if we do by a minimal and I
do believe in by in New Mexico
and I do want to help these
young people out because that's
our future as far as our
agricultural part of it goes.
Those animals have to be sent
out of state for processing as
well.
Mr Chairman.
I do have a couple of quilt no I
do have a comment to make to
secretary woody and I don't see
him on your I hope B. is listing
in.
And miss garland is will
whenever I'm reading this sheet
here this title The New Mexico
livestock board.
And it says New Mexico has the
world's largest land cattle port
Senator races we're six hundred
and forty thousand head of
Mexican origin cattle cross each
calendar year I do have a
question there are you what are
you being helped in any way with
that the USDA as far as
inspection goes Secretary witty
or is it strictly in M. D. A. or
The New Mexico livestock board.
Miss garland.
So the the inspection of the
animals crossing the border down
there at that Senator re support
is actually controlled by the
New Mexico livestock or and we
we have traceability
measurements in place in case
there is an outbreak of some
some sort we are able to quickly
and effectively trace those
animals and get them under
control so it is through our
agency yes well Mr chairman and
miss garland I do appreciate
that answer but is that whenever
you're talking about
traceability we're not catching
the problem there until there
happens to be an outbreak is
that correct such as trick or
you limiting what does come
across we have seen the.
It measures that some people go
to to get both across.
Making them look like they are
not built.
And so therefore the trick
process the trick impact on our
beef cattle herds is very
important.
And I want to know what the our
livestock board is doing to
prevent any any of these major
impacts from produced from
affecting our producers and say.
Mr Chairman representative in
these L. only non reproductive
animals cross the at that point.
So if there are
Breeding stock that must cross
and then they cross on a
different level of inspection so
but through the port on a daily
basis and if we see any type of
animals that are sick we quickly
quarantine them.
I have concerns there I just
didn't know what what the
involvement of the New Mexico
department of agriculture would
be there or if it was also FDA
or not but anyway I will let
that one drop Mr chairman of
Representative.
Thank you Mr a garland for your
responses there I do have a
couple of questions regarding
the bill Representative Dow I've
I've read your new material and
everything.
But I have a question on page
seven of the committee
substitute.
On page seven starting online
TN.
Well actually starting on line
J..
I've got a concern I don't know
what Serra is that that since
there does not make any sense at
all to me adopt and promulgate
rules governing the importation
manufacture sale distribution or
use within the state of Serra
com vaccines and other
biological.
Within the state of Serra.
Can you explain that to me
please.
Mr chair I know what blood serum
plasma is and all that but this
one kind of throws me.
A comma vaccines.
Would you explain please.
Mr Chairman representative L.
yes all level and the answer
that.
Mr Chairman representative the
he's L. this is actually it's my
understanding from the bill
writer that this is the
The new version it if you'll
notice there that strikes out
the words serums so they answer
they replace that was Serra so
that's my understanding that
that the legal terminology
basically for serums.
In thank you for that
explanation I have not heard
that yet and I'm very in tune to
what changes are being made with
the but it still does not make
sense or use within the state of
Serra com of vaccines.
That will just a flow very good
Mr Chairman.
My next question is in this
falls under the one of the
analysis this is this bill
Representative Dow and others
of.
Committee members that are
sitting here present that are on
this bill is says that this bill
is in conflict with house bill
two sixty four that is being
sponsored by Representative
small can you tell me the major
difference.
Mr chairman and Representative
Representative Dow.
Mr Chairman representative is
Allen members of the committee
Representative small introduced
a bill to to direct in in the
eight to establish in state meet
inspection I think the this is a
lot there's a lot more detail in
this bill which is the result of
many many hours in meetings
across the act community across
the state over the last year and
so I think the major differences
who would administer the in
state inspection and that that
you know it's it's a very his
the much so sort of bill that I
think the gist of it is is in in
in dust job to do the in state
inspection.
If the NM dust job to do the
marketing and the supply chain
coordination and so I think this
bill gives it to the Mexico
livestock board his suggests
that it should be an MBA and
Representative capital has a
bill that I think addresses what
Representative small stating I
can't speak for the bond in the
processing supply chain
marketing side of it that would
be Representative capital bill
which in the a would be in
charge of and in this use of the
livestock board who is already
in charge of has a veterinarian
does the animal care and welfare
and is traditionally you know
some type of force he had been
responsible for livestock from
conception through harvest.
Okay thank you very much for
that explanation there I think
that what you guys have right
here is very good bill that does
cover all the bases Mr chairman
I I know that we're running
short on time but whenever Joe
Madrid put in USA beef out there
east of Ross will he has the
ability to process one two three
four five six six or seven
different varieties of protein.
And working with the Chavis
county economic development
people.
In trying to get all parties
involved it was like pulling
teeth out there.
And yet our schools are still
not utilizing.
New Mexico grown proteins in our
school now what's wrong with
that picture.
Mr Madrid has gone out on a
limb.
To ensure that we do.
He he has to follow all the
guidelines he is a federal
inspector there on a daily
basis.
And he is making sure that
everything he does is to the TV.
And yet we are not utilizing
that so I.
Assuming that Dr witty is going
to be as far as promoting what
you all are trying to do here.
Is to get the word out to not
only our schools.
But to our senior centers and to
our hospitals and to order jails
that we have a product here that
is beneficial not only to the
welfare of the state of New
Mexico but to the only overall
general health of the citizens
of the state in New Mexico Dr
woody my question to you is
there used to be a meets cutting
class over at New Mexico State
University can you tell me.
What the status of that classes
right now.
Mr Chairman Representative is
off that is my understanding
that we program the me class is
is not happening at the moment
there in the proper the colleges
in the process of the vision RFP
to reopen the meet lap and
reinstate that program when they
modernize the agriculture
infrastructure that's going to
be a primary focus in the in the
new complex at the colleges is
building your New Mexico State
University.
Mr chairman and Representative
Dow and Secretary witty I
attended New Mexico State
University as a pre vet
majority.
And the agriculture part of it
was.
Thriving and over the years our
agricultural college has
continued to go like this
whenever it should be going to
like this because right now
every producer in the state of
New Mexico that's involved in
agriculture is responsible for
feeding a hundred and sixty
other people and yes I am very
passionate about the.
Industries that I'm involved
with not only ranching but for
me it is will and it's time that
amendment issue stepped up and
did their part Mr Chairman
Representative Dow
representative Armstrong at all
the risk to bill I do appreciate
this bill and I do and the
committee substitute for house
bill thirty three and I do
intend to support thank you very
much very good thank you very
much representatives L. we are
now close to an hour and a half
into this bill we have four
other bills to look at this
morning so I would ask the to
less speaker from the committee
please keep your questions brief
and then there's the Sanchez
keep keep your answers brief
that's going Representative
Matthews.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and and thank you
all Sanchez the for.
But in this bill together I have
a couple very simple preliminary
questions when a cow is ready to
be processed.
And there's no space.
Can it what happens dig can't
can't wait another year or is
there a window of time when it
needs to happen.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Matthews at the
great question and and it it is
it's very similar to a vegetable
I mean like when a tomatoes
right you've got a harvest it
it's the same is true of beef
and and all meets.
thank you Representative doubt
Mr chair of my second simple
question can you process.
Different animals in the same
processing plant.
Meeting like lambs and and pigs
and beef.
Mr Chairman representative accu
CS if you go through the proper
protocol the proper permitting
and licensing and oversight yes.
two at.
Mr Chairman Representative out
of the.
These meat inspectors would be
training would be able to
inspect any kind of meat.
Mr Chairman Senate Matthews yes
ma'am.
And Mr Chairman representative
Dow and perhaps as question goes
to secretary witty
who gave a very nice explanation
of sure the complexity of this
from an economic development.
Representative process and I
have some of the same kind of
questions but let me just ask a
short one because I know we're
short on time
what is your next step.
And maybe I'm asking the wrong
person so if I am the proper
person can answer that's fine
with me what is the next step in
putting together the economic
development.
Plan and processes to assuming
this bill passes to.
Get the facilities we need to
build out this industry.
Mr Chairman representative use
secretary would you want to give
this a shot.
Sure thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative Matthews you know
there's there's a lot of next
steps but this this bill passes
the last word starts the
training and and and standing up
the program on our side of the
equation I'm working closely
with economic development we're
talking to folks who wanted to
increase the capacity of
processing in the state of New
Mexico but it's more than just
the processing it's it's if the
ability to have a place for for
the product to go is working
with the restaurant is working
as Representative he's also the
school systems with with
institutional buyers the the
love that in the in the
beginning he said in the
systems of the world as well
it's about building the capacity
all the way up and down the
supply chain it's it's letting
them know that New Mexico is
working towards a state grown
beef system a state grown land
system we've got a pork producer
and Representative but Romero's
district who is supplying
restaurants in Albuquerque.
It's about letting them know
that we're gonna have the steady
supply and building up the
system so it's it's a multi
faceted approach one step at a
time.
And I'm Mr Chairman at secretary
thank you for that answer what
is the timetable for this kind
of a roll out what's your
projection as to when we would
really start to see some results
in terms of economic development
from this
For more passage of this bill
and the funding of the bill.
Mr Chairman well that's a that's
a tough and I'll play the
economist role we're good at
giving numbers or dates but not
both in
my estimation is that as we
continue to build this this
program out and we develop the
beef industry as as the economy
begins to re open you're going
to see more of a demand on the
institutional side that's are
going to be our focus we're
we're talking to several folks
who are coming in that are
looking at coming in and and
standing up meat processing
facility you know that's a six
month to a nine month process to
get one stood up and and get
operating thank you for this
time to make the connections
with the institutional buyers of
the others so I would say over
nine months to a year and a half
to really lay that to keep that
the foundation starts yesterday
but to get it going and make
those connections and get the
market places sure that we're
gonna have a steady consistent
supply that's the word that's on
the table Matt.
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews the only thing I add to
that is if we simply pass the
marketing supply chain piece of
it without the pairing of this
bill as well we will grow the
demand without having the
capacity to supply and so that
the to go together.
Mr chairman Representative data
secretary really thank you very
much for those answers I think I
understand the situation little
better and I will be supporting
the bill thank you so much for
bringing forward thank you let's
go to our final up the panelists
for questions Representative
what.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to the people of brought this
bill forward this bill is about
the here's receiving a higher
price for their product at the
same time the consumers being
able to purchase it at a cheaper
price because when we keep it in
the state of New Mexico it'll
it'll create all that it'll make
all that happen
I believe secretary Wendy talked
about all these things need to
happen in conjunction with one
another and that's what this
bill does is it helps New Mexico
ranchers and farmers.
And then it still puts cheaper
protein on the table for the
consumers.
And it gives an advantage to the
producers on the niche markets
we have we have all natural
people of one all natural beef
we have people want grass fed
beef's we have different niches
in the markets that we could
concentrate on right now people
are taking their based a
Colorado they're taken to Texas
and bring them back and that
would help New Mexico if we get
the bills like this in
conjunction with others passed.
It's not only to create jobs but
it's to create an economy within
the producers in the business
people that we have in the state
already.
The processing plants we need
them but in turn we need this
bill have the processing plants
so it's it's all about
coordinating these things to
happen and I'm a very strong
support of this bill the
ranchers of the state of New
Mexico need this bill although
protein producers needed.
And I'm I'm glad it was brought
forward in a much strong support
of it thank you thank you
Representative what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Representative is a Mr chairman
I move the do not pass on house
bill thirty three but a do pass
on health agriculture water
resource committee substitute
for house bill thirty three.
That there's a second by both
Representative Matthews and
small so at this point And
secretary please call low.
Representative Allison.
Representative Brown.
Representative these.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative is a lot.
Yes representative Allison.
Representative Brown.
Chair Herrera.
Chairman.
Yes.
Six.
By a vote of six in the
affirmative zero negative House
Bills and hospital
Substitute a substitute Hospital
thirty three excuse me that had
to do past graduation thank you
for being here this morning
thank you all very presenters
and all the experts have a great
day of early.
Let's now move then committee
members to house bill one thirty
three which is the college
hunger reduction pilot program
that's a mouthful Representative
Representative a Ferrari
Representative bash we can bring
them in as panelists please.
Representative Ferrary and
Representative bass if you're in
the ten is this please raise
your hand we can pull you into
the panelists list.
Representative Ferrary
therefore I do you anticipate
having Representative best with
you I know Mr chair I did not
hear back from her and
Representative Stansbury might
be able to join us later by not
sure about that if you have any
expert witnesses need to bring
over yes if you would bring
deputy secretary of HUD
trajectory we are.
Thank you.
Is that it yes very well I see
Mr you Secretary hero she is now
made a panelists it looks like.
This year yes yes welcome US
secretary Trujillo and with that
being said without further ado
house bill one thirty three
Representative Ferrary the floor
is yours.
Thank you Mr chair house bill
one thirty three as you
mentioned is is quite long at it
makes it appropriation the
higher education department
Representative pilot program to
reduce college hunger and the
reason we're bringing this
forward is because students are
facing rising cost of books
supplies intuition sounds like
when we went to school right
today's college students often
skip meals to pay for their
education food insecurity can
seriously harm a student's
ability to achieve academic
success and in twenty sixteen I
did a nationwide survey of food
insecure students and thirty two
percent believe that hunger
housing problems had impacted
on their education and of those
students fifty five percent
reported that these problems
caused them to not buy a
required textbook and fifty
three percent reported missing a
class and twenty five percent
reported dropping a class
this program is
Modeled along with other
universities have been doing
like Ohio University took steps
to address hunger on campus by
enabling one of their retailers
to accept snap benefits and
they're also taking a multi
faceted approach to addressing a
college student hunger by
hearing expansion that snap use
on campus with food recovery
collection and donation programs
and participation in national
hunger awareness campaign
campaigns and the Arizona State
University
they also did the began about
your program.
And using of my funding from
universities housing funds and
hungry students can go to the
dean's office to receive a
voucher for one or two meals and
if they need more long term
assistance the office will
connect them to the university's
on campus food pantries so what
we're trying to do with this
bill is allow AGD to be able to
set up
many pilot programs with in
different colleges around state
and set up an art P. program
that they can apply for
and then help our.
Solve the problems on their own
campus according to what
Resources are available so with
that I'd like to introduce W.
secretary ATD but she's the R.
Trujillo and she'll share the
UNM students study that included
within security amongst other
information thank you deputy
secretary.
Good morning thank you good
morning Mr chair and members of
the committee Representative
Ferrary I appreciate this time
to talk to you about college
hunger to introduce myself prior
to joining the higher education
department I was the director of
equity and diversity at northern
New Mexico college where I often
what forces on food justice in
literature the faculty adviser
toward campus farm and work with
the student food insecurity
subcommittee that eventually
establish that you want to get
rid of New Mexico all rights and
also I wanted to think of of
some of our own recollections of
being in college many of our own
memories of being a college
student often feature the
prominent male of rounded or hot
oatmeal made with our dorm room
electric kettles in fact the
image of the starting student is
pervasive and often normalized
as part of the college
experience this image is no
longer hyperbole but the
circumstances approximately one
third of college students
nationally the prevailing food
insecurity in higher education
is rising according to the
twenty eighteen United States
government accountability office
report studies found that
insecurity range from nine over
fifty percent of college
campuses across the country with
the greatest need coming from
community colleges with fifty
five percent of students
including six.
It also stated that out of
thirty one studies conducted the
two of them estimated food
insecurity rates over thirty
percent.
I know that being from twenty
eighteen this report does not
include data from the pandemic
here we've just experience which
we can imagine impacted many
more students thanks to the work
of doctors that effect us from
you're not University of New
Mexico we have local data
collected from April twenty
twenty through a survey that was
administered at the University
of New Mexico according to the
twenty twenty basic needs
insecurity research report at
UNM what we do security impact
academic success and health and
well being.
Security is associated with
lower grades up to fifteen times
higher likelihood of failing
classes and a greater likelihood
of students withdrawing or
otherwise to agree or suspending
their studies.
Students who are food insecure
are less likely to report a
sense of belonging more likely
to feel like they're not will
continue to faculty and less
likely to access campus
Services.
I'm.
A study that was conducted in
April of twenty twenty so that
there is a prevailing to food
insecurity our state's largest
research institution with over
overall showing an average of
thirty two percent of students
identified as being food
insecure
of the respondents were American
Indian students fifty two
percent of those students
reported being food insecure of
African American students who
reported at forty six percent of
them reported being food
insecure I'm sorry that was
forty nine percent for gay
lesbian students forty six
percent reported being secure
and for Hispanic students thirty
five percent.
So what the study demonstrates
is that basic needs insecurity
such as uncertain or inadequate
access to see who is higher
among college and university
students than the rest of the
population and creates a barrier
to academic success the right
food insecure households in New
Mexico is one of the highest
across the country unfortunately
at sixteen point eight percent
but at UNM our students food
insecurity is about double that
range the good news is that many
of our institutions of higher
education we're working on this
issue University of New Mexico
New Mexico State University New
Mexico highlands university
western New Mexico university
Santa Fe community college and
northern New Mexico college have
implemented pantries help
alleviate hunger insecurity
amongst their student
populations you
got a twenty fourteen and has
served over nine thousand
students by providing free
groceries once a month NMAA use
the pantry distributes bags
twice a week
yes the box packages to students
faculty and staff.
SNCC students made their food
pantry once the northern New
Mexico college's of country
access to locally grown produce
during the season with their
farm to food pantry program.
Although these efforts have made
a difference this pilot program
would permit institutions of
higher education the start new
programs for expand existing
programs if implemented the
pilot program to compile data on
the rates of hunger on campuses
and the best ways to address
that I'll conclude by promoting
the author of the U. N. and
study as their goals are similar
to those of H. B. one thirty
four our aim is to improve the
basic needs security of college
and university students in New
Mexico through a combination of
data collection and research on
the one hand and the development
of it advocacy for solutions on
thank you and I stand for
question.
Thank you Secretary
Representative Ferrary it
questions comes before we go to
the committee to the attendees
this no Mr chair were market
can't take those.
Very well thank you very much of
those the attendees list all
those that are in opposition to
house bill.
The house you one thirty three
do you raise your hand at.
See none all those in support of
house bill one thirty three
please raise your hand.
Begin with Allison Smith health
is with good morning with this.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Allison Smith I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of food banks the
New Mexico association food
banks mission is to work towards
ending hunger in New Mexico
through collaborative food
acquisitions distribution
education and advocacy
throughout the state we want to
thank Representative Ferrary for
bringing this bill forward this
appropriation and look forward
to working as a partner as pilot
project gets underway thank you
for your time and support we are
support for this legislation
miss Smith thank you very much
May Day that's going to power
all right miss Royer with this
good morning.
Representative of the
Representative Mr Chairman
representative and to
Representative Ferrary sponsors
of this bill we of the New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council and the Rocky
mountain farmers union are in
full support of this bill we
recognize food in security is a
huge issue here in Mexico we
want to make sure that no matter
what age people have food
security and we really
appreciate the Sanchez bringing
this bill forward thank you very
much for your support Mr road
it's going to I think he had a
good morning you're with us.
The they're panicked Committee
great to have this exciting bill
forward I am a registered
dietitian here in New Mexico I
taught for you in and within the
nutrition program for many years
so there are and actually I
assisted Dr Cargas with setting
up their study prior to my
departure from UNM but as
someone who has taught students
and really wants to ensure that
students have the best so that
they can to be able to be you
know a hundred percent president
and learning and ready to go
knowing that just having their
basic food needs met is so
critical across the state and
then in addition to that I'm
also a board member of
Roadrunner food bank a long time
supporter of the food bank in
the food bank network and this
is just such an important area
my area of work is often in more
and early childhood and so very
often college students get sort
of left out of a lot of these
conversations in a lot of the
programs and there's it there's
a sort of a critical gap with a
lot of other federal nutrition
programs or they get lost so
this is just such an important
program and I just I certainly
would be happy to answer any
questions but stand very strong
very strong supporter of the
still thank you thank you Mr
marks of Asia this is a major
good morning morning Mr chairman
to thank you for and members of
the committee thanks for letting
me speak this morning.
Mexico council university
presidents as a as the council
of the US seven four
universities in Mexico we stand
in strong support of this
legislation it definitely
compliments that will actually
bring additional resources to.
What services we are currently
providing they also look for
expected the higher department
but L. to work with all the
institutions and also created
coordinated statewide effort
three more attention to to to
the hunger concerns of our
students in New Mexico and also
like just urged the committee
and members of the committee to
also support the House Bill to
additional funding to the higher
department which is much needed
because this department someone
always been under funded for
number years and so.
Use those kinds of support as
well as provide and and and roll
out the services we look forward
to working with secretary rod
Regus and US secretary Trujillo
and I want to think sponsor
operation bring this legislation
to twelve eight eight thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you Sir let's go
to now Rovers Erica you are with
this morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Mr chair and committee members
hi my name's Eric Rovers I am
here on behalf of New Mexico
first and I'm speaking in
support of house bill one thirty
three sponsored by
Representative Ferrary bashin
Stansbury so New Mexico first
has been convening a group of
hunger water food and
agricultural advocates that
represent hundreds of New Mexico
stakeholders for the past nine
months we've heard from
communities that students
pursuing higher at are having to
choose between meals and their
education.
Looking at various research
studies we see that around forty
eight percent of community
college students and forty one
percent of four year university
students are food insecure.
New Mexicans shouldn't have to
make a choice between eating and
pursuing an education and
getting a better job this is
both a humanitarian issue as
well as an economic issue that
affects New Mexico's
competitiveness as a state when
we cannot make higher accessible
to our residents for this reason
New Mexico first fully supports
H. B. one thirty three and we
think Representative Ferrary for
bringing this forward thank you.
The agency Rovers that's go into
Kerr.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Kurt
record on the director of
Lutheran advocacy ministry of
New Mexico excuse me the third
advocacy ministry also speaks on
behalf of the New Mexico
conference of churches in the
interest of time will simply say
that I concur with the
statements have been made it may
be for me and I hear and I'm
here today also to support H. B.
one thirty three thank you thank
you very much.
Move it to the committee for any
questions or comments I don't
have anyone with their hands up
to this point Mr chair before we
go to committee Representative
Stansbury is in the audience.
Is that pool rover she is now
going to be a panelist and so
before we get the Representative
Matthews let's allow for
Representative Stansbury one of
the sponsors of the bill to make
any comments should you wish
Representative Stansbury good
morning that we wish to make any
comment thank you so much Mister
chairman and thank you to the
committee and this morning H. B.
one thirty three is to advance a
pilot to address hunger on our
college campuses and one of the
things that we found through a
study that was done this last
year by a number of research
partners is that there's
systemic hunger across our
universities and schools and so
it's really critical that we
address that those issues on
campus and it's a hub to help
students and faculty and staff
are experiencing food insecurity
actually access resources and
food so thank you so much this
morning and hope you all are
doing well thank you thank you
for joining us first we have to
speak Representative Matthews
Representative.
Floor is yours.
Here looks.
No no you're you're you're and
sounds up nineteen muted.
Representative you did it again.
Okay hi
I just want to
not really at a question but I
taught at C. N. M. for a number
of years and I just want to say
that I had students who
literally were working three
jobs sleeping in our cars trying
to get an education and I in
full support of this we.
The the effort since some of
these people make where they
became my heroes they work so
hard to get an education and if
we can find some help with food
that would be awesome thank you.
Thank you next the less we have
Representative Hochman Vigil
represented the floor is yours.
You very much Mr chairman I want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill I just a
quick comment I was shocked to
read materials that up to thirty
two percent of students are food
insecure on college campuses
that is completely unacceptable
we have to do something about it
especially for our you know
young people are doing what they
can to better themselves and the
and their lives so you know I
support the bill just one
question for one of the sponsors
is this a freestanding
freestanding appropriation or
has this been incorporated into
you know any higher education
institutions budget.
Mr chair and representative Dan
Hochman Vigil we are not
incorporated into any of the
budgets as far as I know
perhaps secretary at W.
secretary Trujillo can answer
that.
Yes thank you Representative
Hochman Vigil and Representative
Ferrary from what I understand
is that we would run this
through of the New Mexico
department of education as an
RFP process that would be open
to all institutions of higher
education throughout the state.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
Mr here that's exactly the
answer I was looking for thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative any other
representatives with questions
or comments.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Mr Chairman a do pass.
past motion by Representative
hopping the hills are second
second second by Representative
Matthews settlement of the
secretary please call the roll.
Alice.
Representative Brown.
Representative these L..
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Matthews yes
Representative small.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Allison.
Representative Brown.
Representative is now.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora.
By chair Herrera chaired Lenti
yes.
I have to do is they're all.
So it it does not seem as we
have a majority of our.
Of our committee members now
being that there are other
committees going on at the same
time though
I don't think we have the votes
at this point in time to to to
move this on to his next
committee
I will ask.
I will ask that we.
Table this.
This house bill one thirty three
to a point where we can bring it
back and we do have a majority
of our members back from their
other committees where they are
presenting.
Thank you Mr chair and really
appreciate that thank you
representative appreciate a
presentation this morning.
Thank you very much thank you
let's then not having than a
majority of our voting members
it we have some that are online
Taylor if you could please do
just that the favor of calling
those folks there on that are
showing that their online
Representative is L.
Representative Zamora and and
and let them know that we are
still in session as well as I I
do know that Representative had
and and Allison have a bill I I
do believe Representative small
might have a bill well and and
brown so that being said we're
kind of at that point we're
we're just losing members back
and forth from committee so
At this point in time
We can still move forward though
with house bill one sixty eight
and and hopefully we will regain
that that the major back into
our committee so that we can
further take votes on on on the
on these pieces of legislation
so with that being said house
bill one sixty eight national
flood insurance compliance
Representative Ortez I see you
in the attendees list I will
bring you over thank you already
are.
Representative Ortez.
Okay
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for
joining us we have House Bill
once the gate national flood
insurance compliance and without
further ado Representative you
have the floor at Mr chair I do
have to expert witnesses I'd
like to bring over as well Mr
Mackey Stackpole needs of the
red hatch.
Should be if your raise your
hand please it will pull you
over that be great.
There there's one.
Morning Mr good morning and then
the other.
She may not be there should
maybe she'll come in as we're as
we're Chattan okay very good so
with that we do representatives
the floor is yours.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee this bill H. B.
one sixty eight will bring the
state of New Mexico in
compliance with the national
flood insurance program through
FEMA this program provides
subsidized flood insurance to
property owners renters and
businesses in return for a
community adopting minimum
building standards inside
special flood hazard areas two
years ago the national flood
insurance program communicated
to New Mexico and other states
that in order to be eligible for
federal flood insurance and
other types of federal
assistance that states needed to
bring up their floodplain
management standards are to the
federal standard for beyond the
also told our state and other
states that if we fail to adopt
or enforce sufficient flood
floodplain management
regulations we may be put on
probation or suspended from the
national flood insurance program
and may become ineligible for
some types of federal assistance
to this need for compliance is
not just at the state level
other local participating
communities where non compliant
state development occurs could
be also placed on probation or
suspended.
This would be this would result
in community residents not being
eligible for federal flood
insurance policies they may be
subject to extra charges they
may find themselves ineligible
for some types of federal
assistance in areas of
identified flood risk that would
be financially disastrous for
many community should a flood
event occur the state of New
Mexico is considered a community
for national flood insurance
purposes and the state must
adopt and enforce adequate land
use and development criteria
that are consistent with the
minimum standards that are
required what's important to
note here is that if we built
state buildings out of
compliance with the federal
requirements we're putting the
general public at risk if
there's a flood event.
So what this bill does is it
brings our state up to this
federal flood plain management
standards and ensures that New
Mexico continues to be eligible
for federal flood insurance and
other types of federal
assistance as well of course is
providing the health and safety
and general welfare of the
residents of New Mexico.
The department of homeland
security and emergency
management will be responsible
for compliance role in adoption
of rules and regulations to
implement these minimum
standards and the New Mexico
construction industry division
will have the authority to
review permit and enforce
floodplain management
regulations on public buildings
and with that I stand for
questions along with my expert
witnesses COVID and Mr Steckel
and miss Hatcher she has made it
over.
Representative Lord yes Mr staff
will be getting also at thank
you not move or the audience I
was just gonna say miss hatch
says that her hand is currently
raised
and so that are issued under a
different name maybe Chelsea or
or Jason.
not to my knowledge creeks at
this point I don't see anybody
or that being the attendees that
so
at if you want to ask required
to seeking under a different
name that we will then go to the
audience for any
focal for their support or
opposition to this bill so at
this point in time
Representative we will now go to
the audience all those in
opposition house bill one sixty
eight please raise your hand.
Go to Chelsea.
Chelsea with his good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I apologize I
was not able to change the name
on it
My zero my name is actually
lower to hatch I am your state
floodplain coordinator I
apologize one real quick then
because we're we're asking the
public comments so.
You'll be moved over and if we
have any questions on the
committee will that come back to
you so that all those again in
opposition to house bill one
sixty eight.
All those in support of house
bill one sixty eight please
raise your problem.
Okay with that being said then
we will go to the committee.
We begin with Representative
Hochman Vigil representative the
floor is yours.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative Ortez
for bringing this bill I just
have a few questions
is Representative is this bill
meant to be retroactive meaning
of the the new standard would be
applicable to state buildings
that had been inspected in the
past.
Mr chair representative how
committee hearing that is a very
very good question and I'm going
to allow my expert witnesses to
answer that.
Either Mister staff pool or and
then catch.
Mr Chairman Representative
Hochman Vigil no man this will
not be retroactive this will be
only for development going.
on past the adoption point.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair representative Ortez
It is.
The other thing that caught my
on a and B. I think is one of
the committee analyses was that
as Representative as drafted
it it's unclear if state
buildings that receive capital
outlay funding but also be
subject to these these new
imposed regulations it was is
that true.
It would be yes ma'am.
Okay thank you very much hi Mr
Senator nice to see you and
Representative Ortez and the
last question I have I'm I'm a
new HFC member and I don't know
if everybody can tell but I I'm
always have to ask this question
now but see the potential for
increased costs but it it looks
like there would be a potential
for increased cost of the
inspections do you have a plan
as to how to cover that cost.
I thank you that Mr chair
representative needy kids I
believe that this year we we
don't need that extra probation
but I'm going to that
Mr staff for give you more
detailed answer.
So at this point it's it's not
envision that it would be an
extra cost to the state right
now this is sort of the first
half and setting up the program
that said C. A. T. and DHS Yemen
visions that as this program
builds out it likely would end
up increasing costs both for
licensing as well as potentially
an additional employee at DHS CM
to manage it but that's that at
this point no we're not vision
increased costs.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Representative Ortez I
appreciate appreciate your
answers I would just caution we
especially if we're envisioning
this this to apply to buildings
all state buildings including
just those that have received
capital outlay funding I I would
anticipate you're gonna have
additional costs with regards to
this program and I would ask you
to to keep that in consideration
as the program is is implemented
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative that's good
Representative is L..
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Ortez in regard
to your bill that you have
before us
What impact will this have on
private property.
Thank you Mr chair
representative sell I I believe
that this really only applies to
state owned property Mr Steckel
would you be able to elaborate
on that please.
This man that this only applies
to state property that this has
no effect whatsoever on and
private property.
Mr chairman and representative
and Mr stockpile of.
How much input right now is
there going to be coming from
local control.
Can you answer that question I
can actually direct that to miss
hatch she actually is our local
floodplain managers should be
the the best person on that.
Mr chairman and Representative
as well as
It.
I'm sorry your question.
I'm just curious about what the
impact is going to have as for
Otaru as local input goes
throughout each county
throughout the state of New
Mexico and to me this seems like
it is taken away that authority
through our by our local flood
control and the ability for them
to be able to come up with their
own decisions plus saving the
state a lot of money.
Yes ma'am
it will not take any of the
authority away from the local
jurisdictions we have a
separates us state statute which
is three eighteen seven which
gives the authority to the
municipalities and counties to
have control over their own
jurisdictions this would simply
be that for you know communities
that may not be participating
currently in the national flood
insurance program.
and as well as that I would like
to say that any development that
happened in a local jurisdiction
sure that jurisdiction have a
higher standard that they've
adopted for their community that
more stringent measure would be
the one that would be
Of complied with.
Mr Chairman representative miss
hatch thank you for that
explanation that I also have to
keep in mind in my particular
district in the very early
sixties there were two.
Dams that were created of west
of Rossell to to do justice to
protect that flood plain that
does go through Rossell from
events that do happen and these
dams were built.
With the army corps of engineers
specifications one of those dams
happens to be in my west pastor.
And that that is private
property out there about so I
don't know probably twenty years
ago army corps of engineers tell
the flood of flood control
people in Travis county.
Because of funding that came in
because if you don't spend it
according to federal regulations
you lose it so they had to go
out there and lower the spill
way one of those dams which gave
me the opportunity to set up the
second largest at nation in the
state of New Mexico which was of
a rush Mr chairman ms hatch
whenever we're talking about
projects like that.
And representative.
Are you working in conjunction
with the army corps of engineers
on a lot of these projects are
you working with the office of
the state engineer on any of
these projects because I know in
the southeastern part of the
state there are lots of these
what they call **** dams to stop
the flooding here are you
working in conjunction with
those different entities that I
just name.
Representative that's all of our
kids thank you.
This would proposed legislation
It it's specific to development
that is going to be funded whole
or in part with
state funds if it were to be
some type of flood control
structure that was being built
like a damn then we would yes
ma'am be working closely with
the owners of that damn and the
designers of that damn to make
sure that it was meeting the
minimum floodplain regulations
okay but whenever we're also
seeing is far far as this
project goes Mr Chairman agency
or testaments hatch of.
The budgets going to be
increased from two thousand
dollars to ten thousand dollars
depending on what the project is
and right now all General
Services hires a flood plain
professional for new buildings
only can you tell me.
Up here it is also stating that
an additional two hundred ninety
five thousand dollars would be
required to hire three full time
employees are we being redundant
here whenever there are already.
Flood control management people
located in each one of our
counties.
Thank you.
Mr chair Representative Ezzell
I'm so the I I can't speak to
the numbers that were provided
of that are representing that
the added costs to design would
be that much
I can't imagine that they would
be I believe that what they're
trying to Representative is that
it could be approximately two
thousand dollars per project.
And
that they're estimating three
hundred projects a year however
I'm not completely sure that all
three hundred of those would end
up in a special flood hazard
area which requires that type of
the design review
when it comes to of the.
Thank you that there may be some
dot double coverage there.
There are areas in the state of
New Mexico they do not.
That are outside of they do not
participate in the national
flood insurance program and in
those areas and those
communities we would need
someone at the state level.
that's what we wanted we thought
that it would be wonderful to
have New Mexico construction
industry division this is where
those development projects go
through to get their building
permits so if if we can have a
certified floodplain manager
there at the state to look at
those and make sure is it in the
flood plain is it not if it is
what type of minimum standards
does that development need to be
built to.
That that's why we need this at
a state level as well as to come
into compliance as a state as a
community with the national
flood insurance program.
Mr Chairman representative amiss
hatch thank you for that
explanation but I thought that
was the whole intent of FEMA.
Designating what areas in our
various counties.
That have been.
Impacted by flooding conditions
plus the the measurements that
they put in place to protect
these areas so that they could
be eligible for the insurance
part of it so I'm I'm really
concerned there also
Whenever you are talking about.
We all know that and then it
says right here one of the
notices that the department of
homeland security is respect is
the agency that's responsible
for compliance with the federal
flood management regulations
it is establishes rules for
development owned or partially
owned or funded by the state to
meet the federal floodplain
management regulations and then
you're also throwing in the
regulations and licensing
department along with the
construction industry division
I've I just feel like we're
being really re done to right
here.
Do you have a response for me at
this time Mr chairman and Miss a
Representative Ortez.
Maybe Mr Chairman representative
if if if I may so this is meant
to close the gaps there are
areas in which an and I think
this has been speech this better
than I could right after this
but in shorts there are local
control scenarios and those
aren't even meant to be with
this legislation goes after this
is meant to go after even all
public buildings this is meant
to close the gap where state
projects that right now don't
have any type of local oversight
on flood plain management
actually would have it and it
would go through the same
construction industry division
process that the locals
certification would go through
and so that's what agency has
was getting out where she says
Hey it's it's still going to see
ID it's not meant to be
redundant in a way if there's
for some reason a and and I know
we're certain speaking
hypotheticals but a state
project that the locals already
are certifying on their local
floodplain management it would
still go through C. ID and
ideally it would simply be a
checkbox to pay the locals have
already done it in the case in
which it wouldn't fall under
local control though the state
would have your second through
C. ID to be able to say Hey does
this does this comply with local
floodplain management and
therefore still make New Mexico
as a community certified for
NFIP insurance agency hatchet
please please correct me but if
up spoken wrongly you might be
able to give an example.
That's what I just got this.
Yes.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell.
Mandy's correct Mr staff was
correct there are situations
where
state agencies who may be
responsible for the design and
development of a public building
would not necessarily go through
the local just jurisdiction for
a building permit they would go
straight to see ID this causes a
problem there's a gap there is a
hole in that process that's
allowing it for public buildings
to be built with out receiving
that's what plan review and
those are the ones that we're
trying to capture and close that
gap on there is an example
that's happened recently in the
case of an elementary school
that unfortunately
But straight to say NMC ID
without having gone to the local
jurisdiction for a flood plain
review
and it was built four feet below
where the of estimated water.
baseline elevation so the
inundation level of the water it
is built four feet below that
level and this is an elementary
school with kids who are less
than four feet tall these are
the things we're trying to avoid
and make sure that our our our
New Mexico residents are safe
and try to close that gap and
capture ma'am thank you.
Mr Chairman representative a
miss hatch.
And Mr staff call I do
appreciate what you have just
tell me your but any time that
there is any building taking
place.
It does either have to go
through the the city planning
part of it with inspections done
or if it's in it out in the
county it has to be approved by
the county commission and also
inspected there as well if there
is a problem they do make
recommendations on no we will
not allow this because this is
an unsafe area or yes you are
perfectly safe here because of
the measures we locally have put
in to protect these areas so I'm
really really concerned here
that wire we I don't know.
Throwing the baby out with the
bath water and bringing in
somebody else to say the same
thing whenever as far as local
control goes it's already taken
place.
Just throwing it out there yes.
Of.
Mr Chairman if I may.
thank you Representative Ezzell
that the problem is not
In the jurisdictions who have an
active floodplain program and
who employee of slip plane it
Madam
it's the other areas of you know
that may not
participate in the national
flood insurance program or it's
a situation where they the the
state agency.
Unfortunately has the option to
go straight to New Mexico
construction industry for their
development permit and the local
jurisdiction is being
kind of left out of it it and I
think that you are correct ma'am
that it there if the process
were followed correctly you know
that anyone that went through
the local jurisdiction NMC ID
would see on the permit that
they went to the local and it
was signed off on.
However there are some
development that there isn't
going to be some development
that doesn't have a local
jurisdiction to go through that
has that floodplain manager they
can do that review for them and
that's where we're trying to
close that gap we absolutely do
not want to take away any
authority from the local
jurisdictions I was a local
floodplain manager for the
village Basti farms for seven
years and I I understand where
they come from I understand the
job this will help support them
because they make sure also that
at at C. IDE they're now trained
in flood plain and they're going
to be able to recognize yes a
development is happening that
has not received that review and
send them back to that local
jurisdiction and say you need to
go talk to them and make sure
you're following their
guidelines this is to catch
those type of situations as well
ma'am.
Mr Chairman Mr Chairman
representative agency had thank
you for that explanation are my
concern here is right now
according to the General
Services Department they're
going to have to hire a
certified plus flame plug flood
plain island floodplain
management professional.
So I'm sure that there's going
to be an RFP for that and
there's no telling what that is
going to cost the state and in
this bill I'm not seeing any if
unless I'm missing it somewhere.
The there's no.
Appreciation in this bill for
that where is this money going
to come from.
Representative will test.
Mr chair Matt representatives
Alice there there is no
appropriation needed for for
this year to get into the into
compliance which is what we need
to do if we want to continue to
receive the flood national flood
insurance flood insurance.
Support from the federal
government I I'd like for Mr
secretary to or or miss Hatcher
right to respond further about
the appropriations I think there
were some issues before you do
miss was had more more remind
the folks that we are supposed
to be on the floor at eleven
o'clock.
The answers brief I have asked
me to excuse us from the
beginning part of the floor
session but we must be able to
be able to get on time this and
so quickly Mr staff residents
but Mr chair representative in
short this is the first step in
a process to help raise New
Mexico's floodplain management
regulations so I miss it protect
the public from receivable flood
events as well as for litigation
standpoint minimize the state
avoidable avoidable liability
that said in the long term as
this program is built out and C.
ID or GST will need to dedicate
resources DHS yet might need to
to dedicate additional resources
and know where we trying to hide
the fact that at some point as
this program builds out as more
projects are created there there
likely will be the need for
financial support behind that
this like this aspect of it is
not that this aspect is to move
us up to the federal regulations
standard help creates a fill in
that stop gap as as miss hatch
addressed it it's not meant to
create duplicative layers or
anything like that it's it's
genuinely meant to fill a stop
gap where regulations or
building management isn't
currently being able to be
enforced at at the moment and to
allow the states through C. ID
to be able to regulate those
buildings and equipment and
Slyke the school just hash
referenced.
Miss Representative up.
You're on mute ma'am.
If Mr Stackpole is waiting for
his.
Miss hatch to make a response or
Representative Ortez let them go
ahead first.
Let's say don't want to answer
any more questions that.
Well Mister chairman you know
I'm pretty mail the on this a
first off of his I have problem
with homeland security whenever
they were trying to go in there
and.
Six things that they it in their
words by having a meeting that
affected Travis county.
Having that particular meeting
up in Lincoln County.
That affected downstream users
and that's exactly what happened
there we found out about it
because of a person call me is
is are you aware of this meeting
people did show up in force from
Travis county into Lincoln
County to talk about what
homeland security was going to
do as far as going through
private property okay that was
one issue there then they came
back and said this is what we're
going to do to protect all the
people of Rossell because that
is a flood plain area those
measures were already in place
so I therefore I do have a
problem with what all is going
on right here of the going
through the regulation licensing
department with the construction
industry division gives me a
little bit of concern there
because in my opinion Mr
chairman and representative in
essence I do understand what
you're trying to do here but I
also feel like you are leaving
get a lot of local control that
has already taken place either
through your municipalities or
through the county commissions
Mr Chairman representative thank
you all for your time and for
answering my questions thank you
Representative result see no
further actually no we have
Representative Matthews excuse
me.
Representative Matthews.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
thank you all for your
presentation
just a couple short questions
when you talk about state
property is that going to
include our colleges and our
universities at our state
colleges and universities.
Many colleges and so forth.
Mr chair at Representative
Matthews on the tax can you.
sedate on that.
Mr chair Representative Matthews
thank you.
This of would.
Only apply to development that
is funded in part or wholly was
state funds so if that if those
days that development of the was
funded through that string then
yes then that would.
Mr Chairman at thank you thank
you for that answer
It.
With these inspections look at
existing buildings and could
there be a situation where there
had to be retrofit of some
nature.
Mr chairman and Representative
Matthews.
No this is not going to be
looking this is not retroactive
at all this is.
That this is a common practice
what I feel like I need to
explain is that.
Any public building already goes
through this process
to meet minimum standards for
flood plain regulation it's just
that we're adding
Attached for some of the at C.
eight agencies that are getting
miss some of that development
but it's not going to be
retroactive at all ma'am.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
that answer and Mr chairman
right.
By being part of this insurance
plan will that.
Save potentially or actually
save the state any.
Money in terms of insurance
cost.
D. chair representative
Matthews.
Miss hatch do you want to answer
that question or is that.
Yes.
Yes
In
order to.
In order to be.
Eligible for the federal flood
insurance Senator minimum
standards through the national
flood insurance program that we
have to comply with in order to
be eligible not only did receive
federal insurance but also for
state to self certify its
insurance so this is something
that we it's it's we have to
take into consideration is that
we are considered a community as
defined by the national flood
insurance program and if we do
not of.
If we want to participate in
that program we must of the you
know adopt those minimum
standards and right now at a
state level we are not in
compliance with those so it will
cause an issue with our ability
to receive that federal flood
insurance but also to self
certify
for insurance purposes ma'am.
I'm Mr Chairman at.
Representative Matthews are
muted.
I'm Mr Chairman
Representative mismatch I
understand we're not in
compliance and I guess my
question is does this mean that
the state doesn't have any kind
of flood insurance on some of
our state buildings.
That are could be at risk.
I mean and and I'm I'm just
trying to understand do you have
coverage or we don't because
we're not in compliance.
Mr chair representative met Mr
chairman Representative Matthews
I think we get a tiny bit of
forgiveness on this to to get
into compliance but I will let
the ex reduces our delve into
that more detail.
We have a we have other matters
get.
This has to the Representative
sorry Mr Chairman representative
the in the short answer is that
right now the NFIP has basically
said it we'd like everybody to
come up to compliance and has
left its the assumption is that
we are still in FIP complaints
because we are working to move
our our standards up to the
federal level however that grace
period is somewhat a more focus
and so we know that time creates
closing.
That that's that's a really
brief wait at to sort of address
or the larger.
Mr Chairman Representative and
and experts thank you for your
answers are yield thank you what
is pledge of the committee.
It would Mr chair I move that to
pass on H. B. one sixty eight.
Second.
Mr chair substitute motion to
table.
Okay with their assessed in
Washington that takes precedence
so we will take that we would
take the role for a motion to
table house bill one sixty
eight.
Representative madam secretary
please call the roll.
Representative Allison.
to table.
Representative Brown.
Representative is now.
Yes to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
I know stable.
Representative Matthews.
No to table.
Senator small.
No.
Representative Zamora.
Yes the table.
Representative Brown.
Vice chair Herrera.
I know to table Chairman T.
noted cable we motion fails the
we will go back back to the
table to
What do passed house bill one
sixty eight.
Resented by Representative by
children Herrera seconded by
Representative of small madam
secretary please call that will.
Allison yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative these L. no.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative small.
Representative small.
Yes yes.
Representative Zamora nope.
My chair her era.
Yes.
Twenty yes.
Sixty two.
Sixty a do pass thank you
representative isn't in your
expert witnesses appreciate you
being here this morning.
Will be going to house bill one
seventy I I realize that people
have to skip away for for other
presentations and other
committees
I would like to have the final
vote on house bill one thirty
three to four for our
consideration so Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chair at this time
I'd move to remove house bill
one thirty three from the table.
Maybe it will help the one three
three from table their second.
Second second by Representative
small if we can bring back to
the sponsor for house bill one
thirty three Representative
Ferrary Representative bash
Representative Stansbury.
Make the panelists
and at this point in time again
because of the shuffling of
committees I I recognize that we
can't be here at that with the
exact time that we're gonna vote
we try our best but at the same
time I don't want to hold
legislation because of that
nature so with that being said
what what is the pleasure of the
committee on house bill one
thirty three.
The past in a second this is a
motion to pass Hochman Vigil as
a second by Representative
small.
He's a madam secretary called
the roll.
Representative Alice yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative you sell.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative small yes.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Brown.
Representative these L..
Representative.
Vice chair Herrera yes.
Chairman T. yes.
Six.
Go to six is there unanimously
passed house bill one thirty
three thank you Representative
Ferrary representative Stansbury
for re joining us again and have
a great day thank you Mr
chairman appreciated to House
committee we will get through
this this agenda today I think
it's really important that you
know we we understand that we
have a lot of work to get done
and so again I have asked Rinna
and the folks on the floor for
our excuse to get this agenda
finished and things that we will
go to the house bill one seventy
which is being presented by
Representative Armstrong Gail
Armstrong and representative
Rebecca Dow if we can bring both
of those Representative is in to
join us as panelists please.
Good morning representative
Armstrong.
Good morning Mr chair.
Morning a the meeting is
Representative Dow in the room.
I don't see here and she's
welcome to join us whenever she
wants to Representative
Armstrong you do have house bill
one seventy New Mexico grown
food produce in child care
centers the floor is yours then
thank you Mr chairman and if we
could have Tamerlan be brought
over as an expert with witness
that would be really nice and
while we're doing that Mr
chairman and members of the
committee on make this short and
sweet it pretty much speaks to
our.
Everything that we have to do
with feeding New Mexicans in New
Mexico and this is making
appropriation for the early
childhood education care
department to create a program
for childcare centers to
purchase New Mexico grown fruits
and vegetables we've done this
and senior center so we've done
this in schools and now we would
like to add
the early childhood so it's real
short and sweet thank you Mr
chairman my stand for questions
thank you very much
Representative I do we we don't
see Pam wrote in the attendees
list to join you should you come
in and need to answer the
questions will definitely come
back to her there being no one
else to present with we will go
to the attendees list and all
those in favor of house bill one
seventy please raise your hand
will come to you one by one
we'll begin with the niece these
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee that was
awfully fast thank you so much I
guess I have to be careful how
quickly I raise my hand there
I'm Denise Miller executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association
and we still strongly support
bill one seventy this work is
extremely important and what's
happening right now in New
Mexico between the
Agencies.
The
your muted it.
I'm so sorry I'm so sorry about
that thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Denise Miller and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico farmers marketing
association.
I'm we stand in strong support
extremely strong support to bill
one seventy the work that is
happening right now with our
state agencies with the New
Mexico grown program and this
includes the public education
department the aging long term
service department in the early
child hood Department is it
really quite remarkable and
what's been happening is that
the the synergy and the system
that had been put in place over
the last decade for the public
education department is now
being shared with the other with
the senior centers in the early
childhood sites and we just had
a grower buyer meeting sponsored
by the Public Education
Department and all the agencies
the other day more than three
hundred attendees which were
both on the food service side as
well as farmers from across the
state attended we have a really
complete program robust program
that is in place that both
trains farmers on the food
safety helps them up get food
into the the senior centers the
child care centers and our
schools with technical
assistance and of the only piece
that's missing is making sure
that there's enough funding as
the Legislature has really done
over the years with the schools
and so this of this bill will
really help solidify and support
these programs that are serving.
In the you know people who need
the eaters across the state
children seniors everyone will
this bill particularly for the
children when there's so much
need for fresh healthy food so
I'll let other speakers address
this as well but the program
that the agencies have raided
you Miss.
We would increase your current
this morning
then then the more money the
folks in the the public making
comment that we have a floor
session to get to so please make
your comments brief very brief
and we'll go to Angela Garcia.
Mr Seah.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is Angela
Garcia I am the president of the
New Mexico childcare and
education association and I also
own the twenty Bucks early
learning centers in Los crucis
we stand in strong support of H.
B. one seventy I'm not only well
that bill encourage childcare
providers to start thinking
about sourcing locally for I'm
vegetables and produce but it
would allow educated education
to owners like myself of the
opportunities and our very own
communities we hope that you
past this I'm so that that
children New Mexicans have
access to various fruits and
vegetables locally grown thank
you for your time have a thank
you.
Miss king you're with us please
be brief.
I'll do my best hi everyone
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Heidi
Keyes I'm a registered dietitian
here in New Mexico with specific
expertise in food security and
child nutrition I recently
completed a three year term on
the institute of child
nutrition's CA CFP national
advisory committees of the CCP
of courses is the program that
this will interact with the most
and then also a current member
of the academy of nutrition and
dietetics child nutrition
reauthorization workers while I
was at UNM I was there for ten
years as a principal
investigator and director of
both USDA and CDC funded
nutrition research and programs
in New Mexico early childhood
settings so including head start
also licensed child care centers
and homes I have hundreds of
hours working with New Mexico
easy providers on how to
incorporate fruits vegetables
whole grains and dairy products
into Munoz an experience
learning opportunities as such I
know the policy side of these
programs and also on the ground
experience across the state the
research is really clear that
young children at this critical
developmental stage need
repeated opportunities sometimes
up to twenty times to try new
foods in order to develop a
taste for those foods and also
to establish healthy habits
early that will track into
adulthood we also rely on easy
programs to provide access to
fruits and vegetables that
otherwise may not be offered at
home so this bill will allow for
not only to be able to meet
different rational requirements
for kids but also to expand that
variety of fruits and vegetables
that are sure to children which
we know are easy partners are
consistently advocating for
expanding seasonal and local
fruits and vegetables into those
programs so while I'm overall
adequate intake is important a
greater focus on variety is
critical so thank you so much
and I'm very strongly it's.
Going into Ecker Rovers Erica
once again please be brief.
You're with us.
Hi good morning I'm good morning
chair led team can committee
members my name's Eric Rovers
and I'm here on behalf of New
Mexico first I'm speaking in
full support of H. B. one
seventy sponsored by
representatives Armstrong and
out this bill is a win for the
health and development of
children in New Mexico as well
as the growers providing fresh
produce for early childhood
center how the nutrition is
critical in those early years of
birth to five and we know that
providing fresh fruits and
vegetables grown right here in
New Mexico gives our children a
healthy foundation for the rest
of their lives as an
organization that convenes
farmers ranchers food banks
teachers parents and others in
the food sector we see programs
that connect growers directly to
consumers is beneficial for
everyone for these reasons we
ask that you support H. B. one
seventy and we think
representatives Armstrong and
out for bringing this
legislation forward thank you
very much as though than that to
rob rob good morning.
Do with this good morning Mr
chair and members of the
committee I represent the New
Mexico healthy soul working
group which is a grassroots
group of over a thousand farmers
ranchers in an urban and rural
residents as well as
conservation and agriculture
organization members and we
strongly support this
legislation there's no greater
investment to and then investing
in early childhood investing in
in farmers and ranchers
investment healthy food in a
local food system so this is
vital and thank you so much
thank you up let's go then to up
the.
The center for health innovation
please be brief.
You.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Susan
Wilger I'm executive director
for the center for health
innovation as New Mexico's
public health institute we're in
full support of this bill for
all the reasons previously
mentioned in any efforts that
through policy that we can do to
enhance fresh and nutritious
food through our institutions
including early childhood
institutions it is greatly
supported so thank you very good
thank you for being brief let's
go to David Anthony Wagner Mr
Wagner you are with this to be
brief.
Good morning Mr chairman Lente
members of the committee on the
Sanchez Armstrong and I'll my
name is Anthony Wagner Wagner
form slept in a farmer growing
fresh fruits and vegetables in
Kerala since the coral I've been
part of the New Mexico grown for
school built program for over
ten years providing on fresh
fruits and vegetables to our
schools and I would like you to
support and we support the your
house bill one seventy.
And would like you all to
support it would like to see
our.
There's a lot of kids and in
child care home programs here in
New Mexico and we like to see
them get fresh local healthy
foods thank you thank you Mr
Wagner let's go to the Rivera
Tiffany please be brief.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to near a very with
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau we appreciate the Sanchez
caring this bill and we look
forward to increased efforts to
increase our farmers exposure to
young children and to help
people understand where their
food comes from thank you Mister
Vera David Sandberg good morning
you're with us the we've.
Thank you so much everyone I am
in full support of house bill
one seventy as a member as a
long time shaft really
appreciate fresh fruits and
vegetables and a member of the
Senate bakery Policy Council in
providing local farmers better
access to markets to provide
equitable and fair compensation
for their products and beautiful
fresh fruits and vegetables like
those from the Wagner where kids
it is all is a wonderful task
thank you so much thank you very
much our goal is always to be
knowing good morning you with
this you've reached thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name is so we think
I am a registered lobbyist with
the national young farmers
coalition as well as a farmer
here in Bernalillo and support
counties we stand in full
support of house bill one
seventy for all of the reasons
stated and we thank the sponsors
for bringing it forward thank
you guys thank you Mr ball
guessing Mr guessing you are
with us good morning.
Good morning Paul guessing
presence of the Rio Grande
foundation and we support H. B.
one seventy seven it obviously
increases freedom of people to
engage in some form small
business as well as potentially
developing larger businesses
over time and it takes that
first step getting a small
business going in order to get
that bigger business set up and
created over time so thank you
and not I hope you'll support
this legislation
thank you for being with us are
there any members of the
audience that are opposed to
house bill one seventy.
Seeing is go to the committee
that let's begin with the
Representative is L.
Representative result.
Mr chair Mister chairman thank
you very much representative
Armstrong I truly do appreciate
this bill I do have a couple of
questions so how many child
cares of centers are going to be
included in this program do you
have any idea at this point.
Madam chair I mean excuse me Mr
chair and representative is out
it would be opened up to any
licensed child care across the
state of New Mexico.
Mr Chairman along that same
thought process.
Could a childcare registered
home be it would that be
applicable as well.
As you Mr chairman and members
of the committee as far as it is
if they have a license test.
Okay that's good to know Mr
Chairman representative
Armstrong of.
Will there be any differences
whenever you're trying to get
this split up to implement in
our rural areas verses are more
metropolitan areas are urban
areas
Mr chairman members of the
committee it will be equal split
equally across whoever would
like to apply for the program
it's been implemented in senior
centers across the state of New
Mexico and so there is there is
a Matt Paul.
Okay I'm encouraged to hear that
because more often than not it
does seem like our rural areas
are being excluded from
everything in our state and to
me that's very important
especially since a lot of what
you are promoting right here is
from our rural areas Mr chairman
I appreciate what Representative
Armstrong Dow and arm
Representative Armstrong and Dow
are doing here because the
younger we teach.
The earlier we teach our young
kids that they does come from
the land instead of grocery
stores it does make an impact on
on everybody's lives I do
appreciate you your build and I
do plan to support it thank you
very much thank you
Representative is L. it's going
to Representative Hochman B.
hill.
You very much Mr chair just a
couple of questions I think this
is going to become the
consummate question for me on
the committee
Mr chair and
the representative Armstrong is
this bill going to be included
in you CD's budget request this
year in front of HFC.
Mrs Ryan would you Mr chairman
would you allow this right to
answer that
yes Roy briefly.
Mr chairman and committee
members thanks so much Pam Roy
with the New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council is my
understanding that they are
hoping see this must not of a
hundred thousand dollars in
their budget this is an inter
agency initiative The New Mexico
ground and it is early childhood
education and care programs
senior centers the public
education department department
of agriculture and the
department of health is also
governor supported initiative
and so all of these agencies
want to see this as a permanent
program across agencies into the
future and so we're certainly
hoping for the support of the
hundred thousand dollar request
in the early childhood education
budget.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thread appreciate that answer
and another question I have is
is this program intended for in
home childcare centers as well.
It
is
Mr chairman and committee
members of him right yes it is
as long as as as Representative
Armstrong said that they're a
licensed facility the program is
actually established in the
public education department has
a format that I believe that the
early childhood education
Department would utilize the
sense of putting out a request
for proposals for centers to
apply so that is equitable
and and so hope that helps.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
representative and this right
should the answer as well lastly
I saw that this program will be
implemented in conjunction with
the USDA can you just talk a
little bit more Mr chair
representative about that
coordination and will federal
funding be available as a result
of that coordination approach.
Go ahead can.
Mr chairman and representative
thank you for that question and
actually so right in
Representative it so early
childcare centers do receive
some funding from as a
reimbursement for meal programs
from USDA is very similar for
schools and it's also similar
for senior centers they are done
it's a little bit differently
depending on the department but
those funds don't necessarily
fully covered the cost of a meal
so by the time you expand on on
staff equipment of the cost that
the funding that is left is
about a dollar fifty two dollars
seventy five for the whole meal
and and the use USDA nutrition
standards to provide those meals
across these programs and so for
the centers to meet those needs
this funding this much more
funding would actually help to
find beautiful New Mexico
produce
and on the plates of of early
childhood centers in their
nutrition program summer meal
programs child in adult care
center programs as well and so
it really would help with that
it also helps food service
directors in these programs
learn how to budget for provide
local we found with the public
education department schools are
now purchasing about twenty two
percent of their fruit and
vegetable it budgets from New
Mexico ground to these kinds of
modest incentive programs the
legislature has supported so I
hope that helps in answering
your question.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative and just right I
appreciate the answers.
Representative the school
funding into Representative
Zamora prisons what questions or
comments Mr chair might my
questions were answered and I
would like to move it to pass on
this bill it got a motion for do
pass or their second second.
Representative Garratt.
It looks like so madam secretary
please call the roll.
Representative Allison yes
Representative Brown.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews yes.
That is small.
Representative yes.
Somewhat off yes.
Representative Brown.
Thanks chair Herrera yes.
Yes it is none of us House Bill
one seventy passes thank you
Representative Armstrong for
doing this this morning.
Thank you so much the patients
to this and move on to finally
house bill one seventy seven
homemade food act Representative
Cook I saw him in the attendees
list open to pull you over the
panelists.
there was some question or
concern in regards to some to
Molly efforts your bill but so
just be aware and so with that
being said without further to do
you have anybody in the
attendees list that you like to
pull over for help.
Unibody.
Representative Cook hi sorry.
I do have somebody in the in the
in the.
Audience that wants to speak
Erica Smith okay will cool were
over and so with what we're
doing that Representative Cook.
The one seventy seven how many
Act floor's yours thank you Mr
thank you for a hearing this
bill I presented this bill to
this committee couple years ago
it would have been brought to me
originally by some people in
reversal reversal down to run a
a farmers market and so I I had
drafted for them and I presented
it and I didn't do much
promotion outside of you know
just haven't drafted and
introduced and I was surprised
when I came to this committee
because a lot of people actually
stood up in it and spoke in
support of it so I I realize
that time that there were a lot
of people who are interested in
this concept so
earlier this year I was
approached by another group
called the institute for justice
and that's who Erica Smith is
with and a.
Promote additional in other
states so I know rest so I'm
gonna pass it over to Erica just
says to speak with a little bit
more thank you Mr thank you very
much reserves please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Erica
Smith I'm a senior attorney at
the institute for justice I'm
also an expert on homemade food
laws also known as commission
lots I urge the committee to
support H. B. one seven seven
because New Mexico college food
laws are severely outdated are
there actually one of the most
restrictive and burdensome and
probably the most complicated in
the country right now H. B. one
seven seven would bring New
Mexico up to speed with best
practices in other states are it
would also help hundreds maybe
even thousands of people who
want to start on the food
business studies have shown that
these businesses really benefit
women in rural areas you don't
have a lot of money as well
state home parents Irish
immigrants and lots of other
people who really want or need
to be able to work on for.
During the pandemic that's more
important than ever especially
for restaurant workers and shops
there's no single concerns with
this bill as it only applies to
foods that are completely shelf
stable accessible because
roasted coffee beans jams and
jellies the same kind of cute
that are already safely sold
across the country in other
states
I know that we don't have a lot
of time if you'd like I can walk
you through what the bill does.
I think we're okay without you
walking us through
okay if we have questions we
will definitely call on
Representative as a cooker and
you miss Smith for any questions
or answers.
Thank you okay so with that
being said I'm gonna go to the
audience and see other folks in
support of house bill one
seventy seven please again be
brief do not be repetitive.
We'll go to Paul guessing Mr
guessing good morning.
Hello Mr chairman and members
the committee of New Mexico has
as Erica mentioned very
restrictive laws about cottage
Cruz forty nine other states do
not require a permit for for
home inspection for these kinds
of small businesses and we
encourage the committee to
support this bill.
Mr guessing thank you that's
going to Kathleen Kathleen good
morning you're with up the I got
the same error message that
you're using an older version of
zoom and they need to promote
the W. yourself if you are
willing if you want to speak so
I will unfortunately not be able
to go to you this morning unless
you want to update come back but
is there anyone in the public
that is on opposition to house
bill one seventy seven.
Opposition house bill one
seventy seven Patricia.
You with us.
Hi I am.
You're not.
No I'm actually in favor US
house bill one seventy seven.
Okay.
So I'm okay I am going to be
eligible eligible to retire in
three and a half years and I
started the process to obtain a
permit that will allow me to
sell baked goods out of my home
but have encountered challenges
throughout the way so this bill
would break down those barriers
for us and allow us to sell
baked goods right and come into
our families find a better
lifestyle for families and
it will help me to save money up
from my son's college fund and
make a transition into something
that I am passionate about once
I retire thank you so much thank
you for joining us Katie.
The transit gay.
With yes ma'am awesome thank you
thank you chairman and day and
to the committee members for
allowing me to speak and thank
you Representative Cook I'm here
today because I like other
makers in Albuquerque have been
shut out of an opportunity
that's provide to others across
our state three years ago I
started looking into starting a
home bakery and I actually was
excited to see New Mexico has
laws that allow that but when I
contacted Albuquerque I
discovered that they do not
apply to me because I live in
Albuquerque city limits and so
I've reached out to city council
members and others as well and
they were all really polite but
basically told me we're not
interested in that at this time
and so I am blocked out of this
opportunity that the rest of our
state house simply because I
live twenty minutes away from a
different area of the city and
so three years since the amount
of time that I've been missing
out on growing my business while
seeking the changes that this
bill would create for us I'm
sure those of you who have
children understand why renting
a commercial kitchen and
launching a full fledged bakery
with a three year old is not
feasible for me and so this bout
bill would allow me to slowly
scale that business in a way
that fits my family's base of
life's lower initial costs which
would reduce our financial risk
and does allow me to raise my
daughter in the home we love and
I have to move to start this
business so our state has
already established laws that
recognize the safety benefit of
this in my fate fellow bakers
and I shouldn't be shut out
simply because our city decided
it was something they don't want
to pursue so I just ask you guys
to support this bill thank you
for your time and thank you for
serving our state thank you
goodness go find and Amy Amy
good morning.
the.
Medicaid go ahead.
Sorry about that is it.
No it's not but we can't thank
you for.
I'm looking to New Mexico a
couple of months ago my husband
and I are
I think that you know that
family for thirty years.
Working in North Dakota and I
think we we were residents of
Wyoming.
You really hard on us and I lost
all my revenue with my speaking
regarding business twenty twenty
and so when unemployment started
to run out and there was no
prospect really I started.
In New Mexico under there
because what will.
Able to do that when we were
home in Wyoming what made it so
simple there in that there are
regulations aren't easy to read
and easy to follow and I didn't
have to go through a licensing.
Receive your annual inspections
or any of that I can we just
start making one of the
following rules and so that's
what I.
When the unemployment ran out
when we bought this shirt our
plan was to make it an issue
eight armed to table operation
and the community has been very
supportive I'm not looking
forward to the homemade.
Increasing your consequences.
I think hello and other things
like that
and my mother in law used to be
con hi in the community is
anxiously waiting for those to
come back but right now but
again these are refinements yes.
But.
Regulations are very hard to
navigate and I haven't been able
to have any incomes and New
Mexico so this bill would be
For people like me just.
And response models like the
former president that and and
make a living and try to grow a
small business in New Mexico.
Very good thank you for joining
us thank you.
The again I'm gonna go then to
the audience if there's anyone
in opposition to house bill one
seventy seven.
If there is not then there are
up there is some folks in
opposition house bill one
seventy seven.
please be brief your comments
the needs Miller your with this
good morning.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee thank you very
much Denise Miller executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association
and we fully you know we really
we are in opposition to this
bill because although everything
we do is about supporting the in
income that small producers can
make at farmers markets and
other direct sales outlets we
are very concerned about public
health and safety and I think
our comments are best summed up
by the F. I. R. provided by the
environment department and there
you know I I think.
The most yeah that if you folks
look at the F. I. R. I think
that covers all the reasons that
we're not in favor of this bill
thank you very much very good
thank you miss Miller let's go
to panicking at a good morning
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you just
really briefly I'm a registered
dietitian here in New Mexico and
there are deep concerns about
public safety in terms of
increased risk of food borne
illness as a result of removing
protections for the public and I
think and the other issue here
too is that we are I would be
concerned about lessening public
trust in bad news where folks
can purchase these foods much is
the way Denise Miller from
Mexico farmers farmers marketing
association noted so.
Really concerned about public
safety here so that's that's a
huge issue for us thank you Mr
let's go to Pam Roy Pam you're
with us good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members first I'm here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
and as much as we would love to
be in support of this bill
because the various the very
reasons that ms Miller and is
keen brought up this is really
about economic opportunities for
small scale producers in our
state
for the reasons of the F. R. FIR
the school fiscal impact report
we are concerns that it does
diminish some of the
requirements even for those
nonvolatile lowveld hello
Products that can be made in a
home kitchen we think that food
safety is important and the
public safety is.
Very important when these things
are actually for sale in farmers
markets you could put farmers
markets in a liable position as
well if something did happen you
know nobody wants to hurt
anybody through our beautiful
homemade foods but we really
would like to work with the
sponsor on this ahead of time
and and or is it Mr this process
it would be really helpful
thanks so much for and again I
appreciate the idea that public
safety number one the right
receiving with this this morning
let's and now go to the
committee first we have on our
list Representative is out Mr
chairman thank you very much
want to of I think it's in my
opinion it's a really good bill
because it's it is an economic
opportunity for a lot of these.
In home businesses to get start
whenever we see of.
The department of.
I guess which one is it.
Hold on just one moment I'm
trying to find a place here.
Environment department has been
detrimental to a lot of these
businesses trying to get
started.
Many of the people folks in my
areas same reason if they're
going to prepare anything it has
to be in a commercial kitchen
well they're not doing this just
for fun they cannot afford
commercial kitchens I cannot go
anywhere to make their foods
whatever they're doing in a
commercial kitchen it's not
available I have also seen the
effects of the environment
department going into high
schools in my area if the
humpback Department has made
let's let's just say brownies
and I have extras left over they
have been told I have to throw
amount instead of offering them
to the other students in the
school what a waste Mr chairman
I do have a question for
Representative Cook come read
one of the analysis.
And it says it you whenever you
are defining non potentially
hazardous foods.
It also includes dried or
dehydrated produce.
Can you expand on that a little
bit and then I'll tell you why
I'm asking can you give me tell
me what dried or dehydrated
produce may be Mr Chairman if I
can defer to Erica Smith okay
Smith on.
Chair representative the food
that are allowed under this bill
is anything that shelf stable
and does not need to be
refrigerated so if once you do
hydrate your vegetables they
become shelf stable you can sell
them.
Mr chairman of Representative
could miss Smith I do appreciate
that with this also include
jerky.
It would not include any
Representative I'm gonna even if
the Turkey why shell stable meat
would not be allowed okay that's
what I wanted the
differentiation there okay Mr
Chairman
I'm just really bothered
whenever we have a department
that is so overbearing as far as
people being able to participate
in a program like that I find it
very.
Troublesome as far as any small
business getting up and going
and that is the environment
department and I'm assuming
Representative Cook and Mr
chairman that you have research
the cottage food laws in other
states and taken the lead from
what they have going.
Mr Chairman not to forget
direct.
Yes Representative I have
personally worked on the kind of
should laws in over a dozen
states and I'm familiar with the
laws in all fifty states are
that's why I'm able to say that
The New Mexico's current law is
severely outdated and is
probably the most restrictive
not one of the most restrictive
in the country so this is taken
from best practices in other
states and if I made to address
the health and safety concerns
I understand that whenever
you're removing regulations that
there is a health and safety
concerns that that's just the
instinct but I can tell you that
these foods are sold in every
state but New Jersey actually
because New Jersey bans their
sale they were sued
and we know from multiple
studies expert testimony
including from procedures
microbiologist that there are no
safety concerns that there has
never been even a single
instance of a person getting
sick from a cottage food law
good souls under cottage food
law so these are extremely state
and I agree that right now the
restrictions are just preventing
people from opening their own
business.
Mr chairman I think it's very
important that any chance we get
for a an entrepreneur that is
out there trying to.
Get a foothold in and start
their own business that we do
needs to support I do feel that
house bill one seventy seven
Representative Cook here
whenever they are going through
the process of trying to have
the goods that are being sell
labels and with the all the
restrictions on there and
stating that there might be.
see what instances.
I mean this is this product was
produced at a private residence
that exempt from state licensing
inspection it may contain
allergens Mr Chairman.
The public has been warned but
it's also.
Very important that we do stand
beside these are these
entrepreneurs thank you very
much Mr Chairman representative
in ms Smith.
Thank you Representative is
eligible Representative
Matthews.
Your.
They got their gap I'm gonna
quit hitting things twice
thank you Mr chairman and
Thank you for bringing this bill
I.
Representative date at date
Hochman Vigil had to leave so
she's asked me to ask some
questions that she had.
In and I assume that's okay to
do
and before I do that though I'd
like to.
I'd like to say a couple things
first of all
When I taught entrepreneurship
at C. N. M. and we had a a
culinary program there I worked
with many small businesses that
we're interested in developing
home based kinds of food.
Kinds of businesses like this
and I and I really supportive of
this idea I E. I think
I'm it seems to me maybe that
get this off the ground
there has to be kind of a real
look at trying to find a balance
between specific safety and of
the entrepreneurship.
Needs there are commercial
kitchens I know in Albuquerque
at the RG CDC and other places
anyway
so my.
My.
I tend to be in favor of this
kind of thing but I told
Representative Vigil I would
Representative Hochman Vigil I
would ask these questions which
are not necessarily in favor so
I just wanted to practice.
Show her question she's
interested in oversight and
liability issues what happens if
reports are made up on state.
Who enforces what processes are
in place to hold that producer
accountable what is the
liability of the state for
allowing that product brought to
market.
Mr chairman and Representative
before I had before that over to
miss Smith I don't really
consider this to be
Questions in opposition and I
think those very important
questions and.
and I will differ over to Smith.
Sure I'm happy to answer that if
there's any ever a complaint
against a cottage food producers
this bill allows the local
health departments to
investigate very much like they
would with any other food as for
liability concerns there is
insurance available out there hi
fi producers to get to protect
themselves from liability that's
usually available for just a few
hundred dollars a year but the
the government does not have any
liability for these it's I will
note that how does foods have
been around for a long time and
I'm not aware of a single
instance of anyone ever getting
sued for for a cottage food
getting someone sick because
they just don't get people
suspect these are very state.
Completely shelf stable.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you and ms thank
you for that answer at her
second question why wouldn't
anyone.
Cancel their permits with the
New Mexico environment
department and operate under
homemade food act.
Representative Matthews that Mr
Chairman also the way it works
right now is the permits are
annual so every year you have to
go through the same burdensome
process to get apartment so what
this law would allow is that you
just would no longer need that
permit if all you're doing is
selling shelf stable.
Yes.
I'm.
Number three Mr chairman and
would approval of this program
because in M. ET to lose federal
funding would revenue generated
sufficiently make.
Representative Matthews and Mr
chair
the federal government does not
regulate cottage foods
especially when they're just
sold within the state
so there is nothing and we have
talked extensively with USDA and
FTA about this they have no
problem with it so there's
absolutely no risk of losing
federal funding because of this
bill.
Mr Chairman
Thank you for that answer and
so I got two more federal law
and in in.
AC currently.
Prevent homemade food products
to be distributed to other
businesses and federal law
prohibits internet sales how do
you plan to get around this.
Representative Matthews Mr chair
that that's simply incorrect
federal law does not regulate
the sale conditions within the
state
this is not the first time I
have heard a state health
department objection that the
federal law is somehow getting
in the way it's simply not true
and we verified this with the
USDA and FTA so there's there's
absolutely no problem with
federal law with this bill and I
should add to your your other
question this will not cost the
environmental Department
anything in fact because you're
getting rid of the burdensome
government requirement you're
actually making their job easier
as I no longer have to go in and
regulate these very burdensome
and complicated part.
Mr chairman thank you for that
answer.
Would would under this bill
would the the producers be a.
sale on the internet.
Yes Representative Matthews and
Mr chair they would and selling
on the internet is already loud
in about twenty other states and
there's about a dozen other
states that are considering
right now to to allow this so
this is becoming a very common
thing especially during the
pandemic people want to be able
to sell on Facebook and Etsy
it's very common and because we
are talking about still stable
it's there's not any safety
concern with doing that.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that answer and her last
question would this act allow
for sufficient notice to
consumers of potential food
borne allergens.
Yes Mr chair representative
Matthews absolutely our anyone
who's selling under this bill
would have to disclose orally
and through their labels that
the students are not inspected
at their main in a home kitchen
and that they may contain
allergens.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to ask
questions Representative
Representative Hochman Vigil had
and I think I think their
religion my questions and not
necessarily hostile to this to
this concept
and with that I will
yield.
Representative Matthew speci
your comments and questions this
morning I don't have anyone else
on the list for the pleasure of
the committee.
Mr chair Mister represent a
small thank you Mr chairman I
move to table.
The motion to table by
Representative a small is there
second.
The second by Representative
Allison.
Madam smerom secretary please
call the roll.
Representative Allison yes able
of the Representative Brown.
Representative is out note to
table.
Senator Hochman Vigil.
The yes able.
Representative Matthews.
Not to table.
Representative small yes.
Representative Zamora noted.
Representative Brown.
I chair Herrera yes to table.
Yes the table.
Mr Chairman I agree.
Thank you for reading your built
in table thank you
Representative Cook for joining
us this morning thank you miss
math for being here with us as
well we come to the end of our
agenda for today's meeting
please money that we have the
sources are going on right now
as well as we will have for
session this Thursday and Friday
so that being said we will not
have to the committee this week
but we will have a Saturday
Committee this coming Saturday
that will begin at one PM
realizing again we have to jump
on or not because of other
commitments but but please do
expect that that that we will be
working again as best as we can
to get through I built of of
these dental bill so that being
said again this Saturday
February thirteenth one PM
please do a anticipate joining
us for committee and so I went
to work on a weekend but but be
that as it may we have Bill
second up and we want to be able
to be responsive to those to
have the more with that being
said thank you committee for it
for your hard work today and we
will see you again on Saturday
have a great day thank you Mr.
