I I do want to go over a couple
of housekeeping.
The matters here before we get
started to date so we do have
House Bill thirty three that has
been moved to a later date the
the Sanchez did have a committee
substitute that did not meet the
twenty four hour rule and so
with that being said I I told
everyone in the beginning of the
session that I am going to be a
strict regards to Supporting
Actor for our rural and so with
that being said we will come
back to that that piece of
legislation.
On next Thursday February
eleventh but we have that bill
and another bill that was also a
move because the sponsor of was
not ready so that being said
today we will not hear house
bill thirty three last of board
meeting sections Representative
Dow representative Armstrong so
just for the committees
reference and for those in the
attendees list that
we're we're here for that bill
please stay with us good morning
I hope I hope the that you
enjoyed today's meeting thank
you for joining us so early in
the morning and so with that
being said we will then go to a
house bill eighty eight finished
here product sales and so I will
then handed off to cause a will
be Sanchez Bill to vice
chairwoman headed up to run the
meeting by Sherman had it up I
do have to expert witnesses if I
can call them over from the
attendees list of the pandemic
the space.
Us if you would please.
Director delete and Mr William
Chavis raise your hand so we can
let you in from the ten is this
the panelists list please.
Good morning.
Morning good morning.
And and madam chair whenever
you're ready.
Madam chair here muted.
I'm careful what I'm gonna say
when I'm off camera so.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
you please presents a I H. B.
eighty eight yes ma'am thank you
madam chair thank you all for
allowing me to present this bill
this morning house bill eighty
eight is an agency bill that
returns from the twenty twenty
thirty day legislative session
and that thirty delay this
legislative session it was house
bill two fourteen two one four
that passed this committee and
act unanimously and passed the
house floor with that person
support and then time ran out of
the three day session so it died
in the Senate but what house
bill eighty eight does is that
it amends the twenty nineteen
have manufacturing act that I
sponsor are you into New Mexico
a framework to begin to allow
agriculture to begin growing and
manufacturing hand with in New
Mexico now that is it is the.
Unscheduled the.
Substance federally so what this
amendment to house to to the
manufacturer Act does is that it
provides a level playing field
for consumer protections really
and it provides that that level
playing field for New Mexico
manufacturers and what it does
next consumers and public health
partners it will now require all
other states have products sold
in New Mexico to meet certain.
State standards Representative
before we didn't have any
standards of four CD products
and products that are either
brought from outside New Mexico
into New Mexico or or derived
with the New Mexico so right now
products like CBD infused foods.
Rinks manufactured outside New
Mexico offered for sale may be
unregulated unsafe not
accurately late Furthermore the
negative impacts of New Mexico
hemp industry up with all New
Mexico puts them at risk and
with New Mexico residents at
risk because it provides them a
false sense of safety when they
are engaging in CBD products and
also.
Through house bill eighty eight
it provides the ability to
prohibit the sale of non
compliant fraudulent possibly
unsafe products from commerce
and it also provides a mechanism
to be able to assessed penalties
for noncompliance and will
ensure the safe and equitable
hemp industry will thrive in New
Mexico and with that being said
Madam chairwoman I I have
to to.
Experts with me this morning but
I also will also have like to
move an amendment for house bill
eighty eight.
Would you please put your
amendment on the table and that
a Taylor can you is up so that
everybody can see it.
And madam chair.
Yes Representative small thank
you madam chair I when the times
appropriate at we had seconded
the motion to move the thank you
yes there is a motion from the
well are we do you want to see
it first are which I just that.
Madam chair.
Sorry.
Madam chair I made the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Thank you do we have a second I
can't.
Thank you.
Proceed with your payment Mr
chair thank you madam chair the.
One two one nine five two six
point one for all reference and
what this amendment does is
we did open myself and.
The folks from the environment
and the health department
engage in dialogue with members
of the industry the industry
from the state specifically the
New Mexico have coalition
Representative representatives
to create some amendments to
house bill eighty eight and what
those amendments do
one.
If federal law changes to
increase THG conference him New
Mexico regulations will
automatically follow it
basically follows federal
regulations.
To.
To ensure that hemp extract is
not sold directly to consumers
and extract may have
concentrations higher than point
three percent.
Three it clarifies that hemp
seed is regulated as a food
product and does not fall under
the head manufacturing at the
end that the FDA regulates hemp
seed as a food product we
basically falls that as well and
finally for it exempts the
transportation of him drugs for
personal use from the food
service sanitation Act and the
New Mexico Food and so with
those additions are with those
amendments based on
conversations with folks from
the New Mexico coalition of
those are the amendments Madam
chairwoman.
Thank you Mr chairman somebody
let's say the amendment for
adoption.
You might want to discuss.
Hi this
is a discussion on this
amendment.
Madam chair.
I'm sorry my cameras not working
okay I representatives are thank
you so madam chair.
The it the excluded from the
food.
Act well then you you said part
of it the the seat is going to
be regulated as food how's that
going to work.
madam chair and representative
Zamora I would.
Again these are recommendations
that that were derived from
the industry folks that.
We had a conversation in regards
to the last thing we want to do
a lesson we're trying to do as a
state is is prohibit their
ability to have
a a robust industry and they can
make money with in New Mexico
native to provide agriculture as
an option so that being said
this is one of the
recommendations but I want to
ask one of my expert witnesses
but perfectly perhaps director
easily if she could speak to
that to that issue.
Madam chair representative so
Laura the hemp seed is already
regulated under the food program
it's considered a food product
because it doesn't contain THC
all foods containing hemp seeds
go through the manufacture to
prove food program in retail
food program is no reason to
regulated under they have
manufacturing act.
Seems like it seems like we have
a food product in a plant but
then we're kicking it out of the
food.
Act so okay we'll look into that
further thank you madam chair
and chair cleaned.
Are there any other questions
from the committee.
Sure.
Representative Austin these yes
madam chair of these questions
that we're asking only
pertaining to the amendment.
I yes it is pertaining.
Okay Christians for the main
part of the discussion thank you
thank you madam chair.
The man.
Thank you.
Has been moved and seconded to
adopt the amendment
so you now have an amendment
amended bill Mr Mr chair.
And
If you.
Students
thank thank you madam chairwoman
that you're back on the bill as
amended I I again I I apologize
I did not have a chance to
introduce my two expert
witnesses which I would like to
allow them a little bit of time
to present a little bit about
the bill itself the first we
have director Center he lied who
is the division director for the
New Mexico environmental
protection department and then I
also have Mr William Chavis who
is the bureau chief for the
state's environmental health
department as well and so I
guess I would ask them children
if you would allow directed
easily a moment to discuss the
bill.
Yes we allow these receipt.
Thank you madam chair just a few
points to add in one is that H.
B. eighty eight reflects the
department's experience in
implementing the twenty nineteen
manufacturing act over nearly
two years we've discovered over
that time that there are few
things that need to be fixed I'm
in the bill and that is what is
before you today this bill also
reflects considerations from
other from members of the
industry and the department of
agriculture HB eighty eight
changes the definition of
finished product so that current
rules regulating hemp products
also apply to drugs for human
ingestion and inhalation in
other words have drugs do not
apply under H. B. eighty eight
two things like clothing or
materials that are used in
construction that would clearly
not be within our jurisdiction
we wanted to clarify that HB APA
also enables the department to
propose an increase in permit
fees to help defray the costs of
running the program and lastly I
just want to know that any
changes to HBOT a we're going to
rulemaking before the
environmental improvement board
where the our stakeholders will
have another opportunity to
provide input on what those real
should look like thank you.
Thank you director Eli and your
next expert witness Mr chair
thank you madam chair columns.
In your office from the New
Mexico to help bureau Mr Travis
everything else at.
Morning madam chair
representative of plant they
members of the committee of
director in the address the
talking points and we are just
we'll be ready open question
thank you.
Thank you and and with that
mantra woman we now stand for
any questions.
All right.
Any questions from the committee
Representative Matthews.
Madam chair you didn't want to
go to the audience sorry excited
I'm sorry excuse me every bit
and haven't done this for awhile
I apologize I'd like to go to
the audience for public comment.
So those in opposition or that
was in opposition to this bill
as amended.
I see none Anna Taylor do we
have I I guess I would ask the
audience are there any on in
support of this bill.
Here we did have Jeff awful and
put in I'm allowed to talk.
San.
I have can you hear me.
Yes
your you Mr opera.
Good morning everybody good
morning madam chair chair
Wednesday Representative small
and everybody else.
It is an older football player
in my college days sorry I will
for example maybe because you
know Asia sometimes better than
beauty so I apologize on that so
good luck to have a baby I would
like to say I represent my
name's Jeff Apodaca on vice
chairman and CEO of Santa Fe
farms and our farming processing
we basically
If you're not but that's my
picture me and my son so
if you guys want to see me or
not but
allow leave it as is anyway
we've been in business for two
years I want to do who knows to
Well the department environment
city clean Williams this and
Jonathan are your hard and done
a great job monitoring this this
element.
Arms we continue to grow we work
we work with over twenty three
farmers within the state we're
helping them grow with the
genetics helping grow the plant.
Let me clarify something with
this plant not only we talking
about CBD ends the smokeable
products everybody's talking
about as a very small part with
this plan you can use the stock
to create bio fiber by word
plastics are in elements that
will be doing it makes it all
soul we are raising an
additional thirty million
dollars to build on the
industrial side of this will be
ability for a different plants
in Albuquerque on a single soul
basically using every aspect of
this plant by the middle of
twenty two will be having for
one of four of factories and
Mason also here in Albuquerque
producing hemp plants and have
products for all elements of
this
I just want to make sure that I.
The farms an organization we
support what's going on with
with the amendments that the
Representative Wendi and them so
she's and has brought to the
table one of the things I wanted
to bring up though is.
Bill bill Johnson Johnson went
don't have fabulous job
monitoring and and working with
us to expand our operations what
we want to make sure his
department fireman has the
support that we have the support
because this industry is going
so fast and changes so fast we
acquired three companies on in
the last thirty days in other
states and in Canada that we're
bringing to New Mexico in the
next twelve months within this
industry we're gonna have to go
to the Department of are meant
to get regulated and to be
monitored we want to make sure
that a farmer Environment has
the research at the resources
and the manpower.
The manufacturing trees going
from a thousand dollars to two
thousand dollars isn't really
going to jeopardize our company
but I know a lot of smaller
manufacturers in the state as a
big part.
But keep in mind there's a lot
of retail's retail shops going
on and we'll probably have a few
ourselves retail energy does not
pay any fees on to be licensed
in the state of New Mexico to
sell these products and so as a
private sector more concerned
about making sure the partner
vitamins and Mr Thomas and his
and his organization have the
manpower to support we would
recommend also creating a
hundred dollars to two hundred
dollars licensing fee for any
retail company or any retail
company wants to sell any of
these products to help generate
additional revenue to monitor
our industry as we continue to
grow so there's a way this is
the the committee can look at
that and also charge a fee and
the manufacturer I mean at the
retail side I think that would.
Revenue that would help the
department environment regulate
and monitor and help this
industry grow.
I'm in the private sector
specifically I'm I'm build a
build companies in new
industries if there's delays on
the statewide regulations side
they can put us we're on the
brink of being the leaders in
the country thank you put us
months and months behind of nine
years behind if there's any
delays on any expansion of world
so
Representative vice chair chair
from the private sector I think
an opportunity to look at the
retail side on some licensing
fees to help generate revenue
from the department of Arment
would be a good idea the also
thing I like to bring up just
the last part is keep in mind
this is the only agricultural
element plant in the state and
you have to process if you grow
green chili for Gokhan you pick
it you read it.
Plant has to be processed from
root to the flower on through
that processing with our
manufacturing licenses you will
go hot above point three but we
do always.
Regulations so I do agree with
the amendment on allowing it to
go on or staying within
regulations we know that
anything below point one is fine
and we know that at the federal
level there's a bill in the U.
S. Senate right now.
Being supported by Senator a
high ranking senator Ben ray
Lujan on that that will take
this to a point one that I think
will say a lot of pressure from
the farmers but I just want to
make that I wanted you guys to
hear that from the private
industry we appreciate what
Department fireman Department
Aggies doing we need to make
sure they have the resources to
help us grow and expand our
industry and our business as
you'll see this will become one
of the leaders in the future of
New Mexico thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Apodaca I'd like to
remind the the.
member that public on public
comment to trying keep the
comments about two or three
minutes thank you there anymore
of public comments or at
participants waiting Taylor yes
Johnson D. all I just moved and
then if you could please and you
yourself.
You're still need all there you
go to Mr Cydia.
Good morning.
My question was actually
answered through Mr out but
doctors comments so I appreciate
the opportunity to speak but my
my questions been answered thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
A.
We have a new.
member coming on is this Mr arch
let the.
Thank you are you for this time
for another New Mexico needed
project the.
Quite a few of the local farmers
market that have established and
farms and I'm actually in
opposite to to to this bill and
one of the issues addressed just
by by Mr Moorhead which acts and
dresses that she increase.
Well
kind of hinder the.
Smaller farmers here.
My question is
This also addresses the
violation and creates a
misdemeanor my question is who
is that addressing these
producers are some settlements I
am you know I think if we're
penalizing the producers in this
industry and session creates you
know minimize people wanting to
get into this industry which has
lots of potential so those are
my two comments like to hear
from Representative let's get.
I thank you Mr arch let them
will now go on to the next
attendee.
That Mr Roper.
Yes.
Members of the committee and I'm
mark Roper of the division
director of economic development
New Mexico economic development
department and I stand in front
of you on behalf of Secretary
keys in the economic development
department in support of this
legislation.
This legislation only will.
The state to meet standards and
maintain standards for the
safety of its citizens but it
will also protect the
investments of the state of New
Mexico was made into the
centers in multiple.
So the Economic Development
Department stands in strong
support of this legislation on
both the safety side we are
citizens as well as the
investment side that we have
made to grow this industry in
the state of New Mexico thank
you for your time.
Thank you Mr rapper and now we
are going to recognize that
Joanna ****.
Thank you and good morning I
first I do want to thank you
chairman land T. as well as the
other committee members for
considering and looking at this
bill I am an attorney in New
Mexico I Representative several
farms throughout the state and I
am also the C. L. O. and C. F.
O. of the New Mexico have
coalition we are very
appreciative of the
consideration from my clients
and my group that the this
committee has considered we also
are very supportive of what the
struggle Dhaka has articulated
with regarding retail fee one
other thing we would ask the
committee to consider is some of
the smaller operations that are
my clients would appreciate us
some thought going into the pre
processing portion of the have a
process once it comes out of the
ground that would include
harvesting driving drying
trimming talking and hearing
that some of the hemp products
that they have in order to get
it to the licensed manufacturers
to process that again thank you
for your consideration was
support this bill and the
amendment as adopted today and
would ask that that additional
person be considered.
Thank you I'm miss **** St I'd
now like to recognize.
I think we have one more
attendee the.
Would you introduce yourself the
state your name and tell us
whether you're in favor of this
bill or opposing the bill thank
you.
Thank you very much madam chair
woman my name is Doug fine I am
a permitted New Mexico hemp
farmer I'm also a hemp author
and journalist based in southern
New Mexico of ten years before
my two years of finally getting
to plant here in the land of
enchantment
for mainly for my family super
food from the seat is discussed
I have also been cultivating
organic hemp in multiple other
states including Vermont which
is where I market my product and
there and therefore I have some
comments on the production side
of SB eighty eight I want to
first thank representative Lente
for.
Very good intentions and also
just much appreciated
receptiveness and listening the
amendments for instance
essentially exempting sets the
seed products the food products
that have no THC at all from the
bill very essential in making
the bill up palatable for up for
in small independent farmers
producers like myself I come
from a perspective as I say as
an author who and journalist who
is.
Reported on probably more than a
dozen different states have
programs have been affiliated
researcher with the university
of Hawaii and my genetics have
been successfully researched New
Mexico State University for soil
cleanup also known as but a
remediation on and in an ongoing
study for cleaning up uranium in
the soil on the four corners
region so briefly to keep it
under time
Representative Lente has done a
great job at making to a fellow
like myself to making this bill
at least somewhat palatable but
in it and in full disclosure of
for by making the amendments to
exclude seat and also to exclude
private.
Use I mean my family grows
primarily for C. development the
heat the super food we're not
CVD people and most him as we
will see a landscaping Senator
years is not going to be about
CVD it's going to be about other
sides of the plan that said it
would be difficult for me to be
processing under this bill with
great appreciation to this is
the and all the good work that
in and the good intentions of
the environment department
we know as small independent
producers what friendly bill
looks like on the production
side we've seen it in many
different states and when I say
we I mean we are very active
small independent farmers who
have worked with the terrific
department of agriculture to
develop one of the best called
as as Jeff mentioned one of the
best production of programs in
the nation it's the reason we're
to have disproportionately high
acreage our department of
agriculture is doing an eighty
plus gold medal job.
We would like to have that same
engagement with the department
of environment in an ideal world
we would table this bill this
year and we would then have the
industry.
Which knows what we want where
the pros where the farmers.
Discuss with departments like
the department of environment
what we would like to see what
we've seen and help is you know
it's it yes of course we want
the normal safeguards for any
that would be in any food
product but this idea of some
kind of special thing because of
this magic fear about THC my two
cents on that folks is we've got
real problems opioid problems
math problems.
The problem is not the problem
as Jeff mentioned the federal
THC limits about to go off I
want to make one small
correction you mentioned point
one it's about to go to one
percent federally very grateful
for the amendment about the
automatic rise tacked on so I
want to say to representative
Lente and all that have worked
in this bill that done a great
job in making a call from down
right scary to independent
producers to arguably palatable
but I must say that in an ideal
world I would I'm just I I'm I'm
speak still speaking in
opposition to it and saying that
in an ideal world we would table
at this year and we would work
to make a more friendly bill
which specifics for much better
say that don't that don't
threaten our farmers such as for
months built in Oregon's bills
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr fine I think that
includes our public comment so
We had one more I'm sorry I'm
sorry I didn't see it on the
screen.
Okay Mister sister address.
Hi thank you.
Chairman and representatives I
appreciate all the work you guys
are doing
I just wanted to say that this
is the food industry it's been
hemp has been considered
marijuana until two thousand
eighteen and I think a lot of
forward progress kind of
reflects in the past I would
like you guys to take into
consideration everything
everyone has said and really
keep into account the small
farmers and is all small retail
outlets I think the fiscal
report doesn't take into account
the a lot of the small every
thing shops in rural New Mexico
House CVD products and a lot of
them are produced by out of
state license manufacturers and
they need to definition of being
less than point three percent
THC
I believe there is a public
safety issue with unregulated
hamp and what they're what this
bill.
For the beginning solves but I
think it does brings up an
excellent point the if smaller
farmers are brought in and we
had an across the board.
Discussion that we could really
become a national leader instead
of having a few outlets
promoting large retail products
there's a lot of people that use
this the make their lives better
and if there's more access to
the stuff the better
I emailed you all written
comments which are much longer
with supporting documentation
but thank you for working with
this industry and thank you for
keeping us all safe.
Thank you Mr Cisneros the I'm
gonna ask before I go again
Taylor do we have any more
attendees that would like to
make public comment that's it
okay thank you and will return
to the committee four discussion
and that and I will start with
that Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much Mr chairman
for bringing this legislation
forward and for your experts I
just have a couple of quick
questions Mr chair and experts
the
it's one of the purposes as you
stated this legislation is to
make sure that there's a level
playing field so that producers
in New Mexico are not
disadvantaged as they may
currently be against producers
from outside of our state is
that accurate.
Madam chair representative small
yes Sir.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chair I think that's such an
important aspect of this
legislation.
And seeing the different retail
outlets in the large.
It's hard to sort through and so
Mr chair I really compliment
that portion and I think
privileging and creating a level
playing field for New Mexico
producers is a very big step in
the right direction.
Secondly madam chair and Mr
chairman
your legislation really helps us
sort through the various
applications of him and so Mr
chair is it fair to say that you
see this is expanding the
various markets in there for
securing the ability for
producers to ensure into those
markets from here in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative spoke
yes Sir.
Great that madam chair Mr chair
that's certainly something I've
heard from down south is
interest from producers but also
challenges and helping to
identify and provide the safety
of common sense.
Regulation for these various
areas seems to be a really big
step in the right direction for
securing those markets moving
forward
Finally Mr chair he is one of
the it seems like one of the key
purposes of this in addition to
public safety first and foremost
is helping to promote investment
across the various applications
for him for New Mexico producers
is that also for.
Madam chair representative mall
absolutely great I think this is
a a really appreciate you
bringing this legislation
forward the collaboration with
multiple agencies here in the
state and look for to supporting
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you representative small
out here from a representative
Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
As everyone knows we had a bad
experience with him.
The four corners area and the
there is no legislation on the
Navajo Nation on how to regulate
and the.
Controls him through but the
title one year of.
Legislation.
Representative Lane T. as
industry products sales so does
this bill in any way authorize
or
legislate any growth because I
think of what the people are
telling me that do not allow any
help legislation to pass is a
little bit different than the
title of this legislation that
you're working with
I don't want to penalize the
farmers that are already doing
it legally it's just that the
area and the four corners it was
done illegally and it put a bad
taste in a lot of people's males
and we were told.
That we should avoid any
legislation improving any
legislation that dealt with help
can you clarify that a little
bit Sir.
Thank you.
Absolutely Madam chairwoman and
representative Allison that's a
great question and in the first
bill to establish hemp growing
in heaven and battering in the
state of New Mexico House Bill
fourteen from twenty nineteen
there was a a ride in the region
within that framework of the
bill.
Thanks.
Tribes within the state of New
Mexico that allows them not not
mandates that they have to
engage in this includes them
that.
If they choose to do their own
tribal regulations that that the
state will recognize and
appreciate and include that in.
Any kind of support that they
may need in regards to technical
support but also perhaps in the
evening of commerce as relates
to that how does it get from
inside the reservation
boundaries to outside the
reservation boundaries and how
that all happened and so.
Representative chair and
Representative Allison by no
means does this regulator
mandate that any tribe or nation
or pueblo us engage in this
activity does that's a side of
the authority that the states
have the cannot mandate on
tribal lands any laws for any
policies that are that would
negate those of tribal policies
for tribal laws so that being
said
right now the state of New
Mexico
has this law in place that will
allowing for the the growing.
If tribes should wish to allow
on their own tribal lands have
that option but would have this
the organize it through their
own time policies and so we're
at today is that what we're
finding is that after the past
two years as director you you
mentioned
lot regulating this industry and
so we were at today is that the
finished product sales eighty
eight now looking at creating
consumer protections to ensure
that the products that are
finished that you see in any
store I mean if you if you go to
anyone of our small towns and
and our any any counted in New
Mexico often times you will see
C. B. B. shop CBD stores almost
on on every corner in every
town.
To date there is no regulation
in regards to.
Labeling there is no regulation
regards to to showing that it's
a state audit and so at this
point in time what house bill
eighty eight weeks to do is to
ensure that director easily.
chief Chavis and the others you
should have the authority need
to test these products to ensure
that the people that are
purchasing them citizens are
protected
In in in their use of these
products.
Thank you.
Representative that's given some
or more clarity.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative eight
not trying to Representative
Matthews.
Madam chair thank you at.
And Mr chair
I think my first question I what
I'm looking at the fiscal impact
statement and it's talking
about.
That the.
lost a hundred forty thousand in
federal grant funding when it
had to reassign staff and that
is going to require I FTEs.
An annual cost of five hundred
thousand dollars to.
Collect an average of a hundred
and ten thousand annually in
fees.
Our good could someone press one
of your experience or or Mr
chair yourself.
explain.
What the situation is with the
funding is this a going to be a
losing proposition in terms of
the dollars and has does NMED
have the.
The appropriation to you do this
program.
It was my first question.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative that these
even my experts was to.
Respond to that.
Madam chair representative let
me start and then bill Chavez
who's the bureau chief and a
little closer to the needs of
the program content and sh but
we we have not had adequate
resources to really manage
program since its start the fees
are just not covering the cost
of the program the currently
bring in about forty thousand
dollars a year right now we have
about two and a half FTEs that
are running the program and
forty thousand just doesn't
cover two and a half position so
we are taking resources away
from our food program primarily
to help run the hit program we
we believe that the increase in
the fees the cap from one
thousand to two thousand a will
help now I just want to remind
the committee and participants
that that is a cap any changes
to those fees will have to go
before the board and we will
consider the you know the size
of the industry the size of the
business excuse me and other
will be other considerations
when we look at those feature
changes we we really do feel
like we need to bring in some
additional fees they still won't
cover the cost of the program we
believe that the program does
require I FTEs to really do it
justice and to be ready to
expand the program as we've
heard from some of our
participants that that's all we
are on the verge of that and we
just don't think right now we we
really do have the resources
necessary to.
To to come bring forward the
program as as it should if we
get the executive budget that we
have requested that will help
greatly the LFC budget that's
been proposed actually
decreases the funding for this
particular bureau by about two
hundred thousand dollars and
that that will be jeopardized
have programs wells other
programs in the bureau.
To Chavez you have.
Thank you
madam chair chair let them
Representative Matthews I just
wanted to address we quickly the
question you have Representative
Matthews in regards to the loss
of federal funding.
We also as the bureau inspect
food manufacturing facilities if
we get money from the FDA to do
that since we've had to re
allocate resources those staff
to it's backed process
applications for help we have
been able to use those staff to
work on food manufacturing and
that's where the loss in the
federal revenue.
We mentioned.
Thank you thank you for this.
Sorry thank you for those
answers in the school to my
questions at am share Mr chair
it I'm sorry I'm not that I'm
not particularly familiar with
just industry and so I just
question mais Sam really stupid
but who is paying the fees that
the retailers as it to
manufacturers and is there any
way that.
those fees could be
would be sustainable for those
to be somewhat higher to help
finance the program.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
and Representative Matthews if I
would ask one of the experts
please address that.
Madam chair representative use
the fees are paid by the
manufacturers that we license
the the the he currently is a
thousand dollars to the he is
paid by by the manufacturers.
Madam chair Mr chair thank you
for thank you for the answer
but.
These are New Mexico
manufacturers because right now
do we have a fee on out a
statement of factors you are
importing into our state.
Chair of.
Presented a Matthews is New
Mexico businesses that we're
it is actually businesses that
were licensing.
No we do we currently do not
charge fees for out of state
drugs but this bill that's one
of the things that it would do
is
Not necessarily at this point we
look at some schools to have a
fee for a drugs brought from out
of state.
Madam chair Mister chairman at
UT your little garbled in that
technique the sound so you said
that you're looking at I just
wanna be sure I understood the
answer you said you're looking
at the possibility of putting
and putting some fees on people
who are importing businesses
that are importing.
If I may madam chair
representative yeah I think B.
R. T. Travis is having some
technical difficulty as happens
you know we're having remote
committee hearings but no we are
not looking at putting a fee on
imports right now the only
proposal is to raise the cap on
fees that would be charged to
food to help manufacturers or
processors
one option one idea that came
out from one of the participants
was to charge a fee for all to
retailers that's not currently
in the bill and so we will be
regulating retailers and and in
a in a fashion and that we could
pull products that are unsafe
from retailers but we are not
proposing a fee on retailers at
this time.
And madam chair Mr chair
Again thank you for your answers
but so if there isn't enough
money to.
You don't get additional
appropriations it's not going to
generate enough fees from the
fees you're charging.
Is is is is this program is
going to be under funded and
therefore I'm going to assume is
not going to be able to do all
the.
All the things that.
Is it we would like it to do
under this legislation is that a
fair statement.
Madam chair members of the
committee it's going to be
stretched to do that we firmly
believe that the hemp industry
in the state is an important
business we fully support it
it's but it's certainly not
going to be an enterprise
program we have other enterprise
programs in the state this is
not going to be one of them yes
if there is a need not the
ability to charge additional
fees or get as an appropriation
to go with this bill we're we
will be counting on getting
the executive budget hopefully
will get the executive budget so
that at least one put us in the
whole anymore that this program
right now have to be subsidized
with general funds probably will
need to be subsidized food
program fees for awhile because
fees are just not going to cover
it.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
You when I was a deputy Attorney
General in this is many years
ago the legislature passed a a
statute to require that the
only.
The only people who could use
the word Pignon seeds.
Up the I'm cert pinyin not nuts
we're if we're if that's came
from trees grown from nuts grown
in New Mexico and any any other
producer of he's not had to use
the phrase pine nuts and this
was sponsored by I believe is
representative office who owns
the candy his family as is the
candy producer and so after this
statute was passed
Representative came over to talk
to me about what what to.
What resources the attorney
general's office was going to
put in to enforcing this law.
And I had to tell him that
nobody has given us any money to
enforce this law and we didn't
just have a lot of people to go
out and check out the nuts and
how they relate to.
Senator.
Then the next letter that he was
very serious about it
and this it was a statue but I I
get very concerned and I and
quite frankly I doubt that
there's ever been a prosecution
or any enforcement of that
statute in the state ever I
don't know that for a fact that
that would be my guest and I get
very concerned when we could in
enforcement.
Programs including having
penalties
and so forth and we and we don't
then from the enforcement
of and it in this area I think
is is more serious in the pine
nuts versus the.
Verses the at pinon nuts
I'm assuming that if we're going
to have these kinds of laws is
because there's some danger in
projects being not manufactured.
Properly and so forth and so
it's almost becomes kind of a
public health issue than a
protection consumer protection
issue I'm not just a marketing
ploy and
So.
I'm just sharing that I really
have a concern about that and
Wondering if it's appropriate to
pass a statute that without
their financial resources to be
able to enforce it and say that
we're doing consumer protection
when we're not going to be able
to do consumer protection are
we.
Are we in a sense and I don't
mean intentionally but are we in
a sense misleading the public
about the quality of the
products so I if anybody like to
comment on that but that is a
concern I'm having with this
bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative in and your
points are well taken and and
absolutely in regards to to to
the industry itself it was done
with with all of the best
intentions to expand agriculture
to expand economic development
to expand our ability to create
another lively that for those
folks in agriculture that may
have inherited Graham are
Grampus feel are they were
holding chili they say I want to
do that so I want to a little
bit of pain relief it's it's
it's it'll fetch a higher number
so and it's most basic level
close farmers and agriculture
was intention to help create a
an economic development tool for
them as we go then from from
growing it to manufacturing get
to the point where selling it
all of these things this and I
say that we want to make sure
that are not in the most safest.
Environments and and and and
district is six regulations of
the product itself and so do
that
Representative EDD director.
Folks in the health and the
environment department
are the ones tasked to do this
is that you know we have to make
sure that that that we give them
the tools necessary that if
there is a public health concern
regards to making sure that C.
products and products derived
from hemp.
Our safety and then we should
allow the tool to do that but I
I understand that this may be
perceived as an unfunded mandate
but none the less at the same
time I think I think it's it's
understandable that director
easily and the administration it
budget requests a budget that
will cover the costs
and and and to that point it is
the dissipation that their costs
will be appreciated and that the
industry will be appreciated
enough so that these costs are
covered so that we are not
running in a deficit as opposed
to being able to support this is
industry that is still in its
infancy but it's still very
fluent in the way that it's
going.
I don't know director easily or
or your chief Chavis has
anything else to add to that
comment and just yeah is that
the nature of madam chair and
representative you know we right
now we don't have the tools to
pull of that product from the
shelves it will take resources
to do that
but we are we fully expect to be
able to pull that off if we find
a hot product on the shelf we
will we will yank it as soon as
we can our team is experienced
with food and seafood products
and making sure those are pulled
from the shelves you it's not
it's not rocket science we can
do that this this bill will give
us the tools to do that it will
take resources but right now we
don't even have the ability to
to do that regardless of
resources so this we we we
believe this bill is essential
for public health reasons for
that are just so that we can
keep that products off the shelf
for that reason alone we urge
you to pass this bill.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
and witnesses thank you very
much for that answer I
appreciate that explanation
And I would certainly take that
into consideration as I decide
how to cast my vote on this and
and I appreciate the effort that
you're making to protect us and
I I hope it doesn't sound like
it's all that many resources to
fully fund you for this product
for this project to perhaps
we'll have the resources and
you'll get some or but so
I appreciate your cue.
Thank you representative and now
like to call on Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair so I
appreciate it
and
Mr chair when I first saw this
of this bill and looked at the
fiscal impact report
insufficiency reports that we
have regarding house bill eighty
eight I was my first thought was
where is the request for an
appropriation because when
you're going to where half a
million dollars in fiscal year
twenty one and that's for the
five fifty that have been
identified as needed it just
seems that
this really did need an explicit
request for an appropriation
that's a lot of money and the Mr
chair and chair of mass Mr chair
what the next committee is it is
going to hear this bill.
Madam chair representative brown
from here if passed through it
goes to judiciary.
Okay.
Your Mr chair so it makes sense
to because Inc you here we have
some federal law and some of
those changes to state law but I
I really really do think that
this needs to go go to
appropriations of us up front
about that the cost of this
proposed bill.
Looking at the
Fiscal impact reports as given
to us by the New Mexico
environment department Watson
agency analysis I should call it
but they're saying that the
Impact on the budget reductions
you know what the next couple
years if for example in fiscal
year twenty three the cost would
be five hundred twenty five
thousand dollars and so the
three year total cost would be
more than one and a half million
dollars so I'm very wary about
testing agencies were doing.
Certainly working for not giving
them the resources to do it yeah
I just think that's this is not
the best way to go on things I'm
also looking at madam chair and
and Mr chair
at the analysis administrative
double point.
It was coded and if we do all we
know is a C. agency number two
eighteen and for those who don't
know that's the industry of our
also works and what they're
saying is that there would be
some additional costs to the
bill.
We would be
you know there would be a kind
of a judicial process to be a
way of doing compliance orders
and and and then there'd be the
imposition of penalties perhaps
and and things like that I think
you know we all know generally
that we create a new a New
Mexico law regulation that the
costs of enforcement can go up
and that can affect the courts
in your concern I don't want to
say that this is going to be as
significant as the half a
million dollars that were also
told about but there are always
those other costs that you need
to consider.
So the bigger thing for me is is
is the half million.
I'm madam chair Mr chair army.
Really glad that we heard from
Mr opera doc a doctor
his thoughts on how to make up
the difference that's needed at
from this and I think you
recommended that retailers the
charge a licensing fee of some
amount for selling these
products I think Mr chair madam
chair that there would be
something if this bill moves
forward are out of this
committee today it would be a
really good idea to to think
about that as an amendment to
the bill
it would certainly help NMED I
think if additional there
additional source of funding
were found.
we don't know if you thank you
to budget will be adopted or not
for this agency so that's
speculative at this point.
I'm also madam chair and Mr
chair I was very interested to
hear what Mr Ryan had to say he
was one of those who spoke
someone in opposition to the
bill and I think you got some
really good reasons and that is
that more thought needs to be
done
The more thought needs to be had
about how this will affect small
farmers in retailers if we're
gonna change something I know
this is a this legislation but
based legislation passed in
those two thousand nineteen so
it's a fairly new law and if we
can address any other concerns
that you heard race today I
think our to do it so we don't
have to visit this again in a
perhaps next year the year after
that so those are those are my
comments madam chair I don't
want to give the impression that
I disagree with what hospital is
attempting to do I think it's
there's a great deal more in it
but I do have those concerns
identified thank you very much
Mr.
Hi you representative of brown
and I guess I see no more
members of the committee that
would like to ask a question I I
have one for you.
Share it and and I I guess it's
really tear experts how how does
the process work when you pull
something from a shelf you know
either either food or I have
approx what what do you have it
you're at the that and we're
could you just walk me through.
Madam chair I have
To get.
William Travis address that
question if if his computer
labs.
We we a better chair Mister
chairman I hope everybody hears
me okay.
To dress your your question
whenever we pull something from
the of the shelf I'll use the
example of a food product so if
it's something if somebody
produce the product that is done
illegally wasn't done through a
permitted process we do have the
discretion to go in the thirty
to go and all that product and
ask for its destruction.
I'm I'm thank you Mr travesty if
you do do you have to do that in
person or do you just put up
this and that I guess they I
assume that all these people are
a computer program you notify
everybody that I'm I a or do you
just have to do that physically
I guess that's my question.
We would have to go to the
actual facility into the out.
Thank you I I just saw that
Representative Samara also has a
question so recognizing that
this time thank you thank you Mr
jobs.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman to
I'm looking at the bill and I'm
looking on page four section V.
and extract means oil.
And line twenty five.
It says a.
Asset another identified and non
identified compounds which goes
on to page five for human
ingestion and inhalation.
Then we take it a little
further.
In on your amendment on page
five.
Line two.
Our money three I mean.
we took out for human ingestion.
In installation.
So seems to me like there's a
conflict on those two rules
there
And then also one of the
witnesses that testified today.
I believe it was Jeff Apodaca
says a talked about smoking and
ingesting the product.
Can you clarify some of that for
us that we know.
Exactly what what we're talking
about are we talking about.
Oil are we talking.
impact on us that are going to
be ingested in New.
And the.
And inhaled.
Madam chair representative what
thank you for that question
director ET would please.
Yes Madam chair representative
Zamora the change in the term
extract that you're referring to
is made to imply that this is
only an intermediate product
it's not to be consumed directly
so it doesn't it's not extract
is not intended for young men
and gestion or inhalation
directly some people getting
chair and extract mixed up this
is an extract this is to go into
a finished product the reason we
don't want him to extract to be
used directly for ingestion or
inhalation is it often has THC
concentration above point three
so it's not safe for direct
consumption but it can be used
to make products and that will
ultimately result in a T. H. C.
level less than that this bill
and in the previous bill even
amended does allow for him drugs
to be smoked that is that is
absolutely true but
the person who is processing
that help for smoking purposes
also must give it a permit from
the department in this test that
him product to make sure it's
not above point three.
This is one reason why we don't
think it's a good idea for him
to be go from the farmer to the
consumer directly for smoking
because we can't guarantee that
the THC level is safe but if it
does to a product that is in
permanent noted by the
department we can guarantee that
the THC level is safe and well
point three.
I hope I answered your question.
Madam chair and entered into
it's still confusing to me that
on section E. we are identifying
it as for.
intended for human ingestion
inhalation.
And that goes from page four
page five.
Page four
madam chair and and
Representative Zamora that's one
of the amendments that
representative Lente move
forward earlier changes that so
human ingestion and inhalation
and per the amendment is change
to use and they have finished
products so extract is not
intended for use in.
Your manager iterations per the
amendment is now four and
finished product.
And madam chair and chair to
But but it's just it's just been
striped on page five line one.
But it hasn't been struck on
page four of the last to page
form the first order page I.
Madam chair understanding as I
read the amendment is it does
strike intended for human
ingestion and inhalation.
On page four the first amendment
And if it doesn't then we need
to clarify that.
The first amendment
it reads on page four line
sixteen strike on a dry weight
basis and then turned lose their
of.
Traded allowed by federal law
which is graded based on
driveway.
I don't see that being struck on
page.
The bottom page four page five.
Madam chair on the second
amendment says on page five line
one.
A strike human ingestion or
inhalation.
And in lieu thereof insert use
and hand finished product.
Yes ma'am but on page four I'm
still a little bit going to.
The page four line twenty five.
and then page five line one.
Yes.
Chair and representative the way
I'm reading now so on the bill
itself.
H. for I think we're
Representative Zamora is beating
is that line twenty five it has
underlined intended.
And then you go to page five.
I am one it says for human
ingestion or inhalation and so
that's what the original bill
said but with the amendment
Representative Zamora Madam
chairwoman
it strikes that
it strikes so so.
So basically what we ended for
human ingestion or inhalation.
Or I'm sorry intended for use in
hand finished products what it
but it now says in.
I still have have the.
An issue with that the wage
wrote
It is it is stating that that
it's intended or human.
Ingestion inhalation should we
strike that on.
On the on the the.
Online twenty five page for in
line one on page five should
that have been.
Madam chair of women and
Representative Zamora the way
that I read it again it it is
gone through agency review as
well as a.
Drafted by council service into
their proofreaders is that the
where it is that.
The reason Page four nine twenty
five I'll just start with acid
in other item in a fight and not
identify compounds and again
with the amendment.
Then go to St intended use in
hand finished products.
Okay and and I just imagine the
look at that and Judiciary to
and.
Absolutely and and they would
understand it better than I do
I I I.
I look at this bill and and I
have.
Good intentions to support it
because of the ag industry in
the farmers in the state of New
Mexico.
It is it does raise a lot of
questions as to how we.
Go forth regulated industry.
The funding for the bill this is
a big concern.
Hopefully.
Hopefully we can get more
funding to support our farmers
in the state and and thank you
for bringing this bill fourth
and that's all the questions
thank you.
Thank you Representative Zamora
and Representative Matthews says
follow up question.
Yes madam chair Mr chair
It.
There's **** since I grew up in
the sixties but how do you
determine that how do you test
for the THC level.
Is that chemical tester.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews.
Great.
As bill Chavez to please answer
that question at.
Representative Matthews it is a
laboratory test that is
conducted the pastor at the
agency that has to be done by by
a laboratory laboratory okay
thank you for this answers madam
chair Mr chair at answers madam
chair here at.
Thank you Representative
Matthews I'm not sure of
Representative brown had a
follow up question
Thank you madam chair I I was
just going to
Regarding what Representative
Zamora had about we're the
amendments
Done correctly I I think you
were on it sometimes helps to
have amendments next instead of
going back and forth from the
amendment to the bill itself and
it takes a little while
sometimes for us to go in and
make those alterations ourselves
it can lead to a lot of
confusion but I think I think as
it is it's correct thank you.
Thank you representative.
I do not see any more on a quick
consent from the committee I
guess I want would like to ask
the chair of the committee.
Madam chair.
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair I would
move approval of past hello the
the man and the.
Hi is there seconded the motion.
Thank you.
Representative Allison and
The second state.
The motion and that that Taylor
would you call the.
Thanks.
Allison yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative these.
Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative some.
Yes.
Representative use L..
Vice chair Herrera.
Yes.
Chair Lenti yes.
Congratulations Mr chair
this bill this past and I'm glad
to chair the chair back over to
you thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair when
we get it we raising.
After doing that that they could
take take I.
next we have an agenda folks
again moving over house bill
thirty three which we we will
here a week from today let's
move that the house bill one
twenty one meat processing and
marketing program and if we can
bring in.
Madam secretary Representative
Chatfield in these list as well
as Representative Gail Armstrong
for making these lists assuming
that the one there.
Representative Chatfield good
morning good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee but to
be here.
You're you're you're very
welcome thank you so much for
for for joining us are you going
to be alone today presenting you
have any expert witnesses.
Mr chair if there's anyone
out there from the department of
agriculture and the department
of economic development if they
could raise your hand and you
could lead to more in the case
they have a they want to make
any statement about this bill
absolutely madam secretary his
hand raised to that point would
you please let them in the
panelists list the
and with further ado
Representative Chatfield the
floor is yours Sir thank you Mr
chairman I'm happy to bring
before you today house bill one
twenty one house bill one twenty
one is an act making
appropriation for the New Mexico
department of agriculture for a
statewide meat processing and
marketing program this would
making appropriation of a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars from the general fund to
the board of regents for the New
Mexico State University for
expenditure in fiscal year two
thousand twenty two for the New
Mexico department of agriculture
for a statewide processing and
marketing program to expand
access to be produced locally.
And to cooperate with the
economic development department
to expand local processing of
beef and re to tail
opportunities for local beef
products.
Mr chairman the cattle industry
in New Mexico and the United
States has a weakness.
huge multinational Packers JBS
Tyson our goal control the US
beef packing industry for I'll
just take one of them for
example JBS.
Have a hundred facilities across
the US we have a hundred
thousand employees.
Recent events brought to light.
Our vulnerability to these large
factors of far it Tyson's plant
in Holcomb Kansas shut the plant
down shortly thereafter COVID
struck in JBS begin to reduce
or close operations at its
subject and that's the way you
plan.
Now the Senate in Pennsylvania
plant kills two thousand five
hundred B. choose per day two
thousand five hundred B. for
date beef prices in grocery
stores more than doubled.
R. calf prices in this is just
from my own experience in my own
excellent but I think they
probably dropped thirty percent.
To help rectify the situation we
need more mid size local packing
as.
We have one they're all will
today that was opened not too
long ago and I believe it kills
about a hundred fifty had a day
that's kind of what we're
talking about that's the we're
not and in smaller ones are
great we need to develop some
capacity.
We have a new one in Las Vegas
that was economic development
help to get this one on the
ground to going and it expires
to about twenty have per day
right now we need more.
This bill would create a.
Program at New Mexico State
University to help coordinate
with feedlots in grocers and
people that would like to
establish a packing else to
expand or to expand an existing
one if you go to put in a
packing house you have to have a
feed lot over here with that can
to supply the need of that
packing house you have to have a
area to hang those be choose
need to hang about twenty days
so you need to know if you kill
a hundred had a day and you hang
on for twenty days you're going
to have two thousand beads
hanging in your refrigerator so
you got you have to have in
their areas of cool story cold
storage to hang them then you
need us a grocery train or
grocery store it can take the
year supply of beef and put a
sell to the public so then you
then you have value added
agriculture.
Of the New Mexico department of
economic development has agreed
to provide lead local like a
Namik Development Act in J. tip
join job training incentive
program funds to help.
Create some of this local
value added programs.
these are the same types of
funds that helped create the
packing house in Las Vegas New
Mexico
Mr chairman I can't see if
there's anyone on for these two
agencies but if there is
something I'd like to say a
little something will I would
love that.
Representative Chatfield no one
in the attendees this is raise
their hand from either of those
departments and we let anybody
into the panelists list so
I'm I'm sure they they support a
hundred percent but at the same
time there's no one here today
to that effect so if you are
concluding your comments then we
can perhaps go to the audience.
Or testimony Mister chairman I
have had lengthy discussion
about this program for over a
year with both the secretaries
of these departments and they do
support it and I stand for
questions very well thank you
Representative Chatfield let's
go to the audience let me ask we
put the hand down real quick.
Although the opposition.
House bill one twenty one as
presented please raise your
hand.
Okay let's go then to all those
in favor of support of house
bill one twenty one please raise
your hand.
Very well we have a first on the
list Ambroise farm to table New
Mexico.
And Pam relates to the agency
Roy you're you're with this good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
camera with farm to table I'm
here representing the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
council in the rocky mountain
farmers union we stand in full
support of this bill we really
believe of course agriculture is
paramount in the state and we
need to support in many ways we
scan manta in part with our New
Mexico nine Policy Council
because there's a growing demand
for beef and other meat products
in schools and the what local so
we see this is a really great
example and as president
Chattfield mentioned the plant
down Roswell's really interested
in in producing across our print
processing for schools and
seniors centers as well so we
look forward to the growth in
the market place at and at the
same time with as needed is the
marketing and promotion part of
this and so we are stand in full
support of this bill Millie
appreciate the Sanchez bring it
forward thank you thank you miss
Roy appreciate comments this
morning let's go then next to so
we speak because I think ready
last name right I call you with
this last time
so you with the second good
morning good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is that we think I'm a farmer
and a registered lobbyist with
the national young farmers
coalition infirmary stands in
full support of the house bill
one twenty one as the next
generation of ranchers and
livestock producers prepare to
enter the field here in New
Mexico as we've seen over the
last year with the comment
pandemic we need to really be
thinking creatively about how to
bring more local meat processing
to the state
and to to ensure their managers
have a have a strong market for
their for their product thank
you for your time and thank we
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward.
Thank you so we have a great day
that's more than than to miss
Paula Garcia miss Christy at
good morning you're with us.
Good morning this is Serafino
invitee impalas dead with the
New Mexico Seki Association
thank you so much Mr chair and
members of the committee and
those sponsoring agency we
really appreciate this effort we
recognize that
you know livestock is so
essential to our rural economies
are land based life ways many of
ours I get present these
thousands across the state raise
livestock both to supplement
their families
you know food to trade and share
with neighbors but also for sale
so we really feel this is going
to be a helpful and vital
measure and that's we stand in
full support thank you so much
for your time thank you Mr see
everyday nexus go to Brian Moore
Mr Moore good morning you're
with us.
Morning Mr chairman and members
the committee on bride more of a
brochure from northeast in
Mexico Representative Chatfield
as my representative we lived
through the things that he
talked about not being able to
provide the meat products that
our customers wanted watching
our ensure friends back up
livestock they couldn't sell and
and it was just really a tough
tough situation and frankly from
a marketing perspective would
love to be able sell to say we
only sell New Mexico beef and so
with that Mr chairman members
committee we said I stand strong
support thank you thank you Mr
more disco than to Kevin Brandt
read I'm good morning you're
with us let's see you are now
with this morning.
Good morning my name's Kevin
Graham on page nineteen twelve
market just like the gentleman
that spoke before me we have a
small grocery store that we
started during the pandemic and
we also focus just on New Mexico
Food New Mexico products.
And the lack of the products on
the shelves over this last
several months has been
something that's been a
challenge for us and so just
want to put on record that we
are.
In favor of this bill that Mr
Chatfield as proposed and I
think it'll be a good asset for
our rural communities in New
Mexico thank you very much thank
you Mr brown have a great day
next we have Tiffany Rivera Mr
very with this morning.
Good morning chairman Lente
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to comment this
morning and thank you to the
sponsor for caring this bill
that's before you
New Mexico Berman livestock
bureau supports the farmers and
ranchers ability to better
access retail and wholesale
markets we believe this
legislation will help them
achieve that we fully support
the appropriation which is going
to the Department of act to
carry out this marketing program
we've seen how effective the
department of ag marketing
programs have been for some of
the other commodities in the
state and look forward to the
development and implementation
of this marketing program to
highlight.
The wonderful beef that our New
Mexico ranchers of produced so
thank you Representative
Chatfield procuring the bill and
thank you committee for the
opportunity to comment this
morning.
Thank you Mister Vera for
Committee members I see that
your hands are going up and I
have taken the list of of the
folks here raise your hand and I
put them down on my end but I
have you on the list so well
when we come to the committee
what we'll go and this next on
our request to speak we have
Jonas Moira.
Mr Moyer good morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Jonas more and the executor
to the New Mexico cattle growers
association and the New Mexico
growers incorporated we are
statewide organization with
members and thirty two of the
thirty counties of New Mexico
representing Katelin she
produces views for over a
hundred years our policy is
member driven and we are in
school support of house bill one
twenty one.
The New Mexico cattle growers
association and the New Mexico
will go associate and
incorporated would like to
applaud the sponsor for bringing
this go forth thank you very
much for the opportunity come
in.
Don't think you have a great day
let's go to Erica robbers Erica
good morning you're with us.
Thank you.
Just fine right.
I'm.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak this
morning my name's Eric Rovers
and I'm here on behalf of New
Mexico first as their strategic
civic engagement policy manager
we're speaking in strong favor
in support of house bill one
twenty one the state statewide
meat processing and marketing
sponsored by Representative
Chatfield Armstrong dial Crowder
and Tamara.
We know that this bill has had
the consensus support of over
three hundred town hall
attendees from around the state
of New Mexico the couple
convened to discuss the health
of our X. factor farmers
ranchers conservationist
philanthropist professors food
related business folks tribal
members and others in the food
sector have voiced support for
local meat processing facilities
and expanding our processing
capacity it also has the backing
of over a thousand others who've
been participating in our weekly
food hunger and water meetings.
I'd like to mainly point out
that the pandemic as others have
mentioned before me has exposed
that in New Mexico many of the
links in our supply chain are
weak we've heard multiple
stories of ranchers having to
call caps due to lack of
available inspection processing
facilities in the state at the
same time consumers around the
state were going hungry
strengthening the system can
create new jobs bring more money
to the state and feed more New
Mexicans I'm local locally grown
food including produce meat and
value added products can create
huge boost to the state's
economy.
We know that New Mexico ranchers
have to send me out of state for
processing wasting valuable
money and resources that bin
could be kept in state and as
such are N. plan calls for
improvement in the supply chain
infrastructure for small to
medium scale producers of animal
products and specialty crops.
We know that the benefits of a
state value added program could
support local producers reduce
the carbon footprint in
transporting me to crease
industry control increase
resilience and improve the local
economy for an added tax base so
as such with over seventeen
hundred New Mexicans support on
this bill and thousands of New
Mexican ranchers and farming
communities livelihoods at stake
we urge you to support house
bill one twenty one thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you have a great day next
we have our many many up really
though but we know I'm sorry
which is that use me but good
morning you're with us.
Yes thank you.
Yes I Representative Townsend
county economic development
corporation.
And my name is Molly oak meadow
in New.
And that.
Yes we are in favor and support
H. B. one twenty one
To CDC has for twenty years been
involved in supporting livestock
production and meat processing
in north central New Mexico
through its mobile livestock
slaughter units and we have been
part of the.
House regional food system we
have developed the food system
concept in north or central New
Mexico.
We are cooperating with farm to
table and have received USDA
funds for development of the
farm to table
Farm to school.
Program Intel's County.
We recognize the need of support
for.
Last producers and understand
these is a key secretary of New
Mexicos three million dollar
agricultural industry.
In that so with that in mind we
are fully in support of the H.
B. two one twenty one.
Thank you very much for your
comments that's the go to Jason
do an MBA.
Jason good morning do you want
to stay at that is this that you
want to help up Representative.
Allen's.
Hey good morning or Mr chairman
and committee members this is
chase in New I am the division
director of the New Mexico
department of agricultural
marketing and economic
development division and thank
you for allowing me to talk this
morning we are in support of
house bill one twenty one and
believe that this legislation
and the appropriation will help
our efforts in enhancing of the
Max in marketing in promoting
New Mexico food and agricultural
for not the production products
but in particularly enhancing
the New Mexico value added
industries we believe this
effort would be the first of
many towards developing value
added meat component of our New
Mexico are cultural marketing
plan it helps keep dollars in
the state promotes the New
Mexico agricultural commodity
the second highest in cash
receipts in the state and
provides additional
opportunities to market
different products with our
state thank you.
Thank you Mr there this thing go
that to that all of our students
all we come here earlier.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee of my
name is Paula Garcia and I'm
here to speak in support of this
and with the New Mexico sic
Association we present we
represent numerous ranchers
throughout the state and we have
found that it is really
important to build our
infrastructure and marketing
around locally raised meat I
personally am a rancher and it
it I cannot get an appointment
to slaughter our animals for
another year at our Clovis
closest watering facility which
is two hours away and that's
just for family is that's not to
be able to market that in any
broader sense and so if we're
really going to build local and
regional food systems it's
really important that that we
address the need for for local
processing distribution and
marketing of of our locally
grown beef and other other
livestock so I have we sent a
strong support of this Mr
chairman thank you very much
thank you Mr Garcia this and go
to the last speaker care town.
Good morning.
You are muted still.
Kerry there.
Hello Care.
Yeah.
That needs.
That being said there's no other
folks in the attendees list at
this point in time so I will
come to the committee for.
Questions or comments and we
will start with Representative
brown Representative brown you
have well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so much.
Representative field I like your
bill I will be supporting it I I
do have a couple questions
though some details that I'm
just curious about Mr chair
representative field it's a very
short go asking for a hundred
fifty thousand dollars
appropriation and then hear the
segments of the appropriation is
from the general fund to the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University for expenditure
in fiscal year twenty twenty
two.
For the department the New
Mexico department of agriculture
for a statewide meat processing
and marketing program when it
goes on a little bit so Mr chair
and and Representative Chatfield
could you explain why this
appropriation is going through
the board of regents when it's
really meant for the department
of agriculture I I gather
there's something I don't
understand about how we're
structured.
Yes Mr chair representative the
New Mexico department of
agriculture is placed under the
board of regents at the New
Mexico State University it is a
little different from the other
secretary St that it resides
there okay thank you for that
answer thank you.
Mr chair and the Representative
Chatfield I think New Mexico
beef is The New Mexico Chile I
think it's something that we
really can a brand it's a great
product I think a lot of us are
who could he be put rather by a
New Mexico beef and have that be
labeled as such we know we're
getting a great product and
we're also supporting our our
feel are at local ranchers so I
I'm really glad to see this this
bill Mr chair and representative
I do have a couple of other
questions about what this
program exactly will look like.
That the end goal is to expand
opportunities for statewide meat
processing and for marketing but
what exactly is going to happen
we there's some reference to a
looks like a publication.
And this is from one of the
amendment analyses and looking
at that some people need to
understand the regulations that
exist
I guess regarding the processing
so I take at least one of the
things that will happen is an
educational.
pamphlet or something is is that
part of it and then what else is
involved.
Mr chair representative what
this would do is establish a
department at New Mexico State
University that would help
people get through the red tape
the regulations and there's a
lot of various organizations out
there that
That are forming co ops and this
would just enable those coops to
put together the supply chain in
the state in the marketing
change so occur like is said
awhile ago you have to find a
feedlot there with at one time
we had a lot of feedlots in New
Mexico but a lot of them have
been taken down because we
didn't you know we were together
when the processing plant here
so
we still have the for quite a
few free lots we have the
ability to support more feedlots
so this part of this Department
would have the job of putting
together the feedlot the the
helping with the red tape that
it takes to get permitted to put
in this back in the house and
the grocery chains and I know
why actually from personal
experience know several people
that are experts in in that
whole industry they they can put
together the pieces of the
puzzle but often to and I also
know that there is a group of
investors out of Mississippi
that would like to
so what they would like to fund
forty midsize packing houses
throughout the United States or
the there's opportunities like
this that that are out there but
if you come into our state where
you go you know I want to I want
to put it back in house to work
where's the land wars the supply
of cattle where's the grocery
chain that would market this
food those are tough questions
and turn in the answers are not
really that simple especially
with the permitting stuff so we
need a place for these people
turn if they have some money
they want to invest in a packing
house they would like to do
business in New Mexico.
Just go to the New Mexico
department of agriculture there
is a department there that will
help you get your feet on the
ground and put this industry in
the business.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
representative Jericho
yeah I I like that I think most
of us don't really think I mean
I in my town I can go to our
main line grocery store to
purchase meat or I can go to
their we have a butcher shop as
well I don't really think about
so much where it where you know
how how they get what they get
and so I think it's good if we
can we can do that more in New
Mexico I'll just point out Mr
chair and representative that it
looks like expansion of packing
her ex the existence of packing
houses would also tie into a
couple other economic
development programs like J. to
the job training incentive
program and Lida and I think
anything we can do to use those
funds for these types of
purposes is a really it's a
really great idea with that Mr
cherry thank those are my
questions and comments and thank
you for bringing the bill thank
you.
Chair out on the on that point I
would just like to say that we
have included the secretary of
economic development in this
discussion and she is in she's
full of support and of using J.
typically the funds to push this
process forward.
Thanks for the clarification
Representative this move that to
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews.
The floor is yours.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
I had no idea that we had a lack
of packing plants in the state
and just kind of stunned by
that.
Because it seems like such a key
part of the food
chain of supply but I just had a
couple a few questions about
sort of how this how this works
if
who expects packing plants is a
federal or state of the meat in
the packing plant is in the
processing of that meet us the
safety is inspected by the
federal USDA and we have got a
another bill that school by
Representative Dow that would
Resume in state inspections and
we used to have instead in state
inspectors but well we gave up
that the program a few years
back and so there's a bill out
there to reinstate the.
Thank you for the answer and Mr
chair members of the committee
it are there.
If we had additional packing
plants there would be another
USDA inspectors to it is I guess
my question is is a lack of USDA
inspectors of any part of the
reason that we don't have more
packing plants.
Mr chair representative if we.
Have some more packing plants
we're going to ask for more
inspectors whether they be in
stater or USDA we need more
inspectors we have small custom
keel up plants I'm not sure sure
the number I think there's
thirty or more in the in the
state Jason may be able to speak
more eloquently to that but many
of them do not have or not USDA
inspected so I can take a beef
there right now you I have to
wait a year to get it on our or
more because they're so backed
up but I cannot so that be from
the grocery store and what we
want to see is that these plants
are inspected and that we can
sell that meet in our local
grocery store for consumption by
our friends and neighbors in New
Mexico.
Mr chair at Representative
Chatfield thank you for that
answer that that helps me
understand this much better
are there.
Any regulations state or federal
and our standards for feedlots.
Yes Mr chairman are you there
there are quite a few of the
standard for feedlots with those
those folks in that the business
are are obviously meeting that
those standards or they wouldn't
they wouldn't be there.
Mr chair at Representative
Chatfield do those include
standards that prevent cruelty
to the animals and and protect
the the health and.
The health of the animals.
Mr chair representative
absolutely.
Thank you Mr chairman
You mentioned the the small
custom kill plants I'm curious
whether New Mexico's cattle
industry.
Would primarily be a niche
market in terms of free grass
fed beef and you know sort of
these I call it a niche market
I'm not sure it's a niche market
it may be a bigger market than
that.
There's just
or
commercialized what am I trying
to say like a factory
could you just tell me a little
bit about is it be very long but
with what what's our cattle
industry look like.
Mr chair representative water
cattle industry looks like today
as many of my friends and
neighbors to have of niche
programs they might be a all
natural be for or grass fed
though
there's a variety of them out
there but what we need is we
need to have big big shoulders
we need to embrace all those we
need to embrace the the niche
market and we also need to to
embrace the cat litter federal
court I like my a lot of money
state to have a little bit more
bring in it I like it federal
court in in some people say want
the grass in the in the it's
healthy million and the there's
a there's a variety of of wants
and needs out there in the in
these packing houses don't they
what you get a packet now sick
it doesn't matter if it's grant
records read they can kill all
the you know they can they can
supply the the industry with the
needs to be able to supply that
the food product in and I don't
know that maybe there can be
some labeling that says this is
New Mexico product a I know
while some time back we we were
dealing with in the with a group
from overseas and they were
wanting to buy New Mexico beef
will of they had been told that
we didn't producing before we
produce a lot of beef but it we
ship it all out of the state and
then we import the finished
product for for.
To to support our food in the we
should do that you know we we
should to keep those jobs and
say keep that production and say
keep and the real local farmer
Dave.
Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield thank you I that helps
me understand the industry
better and I apologize for my
ignorance is just as a been my.
What my life has been about
recently and so I really
appreciate the education you're
providing me and my last
question is an economic one
any estimate of if we really get
this thing wrapped up and going
how many jobs might be created
and.
Would all these plants or would
most of them be owned by out of
state people or would these be
New Mexicans who who were the
owners of the plants in addition
to working in the plants Mr
chair representative to answer
that question I would defer to
Jason.
Thank you Representative
Representative Matthews I did
bring in Jason new to the
Representative let's hopefully
Jason is as computer
Mr note are you there.
Yes Mister chairman I'm here
thank you.
Big.
I can I think I can try to to
address some of those questions
I mean the what kind of jobs
that's going to render it
ultimately yes it is yes need to
be determined I think there
would be need to be some
additional study and that I mean
we've got what has
Representative chapter alluded
to roughly thirty custom kill
plants six of those right now
are federally inspected so you
know it's it's yet to determine
if we we think it would be
significant.
Of it and and and and and and
ultimately as as this develops
And I'm sorry my my internet
connection was a little bit
unstable and I didn't get the
second point of your question
Representative Matthews.
It I'm here I'm Mr chair at Mr
new the second part was I was
curious about any estimate of
the number of jobs that might be
created if this program really
takes off.
Yes Mister chairman
Representative Matthews that
that would need further study
and and and and what their with
what the resources what this
bill would bring we think we can
ultimately determine that.
Thank you and Mr chairman thank
you are you now.
Thank Representative Matthews
eleven were able to expand your
education on matters of
agriculture from from all points
in our state so it's a good
thing Representative small the
floor is yours Sir.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and thanks big thanks to
Representative Chatfield for
this legislation before I have a
couple of questions just want to
recognize and honor Mr chair
your your knowledge and and in
this area the fact that some of
the best cattle genetics word
has it.
Come from a farm in a place that
you might now that said Mr
chairman Representative
Chatfield
The you some of the other
questions have already gone
through the different value
chain and I will go back through
that I think it's one of the
most impressive parts of the
bill but Mr chair just ask me
for that field chair
That's thank.
Hope that this connects your
position created at with the
department of agriculture this
would creating connect all parts
of the value chains such that
the idea of being New Mexico
producers would ultimately be
able to get a higher price per
pound for their cattle at an in
state producer or processor as
opposed to a processor just
across the line in Texas is that
accurate.
Yes there's a lot going on
there.
And I Mr chair I can I guess I
can rephrase that we don't hold
up too much time it is that okay
and I'll just.
Representative.
I'm not sure what was happening
there are maybe something else
going on in here in the room if
if I have to okay my computer
out and talked to yet in a
different room down the hall to
the it's only me
You know I'm not sure Jason can
you tell me what the what the
finished products of I will be
for an average size of that is
after processing what's the
value of that carcass.
Mr leader you there.
Mr chair not I can tell you that
that it as and calf depending on
the price you get six to six
hundred nine hundred dollars for
for Kathleen you selling and and
once she's goes to three lines
in the in this process you
probably got a four thousand
dollar product or or you know
Pemberton street already found
the steak is a lot more
expensive so so we're losing a
lot of value by not processing
this stuff with our in our
instance say keep that keep the
job to say keep the keep the
product in state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chatfield and.
It also ultimately as a New
Mexico producer you the New
Mexico border hat will that one
of the ideas of this is so that
the New Mexico producer has a
choice and that they can get a
higher on the roof pound for
that animal and in in state
processing facility verses
taking shipping that animal out
of state or sell and that animal
to a feedlot out of state which
would then sell it to a process
disabilities that correct.
Mr chair representative that
would be the immediate effect
but the long term effect is that
whenever they begin to close
some of these packing houses are
due to the COVID prices are are.
Prices just begin to plummet and
if you have maintained if you
have to say on a little longer
you know the the fat cattle.
would would fill the feedlots
and therefore nobody would
want to dark as if the writers
in New Mexico canciller cans
they came make direct payment at
the end of the.
At the end of the day you know
and so so you have two problems
there that are that are access
rated by each other one of them
is that they're not going to be
any meet the foot in the grocery
store for people eat in the
second one is that the young
calf producers cannot sell their
product because
nobody wants to more no place to
go within the the year long I
can't go to feedlot the free
lock I can't the sale it is so
if it will the the.
crisis to awhile back only
lasted a few days and we're
still feeling the effect of it
because of the cattle that were
in the feedlot to we came over
fat they become heavier and that
increase the amount of beef well
that was put on the market per
head which drops the price of
beef and so we're still not
completely over that and that
was just for a very short time
if it if it went on for weeks it
would be a really serious
situation.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Representative
Chatfield really appreciate the
from that kind of.
Sort of disaster scenario this
makes sense but also Mr chair
representative field as we move
to get out of the move past
COVID as we all hope to do even
in a quote unquote more normal
world this your position will
help make in state processing
more attractive to in state
producers per pound that's one
of the key once we get into a
normal world that that's
something that we can hope to
look forward to correct.
Representative you're muted Sir.
I'm sorry.
Mr chair there was another beer
another bill being presented in
my office but by my office mate
so I got up moved down to the
break room there's no but
there's no one else in here but
maybe so maybe you won't have to
meet me for a little.
And your Representative a small
question.
I did hear it right it does tell
me again absolutely I was movie.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chatfield I just
send in once we get back to a
quote unquote more normal world
without the pressures of COVID
at and say a year two years down
the line we hope we're getting
that more normal world this
position ensure creating
Representative Chatfield should
help to make in state processing
more financially valuable to in
state producers so that they can
actually get a better price for
their cattle in state processing
versus having to ship it out of
state is that correct.
Mr chair representative
absolutely right now today these
processors process all of our
cattle and they not only do they
process our cattle date only
many many of the fat cattle at
that's coming into the system so
in a way they have a monopoly
they kind of control the cattle
market now I'm not against them
forum we need ammonium we for
provide the greatest
best quality product probably in
the world I mean we have we have
a great to supplier of beef but
we are just so vulnerable to a
to a
industries that not only owns
all the facilities to to process
our beef but they also own a lot
of the cattle it goes into a you
know what I would like Morrissey
is that we locally produced our
cattle in the it's Fred locally
and it's it's slaughtered
locally and and and it's
available to New Mexico citizens
I know during the crisis there
was a person that had three
hundred head of cattle in the
feedlot they were ready to go
they were getting killed three a
day.
Because they had no access to
processing and and it was not
good
Understood thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative my
final question and I look for
something legislation that Mr
noon mentioned out of the
roughly thirty processing
facilities.
Roughly twenty four those are
what's known as custom exam they
don't have USDA inspections
therefore they cannot sail in
state to retail markets that
means that six of the backing of
the current processors do have
those USDA inspections and are
able to sell to retail that's
correct right.
I believe so Mr chair okay thank
you Mr Representative Chatfield
and thank one of the questions
moving forward will be in New in
New Mexico doesn't pay anything
for those inspectors correct at
those six facilities Mr chair
not to my knowledge okay that's
right so we're getting that
federal service allowing these
local processing facilities to
sell retail not having to pay
for that's great and we've
actually seen a little bit of
growth in that area you know to
roughly what is it about thirty
well over thirty percent growth
here in the last two or three
years and the number of of
processing facilities that are
USDA inspected.
Mr chair representative that's
that's true true hearing myself
from somebody else's
but the also I would like to
point out that if you we started
in state program some of that
can be funded federally also so
well it's not like state funded
or federally funded you so if we
did have a in state inspection
program I believe it is my
understanding that the fed would
kick kick in some of the funding
on that.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you representative I think
you're the value for your piece
of legislation and complex value
chain is X. is is really
substantial really complement
the legislation
and for this and I think it
could be the foundation for
significant additional private
investors very clear pathway so
I'm proud to stand and support
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you very much representatives.
Thank you thank you chairman
small we have a couple more on
our list but these money
everyone that it's ten thirty
five on my watch and that we are
going to go to the floor at
eleven o'clock we have one more
bill to address so that the fear
that some work group
Representative Zamora
Representative what are you with
us.
Thank you all try to make this
quick Mr chairman sorry my
computer's not open my cameras
not working on my computer
I'd like to thank Representative
Jack Chatfield for bringing this
bill forward what this means to
the state of New Mexico and the
producers which are the farmers
ranchers a starting point of the
cattle and the and the beef to
be process is more money for the
state and more money for the
producers
better control of the product
getting onto the shelf for the
consumer and that means a lot in
the cattle industry.
This will make it better for the
ranchers producing these beasts
they do a great job in New
Mexico producing cattle
And I think and I know in my
heart that this will be good for
the state and for the consumer
and for the producer and our
thank Representative Chatfield
for bringing this bill for.
Thank you Representative more on
this go to our last the speaker
we have Representative
Representative L. floor's yours.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I'm sorry I was presenting to
build another committee I just
want to reiterate Representative
Chatfield to say it.
there is a monopoly going gone
and it's very.
Disheartening for me is a beef
producer.
To have all.
New Mexico ground beef shipped
out of state before it can come
back in to be consumed by New
Mexico residents.
Mr Rossell Mister Joe Modred who
is a very good friend of mine
has USA meet and he has the
ability to process.
Our beef bison sheep goats pigs
emusic ostriches out there that
plant with USDA oversight and I
push many years ago and I think
Pam Roy participated in this to
try to get our schools involved
in using this maybe because I am
a strong believer in.
New Mexico grown in our schools
here then if this bill passes we
would be able to realize what
New Mexico agriculture really
does for not only our schools
but as well as our.
Hospitals are senior centers and
our penal institutions Mr chair
Mister speaker I stand behind
this one hundred percent thank
you for your time.
Thank you Representative is L.
noted anyone else questions or
comments from the committee if
not what is the pleasure of the
committee.
I made the day pass Mr chairman
Representative second the second
by Representative Zamora was
some and race as well as any
opposition this bill.
Seeing that Representative
Chatfield you have a do pass on
house bill one twenty one thank
you Sir for your presentation
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you have a great day do we will
turn the house memorial one
which is presented by our vice
chair herself Representative it
up House Bill what one thirty
regional last us longer units.
But.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
I also have an expert witness by
the name of
this Rodriguez who is the
executive director of the task
economic development corporation
and the issue would be admitted
on Mr chair as my expert witness
there she is.
Okay well let me present this
bill I guess is a meat
processing day I'm very excited
to introduce this memorial hi it
is to really do a study much
like Representative Chatfield
said bill to do a study on
something called Google
Google livestock slaughter units
we we call it the in the north
Google then times that's what we
call it it's really it's really
a big rig that goes out to of
that two ranches and local farms
and these other livestock on
site it was a very sophisticated
operation it was started in two
thousand six with the seed money
from the New Mexico state
legislature I it was in
existence in the because well.
As many projects do happen in
the in the in the they just
couldn't keep up that stating
money so I would like for this
study to really kind of look at
all the ramifications of being
maybe I don't know.
I don't even know how many
mobile unit block stocks latter
units we should have the state
but that from a comprehensive
state the to see how much it
would cost how much would you to
much of costs to maintain the
sustaining operations.
And what the local market would
be and in different areas of the
state so what we have done is
As steady to be set.
The New Mexico department of
agriculture with the assistance
of the New Mexico I just four
New Mexico ranch resource center
at New Mexico State University
I look at it and get it is.
For next year there is no
appropriations in this bill
because I've already talked to
all the.
The representatives from the
north and we have selected Leo
how to beyond Representative
regimen toy and Representative
Christine or tests are all but
we're all going in with their
capital outlay to raise a
hundred thousand dollars to pay
for this study because it is a
it was a huge loss it was a huge
loss when this when this wasn't
available to local farms and
ranches anymore and I I guess I
also want to compliment said is
in the tax system economic
development center they were one
of the first commercial kitchens
in the state of where local
farmers and and debt that could
bring the produce they can
process it they had a a robust
small business development
center that helped walk all
these
Local producers through a
business plan through marketing
through you know how do you put
a safe parking on the product
and how do you sell that to
stores there Moffit the schools
involved with that involved with
everything.
Everything connected to growing
local.
And in the north so with that I
would like to introduce
my witness my expert witness
process Rodriguez so I think
it's been asked with that G. CDC
for as long as I can remember
and that if you had come on and
just kind of further explain to
the folks here how this works
process was in charge of this
program for many years recess.
Process hello you there.
Muted.
Okay good morning.
So
thank you madam chair and
representative I would like to
start by introducing myself
again my name is much Senator
Rodriguez I am the current
executive director for the past
county economic development
corporation Intel's to Mexico
and we are looking to revitalize
and revive our mobile batons
that unit and with the help of
the legislature as it was in the
beginning are looking to move
forward with it I think that I
would like to see if there are
any questions there's it's a
meat processing days so there's
been a lot of information shared
this morning and again open the
floor up to questions.
Thank you.
And Representative woman had
asked if that's the.
The station can we then go to.
Questions or comments regarding.
I share Mr chair thank you let's
go to the.
Most of the work of house
memorial.
What a please raise your hand
then first all of our C. N..
RT Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Paula
Garcia and with the New Mexico
sic Association and many of our
members are our farmers and
ranchers and this initiative
would be very beneficial to the
rural agricultural economies
around New Mexico who have a
strong need for of livestock
processing from meat processing
I'm personally a of a past
beneficiary of the T. CDC
program where they had the
Google my god Sarah that that
Google My tents are used to come
to model where we have no
processing capacity here and
there were over a dozen ranchers
that were using them with us and
were able to
choose for personal use or to or
to market that because they had
USDA inspections and so was it
was very beneficial for our our
small businesses here who who
are up for part of the land
based economy we would love to I
personally would love to see
this but are are so ciation it's
it's also very supportive of
getting this program back up and
running and and really doing it
in such a way that can
and if that can be feasible in
the long term so thank you Mr
chairman for for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr Ceylan expected
Rivera.
Me with us.
Chair LESC J. and members of the
committee again thank you for
allowing me to comment this
morning Tiffany Rivera director
of government relations and
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
want to thank Representative
headed off for bringing for this
memorial we are very supportive
of bringing back the state me
inspection program here the
state and are appreciative of
the potential that this study
would I'm cover for the regional
slaughter units so thank you
again Representative put up and
thank you for being considerate
of our state's ranchers and and
they're opportunities to expand
their markets thank you thank
you Mr
Robert.
Erica you with this.
Hi there I'm I'm here and you
almost got it right at their
core Rovers but no worries
everyone gets that rural.
Okay please be brief.
Absolutely I'm good morning
chair I'm.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak on this bill again
my name's Eric Rovers I'm here
on behalf of New Mexico first
and I'm speaking in support of
house memorial one study and
regional livestock slaughtering
units
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward we have
heard from so many of our
rancher members that they dearly
miss the moment Fontana and
considering the supply chain
problems that we've had in our
state that were mentioned in
previous testimony for the last
bill this is another bill that
addresses the needs of our ag
producers and help support our
agricultural traditions here in
New Mexico so considering the
geographical size of our state
often ranchers don't have easy
access to processing their
livestock and as such with the
backing of hundreds of producers
around the state we wholly
support this memorial.
I'm so thank you again for
letting me speak in support of
the bill and thank you for your
time thank you very much have a
great day nexus go to Pam Roy.
This really with us.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you so much sis
Panerai with farm to table and
I'm here to represent the New
Mexico food and agriculture
Policy Council and rocky
mountain farmers union in full
support of house memorial one
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward into Mr
tragus at the task canonic
development corporation we've
known your operation for many
years really excited about
seeing it as a really strong
regional initiative M. we
believe that we need all options
for meat processing in New
Mexico and we believe that
Google My tons it is part of
that
And also we think that the
feasibility study will really
help us identify the kinds of
resources that are needed to
steam enrollment times as Google
meat processing facilities as
well as many other aspects of
the market place that we have
already been discussed this
morning so thank you very much
for the full support of house
memorial one thank you let's go
next to us so I think so a year
with this that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and my name is
that we think and representing
the national young farmers
coalition and I'm a farmer
myself here in Bernalillo county
and Secora county
young primary stands in full
support of house memorial one
for all of the reasons that have
been stated previously and we
really think the sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you
very much so we is anyone in
opposition to house memorial
one.
Seeing none I have one hand race
from the committee
representatives up.
The floor is yours.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Brett thank you
for bringing this forward I do
have a couple of comments
regarding your memorial itself
on page two.
Line three.
You said the New Mexico
livestock board no longer
provide meat inspection with
that shouldn't that right New
Mexico department of agriculture
didn't they say we don't want
any part of it anymore does that
correction need to be made I
think so you're right
Representative I'll change that
before it gets to the floor I
guess okay and Mister chairman I
guess my next concern is also on
page two line nineteen.
Right now oil and gas is still
the biggest contributor to the
state of New Mexico and those
jobs are invaluable for all
those people that do live in
those areas where there is the
oil and gas production so I kind
of take offense to that yes
economic diversification you bet
as hard as it is for those oil
and gas companies to maintain
jobs in New Mexico and they're
all moving across the state line
and doing the same work over
there and provide the jobs over
there.
We have a problem there so I
just want to point that out of.
We are we do stand to we do
stand to lose jobs because of
the regulations that the state
of New Mexico was put on so I do
want to point that out to the to
the audience madam chair I
fully.
One of the key issues that I saw
in one of the now as as was
D. A. is not a research entity
and
It will have to be the New
Mexico State University College
of bases which stands for
agriculture consumer
environmental sciences that
would do the research on that so
maybe that needs to be addressed
to Mister chairman those items
are brought up I really do like
to build we need to promote New
Mexico grown products thank you
very much thank you
representative thank you for
Representative so that's the
move to Representative Zamora
present what.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative that might
offer bringing this bill
forward.
I have a just a quick question
is how would it how does it work
on the Google Madonsela is
sometimes when we kill it be if
we usually expected to hang for
fourteen days or something like
that in fourteen days how does
that part of it work
let me say a sensor that
question thank you Mr thank you
representative.
Mr Regus all of Madam chair
representative so basically the
unit itself is occupied with a
hanging.
Section to the units so there is
a for refrigerated section to
the actual unit that would allow
for hanging for transportation
the to the cut Representative
facility.
And so the unit depending on the
size that eight thousand pounds
that is the capacity for
carcasses within the unit
itself.
Okay and Mr chairman and
this is the so then the the
mobile Madonsela will actually
go to somebody's rancher farm in
New.
And.
Kill the beef or whatever and
then hang it and then deliver it
to somewhere else where it gets
on and then cut and
Representative.
Correct and so the of unit will
go out to the farm branch at
does humane slaughter onsite it
then our processes addresses the
beef inside the mobile unit it
gets hung for transportation and
then it will deliver the product
to a cut Representative so.
Okay and and Mr chair and
representative of that up so
then the.
I believe I I I would suspect
that there's a fee charged to
the to the.
Armor the rancher the beef the
guy go on the the the so then a.
What what is it that shut down
the first unit was it it wasn't
cash flow on ur or was there
regulations or what what is it
that shut him down.
It was a mixture of both so
basically cash flow was an issue
again we are nonprofit and
you know the program itself
started out as a pilot program
operated successfully for seven
years.
And so in the end from you know
perfected the program you know
have not now have the been there
done that experience from the
actual option program being run
for seven years.
you know were able to work with
the regulators under USDA to be
able to have an in house
inspector here at our facility
and so I think it was a
combination of both and again
with the been there done that
done that experience you know we
feel that you would be able to
benefit or we would be able to
benefit you know locally and
regionally from from the mobile
slaughter service.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your answers.
The more funding on the list we
have Representative small thank
you Sir Mr chairman thank you
representative that that really
quick Representative at a I
believe on
On page two where where it was
just pointed out that currently
is as aware as a New Mexico
livestock or no longer provides
meat inspection Mr chair
representative at at I actually
I I would ask I think that's
actually that is accurate Mr
chair representative at a at a.
Concluding in two thousand and
seven the livestock board did
run a state inspection program
Mr chair representative at a in
two thousand and seven because
that program must meet federal
standards and because the
federal budget because USDA
found that program was not
meeting federal standards.
The program was discontinued
because Mr chair representative
at a as I recall and understand
again the livestock or program
at that time in two thousand and
seven was not meeting federal
standards so
long way of saying Mr chair and
representative at a I believe
the current house memorial at
least in that portion on page
two line three may actually be
accurate in that it that the
livestock for did used to
provide those inspections thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative at a.
Thank you.
seen on the question or comments
from the committee is there a
motion.
Would you pass Mr chairman you
passed by Representative small
as they can by Representative
Allison of madam madam secretary
please call the roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative brown yes.
Representative these.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes yes.
You.
Yes to month concerts.
Representative small.
Yes yes.
Representative Zamora yeah.
Yes.
Well I.
Is that Miss.
Representative chairman T. yes.
Thank you and congratulations by
a vote a unanimous vote you have
a do present house from where
one Representative it up and
just to note Representative
Matthews is quickly moving up my
list as one of my most favorite
the.
The new reps on this committee
cool I love it thank you all for
voting us today on everything
hand and meet and then we will
see each other next Tuesday as
the is the agenda is already on
the golden rod and on the
website that being said thank
you all for some great work
thank you will be committed and
we will see you again next.
What.
