Representative Reed present.
Today. Uh, you have sitting in
Today. Uh, you have sitting and
Bill
87 hot seat is yours whenever
Don't used to be the Republican
analyst for consumer and Public
Affairs when I chaired the
committee, and he sat over here
With me several days a week for
a number of years.
Um, so Senator Branch has the
exact duplicate of the bill that
I am carrying, which is House
Bill 236 on limited return to
work. We discussed it quite
thoroughly the other day, and
I'm I'm co sponsoring this
legislation with
Leader Lane and protests and now
Standard questions. I have the
same witnesses. Carter Monday
and Grace
I wanted to call you, Grace
Williams, because
I'm sorry.
Today. Carter Bundy in Grace
Phillips was
Thank you, man. With that I will
go to the audience and I'll go
with those who are opposed to
this legislation.
Hey, buddy, opposed to this
legislation raise their hands go
to the
Anybody yonder video or what do
you call that, And this is film
opposed to the legislation.
Raise your hands. Okay, I'll go
to those in favor of the
legislation. Raise your hand.
A lot of them.
Okay. And, uh, later, okay. I'll
go to those in favor that want
Thank you. Thank you Next.
Okay, anybody else?
Ports that will help people I
think for this and
What else that has to speak.
Clinton.
John Logie. It's with the New
Mexico Federation Police.
Okay. Thank you. Yes, sir.
Chief.
Railway.
We done on the inside, Okay?
Shall we? Anybody there with the
right hand raised.
Scott, If you like this
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name's Darrell
Scott or prior law enforcement
officer myself who's really been
following this law of the Senate
and just would really appreciate
this getting through. I am one
of those people that could
definitely get back to work.
And help. It's something I want
to do, and I would appreciate
that be able to do to get
Our streets, maybe back to a
better level.
Um yeah, and the court security
needs to needs staff bad and
it's one of those things that
I've seen personally in some of
the consultant work that I've
had to do.
So I would really appreciate
that. You do a do pass on this.
Thank you,
Madam Leader. Ah, welcome,
Senator.
You made it. Thank you. Uh,
okay, Bill. Go back to you.
Anything else? Where? Nothing.
Nothing, Mr. Chairman. Okay,
we're gonna committee
Representative Martinez less
than first Mr Chair. I moved to
do pass second lap.
Okay, representative status.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
So, um, just to be clear. This
is the same exact bill that we
heard. I don't remember when in
this committee.
Mr. I'm Mr Speaker. Mr.
Chairman, Um
There were two additions that I
mentioned earlier.
That are
In this bill that we added into
two third hospital to 36 and one
is for, um
Peace officers who are hired by
the attorney general and
biologist, tricked attorneys and
they do investigations and they
also
Track down warrants. So those
are two areas because we have a
everywhere and a lot of people
don't know they have a warrant.
So that's an important area of
community safety and the other
Was and I can attest to this
even though I haven't practiced
law in this field for a couple
of years is the C Y F D
investigators. Those who
actually removal or potential,
So that's the difference. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and, um, leader
Chase E. You know, I
I also think that um and I made
the same comments when we were
in this committee last time in
terms of, um C Y F D workers and
those workers who are those
areas where they're experiencing
large, um, vacancy rates.
Um, last night I was in the
Senate judiciary and to present
a bill that your senator to see
Pinot and I
Or sponsoring. Unfortunately,
that bill was rolled. Um, but
Um, in terms of the
investigators at C Y F D.
There's a 25% vacancy rate.
Um or no, Let me correct myself.
There's a 25% overall vacancy
rate.
But the other thing that I
discovered Mr Chair is a 35%
vacancy rate in terms of the
workers who oversee, um Children
in foster homes.
And so I think that that's
another area that we should
include, Um we've got to fill
those vacancies somehow, Um
That agency is in crisis. Um and
even with a new secretary.
Um, I don't believe that the
crisis is going to be over until
we figure out with experienced
workers.
Now, Mr Chair Leader. I don't
have a whole lot of, um, I
guess. Let me let me just say
that, you know, given that if we
can, if we can add them in as
well.
Um, you know, that will be
helpful. I'm just not sure that
in any of these areas, people
will come back to work because
they left work, probably because
of horrible working conditions,
But I guess we should We can at
least try
So my Aston is to include those
Mr Chairman, representative.
You know, See why FD was
consulted because they asked for
the investigators, and they are
actually have more of a law
enforcement role, even though
they're not law enforcement, and
they have to combine. I would
actually hate that I that my
clients had to deal with. I
think they need to train new
workers better and pay more.
And you know it's part of the
transformation of a culture and
I don't really know that you
want some of them.
Some of those individuals back.
Some of them were great and went
to higher paying job.
But I just wholesale. Don't do
have opening opening it up.
Given my experience. Yeah, Madam
Leader. I can appreciate that.
That well trained probably
wasn't a good fit for them, but
I think we can say the same
thing for some of these officers
that we're trying to bring back
and and correction officers. And
this is, um Madam Chair, Mr
Chair representative. Jealous.
Maybe I need some more coffee
this afternoon.
Um
The bill really has been aimed
at trying to provide
Personnel that really are
involved. I know that, um more
of a crisis like when the
investigators
Are actually making the decision
whether to remove a child or
several Children from the home
and asking for the holding.
So it's and I know whether the
corrections and state police
I just don't think those
caseworkers fall into that
category certainly have an
effect on people, but they
They don't. Um, Mr Chair, Madam
Leader. I guess we'll disagree
because I think that, um the
kids that we have in care, um,
definitely ours. Evidence by,
uh, you know, the newspaper
articles? Um
The neglect right because of the
fact that, um the caseloads are
high. Um, and if you're not also
monitoring what's happening to
kids, Madam leader that also
leads to and so you know, I
don't know what the answer is.
This might be part of an answer.
But, you know, I think that
Um, we need to figure out how
we're going to address it.
Representative Garcia.
Anybody else?
Okay. I'm not bragging. I guess
I'm just not going to repeat
what I said before.
Everybody knows what do we have
had their bust? I've made it
public. I mean, I think this is
the wrong way to go.
Always says is the opportunity
for local government, uh and the
state not to trade new people.
And like I said before, I mean,
they opened the wide open.
And now we're in this situation
because we didn't train new
people just did not bother
training new people to come and
take the place of this people
that sat there forever and ever
So when we told people that had
run out of time, and life and
energy faded away,
We have all these vacancies at
the bottom.
You have nobody to fill them in.
We're not trading anybody that
yellow men Because now we're
going to hire some more people.
I'm not gonna call them old
people, retired people.
You feel these vacancies, not
training the young people.
Not feel any vacancies with
people that are willing to work
another 20 years because all
we're doing is working for the
next two or three years. That's
all we care about.
They care. All we care about
today is that we are taking care
of the three years in the
future.
But we're not even going to
worry about what happens after
that.
And what I really like to hear
is I said 80 years as a
magistrate judge
Eight years in the courtroom in
Cibola County.
And I never saw. I never even
heard that they would hire a
court security. There was no I
mean, we were lucky that after
so many years, they bothered
spending money on
On monitors that people can walk
through. But there was nobody at
all. Watch them walk through the
monitors whether you had middle
or not on you because you had
the monitors there, but nobody
is standing by them so that
people would just walk right on
through there with nothing.
So for them to say that they
need court security.
Never needed it before.
I mean, or maybe, uh, maybe us
all judges in my day. We're a
lot tougher than today's judges
because
We never had for its security.
There was no such thing.
So what can I say? For there to
have made it for the last? How
many years has Magistrates Court
being around?
Of course security Anyway, I'm
opposed to be able to tell I'm
going to say anymore.
Yes, And I'd like to explain my
vote.
Yes.
Yes, And I'd like yes and I'll
explain my vote.
Yes.
Damn
Um
Mr Chair. I voted yes, with lots
of heartburn.
Um, for some of the reasons that
you've expressed. I think that
we not only need to look at
training new focus to come in.
But I also think that we need to
look at the conditions that
cause people to leave not only
at C Y F D but in the jails as
well.
Um, we need to figure out how to
for lack of better word empty
them of the folk who don't need
to be there because they're not
getting the services that they
need. Um either medical or
physical or mental. Um and so we
need to come at this. I think
from a different perspective.
Um, I don't believe that.
You know, building up huge, um,
security workforce is
necessarily the answer. It
hasn't worked before, And I
don't think it's gonna work.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I also
voted the first round for this
bill. And while I think you
know, I also want to speak as a
young lady of Albuquerque that,
um
Some of the other had been there
for longer had really good
retirement deals. Years. Um, and
some of us who are coming in.
We're looking more and more
years Um and so I know so many
young people who don't apply for
those jobs the city because they
see that the benefits are
becoming every year and every
every every time waiting a
little bit more. And so I think
there's a significant thing that
we there's a significant
importance to investing in our
young people and having young
People want to come and work for
government.
I was the youngest person on my
team when I was working for the
city of Albuquerque by
15 years and I did it because I
love my community. I love my
city, but I think we really need
to figure out also how we're
going to have young people.
Thank you, Mr Chair. First of
all, Thank you very much for
for, um, putting this
legislation forward.
You know, to my friends on the
other side that have
disagreements on this? I will
just say that this is not the
The only thing that they'll have
this is going to fix everything.
This is just going to be an
additional tool.
And, um, I will say, you know,
and I'm gonna keep it short The
issue with Magistrates, the
magistrate, uh,
Judge in uh, that mean just got
bombed. Long ago. We saw it on
the news. And so I think times
have changed and and we need we
need to protect these people.
These individuals we need to
protect those people who are
working in all these different
facilities that are shorthanded
and we are working our people.
To the bone, and we need to do
something.
This is not the answer to
everything. But this is a good
start, and we will supplement
all the other things. We hope
that we hear the others. You
know our friends that you know,
we do need to invest in our
