Amanda for your consideration
call madam chair are you about
that go ahead.
Representative Crowder.
Here.
Representative Garrett.
We spoke with this morning so
so
Representative Harper.
Here Representative Lundstrom.
She heard Representative Madrid
is getting on at some issues
with the link so I'm not sure
committee president because I'm
gonna be here Representative
Pettigrew.
Here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative.
Vice chair Garcia nice to have
the issues.
Chair Rubio.
Here.
Give seven folks present in
court.
Thanks Mario I'm so thank you
all again good morning
I'd like to introduce House Bill
three as amended for your
consideration as the fiscal year
twenty twenty two operating
budget for the New Mexico
department of transportation the
FY twenty to operate it for the
department of in public for the
first time it exceeds one
billion dollars.
I'm.
One million dollars the revenue
for the department consists
primarily of gasoline and diesel
fuel tax weight distance and
vehicle registration fees that
have held strong in trying times
with a three point five percent
increase projected between FY
twenty one and FY twenty two as
well as additional revenue fund
balances were factored into this
increasing the department of
transportation's request I fifty
four point nine million dollars
the department of transportation
is budgeted into four program
areas the project design and
construction program consists of
state funds and much of the
federal highway funds will
support a robust highway
construction program estimated
to be four hundred and sixty
five million for the upcoming
year the recommendation for this
program of three hundred fifty
eight person includes twenty six
point four million dollars in
salaries and benefits three
hundred and forty four point
five million in contractual
services and two hundred and
forty two point eight million
and other cost category the
total FY twenty two
recommendations for the design
and construction program is six
hundred and thirteen point eight
million representing a three
percent increase over the
department's request the highway
operations program represents
over one thousand eight hundred
and forty hard working women and
men who keep the roadway safer
traveling public I'm for it safe
for the traveling public by
maintaining pavement clearing
snow replacing guard rails in
traffic signs as well as the
unfortunate and never ending
task of cleaning trash and
litter off of our state highways
The appropriation recommendation
for this program includes a
twelve percent increase over the
requested budget including one
thousand eight hundred and forty
point seven person at one
hundred and nine point two
million in salaries and benefits
seventy four point seven million
contractual services.
And ninety three point eight
million dollars resulting in a
total recommended appropriation
for this program of two hundred
and seventy seven point eight
million dollars the business
support program is responsible
for the financial human
resources information technology
and other various services I
must congratulate the department
for last year state audit where
they had zero audit findings a
testament to the great work they
do in accounting for over a
billion dollars of taxpayer
resources the business support
programme consisting of two
hundred and forty nine point
eight person is recommended for
a one percent increase over the
requested amounts for twenty
five point six million dollars
in salaries four point six
million dollars in contractual
services and thirteen point five
million in other costs for total
recommendation of forty three
point eight million dollars the
model program includes public
transportation and traffic
safety programs and the point of
entry program a five point nine
million dollar fund balance in
the weight distance permit
identification administrative
fund is recommended for
improvement of the ports of
entry model program
recommendation is an eight
percent increase over the HSD
request the recommendation
includes a hundred and twenty
one person seven point six
million dollars in salaries and
thirty four point three million
in contractual services thirty
five point nine million in other
costs for a total appropriation
recommendation of seventy seven
point eight million dollars the
total recommendation for New
Mexico department of
transportation's FY twenty two
operating budget consists of two
thousand five hundred and sixty
nine person one hundred and
sixty nine million dollars in
salaries four hundred and fifty
eight point two million dollars
in contractual services three
hundred and eighty six point two
million dollars in other costs
for total appropriation
recommendation of one point zero
one three billion dollars if
approved by the committee this
recommendation.
Reflected in the amendment which
is point two one nine seven five
five point two along with the
general appropriations technical
language presented on February
fourth that provides limited
budget adjustment authority the
ability to upload additional
federal funds and accept fund
transfers into the state road
fund will appear in the house
transportation public works
committee report presented
tomorrow before the house
appropriations and finance
committee as a transportation
appropriation act of twenty
twenty one so with that any
action taken on additional
amendments will also be
reflected in the report.
And so with that everyone I
I will open it up for questions.
Or I will entertain a motion
which ever elected.
Chair just for clarification in
your opening remarks you said as
Amanda and we have an amendment.
Do we need to move that
amendment or is that already
been done we haven't moved it
yet so please feel free to do
that Representative if that's
what you would like to do.
madam chair has your name on it
I'd be happy to support you
okay.
So we have a motion for that to
move that amendment do I have a
second by second.
Thank you representative Garrett
so that we have discussion do we
have discussion did anybody want
to speak on that.
Madam chair would would you mind
explaining it to this place.
Yes.
So yes so that was all of my
amendment is basically
everything that I just that.
Okay.
All right so yes so we didn't
move it so that was up for
discussion so
let me know if you all have any
questions and Tom and I are are
here to act to answer whatever
questions you might have.
Okay no questions Graham.
Okay Representative Madrid.
Thank you madam chairman ensure.
I got here late so I'm just a
big portion of your your
presentation apologize or
struggling in getting down from
the mountain but since I missed
the first part can go over like
to the age of the first page.
For two million dollars
appropriated for fun and
expenditures what how would that
hundred fifty be used exactly it
and clarification.
Representative Tom what do you
what do you want to address
that.
Madam chair address at this
point the amendment that you're
dealing with is the OpBud there
are two dition additional
amendments which will come after
this.
I apologize.
Two hundred right now we're just
talking about the operational
budget we're not yet at the
special appropriations okay you
amendment for House Bill three
for the operational budget okay
very well I apologize I'm coming
in so late that I'm trying to
get my bearings as to where
we're at on the meeting.
The current thank you
Representative Harper.
Madam chair I would move that we
adopt the amendment.
Thank you Mr Representative
Harper is there any opposition
to adopting the amendment.
Will.
Great.
So no so there is no opposition
so we have an adopted amendment
to house bill three
And so in.
So I'm we're gonna go ahead and
move on then to be special
appropriations
I know that this is the special
appropriation is normally dealt
with in H. FC however chairwoman
Lundstrom has asked this
committee for input in the
process
because we had to cancel last
Thursday's meeting in Argenta
got pushed back.
In full discussions in committee
in discussions with many of you
the general intent on special
appropriations there's a number
of things that we've we've
looked at which is of that the
money not be earmarked for
anyone project or a list of
projects that greatly exceeded
the appropriated appropriated
amount or that the funding not
sit sat stagnant due to projects
not being designed and ready for
construction it was also very
important that the funding
haven't equitable distribution
throughout the state so that the
district engineers could deliver
shovel ready projects quickly
and finally that the funding be
used on a mix of both
construction and maintenance
type projects of the and and
lastly the committee members
recognize that the local
government funding was being
distributed successfully
throughout the process through
the process he's already in
place at New Mexico department
of transportation also that
pleases the committee I do have
an amendment that will serve as
a guidance to House
Appropriations the amendment is
point two one nine eight two
zero point one and it allows
that a hundred forty five
million dollars shall be
distributed equally among the
six transportation districts for
roadway planning design
construction and maintenance in
accordance with projects
identified in the statewide
transportation improvement
program the local government
portion of the appropriation use
of use the distribution methods
defined in the transportation
project fund which is section
sixty seven dash three dash
seventy eight
and then legislative finance
council's recommendation
includes an earmark of five
million dollars for the purpose
of the central air service
should that legislation be
enacted as I mentioned the
special appropriations are
normally dealt with and House
Appropriations and so this is a
guidance for the appropriations
committee as it moves forward
and and we do it here.
Ring tomorrow in that committee.
are there any questions around
that
We have the Representative
Madrid.
Madam chair I apologize we move
your amendment yet for
discussion go ahead and
Representative Harper all of
move the minutes for discussion
thank you Representative Harper
is there any discussion on the
amendment.
madam chair I they have got the
amendment of other computer and
it's a.
Two one nine eight two oh point
one I believe you said is that
correct.
Yes it is to put two one nine
eight two zero point one.
Okay
Madam chair I know that in in
Committee subcommittee yesterday
that those numbers for a just a
little bit I'm not sure.
They were they were adjusted
upward.
And I think it would be good if
we can get.
Representative Lundstrom to to
engage with us for a few minutes
to maybe talk about that I'm I'm
not sure what the statuses in
their manager number two I don't
know if if you're going all out
opportunity for the public to
become part of this conversation
I got a text from the secretary
said of all us if if they're
gonna have an opportunity to
speak so I just put that out
there so you would know that.
And and I can try texto
Representative Lundstrom if
you'd like yes doctor she's
she's on right now okay I'm
Representative Lundstrom I don't
know if you have a couple
seconds but Representative
Crowder has a question I had one
of the questions we will.
Chairman Lundstrom I I.
Notice that the numbers in the.
Proposed amendments are a little
bit different than some of that
we saw yesterday and
subcommittees and I didn't know
if this amendment needs to be
updated on the special
transportation fund or is there
are these numbers still the
recommendation.
Hear about the
the Senate side inside of the
General Appropration Act of a
hundred seventy million and then
a hundred fifty million is that
what you're talking about that's
what I thought that this
sentiment is for a hundred and
fifty million and a hundred and.
And then a hundred million for
local roads yeah I have no idea
because that amendment is not
tied to the general
appropriation act car about okay
thank you all right.
Did you have a question.
No madam chair I'm I'm wondering
if the if if the the number that
they're referring to includes
the motor vehicle excise tax so
so we can check on that
if if that committee what I mean
we can deal with that I guess as
a technical adjustment or or
however you would like to do
madam chair.
Thanks Tom Representative
Crowder did you have any other
questions on the amendment.
No ma'am okay great
are there any other questions
Representative Representative
Madrid.
Make sure I understand so we're
looking a hundred fifty because
that's two hundred fifty million
correct.
The appropriation for unfunded
projects that I'm seeing on the
minute correct.
Yeah so do to talk to you want
to help clarify that.
Well I I you madam chair
representative Madrid yes in the
in house I'm sorry in the LFC
recommendation volume one there
was a special appropriations
listed for a hundred and fifty
million for a day and M. D. O.
T. for major projects with the
five million dollar car about
three essential air service and
there is an additional hundred
million for local governments I
a that Representative Crowder
and Representative Lundstrom
that brought up an issue that
that local government should be
a hundred and seventy million so
I need to verify the difference
there.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes chairman Lundstrom.
In our framework for house
appropriations and finance is a
hundred and fifty.
And that is a grant program that
goes to the Department the local
governments apply for so it
can't be manipulated by a list
of projects it's a grant program
that local governments provide
match for is quite extensive.
Process.
Thank you madam chair chairman
and and Representative and the
chairman Lundstrom was roled
thank you for that insight.
So.
Fifty that's the ground so this
has a variance based on certain
conditions no earmarking of any
particular projects.
Yes.
Madam chair I say again this is
a grant program to local
governments have to apply for
okay and it's usually they have
to find a match they have to
have it in there are two per
they have to have it in the
state transportation plan it's a
whole process that they go
through.
And they really like that
program because it gives an
additional dollars for local
roads.
Thank you madam chairman and
madam chair Representative
solutions as well thank you.
Representative.
You're on mute Sir.
Apologize madam chair and be
available to many different
directions so as I understand I
don't a.
The hundred and fifty million is
the grant program that chair
Lundstrom and
vice chair Madrid were just
discussing is that correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct the department of
transportation is a non general
fund agency which means the only
way we're going to get local
projects identified through the
state is this process so in the
Appropriations Committee we set
aside in a framework a certain
amount that goes into the grant
program because there are non
general fund agency.
So it goes into a well
established long time local
government grant program and we
can't always funded we've been
fortunate the last couple of
years we've been able to put
money into that program.
Thank you for that explanation
and the hundred million in
section six madam chair.
How's that how's that
distributed.
I'm not sure of the hundred
million Tom can you tell me what
he's asking me.
madam chair the the way the
amendment raises a hundred and
fifty million for the DOT for
major investment projects and a
hundred million for local
governments for the grant
program and so so I think there
might be some confusion about
the the grant program with the
local government our with the
motor vehicle excise tax yeah
because I I is this the
Representative Madrid of
amendment or I'm not sure what
the soonest no we're still on
we're still on my amendment
madam chair madam chair okay
because of the thing is is that
what we're going to do is we're
trying to set a framework within
HSC anyway.
So I mean you can send
amendments if you want to but if
it doesn't fit the framework
we're not going to put it in
there I mean I'm just going to
be honest with you about that.
our framework calls for two
numbers one is the hundred and
fifty million and that's for
local governments and that cost
goes directly to the Department.
Then there's.
She grows up.
Yeah I don't at chairwoman
Lundstrom I think you might have
frozen up so
so much debt.
But projects it's.
Ahmed reported at one of our
done so I can tell you the
people on HSC are pretty
concerned about that
if we ask for that in the past
and they're not down we want to
know why so that list of
projects was in section nine two
years ago and they have their
work done madam chair and madam
chair Lundstrom you completely
froze up your entire explanation
didn't get didn't get hurt.
Okay we we got the early part of
of of your remarks and then
towards the end but not the
middle chairwoman.
Madam chair representative on
said that the amendment that
that Representative Rubio has
divides the money equally
amongst the six districts.
And that's appropriate that's
what we do anyway so that
amendment are you talking about
the hundred seventy million
right Tom.
Matt madam chair that's a
hundred and fifty million for
the DOT yes the issue whereas if
it's if if they amendment is
tied to the local government
fund.
That may not be appropriate only
because you may not have local
governments supply.
It did you all understand not.
So if you're in district by
district was district six.
And you take a hundred fifty and
divide that up if they don't
apply and it's general fund
money.
What happens.
Madam madam chair representative
on service you need that that
the there are there are two
separate one was to the DOT that
is divided by six districts the
other is for local governments
using the process already
established for application
through the DOT okay.
Okay all right yeah the process
is already there.
we can divide that money and
that's how it's generally done
but if it's not exactly to the
T. it's because you may not have
received applications from those
local governments.
and Madam chair representative
the very it does look money for
the local governments is not
divided by the six districts it
just goes into the pool for the
application process established
in the local transportation fund
so you're talking about the
special set aside for statewide
that's divided equally yes ma'am
okay that's fine because that's
what we're gonna do it I mean
that's yeah we need to do it
that way.
So madam chair a.
And
Secretary church
Going back to look at it at this
try and understand section five
and section six I now believe
that section five items a one
and a two.
Hey a one in eight.
R. for major projects and that
section six of special
appropriation of one hundred
million dollars is for the grant
local government.
The grant program for local
government is it is that and my
is my understanding correct or
do I have a reversed no no Madam
chair representative you are
correct it appears that the
dollar amounts are different and
that's where I believe we need
some clarification so
technically the the amendment
reads that the the major
transportation projects for the
department of transportation
would be divided between the six
districts based on the statewide
transportation improvement
program the second part of that
is the local government road
fund projects which then would
go into the application process
that is administered by the
department of transportation
okay yeah and I would even stay
away from even put a number in
there and I'll tell you why is
because.
Our LESC framework is different
than what you're going to get
out of H. AFC.
And then it goes over to the
Senate and the Senate may change
that number.
So.
But you know I would I would
avoid trying to say
specifically a hundred or a
hundred fifty or a hundred and
seventy.
Because we may put more in there
I don't know that yet you know
we're going to have to see what
our revenue projections look
like our consensus revenue.
It happens tomorrow so I would I
be careful not to even put a
number in there I mean we know
what you're trying to do.
And I just wanted to go over to
the Senate and then they
completely reduce it or take it
out you know we still have to
negotiate with them on the whole
transportation piece within the
budget.
Representative Crowder did you
have one point I'm not.
Yes thank you madam chair it
seems like after listening to
this maybe the more appropriate
thing would be to withdraw this
amendment in this committee and
ask you to to sit down with
chairman Lundstrom from the
eighty yes the committee and and
restructure your amendment and
let us take care of it when it
gets to appropriation of
finance.
Thank you Representative Crowder
yes it sounds like from the
questions that are coming about
that being we should probably
just stick to the operating
budget at this point and then
and then let
The chairman handle the special
appropriation representative but
I think I think that would be
appropriate madam chair.
Madam chair I I still maybe one
more question on item one A. the
five million dollars for the
official for air service
what bill is that based off of.
I know.
Madam chair yes I believe that
bill is Senator Bobby Gonzalez.
And representative Harry Garcia
but I I it started on the Senate
side and I believe it's one
thirty three I'm not I'm not
absolutely sure I can I can
double check that.
Bill does is it provides a
funding source to fill the gap
based on what federal dollars
come into small communities for
passenger air service.
There is a grant program like
this in the state of Wyoming
particularly for rural areas
it's impossible for certain
towns I don't even think Los
crucis as its own has passenger
service but there's many many
small towns in this state that
did do not have passenger
service and if the city wanted
to apply for it.
Will provide money but there's
still a gap there that needs to
be filled that's what this money
would do so the department of
transportation is setting up a
grant program we need to fund it
so the local governments that
are interested in getting
passenger service can apply for
it.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair so with this this five
million dollars that is a set
aside.
With this work for smaller point
let's just say Sir port that
already has a passenger service
can they apply for because right
now the city and the county pay
an offset to keep that our
service there
would be.
What it does is that it allows
it's a point system you can
apply for communities that
already have that air service
would really receive less points
and so it doesn't have anything
at all but no one would be
eliminated.
No community would be eliminated
as an example to also is a
pretty vibrant air service
Gallup has nothing.
so if both those communities
applied.
They be awarded points but if
you're already in the game and
already stature infrastructure
set up in your planning and your
routes already established you
don't need all that fundamental
kind of foundational work like a
community that doesn't have
anything.
But it's in economic development
driver because it's very
difficult to attract businesses
and companies to a community
it's hard to get to.
And what really drove this was
the whole COVID thing of being
able to move.
Very ill people in Albuquerque
or Phoenix you know it's it's
real tough to move on by car and
using a helicopter is very very
expensive.
By.
But I like with what you just
explain to me thank you very
much fanfare madam chair I
I know I know how much of this
is invested in ours just to get
it to the point where we can
have that service and there is a
bit of a concern and Dr we have
tons of money just to go flip a
workaround but five million and
get you very far on on on on on
a handful of the work we're
asking that madam chair it's
Senate bill one thirty three
thank the house version is five
million dollars we're going to
ask that there be matched on the
Senate side.
And then grants would be sought
by the department to help back
field so everything you all are
saying is a framework for our
chamber and then when it goes
over to the other side the whole
business that they're gonna put
more money into that because
it's a whole bunch of
communities that really need
this help.
Thank you very much for that
explanation that's that's
wonderful all right madam chair
of I think I'm done.
What questions
And and I would support
Representative Garratt
Crowder's.
suggestion that that we let you
and and the finance committee or
appropriations finalize list
this bill would you madam chair
we bring it back I mean you know
we're gonna show you everything
that happened there gonna be
projects that come out of the
district illustrious you know
projects that have been
discussed that have been
identified as a high need it
will be distributed equally
among the districts I mean it's
it's it's a very fair process.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all representatives I
certainly have taken your
thoughts into consideration and
and gladly will withdraw the
amendment at this point and then
Representative chairman
Lundstrom yeah if we can I'm I'm
sure we'll we'll hear from you
all eventually and then we'll
obviously present tomorrow and
HFC the operational budget so
I know that Representative
Crowder did you still have your
hand up.
Yes ma'am this because I was
about half asleep forgot.
Okay Representative Madrid did
you have a question on that
amendment or did you want to
move on years.
I just like to follow up to
because it's kind of bounced
around and I was on points
earlier with the.
And the truth will my question
is is what do we do like in my
situation and madam chair woman
you understand this because
you're from style or I don't
have any local government and
that seems to be in my cycle of
trying to find and see all
monies can get down to us is
there any suggestion are not I'd
like to get it but from the
circuits are on on something
like this as well and overall
what the ****.
I'm
here can you clarify your
question Representative I'm just
trying to save and when we talk
about the monies appropriated I
don't have local government so
we're how does my money get
channeled or I'm trying to see
the work gets student outcomes
down.
I did explanation for.
Secretary.
Or we.
Chair I have a suggestion sure.
I'm not time remind me what
highway district is chaparral in
and that area.
madam chair I believe it's
district one okay that and madam
chair madam chair I believe that
secretary Santa is available I
would speculate it's the R. PO
and PO process for those for
their local governments yes it's
sad and I and I think would be
very important is for us to hear
what is that project that the
representative just got
concerned about you know is it
even on the last has it been
batted where's the department on
and and if you have that project
in that district I ask you right
now you know if he if he's
available.
Madam chair the district
engineer for district one is on
on the on the attendees list.
would do little yes.
I can go ahead and promoting to
panelists give me one second.
Madam chair this is Trent can
you hear me yes we can hear you
thanks for joining us Trent.
Yes madam chair so madam chair
representative Majid I'm just to
be clear so to our local
government program we have
issued money to Dona ana county
city of Los crucis City of
Anthony
city of someone park.
so we do have a local government
program
that would be supported with
this funding in your district.
C. N. P. O. correct.
So Madam chair representative
address we would work through
the MPO both the el Paso MPO and
the Misia valley MPO.
but again we have several local
governments in your area that
have applied for and received
money through the local
government program current.
Representative.
Madam chairwoman and Trent my
quick question is like a petty
suggested is what projects do I
have out that way that some on
the books we're and in terms of
planning design and we've
already gotten something on
projects of books up towards my
area out there my district I'm
trying to see if we can make
some assurances that these
things are continue to transpire
member well but you have a
presentation to the doctor.
Madam chair representative Majid
so I can well that my government
coordinator prepare a list of
the projects maybe over the past
three years that they received
for any future projects
I'll try to pull the list from
the in P. O.'s.
to see what's on the books but
that really falls on the locals
as Representative Lundstrom said
to have those projects ready and
present to the NPOs and to the
D. O. T. for for that funding
that that falls on them as a
responsibility not on us as a
DOT.
So like the figures several
months back I six months ago as
so you do a presentation over
out highways to thirteen and for
for.
Is that still.
The process of coming or the
funds are funded.
There's a still funded project.
No madam chair Representative
Madrid so that's utilizing
federal funding and some of our
state money that is not part of
the local government program.
well what the.
Representative Madrid the local
government program will focus on
the locals priorities not the
DOT's priorities so it's a
different funding category.
So it's not funded to my
understanding or is fund.
Read so New Mexico for for the I
can for for interchange is
funded and under construction
right now the for all four four
lane.
Divided highway is funded that's
in fiscal year twenty three.
We are currently doing the study
for the two thirteen project and
the interchange at four four two
thirteen that section of the
roadway is not funded at this
point because I don't have a
design.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
and thank you trundle full
sensors thank you for a very
long serves well for Christmas
right thank you.
Did you have a question.
Yeah I do I I would like to ask
madam chair that each one of
these district engineer spend
the time with your members
particularly this is a good
example I mean.
I am PO when you come from a
very small community is not
going to get you very far.
I happen to have had a lot of
experience with our PO's and
NPOs in my career.
And there's functional
classification issues around
projects and I I just really
think it's important
particularly as Representative
Madrid is raised.
What's on the books what needs
to be funded because there's
also other ways to get these
things done I mean and that is I
mean working directly with the
highway commissioner from that
area.
Just say you know this is got a
new safety issue there some
other things are happening here
but I just strongly suggest that
those projects be shared and I
don't mean and in an aggregate
way but I mean breaking down
exactly where we're at with
everything that each member
cares about.
Are you gonna be disappointed at
the end of the day or feel like
maybe our priorities are being
that I know they have at least I
used to have a five year
planning and construction
Verizon.
That changes the changes when
they have money they can do a
lot when they don't they they
just can't but I just think that
there needs to be a better
understanding I mean when I
heard what you just told
Representative Madrid.
It tells me that they need
design money now any design
money but I don't know what
that's going to cost I don't
know where that is in the
planning horizon he probably
doesn't either at this point so
we it needs to be more detailed
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative so I've
I've withdrawn my amendment I
know that we Representative
Madrid had his own
representative did you want to
go ahead and and move that.
Madam chairwoman I thank you and
I would like to try to move
forward to benefit myself and
moved Committee from a learning
perspective and having
Representative
chair woman from of from
appropriation gives me a lot of
benefit of insight to
breakthroughs down and she's
absolutely right this is a time
where I struggle to find
anything and everything and
everything is a learning curve
just as.
Madam chair will recommend you
in the same position and I'm
trying to work from for the
south and help bring some things
down and I'm just learning so I
may be permitted I would ask you
as per please allow me to lease
presented and and discuss as for
as much the benefit of the
committee and having the people
that we have the can speak on
this with your permission Madam
chairwoman.
Go ahead Representative.
Start out by reading now a
couple things the goal of this
amendment bill is just a
proposed capital works in the
chapel improvements for all
state and you just have to
listen to some of things I know
mine is no different to be
question may be remembered as
well but more to the
specifications of the reasons
why the the direction it was we
decided to go with so I'll read
it through and then we'll just
we'll allows for discussion Mr
granted sure we.
Yes Representative
Representative Crowder real
quick did you have yes yes chair
with the amendment gives the two
oh two number so that we can
follow along place.
Thank you Representative
Point two one nine seven two
nine point two.
Thank you madam chair.
We start on page one the
proposed Mr house transportation
public works and capital
improvements to the following.
On page four between lines
twenty twenty one insert the
following in section section
five transportation projects the
following projects maybe funded
using state federal revenue
sources available to the
department of transportation for
the perfect purposes specified
okay improvements in New Mexico
highway eleven is needed in St
Francis transportation
grant from just one improvements
to interstate ten corridor for
mark the twenty five to mile
marker thirty five state
transportation commission
district one a reconfiguration
see a reconfiguration of
interstate intersection but I
waited to certamen for four the
state transportation commission
district one down the downtown
Clovis phase one improvements
and I states highways sixty from
mom marker three eighty five to
Walmart this reading line in the
state transportation.
In district to do downtown
Clovis phase two will programs
in the United States I was
sixteen what Marcus research to
five tomorrow Marcus reading
nine in the street and the
transportation state
transportation commission
district to.
Improvements to then state
highway two eighty five from
watermarked seven north of state
line West Texas while marker
twenty two state transportation
district to.
The reconstruction.
Is approximately.
Actually twenty two miles of New
Mexico highway thirty one
connected to highway eighty five
with the United States I was
substitute next New Mexico
highway one twenty eight AM in
transportation commission
district through H. is a
district design reconstructive
programs approximately fifty two
miles of New Mexico highway one
twenty between John and the
junction between New Mexico
highway thirty one state
transportation commission
district to.
Design and construct of any
change connection in section
forty five New Mexico highway
forty seven in state
transportation commission
district three.
J. planned construction of a
sale the welcome interstate
forty of United States highway
by fifty in state transportation
commission through the
construction process so the
local for administrative forty
two W. go to airport in state
transportation commission
district three planning design
and construction to complete the
sale of the work Donald J.
northwest and Bernalillo county
and to widen the road where the
state transportation commission
district three Jim planning
design construction presume
yells extension Mexico highway
are suggesting to the government
were three ninety stages
position district I improvements
of New Mexico highway first
sixty two county road three
million state transportation
commission district for our.
search in improving so
affectionate for malls in New
Mexico are ways of searching in
the state transportation
commission district six.
Chair woman in closing I just
want to say that
This is this is an essential
plan that we worked on to try to
get all the districts this
report is not in their weather
but they've had a lot of things
done in the last two to three
years or almost in the end this
was trying to spread the money
that was available throughout
the whole state to to the
particular specifics of this
amendment bill our projects is
going to really help open the
corridors of from all four
corners of our state to helping
our economical Bros and and last
of want to say this Madam
chairwoman no incoming and and
and madam chair woman of petty
Lundstrom we know from our trip
report in the past year that
we're still number three in the
worst roads in the nation and
this is what I want to say is of
the more billable important
aspect of us putting the
investments correctly to helping
corridors of economical growth
coming and going and knowing
that these other projects of
coinciding with what's on list
of D. O. T. as well so I would
just say that this was a the
almost three quarters of the
sounded an opening I did make I
think it's still offers a member
to be amended again in the sense
of we want to make it equitable
for all six districts we can do
so I left one out but was this
researching the the projects of
directing where the red in the
face thank you madam chairwoman
are open for for questions and
answers and I have is a
secretary Representative Warner
yeah he's been promoted to the
panelists there will be more as
expert witness to the questions
asked.
Okay well thank you madam chair
woman.
Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate having a chance to
ask a few questions.
I would like to ask a few
questions is because these are
the kind of questions we are
asking HSC.
so if Mike Santa would be the
appropriate one answer that's
fine if not then we do ask
representative address the first
question I have is what is the
total cost of this amendment.
Madam chair.
The the estimated cost of that
is price somewhere around eight
hundred million million dollars
and
I guess.
I'm just a little taken aback by
some of the stuff that's going
on but
What I can tell you is we
provided a list to the committee
to this one is it was a hundred
fifty million dollars for
smaller maintenance projects one
was over a billion dollars that
was for major investment
projects I believe what
Representative Madrid did was
take some projects from that
list and put this in an
amendment.
and presented to you to try and
identify some of the projects
that Representative Madrid was
interested in and I believe he
tried to pull some projects from
each district from that list.
and it's in the total more than
obviously what is being
recommended at this time of the
hundred and seventy million I
believe is the number it is
right now
and so.
I think it's just giving the
department the opportunity to
choose from that list it's in
this amendment up to the hundred
seventy million madam chair and
madam chair.
Okay so we're talking about
eight hundred million for these
projects what project was
identified for districts six.
Michael workers someone yes
secretary please.
Madam chair are I don't have the
amendment with me it there
should be some at the end there
let me look it up real quick I
didn't I wasn't be the expert
witness madam chair if you just
give me a minute
Madam chair representative
Madrid which one is for district
six I'm trying to get my notes.
Madam chair and madam chair
district six would be statewide
intelligent transportation
systems.
The statewide intelligent
transportation systems I'm
sorry.
Doesn't that doesn't time with
what I know about district six
so which one is districts six
okay sorry reconstruction
improvements of approximately
five miles on a New Mexico's
highway six oh two in strict and
state transportation.
Districts.
Okay where does that rank on the
construction list now my.
I've been very close to us in
district six.
Yes.
Go ahead.
Rural.
Pulling up the list that we
provided the committee I don't
think the I. TS has anything
with districts six I think that
has to do with a million
improving all the digital
message boards that wasn't
anything that was on our list
and so the ones that were on our
list are the Allison corridor I
think there's three different
phases on the list that we
recommended I'm trying to get
this amendment up I don't
believe that's on this list that
is in this particular amendment
I think there's actually two
amendments that I have I'm not
sure which one we're on if there
is a number or anything
like I said I wasn't aware of
the be the expert witness on
this and so I'm trying to pull
up some documents so if you give
me one moment Matt help problem
make my point in this is not
because I really really want to
drill down on district six
project my point on this is that
it has to tied to what's
happening in the district.
Just because there's funding
that are set aside for certain
components of their construction
blam.
And like I said I'm pretty close
to what's happening in district
six and I'm over this areas it's
it's the state road just south
of Gallup and is there any.
Six oh two goes from Gallup
south into zoning.
And but I also know that there's
a whole bunch of other projects
that this area has been working
on.
Eight hundred million is is was
the planned them to actually
look for bonding on this
Representative Madrid or where
we going to get the money to do
this.
I'm just asking because
certainly it's not in the LFC
framework.
The word not applaud you
suggested earlier and I was not
but an actual dollar amount
always knowing that different
phases of the stages but I
obviously you're correcting I
wanted to leave the latitude to
be able to what the times will
permit noting the men's in the
coming year we should begin some
federal systems this game the
better capacity of going from
show to may to use the
flexibility according to
projects in the phase so they
would be reminder this.
Well my my question is is and
who gets to make the decision on
the priority.
The budget all we read to the
point of I'm thinking of moving
deal to be responsible to make
this adjustments based on the
flexibility of the amendment to
the bill of the bill but from
the bonding capacity at the time
it's.
Market right now but I like the
secretary doesn't Santa Fe you
put on that as well.
Mr madam chair and and madam
chair I I think
reading through this amendment
it looks like the discretion
would be at the Department level
I can tell you the priorities in
district six are out Allison
court or fifty on two three and
four
those are the top four there's
also New Mexico for four miles
of New Mexico for which is the
bypass and Hamis and then
replace the in the Suwannee
bridge so those would be the top
priorities in district six that
we provided as major in
improvements major projects and
then we also have New Mexico
fifty three US one eighty New
Mexico two sixty four for
smaller maintenance projects so
those are the priorities that we
shared with the committee
and as far as and as the
amendment goes it looks like
it's giving the department the
discretion to pick from the
projects that are in the
amendment is what it looks like
to me Madam says so what my
point is is that.
This amendment and I'm just
using my own district I don't
know about any of these other
projects that my own
DOT district it doesn't it
doesn't try to this amendment.
And so most of priorities at the
secretary Santa talked about our
priorities that it been worked
on for a long time I mean when
they talk about Allison that
projects around the time of long
time their staff has been very
close to it a lot of engineering
work a lot of planning and
design work is been done.
So what we try to do and we
identify these projects for
general fund is fine those that
we know are pretty well along
the way that need to be.
push through so to speak of
that's why this is it's more
than just we we find projects to
unplug it then there's there's
quite a bit of work that goes
into this I mean we could go
through every highway district
to say the same thing you know
did we hit the mark that we know
exactly what we're looking at
and I'm only bringing this kind
is as as a teachable moment not
because I'm trying to be
critical and I want to make sure
that that that's understood I'm
not trying to be critical I'm
just trying to say that they
have a very sophisticated
planning process this department
does and.
They have funds that are
earmarked specifically for
components of that planning and
design process so it's
you know it's something that
takes a little time to do it
it's usually more than just an
amendment quite honestly and.
When we set up general fund
money within our framework it's
because we know there's projects
out there and and they do a good
job rolling some of that stuff
out so I I don't need to get
into more detail Nassar's
questions but
you know they did the other
thing is is that it goes over to
the Senate side they may say we
don't want to do these at all
and at least.
we know what we want to do on
the house side but they may
decide as they did I think it
was two years ago let's just
turn it all over to the
department and let them decide.
Thank you Mr secretary and thank
you representative.
we have Representative Garcia by
Representative.
Thank you madam chair all.
In a lot of B. will Madrid I'm
sorry sure
I got a question chairman these
projects about a couple of these
projects in the districts you
know some brought some issues
but Madam chair of.
Four five budgets amending get
any someone one hospital Buffy
terminations.
You're on mute Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
a representative Garcia for the
question it's a it's true that
there are some variances on
these projects it was trying to
from a learning curve see where
the bases were and and I worked
off of a list from DOT of
projects are out there to their
run funded okay as far as the
funding mechanisms to the ones
that were latter phases I didn't
have that information percent
given the timeline I was trying
to do all that we were doing
in this process so I I left the
option open to you know that
would bring to the to the table
some discussion chair woman of
Harry Garcia Representative
Garcia prevents you question.
Thank you madam chair a.
Well it's not really the
national question I just want to
see how all these given all the
you know I know my district in
in one of these in my district.
The great what we're question on
madam chair what what what what
was it will probably be twice
on.
She.
Representative you're unable.
It was just it was project
coincided they worked on both
sides of the bipartisan it had
interest on this and it was but
I think helps the economic
rose to areas of they've been
asking for a long time so at the
end that's that was the the
decision for the.
Thank you madam chair the grid
This is just a German human
German from brought up a little
bit of bill the funding is going
to be.
Thank you this is going to be
huge because you know if we got
the you know we can't afford to
leave any district all from one
you know one districts six
digestible completely a disposal
projects this prosecutor if you
were a.
You know districts you can just
come up with on the back burner
and all these concerns are thank
you madam chair thank you for
the.
Thank you Mr next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
originally when I saw the
amendment I thought this applied
to the appropriation that was a
general fund appropriation which
gave a lot of latitude but as I
read through this and look at
the dollar amounts involved this
is more about telling the
department of transportation the
overall big project your spot as
legislators we believe because
these are in the multi million
dollar projects the the Santa
con is I think I've heard five
hundred eight hundred million to
to do all the the aspen and and
and my colleague just tell me
that's incorrect so I I stand
corrected but
It seems to be way way beyond
the hundred fifty or a hundred
and seventy million that we're
talking about for state roads to
be to distributed so
I'm struggling to understand out
I noticed that there were
several people I believe kind of
came together were consulted
over this.
They're good people they they
know what they're doing in other
districts but.
I'm having a hard time having
this sink into this bill.
Without.
Any prioritization there's no
guidance from the state engineer
I think the state engineer and
And not the district engineers
can do a better job of putting
these big projects together then
we cancel.
I'm struggling with your
amendment
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and
Thank you Representative Madrid
for bringing some members hi I
for one of do not oppose the
amendment and the reason.
Being as it does not actually
attach funds any of these
projects and so as our districts
some of these are on the.
All.
Forty five million dollar
listing regionally provided to
us a couple weeks.
from throughout the different
districts each one of these are
still important projects and
projects that that should be
some form of funding come
available.
would these would be good thanks
for each of the communities and
so the fact that that does not
have a dollars amount attached
to it all it does is put a
projects out there that that
allows the DOT to move forward
with list of project and so I I
for one support this amendment
and I thank you for bringing up
for.
Representative.
Thank you madam chairman and
thank you representative for
Truro I mean a group it's
exactly that it's projects that
are big enough I'm sorry to say
but I my feeling and belief is
that we have to think of the
bigger bridges and keep pushing
for the leverages of trust in
the O. two in empowering DOT but
I'm not going to be honest and
I'm not going to be dishonest
and say that I don't think that
we're capable of doing this is
state I think it's important as
a state that we this legislation
have a voice to our areas and
input we're are may not appear
right with everybody I accept
that but I also entrusted my
goal was as executive producer
and I was put some leverage and
put some bigger projects out
there we have you know we we
fund this every year.
Will billion dollars no matter
what we get to put down yes
secretary Santa Fe so say we
have a billion dollars of
unfunded things I need to get
done so we're still short and I
guess my thinking as we go
talked is bigger numbers as a
registration so we understand
the phasing process is on
learning right now by your the
bios questions okay so I'd like
the signature Santa to comment
as well would you please.
Madam chair
The only thing I can say is that
when someone wants to put
forward any projects in an
amendment like this my advice to
them has always been to look at
the projects that we find the
committee if you're gonna do
something at least pick from
those projects they have amounts
on there they have mile markers
they have leading dates
completion dates and if you're
gonna do that I would ask that
that that's what you do and so
there's projects on there that
don't that weren't on the list I
provided the committee I don't
know
where those came from or maybe
you know I'm sure there's a good
reason that they're on their and
this is you know just to be
clear not a D. O. T. amendment
and so I'm happy to help
Representative Madrid answer
questions I appreciate him
trying to give us discretion but
this isn't a DOT amendment and
I'll tell
to say that that's my
recommendation if you want to go
with projects in in the past
we've always talked about the
projects provide a list and gone
off the list in.
That's that's kind of what my
response to this amendment and
is madam chair.
Thank you Mr secretary next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman I
just want to thank
Representative Madrid for
bringing forth the amendment as
a teachable moment
I've learned a lot from the
conversation that sure woman
Lundstrom is provided with us I
will say there are three
projects that are in my personal
health district
however I think it's important
when we bring amendments that we
talked to the actual
representatives of the districts
are because I'm well aware of
the sale del Norte and because a
lot of work is been done on it
by D. O. T. and that council of
governments so I think it's
important that when we have
amendments affecting specific
projects that affect capital
outlay that representatives and
senators have given it's just a
good policy.
To discuss before it appears on
that that's just a
recommendation as someone who's
brought for three amendments
that were discussed the more the
hard way so I don't support the
amendment as it's written but I
do support the teaching and
learning that's going on right
now thank you madam chairwoman
thank you representative.
Thank you representative as
well.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
and Representative which Madrid
I I.
We like to echo some of the
great comments from
Representative Garrett.
I think.
I applaud the effort working
together and and in a bipartisan
way roads are not partisan
we we all these roads.
Our.
And I.
Right I also want to sink a
surgery Santa for for coming in
and and getting feedback given
all this this was not
But his his amendment
I just want to personally thank
you Representative of all for
your help that you give this
committee.
And the and also let you know
that we are we have so much
respect for the department and
for the hard work you all do
and prioritizing projects and
making things happen.
You know possible con is super
port road for Rio Rancho for my
district in fact the last.
Eight years.
More than half of my personal
capital is gonna that project
every year and we've been on the
call we got about twenty million
dollars over the years enough to
buy
all the right of way or it was
pretty close to it the number
keeps growing as we we are move
forward with that and it's gonna
be a huge economic development
project.
we really see it as a way to
bring businesses to the area
businesses to Rio Rancho take
pressure off the bridges grow
gross receipts tax revenue for
the state and the city and
county.
but we want to make sure that
we're doing that partnership.
was the department.
and and that we are making sure
that we talk with us the the
represents that that road it
affects that whether it's in our
district or nearby
Representative Garrett I we we
we will talk back and forth
about that road and about
Christian atrisk so this and
other roads.
so I want to say this
Representative I I think this is
a a great start.
to an effort to look at roads
that.
No maybe you're more than just
connect connections but roads
that can really lead to economic
development to increase our tax
base so we have more money to
fix roads and build more roads.
and I just want to encouraging
you to keep keep on working on
and and use this as a as a
learning experience.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative and thank you
madam chair woman appreciate
them put.
And.
Thank you representative so we
have an amendment I don't know
if we I I'd like to entertain a
motion at this point.
Madam chair I do realize from
the commentary that everybody
opposes us but like I said I
support really a ****
Representative Madrid and what
he was trying to do so I would I
would knew that we
Bring this some of them.
Representative Pettigrew it's
already been moved I'm I'm
asking for a motion at this
point on the amendment
Representative Armstrong.
Yeah I would at this point move
to table the amendment.
Is there second.
You don't need a second for
tabling.
Thanks Representative I'll
withdraw my amendment.
Thank you Representative Madrid
so we have Representative
Madrid.
Of withdrawing his amendment at
this point thank you all for a
lively discussion on this on
house bill three in the
amendments I appreciate you all
taking the time I know it's been
Senator we've had several
conversations around these this
this this House Bill three and
the special appropriation so I I
appreciate your your feedback
and and everything along that
line along these lines
in so we have a couple more
items on the agenda for today
we're we're scheduled to go back
on the floor at eleven I do have
Representative Cerny on for
House Bill one forty one
education infrastructure
technology definition
Madam chair is right right.
What is your plan on house bill
three would you like to get that
out of the committee.
So I'm I so this is probably
wrong needs your help I'm not
quite sure
I think I know that we're
presenting House Bill three
tomorrow and appropriations the
amendments so we've already
voted on the operational budget
and so the special
appropriations piece we're
leaving it up to House
Appropriations at this point
four based on the two amendments
that we've withdrawn.
And if I may madam chair you all
are scheduled in front of HFC
until Thursday okay are we had
to push everything back because
our floor session schedule
changed okay.
So so madam chair and and share
Lundstrom do you need HB three
out of here into your committee.
Yeah we.
Yes it would since the motion
has been approved it would come
to us see in the committee
report it would go down to the
floor then it gets prove your
committee report is approved
then it comes up to us and we
build it and to report on
Thursday when house
transportation comes in front of
us.
So madam chair that sounds like
we need to go to build out today
since.
Our next meeting will be
Thursday morning I guess we can
cut it that close if you want
but.
Yes so there was a motion
earlier on the appropriation
budget
and so do we do.
Mario can you roll call on on
the operational but on the
amendment please.
What do passed Madam chairwoman
yes so it's we adopted the
operational budget we now to
believe that you pass on house
bill three is on that.
Okay so.
Thank you all for your your
patience is so we wanted there's
a motion for it to pass on House
Bill on the minute for House
Bill three hearing
transportation just a second.
Okay Representative Powdrell
Culbert has a second
Representative Crowder do you
have a question yes of the.
Madam chair you say on the
amendment we we have already
amended the bill I believe and
we just need to do on on on the
house bill three as amended as
Amanda yes okay Representative
Crowder so we are we are on a
due pass for House Bill three as
amended is there
Just.
And we have Representative
Culbert Powdrell Culbert with
the second
Mario if you want to do
what was the first sorry okay
thank you all right
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes Representative.
Yes.
Mr Garcia.
Yes.
Madam chair review.
Yes four of ten two zero.
Thank you we have a due pass on
house bill three as amended.
I'm.
Next we have Representative
Sariñana.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
I do have an expert witness
Thibodeau Madam chair.
Okay alignment.
You should be coming into.
All right thank you madam chair
members of committee I am
Representative Debbie seven Jana
and I'm here to present house
bill one forty one
one forty one is a companion
bill to house bill ten which is
our amazing broadband bill the
purpose of house bill one forty
one is to mend the definition of
education technology
infrastructure using the public
school capital outlay act to
mean the physical hardware and
services used to interconnect
students teachers school
districts and school buildings
necessary to support broadband
connectivity and remote learning
as chairman by the council
So we've added services student
teacher and remote learning to
the definition.
The park the proposed amendment
broadens the definition to
include services like wifi
hotspots in prepaid
subscriptions or service plans
in addition to physical
hardware.
It extends the recipients of the
education technology
infrastructure to students and
teachers in addition to schools
districts and school buildings
when necessary to just to
support broadband connectivity
and remote learning as a
determined by the public school
capital outlay council the bond
counsel so no issues with the
proposed amended language.
And this bill expands the scope
of the public school facility of
the Ortiz broadband deficiency
correction program to cover the
cost of infrastructure and
services for remote learning.
the bill also addresses the main
reason we're doing this it
addresses the difficulty
students experiencing remote
learning when the lack of
computer and internet service at
home or internet access at home
and as a teacher I've I've had
kids who either didn't have
internet or had such horrible
internet that they couldn't even
come into the classroom and if
they could it would be garbled
or slow or constantly be
constantly knocked out kind of
how it feels building on the
fourth floor just to let you
know if you're not on the fourth
floor
so couple statistics it is
estimated that roughly twenty to
twenty thousand New Mexico
students still live in
households without a computer in
over sixty six thousand school
age students in New Mexico live
in a household without an
internet subscription.
So the need for content
connectivity all over New Mexico
is still there and this bill
will help alleviate the problem
in madam chair I'd like to defer
to Thibodeau if yes and you did
to see if you have any
additional comments.
Yes go ahead Sir.
Madam chair and Representative
Sariñana no I think
Representative Sariñana covered
it very well I am an estimate
I'm a senior policy analyst with
Ellie S. C. and I am I'm here to
provide any technical support on
questions if anything comes up
it's.
Madam chair with that a standard
questions.
Great so we'll go to the
audience for right now we are on
Representative certainty on as
bill related to
access and is there anyone in
the audience who would like to
support this legislation if you
could please raise your hand.
Great and if you can keep your
hand up if you're interested in
speaking on behalf of this bill
we have a couple people.
So first we have Alyssa.
Good morning madam chairwoman.
Go ahead sh I'm good morning
chairman members of the
committee my name is Lisa deal
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and a member of the legal team
for the Yazzie plaintiffs me as
a Martinez lawsuit.
And the New Mexico Center it I'm
on the stand in support of the
spell the language are that this
bill expands begins to address
the needs of broadband internet
access to students at home which
we know is a critical critical
issue I and this this bill
surely a step in right direction
thank you very much.
Thanks Lisa next we have Sharon
Sharon Berman.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name is Sharon
Berman and I'm a civic
engagement and policy manager at
New Mexico First and I'm also a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico First.
We support house bill of one
forty one and thanks thank
Representative Sariñana Garrett
Figueroa Herrera and Matthews
for their sponsorship of this
bill.
In our latest on housing health
education over a thousand
participants from around the
state.
Agreed that their access to
education is key to the well
being of New Mexico and its
people.
And as the pandemic has revealed
not everyone has the access they
need to thrive there are efforts
afoot to strengthen
infrastructure and it's a mighty
and necessary task this bill
creates a welcome opening for
broadband improvement that will
directly benefit our students
for generations to come we hope
you will support house bill one
forty one thank you.
Thank you Sharon next we have
down a hard.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can hearing yes madam chair
members of the committee this is
Dennis are I'm registers
registered lobbyists for Intel
corporation and Pearson
education both of whom strongly
support this measure and some
other measures you're going to
be seeing this session to
enhance broadband capabilities
and access to learning distance
learning for students we applaud
to speak the sponsors for
bringing this thank you so much.
Thank you Mr your
if we have any opposition to the
legislation if you could please
raise your hand.
There doesn't appear to be any
opposition so open it up to the
committee are there any
questions from the committee.
We have Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
representative great to see you
this morning.
I I guess the.
The one question I have is.
I understand the bill right
we're now opening up.
What capital outlay funds I'm
can be used for counties
educational related services to
now include.
Internet services for teachers
and students away from the
school building itself.
it currently is refers to the
actual school facilities miners
understand that correctly and is
and madam chair I'm
Representative that is correct
right now it's just well
districts and school buildings.
So madam chair objects are not I
guess my.
My question is them
so we we do have very limited
happily dollars and and you know
that just as well as anyone here
we get you know we might have a
million dollars of capital
outlay that we can use that we
have.
You know thirty forty million
dollars of requests in our
individual districts and so it's
challenging to prioritize where
those dollars go and I know that
the public school capital outlay
is forty no has as a great
process they go through with the
we also have a very similar
situation where they have many
more asked may have dollars.
So my my my question is you know
just thinking about the great
infrastructure challenges we
have when it comes to broadband
in the state.
We could probably take all of
public school capital outlay
dollars and plug it into that
and not make much of a dent and
not leave much left over for the
schools themselves what what is
the.
What is the balance your that
you're you're hoping to strike
Madam chair representative we
have
We have the schools are set
pretty much I think every school
has the internet they need
through a different act but this
is where we are looking at
specials are rural I mean even
in Albuquerque we have areas
where we need
buses with hot spots but in our
rural areas if we can get them
what they need and it's really
getting a temporary temporarily
what what they need until we get
the broadband out to or or we DO
which you said as far as
satellites or whatever but right
now they needed and they need to
be in school learning as soon as
they can but it remotely if they
have the tools they need they
can be successful so it's about
the need now trying to get
hotspots out to the kids.
Yeah so so
madam chair and processing on us
that so that's helpful sort
we're looking at really just
getting some hot spots out there
we're not looking at.
Using these funds to to track
fiber out to these communities
So
I think that that helps me feel
a little more comfortable
supporting this I wanna make
sure that.
we continues this cap will a
funds really for what they're
their intended for and not open
up a big new business for New
Mexico to start you know.
You know become a utility so
that that helps me very much
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative.
Thank you representative harbor
next we have Representative
Garcia Mr Burciaga.
Thank you madam chair of thank
you Mr nana my concerns are just
as you said just a little bit of
goal all rural New Mexico.
How.
You know and I've always madam
chair supported rural New Mexico
because I have the rule is
district in the whole state how
do you plan on reaching these
people these kids I'm sorry they
don't even have running water
out in the reservations in my
part of the district how do how
just go no.
How we gonna benefit from that
what you're trying to do here.
Thank you madam chair
representative we're gonna try
to get what they need but right
now all we can do is try to get
hot spots are prepaid
subscriptions or satellites or
service plans this is what we
can do with this particular bill
we we we do have a broadband
bill to try to get that out to
you House Bill ten you want to
vote for that but then and this
is just a part of that bill to
try to get internet or what we
need wifi out to everyone.
Thank you madam chair
representative you know I
respect what you do and I mark
is needed but this seems to me
that rural New Mexico always use
the phone you mentioned all
group has problems if I had the
problem what do you do my
problems are.
The country you know those.
Money that we really need to
address.
You could do that or not but
because should conduct a manager
all if you have a problem and
all the creepy can you imagine
what we have a lot of the.
My part of the country.
Thank you representative and
that's exactly why we have House
Bill ten it's our big broadband
bill and this is just a little
part of it to get us where we
need to be until that the fibers
are laid and everything we need
is out there so we're trying
we're working on that we would
like you to support our house
bill ten our broadband bill but
this and like I said this is
just a small part of it to try
to get it out to the kids we
know how important education is
to everyone.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and like
Representative Fajardo personal.
all this money would be put in
this is just a little bandaid we
were not even touching the
problem you know we're trying to
bandaid on it and and I'm show
back to rural New Mexico you
know this find your lunches
provide us just fine but I have
even even madam chair thank you
missile yet though we're on
Senate deal which is rural they
don't have no internet service
out there in all these issues
that we keep on putting money
into a project that we're not
getting over with we need to
really look at that this is my
concern sure enough
Representative sure now thank
you.
Thank you Representative thank
you representative vice chair C.
up next we have Representative
Garrett.
Madam chairwoman I was going to
move it to pass.
but I see somebody else is going
to speak thank you
representative Representative
you madam.
Thank you madam chair good
morning committee you know I I
was just gonna want to kind of
address some of the concerns
that I've heard about you know a
this being referred to as a
bandaid for the problem I think
it's much more than that and
public school capital outlay
Council in their analysis says
that this really opens the door
to truly expanding internet
coverage for schools and that
certainly includes rural areas
so this is much more than a
bandaid this is actually a
pretty big deal to get more cost
effective for the council and
and wider reach of high speed
broadband services for our
students so this is something
that's very very much needed we
heard this an in house education
a couple of weeks ago but but
this is certainly much more of a
solution with broader
implications at a lower cost for
public schools in the capital
and the public school capital
outlay council so I just wanted
to address some of those
concerns that that actually for
a small amount of potential
money we're looking at a a huge
increase in a huge expansion in
in internet services for
students certainly not just in
urban areas but rural
communities as well so I think
this is a much needed and very
very important piece of
legislation I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative thank you Mr
Representative Romero next we
have Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill
I guess my question specifically
the.
Is.
With this money be coming from
the capital outlay that we are
are.
created every year.
From a different part of money
this is from a I believe in and
I believe it's from a different
part of money it's ten million
dollars from the capital outlay
public school capital outlay act
but I'd like to defer to my
expert witness just so we can
expand on that.
I thank you madam chair and and
Representative Pettigrew this is
money for the from the public
school capital outlay fund
there's ten million annually set
aside for what's called the
broadband deficiencies
correction program which
typically is used to do hard
infrastructure projects in
schools so this is we were using
state the ten million in state
funds to match federal E. rate
funds and and we're leveraging
quite a bit of federal E. rate
funds it's eight about it and
ninety percent federal ten
percent from the state to build
broadband schools right now so
typically that ten million isn't
used up every year and there's a
little bit of leftover in the
issue we ran into with the
pandemic is that that that
funding couldn't be used for.
For personal connectivity
devices like wifi hot spots or
or things of that nature that
could help students during the
pandemic because of the
statutory limitations around the
programs so this would just
clear to clear up some of the
statutory limitations and make
that ten million dollars
eligible for for personal
connectivity devices for
teachers and students.
Thank you very much for that
information madam chair to to
keep going on this then so
there's there's ten million
dollars capital outlay that
exists right now and what this
bill intends to do is to be able
to tap into that to supply to to
find.
It temporary broadband to
teachers and students that don't
have access.
And so with that
Secretary indoor such.
not knowing as a secretary of
education endorses bill.
Can madam chair like to defer to
my A. L. yes it's another L. AST
endorsed bill but I'm not sure
do you know Tim.
Madam chair represents are not
now I don't now whether or not
PED has that as a position on
this particular bill I know the
PED's been doing work with the
with that New Mexico homework
gap team to expand connectivity
I don't anticipate that they'd
have any particular issue with
that
I don't believe that they've
spoken in support of this bill.
Thank you madam chair are you.
Thank you representative group
next we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair just a
quick question so
Tim uses
That the money in the past.
Was not
Could not be used for this
purpose so in the future any
dollars left over with they go
directly for this this
particular use it would not have
to go through legislation or
anything in the future.
Madam chair and Representative
Powdrell Culbert I think the
thank you raise an excellent
point I think this is what just
expands the allowable uses of
the fund but really all of the
awards would still happen
through the public school
capital outlay council so would
still go through a needs based
application process each year
and so in in the future if the
pandemic doesn't turn out to to
go on for quite as long as we
think it's going to help then
then I think there's it'll it'll
probably return back to the
original intent of the fund
which is to provide broadband
infrastructure to schools.
Okay and since we're talking
future this.
If that were to occur.
Then are we gonna have to come
back and go have legislation so
that it'll revert back to its
original intent.
Madam chair and Representative
cultural comment I don't believe
that we need to refer this
language I think the allowable
where we're just sort of
expanding the allowable uses
right now we're not getting rid
of any current allowable uses.
Okay I would maybe just stated
wrong I understand that my
question is if we if this passes
today.
Then are we gonna have to
revisit this so that it goes
back to its original intent
that's that's currently yeah
we're currently trying to
change.
Representative I'm sorry madam
chair and Representative
Powdrell Culbert I I I don't
believe so but I think that
would be the purview of the
legislature at the time if you
if you wish the legislature in
the future wishes to return it
back to its original intent than
another bill would have to be
passed to eliminate this
language and Representative
where did you want to add to
that.
Just as one of the bill Google
Sanchez I wanted to add madam
chairwoman and Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
You know we've learned that.
Remote learning is here to stay
We have schools in the state
that are operated entirely
online before the pandemic
so this tool this capacity for
students to interact with
teachers to do re search that's
going to remain with us so
that's why we don't really
foresee this language reverting
it simply taking down a barrier
that has been in the way of
adequately connecting students
and teachers I might add we have
teachers that can't teach from
their homes because of broadband
issues it's both the student
issue and and educator issue
thank you madam chairwoman.
Thank you madam chair
representative work what I'm
trying to get at is this.
I think this is very much
needed.
However.
I'm concerned that that we keep
expanding and opening this up
and so will look maybe even a
year down the road and someone
wants to add something else and
that something else and that's
something else that these
dollars can be used for and the
E. rate dollars you know I think
they fluctuate as to how much
even though Tim is ninety
percent a rate of federal
dollars that those dollars
fluctuate don't say.
Madam chair representative but
that that's true they they sort
of fluctuate on on what sort of
work needs to be done each year
so it if that broadband
broadband infrastructure project
is ready to get off the ground
the the the colloquialism in the
field as the E. rate funds open
the ground and then the the
state funds likely the fiber and
there could be tend to be fairly
expensive and expansive projects
that take some work to get off
the ground okay and then madam
chair representative I just want
to make sure that.
If we're going to
I'll open this up that those
dollars stay focused on those
educational connection the.
You know for these kids and that
that's kind of where I'm going I
don't want to just open it up
the next session we see somebody
else with another project and
another project in another
project because I know the need
is out there I I lose connection
to one side of my house.
And to the other and that's only
thirteen hundred square feet but
It's it's important that these
kids have.
Property to and so I I just want
to make sure.
If we pass this piece of
legislation.
It does what it's supposed to
do.
Find you know this these
additional connection for people
who don't have thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
we do have a we don't have
anyone else on the committee
will wanting to speak there is a
motion for do pass
on the legislation I did want to
say and and and just letting
Representative Sariñana and and
folks who are hearing
as of Representative Gary and
fatal I mentioned last week
during
the hearing around hospital ten
this is been really not only
just years the certainly years
in the making because we've
we've known that there is a lot
of inequities when it comes to
access to connectivity
throughout the state and
Representative
vice chair of course you
mentioned it earlier in terms of
The that really the the
geographical divide that exists
within connectivity the hope is
that would house built in and in
connection with
this situation with this
legislation with Representative
Sariñana that it's very much
going to work in combination and
and will will hopefully that's
our hope anyway is that it will
begin to address a lot of the
concerns that folks have around
a lot of these issues around
that geographical divide and and
equity and and how we bring all
of those things together so
there is a motion for the past
is there a second.
Representative Madrid is that
second.
Yes so we have a second from
Representative Madrid is there
any opposition to this
legislation.
So with that we are
Representative Pettigrew is are
you so Mario can you do a roll
call will be please.
Yes.
Your yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative.
With explanation.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Mr Garcia yes.
An interview.
Yes I said yes needed.
Got APS one now and one absent.
Representative Sariñana you have
an eight one to pass of your
legislation and Representative
Pettigrew for your explanation.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you member for bringing this
bill I would like to have a
conversation offline and before
this continues on with the bill
writers to understand the
formulas to ensure that it does
We're for southeastern New
Mexico at this point in time I
can't get through the
calculations to figure that out
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thanks
committee.
Thank you Representative
Sariñana and congratulations.
Next we have Representative
Harper house bill two seventy
one.
Thank you madam chair and if I
could the invite to very patient
expert witnesses.
Jerry Valdez and Mallory men's
interests.
Yes we'll get them get them
right and thank you.
Thank you.
Okay so.
This will hopefully be a very
short bills you of time the.
Take care of your freshen
yourself before the four
session.
so house bill two seventy one of
give me just a little history.
So back in two thousand five
Defense passed what's called
Sliq unified carrier
registration.
And what this does it replaced I
have a single state to state
registration system for for
those folks that do
transportation business.
Right so you're you're you're
talking companies and such.
And what this did was it
provided for a uniform.
way for these businesses
contract with a lot of the
states and actually forty one
states yours right now are are
part of this uniformed Kerrier
Act from two thousand five and
New Mexico is one of.
And we in two thousand six
passed a law the was hospital
for nineteen to bring us into
compliance with us actually
would be one of these forty one
states.
Well when that law was passed.
it was neglected to mention
which fund the revenue would go
into in the past it's always
been the state border
transportation.
R. three fund and and I was left
out of the legislation it's
still is the current practice
right now The Department no
treasure to receive those funds
into
the motor transportation if you
find.
But there's no statutory
language that points to the fact
that that's where it should go
and so really this is a clean up
codifying the current practice
of the department.
And to make sure that the funds
that come from the unified Kerry
yours Act.
Goes to the motor transportation
from farm.
And madam chair it's a pleasure
to work with you on this bill I
want to thank you for for a co
sponsoring it was me and I turn
it over to Mr Valdez are miss
manners if they would like to
add anything at this point.
Madam chair representative
Harper thank you so much we want
to thank you and madam chair for
sponsoring this bill
the technical correction to the
statutory language like
Representative hopper topped
about and what it really does is
it ensures that these funds will
be used for their intended
purpose and that's to contribute
to the highway and safety
programs around the state and so
although there's no
administrative or fiscal impact
at this time we want to make
sure is we caught codified this
in statute to make sure that
these funds are available and
they're being used for their
intended purposes so thank you
again for your consideration and
I'll turn it over effect madam
chair to marry much an artist
who is our H. D. director port
department of transportation if
if that pieces that the
committee.
Sure thanks Mr Mendes and go
ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee the department right
now is currently receiving three
point.
Years and like miss does
mentioned it is going to
construction and maintenance
activities for the safety of the
public and that we stand for
questions thank you.
Great thank you so much you all
we will open it up to folks in
the public are there is there
anyone who would like to
raise your hand in support of
this legislation and to speak on
the legislation.
Is there any opposition.
It doesn't look like there is
any opposition in the audience
so all open it up to the
committee first we have
Representative Powdrell Culbert
madam chairman overdue pass.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert Representative
Crowder wants to do with the a
second on that of first we have
Mr Garcia who did you have a
question Representative vice
chair thank you madam chair what
do know recommended to pass on
it but the B. B. two with.
Usually.
Great.
Thank and vice chair so we have
a motion for do passed from
Representative Powdrell Culbert
and the second from
Representative Crowder is there
any opposition to this.
Seeing no one I'm Representative
Harper you do have a due pass on
house bill two seventy one so
congratulations
thank you madam chair committee
members appreciate very much.
Thank you all and thank you to
everyone who was watching and
and listening and to committee
members now that we have
fulfilled our duty for House
Bill three we will certainly be
getting back on track with all
of our legislation starting on
Thursday so we'll be back here
on Thursday at eight thirty I I
believe
there will be a four session on
Thursday as well but we still
will have time to to have our
committee Thursday morning so if
there's any questions or
anything please feel free to
reach out to myself or to Mario
or Tom and we'll we'll do our
best to to answer and help with
anything that we can so with
that C. will on the floor.
