Representative Johnson is still
in the attendee list if she can
be moved over thank you.
So that's where I was I was
sitting in the attendee list L.
yes sorry for the confusion the
link that's in the golden rod in
the agenda is for attendees you
receive a specific link through
zero that's specific to you but
we I think we've gotten that
most of that out and I'm sure
we'll see our attendees number
jump up as folks try to access
the link from the golden rod
okay.
Chair this is wrong.
Excuse me Mr chairman this role
to want to let you know and
Representative Townsend at the
webcast is live now.
Well.
Total delight it's not it's
going.
And Mr chairman
When I as I monitor the list it
looks to me like the only one
missing at this point is
Representative Cook everyone
else's present.
And.
Your.
Work as a emergency within as
family and there may not be able
to join us okay I just want to
make sure we didn't leave them
out of somebody reached out to
him if he was having trouble
thank you Jim you think or okay
to start.
Yeah I believe so okay
I'm here to call the roll.
Thank you chairman
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Representative Cook is
excused.
Speaker egolf.
Here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Gaydos here.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis.
Representative.
Here.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
As it.
Representative.
Here.
Representative night here.
Representative dream president.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Lewis.
Mr chair representative Lewis is
contacted me via tax saying that
she's on but she's having tech
issues with her Mike and video.
Okay.
Thank you.
Can't talk and see.
She's working on it the switch
is that.
Vice chair Armstrong.
I'm here.
Chair Eli here.
There's a quorum.
All right what I'm gonna do is
since I'm presenting house
resolution one I'm gonna turn
this over meeting over to my
vice chair representative
Armstrong Representative
Armstrong you of the chair.
Thank you Mr chair and I think
it were ready to go ahead and
have you present
house resolution one.
All right thank you very much
members I'll try to give you you
should have now miss Dorsey's
analysis of the our committee
work I'm sorry the house
resolution one as well as all
but I think one of the proposed
amendments but I I saw all but
I'll try to go through this in
some order and take not too much
time the committee let me start
with.
Kind of the principles that I
think of governed the drafting
of house resolution one the
first is transparency and as you
go through this we as we go
through this together you'll see
that we really tried hard to
have all of our processes be
transparent to allow as much
public participation as possible
in keeping with all of our past
practices and what transparency
to provide for equal asset
access for the members to debate
deliberate built on a pairing
kind of equitable way but with
the overlay of this pandemic
that we're going through so
what are we talking about is
this session of these rules were
adopted on the house side will
be an entirely virtual session.
Meaning that it's going to look
a lot like the special session
that we had in June and November
at least is the committees are
concerned but on the floor with
some exceptions will go through
it all of the members will be
required to go through either
electronic or telephonic means
they will not be allowed to use
the microphones while on the
floor to put everybody on equal
playing field.
one thing that we did do that is
very unusual and Legislative
Council actually suggested this
as you start to look at
on the house resolution one is
we did a purpose Klaas in fact
clauses to lay out a couple of
things the reason that we are
doing this and specifically the
pandemic.
And the fact that if you look on
page three of the house
resolution you'll see two things
that should be of significance
particularly to the members of
the minority that these rules
will only be used during
declared public health
emergencies were health and
safety require extraordinary
measures be employed and that
these rules are only applicables
for the first session of the
fifty fifty fifty fifty
legislature so I want members to
understand a couple things one
we're just doing it for this
session two we are doing it
because of the health crisis on
any of those circumstances
change I is rules chair
committed to the minority and to
other members that we can
reconvene as needed as
circumstances change but we did
get the modeling from Los Alamos
national laboratories and
without question what it shows
that she is the more members
that are on the floor and the
longer that they are on the
floor.
More dangerous it becomes
dangerous to member stagers to
staff and to those outside the
building who have contact with
either members or staff so we
want to be really cognisant that
that we're not are super
spreader event on and also with
the variant now in New Mexico
that was not covered by the Los
Alamos national laboratory's
report because we didn't have it
down on now that it is in New
Mexico and we don't know the
extent to which it is it's even
more dangerous so what we're
trying to do is is balance the
democratic process with health
concerns to make sure members of
the public and staff and our
members are state so with that
let me go through the are kind
of the top one the rules there
are two major changes as we go
through this one is is that
we're going to have.
What is referred to the rules as
a limited floor session that is
different from what we saw in
June and November.
And our you'll see as we go
through the rules that is really
I would call it a non
substantive are meeting on the
floor involving the minority
leader the Majority Leader and
speaker to really do kind of the
paperwork of the session
messages introduction of
legislation and also committee
reports from referrals but
without oceans to adopt motions
to adopt and
and and then third reading will
be handled in us in a subsequent
our floor session that will be
devoted to debate votes in
deliberations on substantive
issues on the second major
change of course Harry mentioned
which is that this will be
entirely virtual on the floor so
I want to direct your attention
to page four of the proposed HR
one
we have a in seven dash one dash
two which is on line nine
beginning at one nine that
paragraph is to talk about the
leaders the speaker the Majority
Leader the minority leader they
can be physically press on the
floor and by the way and the
Appropriations Committee can be
physically present for purposes
of being president I want to be
clear with everybody we're not
preventing anybody from actually
physically coming to the floor
but for purposes of being
present in the eyes of the clerk
they're going to have to go to
the computer with that exception
wait out in seven dash one dash
two I did we have had
discussions I've had discussions
Representative Armstrong spent
involved those as well with the
minority
to try and work out kind of
wrinkles in the system.
For coming this meeting today
and one of the things that I
thought was totally legitimate
was the points of order so as
you know on the floor members
may have points of order and
they want to get to those
quickly and for doing zoom and
the speakers just going down the
list you won't have any way of
knowing that so you'll see that
we have a procedure for points
of order thank people can go
through their leadership so for
example if Representative is al
is on the floor once raise a
point of order she would tell
Representative Townsend who
immediately informed inform the
speaker and then yields to
Representative is out to make
that point of course so and we
have a number of people that the
members can reach out to so that
it can be done quickly and
timely so that people don't lose
that right on the speaker on
page five beginning on line to
we do we do add now that
personal headsets can be
required by the speaker this is
to avoid it back on that can
happen if you have a bunch of
computers with people listening
and talking with out having
their head section we want to
avoid that face masks were
requiring and they will be in if
they are an ethical violation
except in private offices now
then we get to and that's by the
way on also on page five line
chance now we get to page five
one seventeen and this is where
we start to talk about limited
four sessions so it's as I
mentioned its messages
introduction reading
recommendations the committees
and committee referrals
committee reports
in those limited four sessions
if you look at page six online
thirteen the leaders right
Majority Leader the minority
leader the speaker and again
this was from the minority
suggestion are the leaders
designees so Representative
minority leader Townsend can't
be present you can certainly
designate to someone else us
Majority Leader Stapleton.
The show and they will be
permitted to use the microphones
but so that no one is surprised
on on page six line twenty one
the only motions that will be
allowed in the limited four
sessions are orders to change
your business but no other
motions will be taken by the
speaker of course on page seven
this was already in the rules
but I want to make this clear to
the public on the our the press
will be accommodated within the
building however we did add this
I and this is a rule we follow
the last time but now we well
this is a practice that we
follow but now we put it into
into the rule on page seven
beginning at line nine our house
rule twenty three dash eight
dash two if at any time the live
video I'm sorry the live audio
or video streaming ceases to
function in the presiding
officer immediately recess
that's to assure the public that
we will not be doing any
business outside of the presence
of the public through the
webcast also we better rule on
not disclosing confidential
information because of security
concerns I I do I haven't seen
any objection to that I can't
imagine there would be given
what we sing on page eight then
on beginning a line I proposed
rule seven dash one.
Residents is our includes
simultaneous remote electronic
and telephonic means I don't
want anybody misled misled by
that when we get later the only
way members can talk other than
the leadership is through the
microphone.
So
Let's see I'm just are are.
Mr Johnson you so the only way
they can speak to the microphone
of the I'm sorry through that
computer device to the computer
devices yes thank you speaker I
appreciate that yes
the
on page ten all rural nine dash
five dash six the again the
committee process now this is
what this refers to is open to
the public and we're really now
talking about public frustration
it's interesting we've never had
in our rules anything about
public participation so what we
did was we put in here sure the
public that they would be able
to participate but within the
discretion of the chair and they
will be able to
participate B. R. R. remote
means of I think we're now using
exclusively Jim I hope so since
last time didn't work very well
I see the speaker nodding yes so
I'm assuming that's correct so
it should be relatively easy and
it'll be up to the chairs and
their technical staff to make
sure that works well
Let's see I'm almost done
Want to make clear.
yeah
so except for our on page eleven
except for leadership everyone
is going to be required to go
through
all of the computer system I
know I've said that a couple of
times but I want to make sure
that two things I want to
membership to know
a lavender Act twenty dash one
of the very last page is a
twenty four hour rule of that is
being suspended with respect to
these rules we can talk about
that as the amendments are
proposed also I I do want to
make clear to the membership
something that's not a proud
moment for me but in the last
four sessions that we had in our
lives I'm sure less special
session in November.
We talked about closing debate
and I read the rules quickly as
I was on the floor frankly I
gave the speaker bad council and
I want to apologize to the
membership for having done that
because one of the things that I
promised is that we would amend
those rules the school twenty on
and that series once I talked to
Legislative Council it is clear
that I miss read those rules so
what has to happen is if there's
an amendment on the floor that
has to be closed first after the
three hour debate and then we go
to the bill and it was just my
misreading of it it was an
honest mistake our again I I
want to be clear with everyone
we are going to have to work
with each other be respectful of
each other be flexible with each
other but I think given that
this is a good balance of
thoughtful deliberate fair
debate with the health concerns
that are out there and with that
madam chair I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair and I think
unless someone objects we have
all long list of proposed
amendments I think we should go
to those first and dispense with
those and then go to
general questions and comments
once we've gone through proposed
amendments.
And I would since there's a long
list I would ask
minority leader Townsend if you
have a particular order that you
suggest we go through them.
Yes thank you madam chair
A great night work will start
off and we will go from there
okay and I I'll let I'll let you
direct the order of the
amendments and we'll we'll do
one at a time and then go back
to general discussion and
questions thank you
Representative divert.
You madam chair thank you and so
I understand this you just want
to do the the amendments right
now and then we will have an
opportunity to discuss general
concerns after we get done with
the amendments correct okay.
I will provide my remarks at
this time to.
Two of the amendments
First one.
Is two oh two number is point
two one nine two six five point
one.
All members for discussion
purposes.
Yes thank you.
Second the motion.
I.
Make sure everyone has the copy
in front of
the two oh two number the last
two six five point one.
Yes Sir point two one nine two
six five point one.
Go ahead.
Madam chair of this particular
Amendment where do
One thing and and it deals with
the issue of points of order.
And one of the.
Hallmarks of our democratic.
Public and and the parliamentary
procedures that we engage and.
And crafting public policy is to
recognize number one that all
members are of equal status.
And number two that as members
we each have certain inherent
rights and and and duties of one
of the.
Obligations and duties of every
members to ensure that the
proceedings of the body are done
procedurally correct.
And in order to do that
It is necessary to
have the members be able to
raise parliamentary objections
and my concern is that we have
basically our.
For it's been our experience
that.
If we don't raise matters
probably are there deem to be
out of order and and the
proposed rules.
Are going to.
Delay the ability to interject
those points of order or other
procedural hi enquire res of the
body and so
the proposal would be to to
strike this our proposed rule in
its entirety and to continue to
recognize that all members may
raised points of order at
appropriate times
And that's the the long and the
short of of the amendment is to
strive the
seven dash eight dash one
matters presented in this
proposed our house rules.
And I certainly would would
You have to answer any questions
or
try to
Addressing the specific point I
I do understand that the
electronic mechanisms that we're
applying are present some
challenges I do recognize that
the
with the each of us having the
ability to have a live
microphone interruptions are are
riled.
A concern moving forward but I
think there are critical point
of what we do is to
let each member be able to
participate and to make
objections as a find the
procedures to be
maybe not in accordance with our
our rules for with our custom.
Hey thank you Representative and
first of all ask the sponsor
whether this is a friendly.
Amendment or not it is not madam
chair.
Hi and this is that will I think
it go to
questions comments from the
committee on this.
Particular proposal
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
So this junior.
I yield to to buy with.
So thank you madam chair and
and Representative.
Nighbor.
I guess the question I have is
functionally.
When there is a
point of order
As it is right now any member
can bring that but in reality.
How often over the last.
However many years six years or
so that you served in the
legislature.
does them major.
Bring a question of a point of
order.
I think we can look at the last
the.
Chair and there's probably a
maybe a very.
Few times where
procedural objections were
raised by the majority are
generally during a debate
concerning an amendment to to a
bill which would generally be
aware.
With that I just.
So with that Representative
This we've been told that all
of.
The rules that are in place are
very reasonable and we were told
that
the majority caucus met input
these rules together in a demand
to all be very reasonable.
I've been told that the that
this rule would apply equally to
both sides but in reality
Representative
sense point of order usually
brought up by the minority party
in either chamber or in any body
whenever there is a ruling or.
A real change
It wouldn't this in your mind
hamper the minority much greater
than it would the majority.
Well my experience of the last
term there are certainly more
points of order or procedural
issues raised by the minority
then there is the major and I
think that Sir a would would
generally be true and in any
body because it's the.
procedure rules that that.
You know there's there's very
few things that the minority
have to
use as an advantage I don't have
the numbers so are making sure
that the procedures are done
correctly and taking advantage
of any procedure or rules that
may be inherent in the process
are generally going to be raised
by the the minority and not by
the majority.
So what with that the
madam chair and and
Representative I I just I can
see how if I were in the
majority and this rule would
potentially hamper the minority
I would also agree from my
perspective that this is
completely fair to everyone and
I usually but in reality in my
in my opinion and I and I and
this is.
State and not a question in my
opinion this it definitely is
hampers the minority's ability
to bring up a point of order
whenever there is a ruling by
the chair
and obviously gonna be supported
by.
has that by those numbers and I
I just see this as something
that is not going to be a fair
rule is not affect this
undermines the very purpose of
these type of roles for members
of the minority to to bring up a
point of order and especially
new madam chair and
representative when
The folks who are being who are
the ones who are supposed to be
able to respond to this many
times discussions with the major
work with the leaders of either
party by their members and if
there's a distraction or
whatever when this takes place
as you stated earlier a point of
order has to be brought up
immediately so
if if it goes past that and and
the leader or myself are
distracted or or who whoever it
doesn't need whether that's you
or someone else if there's a
discussion going on that means
that we passed by that and once
again that further hampers are
are right so.
And madam chair I may respond
and the.
The fact of the matter is
there's three members of the
majority party that would be
able to and posed as points
there's only two members of the
minority party that would be
able to interpose of points
which gets back to some of the
concerns that the minority whip
as just raised.
Thank you next I have
Representative my Estes thank
you madam chair representative
we're.
Representative I'm looking at
two fifty six is that correct
two fifty six the.
The two fifty six I have only
has a one word insertion I
believe you're talking about
deleting lines twenty to twenty
five on page four.
Could you clarify that for me.
I don't know what you're talking
about two three okay okay madam
chair all forgiving madam chair
representative or could you
please give me the the last
three numbers at the bottom of
the amendment that you're
referring to.
At yes Sir two six five thank
you one.
Thank you that was my error was
looking at two five six not two
six five.
So I don't have that in front of
me but what you wish to do is is
delete on page four essentially.
The proposed rule seven dash
eight dash one.
Yes madam chair representative
the entire seven dash eight dash
one would be deleted in its
entirety so the lines twenty
three twenty five all paid for
in line one on page five thank
you thank you madam chair of
Rosenberg I just one of.
Stand in opposition to the
amendment I think with
discipline caucuses these are
the only folks who should be
raising points of order.
At all you know I don't think I
mean they're they're managing
the ebb and flow of the of the
floor debate they're making
tactical decisions on behalf of
their caucuses.
Adam and Karen is
is independent of the of the
various caucuses I I can so sort
of see that concerned three to
two but it's really one to one.
Leadership of the house minority
can make this motion leadership
of the house majority can make
this motion.
Of even under normal times I
think there's only folks who
should be making those motions
but certainly by zoom a quick
text you know I think the
debates are gonna be slow down
Madam chair of their neighbor
somewhat because of the zoom
presentations and debates a
quick text solves this problem
if if
You know if a back bencher
member has a point of order they
wish to disclose thank you thank
you Madam madam chair I address
a yes.
Madam chair the representative
from Bernalillo points out that
these of the parties to who
should they're close those are
objections and and basically
every member has the duty to
make sure the rules are followed
so you know it's a right of
every member it's a frankly a
duty of every member but I would
add that at least on our side of
the aisle the minority side of
the aisle are a lot of that has
fallen on my shoulders yet I
would not as the Republican our
parliamentarian be able to
interpose these types of a job
objections under this rule.
And Representative Eli do you
wanna.
I thank you madam chair just
real quickly this was not this
point toward was not originally
in the original draft
it was the minority caucus that
came to me and said we need
something on points of order so
I put this in there if we get to
the floor and they think there's
an imbalance in this because
they need some additional
designate your present I'm happy
to entertain that on the floor
and we can take a look at it as
I told them prior to this
meeting but this is I think an
appropriate way to do this given
the fact that given Jim
technology we're gonna have to
have some kind of organization
and I will save for the minority
that are I would make give the
assurance to the minority that
are if there's some reason why
these come late I think that's
goes back to we're gonna have to
respect one another and if it's
late because you didn't get it
to the leadership in time we're
gonna have to be very thoughtful
and empathetic about that and I
believe the speaker will be and
I certainly well thank you madam
chair.
Thank you litter Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
The gentleman yield.
Madam chair yes I would yield to
my minority leader.
I I've listened to this with
the.
With some tongue in cheek
because in the opening
statements.
I heard
The representative talk about
Good balance and thoughtful
consideration.
And
which I appreciate I think
that's what we should to.
And I will be able to verify
that.
At the end of this meeting.
When I look at the votes and see
if that has occurred.
As to only members.
only the leadership being able
to make points of order I think
that is absolutely a
contradiction.
To the rights and
responsibilities of every
elected representative without
fail.
Without fail.
Every member of that house.
Has the responsibility.
And is accountable to their
constituents.
For their ability to express
themselves.
To implement rules and to offer
advice and consideration that
represents their constituents
so I would say
That I strongly.
Propose this because.
It negates.
The quality of each
Representative.
It hampers and constricts.
Their ability to.
Disseminate their feelings and
their understanding of the rules
and laws around our four
sessions.
And I will support this but
because it is fair and it is
equitable and I believe
it's just as well so thank you
very much for bringing this
forward and I would urge all of
our members of rules to
consider.
what you would believe was fair
and equitable if you were
sitting on the other side of the
aisle.
Thank you thank you
Representative my tray you had
an additional.
Yes madam chair Representative a
number two
Right now a direct question you
but it may be more appropriate
for Representative Eli and that
is
Representative I stated that the
minority asked for something to
be on points of order I'm is
this Representative Nighbor
something that you requested.
Madam madam chair we are.
The issue was how do we deal
with the interference that we
have experienced all of these
are meetings and what are how
how would we as a body.
Deal with our with with that
type of interference and I think
that this may be may have been
raised because are very
concern over that interference
of.
I I know our our have discussed
with our Representative from
Santa Fe County regarding
points of order general
parliamentary thanks but our all
right I don't think I've ever
ever a requested that it be
limited to two one or two or in
this case I of our members out
of the seventy members at
Representative the districts in
New Mexico so
again
I I.
I don't want to put words in the
representatives about the I
think it's an effort to deal
with the distractions that we've
all seen on germane to try to
control our the ability of
having so many water parks open
at one time.
M. Representative representable
may want to chart out all the.
So I'm.
One well Representative the life
you want to say is
every one of you would yield I
have a lot of you happy to you
all right so on Madam chair
representative
yeah I the subject came up and
it seems like I I there was not
a specific suggestion there was
some talk about whether we add
other members to the points to
work once the draft came out but
I think people are
misunderstanding of this rule is
going to work it's not the only
leader Townsend or we have
Montoya would be able to raise a
point of order what I'd intended
as let's say Representative
Nyberg had a point of order he
would let Representative
Townsend I'm minority leader
challenging would let the
speaker now and then they would
yield Representative Townsend to
make his point of order it's not
to limited just point to work.
The leadership it was really to
provide a framework so that we
could timely addressed points to
work and so yes that subject did
come up and that's what I was
trying to address but in terms
of the specific rules that we
drafted together now and I don't
mean to imply that.
So thank you madam chair at that
was actually gonna be my second
question and so Representative
night Representative Eli that
was something that
Representative Eli had suggested
to me is that.
I'll point of order could be.
Someone wishing to raise a point
of order could get with
leadership.
And then it could be directed to
that person but that's not the
way this reads.
on page four online at line
twenty four twenty five going to
the first line of page five it
says that that membership I'll
contact their respective caucus
leader or the house
parliamentarian.
Who shall raise such points when
recognize so it it appears to me
I mean it asked if that's what
you're trying to to to get to I
I'm not sure that's what it says
it seems to me that the person
reaches out to the folks who are
able to make a point of order
and then the person who is able
to make a point of order makes
it on their behalf I I it seems
to me what you're what you're
stating and what I'm reading
don't exactly match up so
Representative night but I was
as asking this question that can
Representative Eli would you be.
Able to answer that question
yeah I I think Representative
and madam chair
that the intention is to provide
a mechanism for members to raise
points award if that's something
that is causing the minority
concern that we're just limiting
the point of order the person to
the minority leadership then
that should be a simple facts
and it's something we could
grant on the house floor and I'd
be open to that because that's
not the intention the intention
is to allow members to make a
point of order individually
whatever framework have a
mechanism in which to raise our
time with the speaker that's all
I was attempting to so that's
confusing to the minority that's
the way the rule will be
enforced I think you're actually
slide council that question but
if you would feel more
comfortable once we get to the
house floor there's some way of
clearing that up I'm happy to
look at it and I think I'd be
open to it so with that thank
you madam chair.
So thank you madam chair one
last question Representative Eli
Representative neighbor.
it.
it was just brought up about
timeliness and I think that's
the whole reason that we're
presenting this amendment is
because.
I don't believe that that
process that especially
presuming that people would not
potentially be in the same room
together that that timeliness
may not take effect and and and
and with the and other rule
change that's that's that we're
gonna be talking about a little
bit where we can't use
microphones on the floor if even
if we're on the floor that that
and then that timeliness is all.
Hampered so thank you those
those a.
Signature.
Thank you representative next I
have us speaker egolf.
I would yield but you are thank
you madam chair
Yeah I I I just was going to
echo what chairman Ely said the
point here is to give a
mechanism for points in order to
be raised by members in a timely
fashion given that we're gonna
be participating even if on the
floor through.
Our computers or tablets and
this is a more orderly way of
making sure that points of order
don't get lost in the shuffle or
don't get hurt so that's that
was the intent and if we need to
clear it up and as a cause for
think that's fine.
And I also want to just your
reiterate what chairman you I
said.
Which is something that I
mentioned earlier on opening day
in that that we're gonna be
proceeding at a somewhat slower
pace because we're all operating
with technology and so there's a
point of order as a member is
trying to make an.
Moving on.
There's certainly not any reason
to think that we won't recognize
a point of order and and address
it which is exactly what we did
with the
foreman meant from
Representative down the special
session you know we are so there
is a disagreement about the
rules we went back and we we did
a very in a deliberate and and
open manner and that's that's
how we'll proceed with these.
Which were added during the
session.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
sorry and I think that just kind
of explains part of the problem
I don't have this to
particularly to Representative
divert or to Representative to a
Germany wide I'd like for more
of this to be in a discussion.
So if we look at Representative
Nighbor where is he currently
and I assume he's in Roswell I'm
in Albuquerque let's assume that
we have a floor session going on
we have leader Townsend and
Representative.
One twenty on the floor.
I want to raise a point of order
how do I do that do I call them
do I text them do I go ahead and
email them well they're involved
in a conversation with
leadership on another subject.
And so the timely raising of
that point of order is gonna be
problematic.
and that's why I think we need
to allow an individual to go
ahead raised a point of order.
But that's my comment I don't
know if there's a response from
anyone or comment.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Madam chair going to if I if I
may I mean I I think you're
thank you and check your
representative reams point but I
I would assume you know within
within our caucus within the
democratic caucus you know that
there might be a designated
person I and I would assume the
same for the minority caucus
that would be the one handling
text messages or whatever might
come in from from rank and file
membership home I want to raise
a point shot I get that I get
you concern presented rural but
I also think that each
respective caucus can organize
themselves to make sure that
there's a designate handling
those request I would assume
otherwise yeah I could get
unwieldy.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair R. yes point I thank
you madam chair of.
I think we might.
Agree with you Representative
that it doesn't need to do that
but we don't have that in this
rural.
Madam chair on that point I I I
disagree I mean I think if you
know to to to risen reams
example right if you have
minority leader two thousand and
and with monopoly on the floor I
would assume one of them would
be the one that would take
charge of
ensuring that points of water
from their membership or rates I
don't think that has to be in
the rule it seems like that's
something that each caucus will
do thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair so I just
want to comment on this I mean
if we have a point person for
each caucus on on raising these
points I mean for me it's like
being a teacher I've been
teaching in the classroom for
for awhile now on on a platform
like soon and I mean I have to
part of my responsibility as I
have multiple ways of for
students to contact me and for
me to disseminate information in
a timely manner for my students
and I don't see this very much
being different if we're
designating members of
leadership to raise these points
any different is that they would
have to develop these means with
their caucus to get something
rapidly available in order to
raise those points so so I don't
really
see why this meant amendment
would be needed I think what
what representative Ely as
proposed would be sufficient up
it would just be up on a
leadership in order to our race
points and and for members to be
on their toes about these things
I think that's what's important
here thank you madam chair.
Thank you our next I have
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and just
further clarify I think the
obligation according to Robert's
rules and in this case masons
rules is that we have an
obligation under those rules to
acknowledge point of order so
we've met that we've met that by
addressing it within the rules
the second point I want to raise
this that what everyone else has
been raising madam chair members
of the committee is that how we
manage that is really what we're
talking about and so once we
acknowledge the fact that we are
hearing to parliamentary rule
which we are I knowledge in the
importance of points of order
then how we manage that is
purely internal to us and it's
something that could be managed
but does not it doesn't seem
appropriate at all to be
included in in a rural since
appointed orders already
acknowledged included and we're
acknowledging it according to
our higher knowledge mint which
is Mason's role so I just wanted
to make sure that we understand
that that we're all we're
meeting obligations number one
and number two how we manage
that is is purely on to what
others have sent to our caucuses
to our leadership to however way
we make that determination and I
think that the rules are
affording us that that ability
to do that and so I don't think
the amendment is even necessary
it's it appears even to be in
some circumstances in some units
are redundant so thank you madam
chair that's only points I want
to raise thank you
representative Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair and I just
I just want to point out that
some of the some of the concerns
with with the with this point of
order and having to as a member
of the Legislature somebody's
been elected by the body by my
constituents taking that away
from me.
And so that's my biggest concern
and that this
a resolution is doing we've had
situations in the past couple
sessions where are our our body
our caucus has raised points of
order it is because drop on the
floor we have had to bring down
let's council Representative Eli
is even acknowledged today that
he's actually will incorrectly
on thanks and so what this does
is it takes away my ability to
do a point of order I should not
as a elected official in say New
Mexico have to go through my
leadership in order to voice my
concerns about a member of the
body or about things that are
going on with the bulls or how
or Mr speaker or anything like
that.
That's the biggest concern here
for me.
If I if I have to taxed my my
floor leader and he's in the
conversation with somebody else
that it just doesn't make any
sense it's like what he's
distracted what what if things
are going on and this is the
biggest concern for me and I'm
and it would be very vocal about
this as we move forward I don't
I don't respect or like any bill
for any resolution that takes me
as elected official takes my
opportunity and my voice away
from doing.
Doing the job that I was elected
to do and bring up the committee
concerns that are important to
me and so you are making me go
through somebody else and that
it's it's it's insulting to me
as elected official thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative
you don't have any other hands
raised and if you've already
spoken and had your hand up if
you could take it down that'll
help me
Representative night or did you
want to I do have one more
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and just
briefly.
It seems to me that what we the
intent.
And it may not be clear enough
is simply to provide a mechanism
so that every member.
Can have his or her voice heard
at the appropriate time.
It is just the dealing with the
logistics the technology and the
logistics of that it might not
it might missing something
Representative a lack.
Madam chair chair Chasey no
you're not that's exactly right
every member what should have
the right to raise a point of
order we're just trying to
provide a mechanism to do that
given the technology that's
correct.
Thank you.
Thank you
Representative night where did
you wanna make any closing
remarks and then I will
entertain a motion.
Thank you madam chair you know I
think obviously there's
different view points off on
this as have probably most
things but.
The the.
No words on the paper do mean
something and the words on the
paper basically allow five
people to make points of order
and.
That is a concern and that the
representative from Santa.
Would like to maybe work on some
words methane should this motion
fail are Abbey happy to to work
with them I also personally
would would think that it ought
to be of the major major plot
for later majority or minority
whip the house parliamentarian
yeah and and frankly of the
minority are prone to tearing as
well because
there are many cases where both
our leader and our will are not
not on the floor and they leave
it up to
me or others to.
Make sure that things are being
procedurally and here to and and
so if we have those instances
it's going to be very difficult.
To have someone who's actually
there are two in propose those.
It's a border because.
The leadership may be holed up
with our with someone on the are
on other issues that are coming
out so I'm I'm committed to work
with the representative on on
trying to provide to their
should this motion fail it and
try to try to accomplish the
maybe what is goals are and and
still make it practical for for
all our members to be able to
raise such points of order thank
you.
Thank you.
is there motion madam chair this
is Representative Montoya I
moved to pass.
Second.
Recepci motion to table.
Thank you that takes precedence
let's
Roll call a motion to table.
Thank you madam chair motion to
table amendment number two point
two one nine two six five point
one.
Representative Chasey.
Yes the table.
Representative Cook no.
Speaker eagle.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo out no
disable.
Representative Gaydos yes to
table.
Representative Johnson yes to
table.
Representative Lewis.
Representative mass yes.
Martinez.
Yes.
Representative on the other.
noted table.
Representative my part no
deductible.
Representative Rehm noted table.
Representative Romero.
Yesterday.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes the table.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes thank you Representative
Townsend noted table.
Representative Lewis.
Yes the table.
I think you're Armstrong.
Yes to table.
At and chair elect yes.
The motion to table amendments
point two one nine two six five
point one do you passed the
twelve to six.
Thank you and we still have some
folks with hands up that didn't
take them down up next we'll go
to Representative Nighbor your
second amendment.
Yes ma'am it's up the two oh two
numbers point to one.
Nine two three four.
Point one.
Three eight point to one.
Nine two three four.
Point one.
Madam chair this particular
amendment deals with the issue
of of microphones and and
essentially what what it does is
of it allows all members to to
participate
who are in the chambers to to
use the.
Existing microphones and to not
go through the audio on their
computer which sometimes creates
that Ackles Act that we've even
heard on this call
and.
It.
Trying to raise this amendment.
Madam chair what was a was a
response that that I I we we
understood why.
We were going to
have to participate B. as our
own what I think I understand
that
but the audio portion of it did
not seem to be what the problem
was and and I've since learned
from the representative from
Santa that that maybe the audio
is not the not real clear on the
of public address system that we
have in the house but I find
that rather odd since they'll be
are at least three three members
who will be utilizing those
microphones are probably the
three members who have the most
to say on any particular day
they will be permitted use of
the microphones and yet other
members who will be on the for
would not and so if it's an
audio concern that that seems
something that the I. T.
department should be able to
address are quickly I think
forcing of the members who who
may be on the floor to have
their computer audio on our
could raise some concerns
regarding the actual fact things
that we have although.
I do see we have
Some other mechanisms to have
your buds or what have your
employees.
The the whole idea of recall
allowing use of microphones is
number one.
That is tied into the system
number two it's so are often
times.
Preferable to be speaking into
that microphone the the
computer audio that that we have
now.
Particularly when when you get
the echo effect and so this this
set of amendments
here's to address that specific
issue and so on page six of
beginning lines seventeen.
We are we would like to strike
the remainder of of wind
seventeen after the period of
microphones and and certainly
there of other members wishing
to participate in limited four
sessions by do so by the
president in the house chamber
and should also be permitted use
of the chamber microphones so
basically
allowing use of market funds
taking out the language that
prohibits use of microphones and
then over on page nine.
Winds seven through fourteen
were asking that that be
stricken in its entirety and
includes their of insert the
language arts on the amendment
happy to read it if you like and
basically allows use of the
microphone and then again on
page eleven
striking
one seven through fifteen which
Would take out the fact that all
aware of the
Baker majority of minority floor
leader staff use of of the
Michael Paul so all three of
these are to basically allow all
members who are on the floor in
the chamber to utilize existing
public address system our with
the microphones and to try to
of.
The president some of the audio
concerns that we see happen from
time to time with respect to the
zoom meetings were multiple
microphones are in close
proximity to one another.
I stand for any questions.
Thank you Representative
Representative Eli first of all
is this a friendly amendment
madam chair is not.
Thank thank you will go to
questions from the committee and
first so that I can manage this
speaker Egolf and Representative
Fajardo your hands are up I
think from the last question
if you could
Thank you so first I have
Representative minority leader
Townsend.
Thank you madam chair
Will the gentleman yield.
I do but I don't think I have
to.
I don't think you madam chair
and we don't need to ask for I
don't believe any test year you
different committee were amongst
gentleman here thank you.
Chair and representative.
What do you believe the real
reason for this yes proposal.
Yes I mean it seems to be it
seems to me.
That.
There's more to this than meets
the eye.
Why would.
The majority want to limit our
ability or any one.
Who is on the floor from
utilizing the audio visual
system that's president and has
been used for.
Many many years.
The the only
Think that I've had discussions
with the
Chair of the committee regarding
this issue is that apparently
the microphones of the existing
HBs system.
Do not.
Are not as clear to those who
are not inside the chambers as
if we were participating the
the audio on the computers I
don't know whether that's that's
true or false but I believe that
that's the
stated stated reason are ways
that as a as I understood the
stated reason
and as I mentioned in my
remarks if that is the case that
it seems to me that that the I.
T. department should be able to
have a better interface between
the existing maybe system and
that the computer that the.
Yes displayed on our computer
screens so that the the audio
gets picked up properly and and
if if that's an issue that needs
to be fixed because the three
people that do the most speaking
are going to be using the
microphones and the three people
that frankly
have or at least one person that
controls controls everything
that goes on we'll be using the
microphone so so
I I think that the if we have a
which it ought to be fixed and
it needs to be fixed the early
quickly if there's not a glitch
in there should be no reason are
to not use the microphones if
you're on the floor of the house
and in fact I believe there's
some reason to use the
microphones in that you get the
echo chamber thank you.
Thank you for that and and I
think it's important to the
public at large that's listening
today and as well as the other
members
about some conversations that
have occurred and I and I think
and I think this was absolutely
genuine.
It was relayed to me that there
was great concern from the
majority's part.
That when they were not on the
floor and they had made the
determination not to participate
on the floor.
That during the last special
session their members felt like
they were at a disadvantage
because they didn't participate
from the floor and they continue
to trickle in as the session
proceeded but because they
wanted to be in a position of
being equitably
At river able to represent their
constituents and I think that
right there is exactly.
The crux of the problem.
and had to do with the last
amendment to be very to be very
Frank
the proposed rules of the
virtual session.
Have worked.
Portly.
I received a call from a
prominent businessman about the
kirke yesterday that read the S.
and said damn you got to push
back on this this is craziness.
And I relayed to him the exact
conversation as best I could of
the reasons why.
And and I I would tell you that
for the public at large or
listening today and for members
on both sides let's think about
what we're done to our session.
I mean restricting a member's
ability.
To utilize the equipment that
has been used on the for for
years and years and years.
And you want them all to be in
the zoom or.
Not because the audio and visual
system does not.
Work that way it works perfectly
well we're going to continue to
use.
The reason we're doing it is
because.
The majority yes has that.
For the public to see the optics
of the minority on the house
floor doing what they were
elected to do and the other side
of the chamber in the.
And and and that is a real issue
that then then backing off and
said now we're all going to
we're we're all going to have to
to
To be at a disadvantage.
That's one New Mexico's in the
shape it's in some times on many
instances is because we don't
put our best foot forward and
Representative I I said I see
you shaking your head at me and
the I I
You know exactly what I said was
absolutely truthful.
And and you know that relays our
conversation on most of to the
word.
And and I just I take great
issue.
With these rules being
manipulated so that we can pull
the public as to where their
representatives are sitting and
what they're doing there is no
other reason for doing that
absolutely no other reason.
That in the last session we did
a virtual session where those
people who were remote.
Participated through those
because they decided they wanted
to do that we to votes by roll
call book in order to facilitate
that there is no reason.
Absolutely no reason.
To try to pull the public on
where we're at and where their
Representative are Madam chair
for me I as a point of order I
believe the minority leader is
dangerously close to shooting
the character in question the
motives of a member yeah he is
he is espousing what he thinks
motive for having brought is not
you.
I believe that the floor madam
chair in order leader is stating
that the reason these rules are
brought is to deceive the public
he is stating that the the
chairman of this committee has
I'll tear your motives for
having brought this in his
questioning the motives of the
member which is prohibited by
the rules madam chair if you
would please ever mind the
minority leader not to question
the motives of members for
having brought legislation or
for any vote they may take in
this committee or on the floor
thank you thank you and and I
will remind leader Townsend and
please refrain from from
speculating on motivation this
is at a stick to what your.
And attention is and and
objections Representative Eli
knows me well enough to know
that I it would never question
his character that is not my
intent.
What I am saying I believe to be
true.
And that there is no other
reason.
That I can come up with.
That would.
Would substantiate.
Why we should be in different
places we have uses audio visual
system for years it works.
What I relate to you was S.
factual as I could in recanting
a conversation.
And I am not in any way.
Questioning motives but I am
telling my members.
And the members of this
committee that we should look at
what we're done and explained to
me if there's any other reason
of Representative I am I am if
there have been new
Representative if they've been
new reasons for this I'm all
ears.
Madam chair I responded I think
you are about to hear some
Representative Eli.
madam chair I what what legal
jails and I had a nice
conversation I thought he
understood what I was saying you
clearly did not.
Look we can't have it both ways
I've seen the reports in the
paper we are council's been
pretty responsible in terms of
his understanding of the Los
Alamos national laboratory's
report he's drawn a different
conclusion that we have he
thinks it's so dangerous to be
on the floor he has suggested
that we come back in April or
may a reasonable position
instead what we're doing is is
we are going forward with the
session to do the people's
business but it doesn't mean
that because we're doing that
there's no danger there is
absolutely danger and so the
question was raised by leader
Townsend why can't we be on the
floor and you guys not be on the
floor because what happens is
when we talked about this there
is an intangible benefit to
being on the floor with a
microphone in hand and so it
does not provide members with
equal access to the debate so
what we were doing wise and
leader Townsend knows this is
that we were leveling the
playing field by saying
everybody is going to go to the
computer so that the end user is
exactly the same and what was
pointing out to Representative
Nighbor wise is just one of the
problems that happens it's not
the reason for limiting the
microphone it's so that if
people have a hard time hearing
the PA everybody does and we can
stop the proceedings as opposed
to some members that aren't on
the floor in some members that
are the thing that I object to
is is this notion that somehow
the Democrats are kind willingly
not going to the floor because
they don't want to be there and
that you know we've always gone
to the floor in the past the
fact is the people that are not
on the floor are the ones acting
responsibly given this health
coverage it's not just us that
we're exposing potential virus
to it's the staff that's in that
room it's the clerks it's the
security guards to the extent
that I can level the playing
field through these rules and
get everybody to start working
on the same page and make.
King it equal for everybody is
the right thing to do this
notion that zoom is somehow anti
one party or another is nonsense
it is not a great process as
compared to being in the
chamber.
But that means everybody should
be on the same page and the
advantage that it has is when
things go wrong we will all know
things go wrong and when the
public gets to see us they get
to see us as one face on the
computer and so I I don't know
what legal challenges even
talking about when he suggesting
that we're trying to fool the
public or anything like that
that support this thing from my
mind in fact these rules are
very clear when the army our
system goes down receding stock
we are all on the same page the
public will have access to the
same information what the
Republicans now want to do is
have some kind of advantage on
the floor and expose the staff
for what they know is dangerous
and it's even worse than when we
first started talking about
because the variant so I I just
want to push back in the
strongest possible way the what
we're trying to do is create a
level playing.
Order fairly debate I'm sure
point of order yes state point
so I would like to have you make
it clear to the chair of this
committee that he's now trying
to impugn integrity and and and
question our motives and in I'm
not supporting the rules that
are being presented today in
reality madam chair.
The minority is come help.
Because of our sheer numbers to
be in Santa Fe New on the floor
in reality as was mentioned by
the speaker in Legislative
Council meeting earlier this
year that if you are for some
reason have central trouble with
your technology.
That when they come back to you
and you are not able to vote
then you will be considered
absent for that vote it even if
the technology fails so madam
chair the the minority is
compelled by greater numbers to
be in Santa Fe and to be on the
floor regardless of what the
technology is you're not gonna
see madam chair if a bunch of of
Republicans not being there
because inherently we have to be
there so in in reality these
rules are forcing Republicans to
take a greater health risk than
the major so I I I I would ask
you ask.
Representative Ely to also in
the thank you thank you
representative and everyone take
a deep breath it's gonna be a
long afternoon and let's try and
focus on on the rules and yet
and leave some of the a motion
out of it I would appreciate
that
I think I
still have the four I think it's
important to note.
That.
In the Senate.
The democratic colleagues.
Are on the floor.
They're proceeding as normal
they're using their microphones
they're using their audio visual
system.
And certainly
I I I don't think the
representative intended to
Say that their actions were
irresponsible because they're
doing what they feel like is in
the best interest of their
quality of their colleagues and
their constituents.
So I take great I you know what
it's.
It's hard.
To argue this point.
That puts this caucus.
At such a disadvantage.
And it's purposely in my in my
mind it's purposely orchestrated
for that reason so I am I'm here
to tell you that I think
That the systems that have been
used for years and years and
years.
The ones that the Senate
continues to use identically.
I guess maybe the virus that you
know is is not so rampant over
in the Senate side and and we
have to take more precautions in
the house that that's ridiculous
we all know that.
We have a system that works and
we should use that and I am
going to propose
Any efforts
to
the limit every one of my
members the right to use the
equipment.
That they have for years and
that the Senate continues to use
that that thank you thank you
next I have
later Stapleton.
Madam chair thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
I I hear the concern of
Representative.
Townsend.
I I understand clearly his
concern.
What madam chair I come before
this committee today on this
amendment to talk about safety
safety first safety of our
members this health body to
individuals I believe we have
seventy in addition to the
seventy we have the sergeant the
bombs that's would be right
there at the door would be right
there in the front I'm I am
going to repeat quickly what
Representative Daymon Ely
mention the research madam chair
that has been done.
State.
That we are at risk.
All of us the minority party
members and the democratic
members are at risk should all
of us be in that rule at one
time so what we look at is.
And safety of all members I'd
say should we have all the
minority party members in the
flaw and all of the democratic
members on the floor and all the
staff that in in that rule.
Maybe I'm not saying it will
happen I hope it won't but maybe
some of us would end up with
COVID some of us so what was
might end up dead as a result of
being in that role so my issue
is not whether or not the
minority.
Need to speak with the Mike my
issue is the lives of mice of
our members thank I'm on myself
that is more important to me
than standing up speaking on a
might and so I have to look at
the protection and the safety
and the health of our members
and it's clearly madam chair it
shows in my opinion it's not a
matter of.
The results of the lab the right
and the rights of the minority
but it's a matter of restricted
to introduce full call we do
exist on the house floor.
Madam chair.
If we do if we do not have the
opportunity Paul all of us to be
equally and it was setting.
Speak with this already in the
same manner using the same type
of equipment yes it is a
disadvantage one group over the
other.
It's a disadvantage if what
members of some place but we
chose as a party to make sure
that all members a say and that
would be in Santa Fe for the
next sixty days it is not miss
madam chair a matter of
restricted one group over the
other it is a matter of health
I'm concerned and the safety of
legislators in the house of
representatives I I assume that
if if if if if one was the party
of the minority and they saw it
differently what.
Yes to me they have always said
there's nothing wrong with.
The COVID stuff and and and
there's nothing wrong with that
we are in mask I mean it is
known nationally that that's the
objective I'm but for me I'm
not.
We want to be safe.
I'm I'm a and madam chair.
Because the minority party feel
that they have to be on the
floor.
I understand that clearly.
They feel because they are less
number.
They have to be on the floor
what I'm members feel that we
want to be safe and secure as
members and thank you madam
chair.
Thank you then later on next I
have the speaker it off.
Thank you madam chair I I was
just going to mention if you
posted already made that this is
merely a rule to allow for
members to participate safely
and third reading of legislation
in other proceedings on the
floor to make sure that we don't
have issues with feedback and
squelching from the microphones
if people are on a device that
not using a headset those the
reasons that we have done this
so that all members will be by
the public view equally are
there is no doubt in my mind
that
the public.
We have has seen.
I and will continue to see the
full chamber are both on the
webcast as well as in
photographs.
The by the news media and
photographs taken by the other
party showing that seats in the
democratic side of the chamber
are empty
I've was featured on the front
page the Albuquerque journal in
front of an empty set of seats
and I was not embarrassed about
that.
Madam chair I I don't think any
member of our caucus was
embarrassed I think we were
proud to set a good example for
the public that we are taking
this global health crisis
seriously we are choosing not to
group on the floor that we are
participating from offices in
the capital or from locations
outside of the capital so
there's nothing embarrassing
about anti democratic seats on
the floor at all I think that so
that that we should be proud of
I think we're setting a good
example and that we will
continue to do so so this notion
that we're somehow I am pursuing
this rule change to avoid a
photograph of anti democratic
seats or or some sort of
embarrassment could not be
further from the truth.
The public knows is happening
they will continue to know
what's happening and they will
see the images and I think and
the major takes pride this act
we are responding to this public
health crisis and seriously and
responsibly and we're coming to
Santa Fe for those of us who are
choosing to do so we're able to
do so that we're gathering to do
our constitutional duty to our
work at the cost usually point
time and doing it in a way that
is as safe as possible for the
staff and for the members thank
you.
Thank you our next I have
Representative my Estes thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative night bird leader
Townsend and I appreciate the
speaker for.
This kind of.
Explaining staff I mean we're we
we're gonna have a virtual
session and so the question is
how do we make it as public as
possible and how do we make it
as equal as possible for the
members I didn't I thought this
a man was going to be the least
talked about because it's just
so practical the microphone is
so that folks in the gallery can
hear us and so that the audio
picks us up on the webcast now
there were two things virtually.
We talk into the computer so if
you stand up and then you try to
say something some people might
not hear you and you don't know
and so if you talk about the
microphone on the floor.
Your colleagues who are until
may not be able to hear you but
more importantly madam chair the
public may not be able to hear
you so the microphones are up
Salita terms of presume session
and so all of us need to be
equal our constituents deserve a
quality and and the
representation and all of us
need to simply talk into the
device we're using during the
virtual session.
Thank you representative
Representative Montoya did you
have additional.
Comments questions yes madam
chair.
so.
Of.
Representative night Burt it has
already been brought up that
that the city that the Senate
Senate.
Is choosing to handle this
differently.
in park and I believe was
mentioned earlier that the
Senate believes that the clear
reading of the constitution is
that
that.
The legislature will convene.
At the seat of government.
and that is why they are doing
what they're doing not for a
lack of what would be
from the standpoint of Senate
Democrats not for a lack of
throwing caution to the wind as
may have been suggested just a
few minutes ago I it wasn't that
directed more at the minority in
the house but indirectly I think
the Senate Democrats are getting
hit with that shrapnel
but the.
It if I'd like to Representative
the neighbors you could go with
me to page two.
Of this resolution.
Which by the way I'm I'm M.
interests it's interesting to me
that that we're having a rules
change we're going this route
with whereas whereas clauses and
think I've ever seen that before
but the.
The.
If you look at the the whereas
clause online sixteen.
Yes as well as allowing for the
full functional and or for the
functional presence and full
participation.
Of members by.
Simultaneous remote electronic
means.
To do that.
It's been made clear by this
discussion to do that surely one
hundred percent the decision of
the major the major to go this
route.
The complete virtual session to
do that.
The answer has been for it to be
fair we have to hamper everyone
else so the people are in the
room it's been stated those of
us who who have had no decision
making in any of these rules are
being states being stated that
we want to gain advantage by
just using equipment that we use
forever and that this and that
the senators are going to
continue to use for sixty days
during the session
so I it it's just that.
To me.
Very interesting that that.
We're having this discussion
every single one of these rule
changes that are taking place
even though Republicans are
going are feel compelled and
that is it that is a true
statement we feel compelled
because we can't afford to lose
a vote.
On any vote we can't lose a
members vote on any single vote
that we are going to be
compelled to be in that room
putting ourselves at greater
risk than the majority.
because we because we're there
to do our job even though we
suggested another route which
would be let's do what we need
to do.
And we can take care of the
other things like we did last
year outside of the the session
prior to our out later on in the
year we could always call
ourselves back into executive
session to deal with these
things that are not necessary
that we pass.
Many of these things budget we
have to do but even that we may
have to come back later on in
the year if the if the federal
government doesn't come through
with the the the type of
stimulus we expect them to do
but.
But Representative Snyder.
It appears to me the whole
reason that we are even looking
at.
Changing all of these rules and
particularly not using the
microphones on the floor is so
that we can.
Hamper everyone individually
obviously anyone who's been on
zoom or Skype or any other type
of meeting or communication
knows this is not the preferable
way from the thousands of emails
and and contact with people that
we've had in the lead up to the
session the idea that the public
is somehow going to have a
chance to be equally people
participants as they have been
in the past that's perfectly
fine in a state in in the parts
of the state where there is good
the cell phone access where
there is good
can activity for the internet
but for for the folks
particularly like the folks who
work with the.
the the the filers of the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit.
Who are now asking for us to
find a way to get them broadband
because their kids are being
hurt more by this pandemic and
other kids because there is no
so they don't have good cell
phone service on on tribal lands
they don't have internet
connectivity if there all we're
doing is harming they have to
take extraordinary measures to
participate when the folks in
the in in the metropolitan areas
do not have to so in an effort
to force ourselves into the
sixty day session because we
can't wait.
A month or two to to pass some
of the priorities that that that
the majority has.
We are we are.
Changing everything else.
I and and changing the way the
the the the public can
participate the way that the
lobbyist can participate but if
us being on the floor we are
having to change the way that we
participate so that we can
hamper.
Everyone equally would that be a
fair statement in your mind on
this number.
I would say the answer to that
question jobs.
For that reason I'm gonna send
your amendment because please
remember to go through the chair
thank you madam chair I am madam
chair for this reason I am going
to be supporting this amendment
because as.
Virtually every single one of
these decisions this entire rule
change was not discussed with us
I'm not until almost as soon as
a just outside of the time of us
coming to the session some
discussions were made and even
then some of the rules that we
heard initially that we were
going to have to to follow are
not even part of this package
anymore so
with that madam chair I and I
stand in full support this and
then.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
part part of begin by saying we
the Republicans are not trying
to say that COVID is not a
dangerous disease.
I mean we had to special
sessions and
to my knowledge no one
contracted comment during that
and I'm glad that no one did.
But
My first question is to
Representative Eli and it has to
do with the Landel report and
perhaps I missed over a
paragraph or something but if I
remember that report it did not
address if we were vaccinated
and I think us getting
vaccinated needs to move up the
ladder if you will but that
report did not address that port
is that correct.
Our Madam chair representative
blots corrupted didn't address
that for the very.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Eli I think
that's important because you
know what the we're finding from
the vaccine is you know once we
have our second shot that we're
ninety five percent protect
you know I I'm gonna still
social distance I'm still gonna
wear mask but you know I think
that my constituents have asked
me to be on the for and
Representative down.
And I think that brings up an
important point because I think
my microphone.
Is there voice that they want me
to speak for them on the floor
of the house and I think that it
is important that I have that
option.
Now I think it's also a fair
option if you don't want to come
to the floor and you want to
testified your speak through
your zoom meeting you can do
that.
Our I don't think we have
anything that prohibits anyone.
You know from building up in
your office and coming to the
floor just to go ahead and
debate if you want to do that
and then returning your office.
I think those are viable options
but I think we should go ahead
and be allowed to use our
microphone.
And I would say.
From the way the rules written
you actually give the
leadership.
More voice from what you're
saying then the rest of us
because they'll be speaking from
their microphones.
Anyway thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair to table.
I have a motion to table.
I'll second that motion and
Please call the roll on a table
motion.
Motion to table amendment point
two one nine two three four
point one.
Representative Chasey yes the
table Representative Cook.
No.
Speaker egolf.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo now.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Johnson yes the
table.
Representative Lewis.
Representative masters yes.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative.
Noted table.
Representative night.
The table.
Representative dream.
No the table.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Table.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Representative Lewis.
Yes the table.
Mr Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Chair Eli yes.
The motion to table amendment
point two one nine two three
four point one do past twelve to
six.
Okay
leader Townsend who's next I
guess I'll go next on I'm
probably the only one that will
pass.
That is the two oh two number is
two one nine two three two point
two can.
Everyone have that two one nine
two three two point two go
ahead.
Yes thank you madam chair this
proposal is very simply a and I
go through it is if I it would
be best
On page seven.
Between lines five and six.
with reference to rural eleven
twenty two dash two no bill
shall be read a third time out
of it regular order.
insert at least twenty four
hours before the next calendar
day during which the house will
be in session the speaker shall
notify the house of which bills
on the calendar or speakers
table will be considered for
third reading this rule shall
not apply to the last eight days
of any session.
Now.
Although this is a relatively
short.
the proposed amendment yacht is
everybody want me to go through
this each and every one of them
you have them in front of your
are are we
does everybody have a copy
Environment and and understand
that.
Okay so this bill is Israeli
Madam chair if it is a an issue
that
The money minority is had first
of the last couple of years
notice.
Is paramount to justice.
Notice.
is and then it's a fundamental
element.
in most fairness proceedings and
I think certainly the attorney's
on here today would agree to
that.
Notice.
Gives all parties.
The ability to prepare
themselves and to represent
their constituents.
I would ask that we look at the
S. understand these proceedings
I understand the issues that.
The public will have trying to
participate.
The concerns that they have had
trying to follow legislation as
it goes through.
We both both sides.
Want to make sure that our
constituents are reliably
informed.
I think limiting notice.
Is actually a process to limit
debate in representation.
It causes them the minority to
be behind the eight ball on
almost every occurrence.
When you don't know.
What is coming next and we
operated I think twenty nine
days twenty eight or twenty nine
days of the last session not
knowing what the order of
business laws and third reading
at any one time.
That is.
That is unfair.
And to leave the body
impartially.
Requires fairness fairness comes
with notice and so I would
proposed this amendment for no
other reason than fairness.
It's certainly step questions.
Thank you representative and
just for clarity the amendment
propose proposes the twenty four
hour notice for the floor and
also proposes twenty four hour
notice for committees correct
that is correct okay thank you
and
Representative Eli is this a
friendly amendment.
Thank you madam chair actually a
portion of it is on page two the
new more the third item word
reach on page thirteen one
fifteen strike rules and
certainly there are rural and
strike and then quote eleven
dash twenty dash wanted to quote
is a friendly.
All that it's on from.
And just so that we follow along
can you tell us what
What that specifically refers to
the eleven dash twenty dash one.
Madam chair yes in the drafting
of these we had to suspend that
role a Levin twenty dash one
which is the twenty four hour
rule on the temporary calendar
on the floor on in thinking
about it it makes sense that we
would not suspend that rule so
that on our it would be on the
temporary calendar for twenty
four hours it's reinstating the
rules as we've had in the past.
Thank you I just want to make
sure people were clear clear
what that was
so first I have for questions
leader Stapleton.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Townsend.
I'm.
What I'm trying to understand
from you all do you all request
for the rules what is different
than what we normally do in
committee for example I sit on
the Education Committee the
chairman has always says you
have to give twenty four hour
notice I see the labor committee
the chairman says you always
have to give twenty four hour
notice on the floor of the
golden rod is come out twenty
four hours before we can present
legislation on the floor so what
is different.
I think the difference is in the
proposal from the major
that those twenty four hour
requirements would be stricken
and would no longer be required.
Madam chair may I say something
on that on that on that point so
just to clarify
Representative Townsend.
The.
Part three of your amendment.
What that will do is that will
preserve the twenty four hour
rule on the floor in other words
you cannot have a bill appear on
the floor and act on it.
within twenty four hours so we
are saying yes you're in further
thought.
I don't we don't think we need
to make a change that rule so
we're happy to keep it in place
that's that's number three on
your amendment is friendly at.
And and we will not do this you
know the as we receive committee
reports limited four sessions
are we discuss this this morning
with the chief clerk she will
each day published a temporary
calendar with the notation that
in the bills appearing on the
floor are pending adoption of
the final committee report rifle
the house in any Station
publisher for calendar so to the
public into the members it'll
work it'll be business as usual
committee reports at and outside
of the last the last few days
the session you know we will be
able to outside last eight days
we won't be able to vote on a
bill on the floor within twenty
four hours of its arrival on the
floor without unanimous consent
system.
In the calendars will be
published the floor counter
terracotta will be published as
normal.
And Mister speaker will those up
be addressed in order as they
are on the calendar.
I measure will approach it that
way we done the last.
Four six eight years and that is
your move around from item to
item based on address members in
other states.
So let's just be clear.
On.
The wall full.
Of the major.
How shall it read.
going forward.
If you look at house resolution
one.
Well.
The twenty four hour rule will
be reinstated for both
committees and for is that
correct.
Madam chair I think I think I
should defer to chairman you
like is he's.
He's the author house resolution
one at that it's my
understanding that if we adopt
the third portion.
Of the minority leader's
amendment.
The effect of that is that we
are not suspending the twenty
four hour rule.
Currently house resolution one
proposes to suspend the twenty
four hour rule if we adopt.
The the third section of the
minority leaders proposed
Committee amendment.
The twenty four hour rule will
not be suspended.
Is that correct madam chair and
chair.
Madam chair speaker that's
correct we're not talk about
committee we're talking about
the floor that's what eleven
twenty dash one ghost.
This but Representative doesn't
share.
proposed H. R. one.
met the twenty four hour ruling
Committee says well.
I'm going by memory now please
help me through that
madam chair leader my
recollection is that there is no
twenty four hour rule for
committee that's been a practice
of the committee yeah that's
because the analysts so we're
not doing anything with respect
to that we're not adopting a
rule or suspending roll this is
just the temporary calendar.
I hope that helps.
Yeah I think it does.
Okay.
Thank you Representative Montoya
or Representative is the leader
staples tend to do so have the
for yes thank you so much I'm
miss madam chair and
Representative Townsend
do you still need that
amendment.
yes yes we will need the
amendment in order to strike
the provisions as outlined in
item three.
Would you tell me exactly what
you're provision in item three
says is item three is a section
that the chair of rules thank
that we shouldn't have is that
correct.
Yes sure I'm sorry okay that's.
Let me read to you what items
recess on page thirteen.
Line fifteen.
Strike rules and insert in lieu
there rural and strike.
The reference and eleven dash
twenty dash one which is the
twenty four hour rule.
Correct.
And then the question just so
that I'm clear also leader
Townsend is the rest of the.
Amendment that you're proposing
number one and number two.
A still being requested or are
you dropping those in lieu of
just amendment number three on
this proposed amendment and.
I'm sure I I have further debate
on this.
Yeah I I'll I'll get to I just
want to be clear what were what
were
I'm talking about I think we
should continue to this gas the
amendment as proposed.
Thank you thank you later
Townsend Representative Montoya
oak of leader Stapleton were you
done thank you madam chair
Representative representative
tells and wants the entire thing
and I think part of it is should
be going gone away and the other
part should be discussed and so
I'll just listen thank you
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Townsend
so on item two that.
As I'm hearing and I and and
maybe we get some clarification
before we get out of here is
that that practice in
committees.
To assess many since most of
those committee's require that
amendments
The president at twenty four
hours in advance of the
committee.
That
as I'm hearing and and maybe
this question for representative
Ely.
that practice representatives is
what your understanding would
remain in place is that in
particular sense there are
committees that have a twenty
four hour rule for the
submission of amendments that
you don't see our.
you don't see that changing or
or as without
item two on this amendment that
the that there would be so
discretion by the chair of the
committee to to do something
less than twenty four hours even
though it may be in conflict
with
The ability to be able to get a
mention is is that correct or
maybe you can we say that
Representative Eli.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I'm following limit let
me see if I can.
restated and if I said it wrong
you can tell me the roll
currently as there is no rule
one twenty four hours for
committees that's not going to
change our in this proposal if
yeah and it what would leader
challenges proposing would
change it would put it into
rural the committees have to
have the bills and then twenty
four hours a day the problem
with that the problem with that
is.
More than amplified by this
committee today I literally got
these amendments some of the
within two or not going on my
computer hello you're still on.
I literally got some of these
members within two or three
hours of the meeting I mean I I
guess if we had a rule that
strictly for so twenty four
hours I would have been a
beautician and say well we got
this rule even though I can read
the amendments we can analyze
them quickly let's do the
meeting Alex discussed some you
would be put at a disadvantage
and the public would be put at a
disadvantage because they know
this meeting is here it's being
scheduled so we have to be
flexible with one another so
this is not the time to lay down
rules like committees have to
have it within twenty four hours
they're doing that for their
analysts and for members and I
think that practice will
continue to be followed but I
don't want to tie it chairs
hands one way the other with
some rule that would strictly be
enforced I'd rather leave it up
to the chairs as we have done
throughout my time at the
legislature and seems to work
pretty well because the analyst
review helpful if things come in
at the last minute the chairs of
conscious of that and so we want
to make sure that you know that
continues but we don't have to
do a slide rule that's all I'm
saying but the temporary
calendar that will will be will
not be suspended.
Right thank you for that madam
chair
actually this committee is a
very and and what the
Representative Eli
has just discussed is exactly
why we believe this item to
needs to be put in place is
It doesn't it doesn't say that
it has to be twenty four hours
it says no.
At least twenty four hours.
and literally a day and a half
ago even though we didn't
weren't even sure which version
of the bill we have there there
have to be to version point
fives of this bill and one had a
a one a single word change to it
but even a day and a half ago we
were starting to receive
requests from.
From.
From the chair to for us to
submit our our amendments this
would allow all item two would
allow the
It would allow for a little bit
further time especially since it
this is the the the the rest of
the rules and context of the
rest of the rules bills will be
able to go from committee to
committee.
in the past
you madam chair the bills would
go from committee to the floor
have to sit on the speakers
table for a single day.
And then they can be referred to
committee in a pending on that
committee when they met again
when it could be on the schedule
could be
could be multiple days with this
without putting in at least
twenty four hours which I think
is a very minimum requirement
and especially something that
would be transparency for the
public much less for the
legislators it would allow for
an minimum of twenty four hours
and at previous to the rule
where it would go from committee
to committee which is what we're
what we're gonna see if if this
if the rest of this legislation
is passed
then we you wouldn't you could
potentially not even get twenty
four hours a if you could
potentially go from and mourning
Committee to an afternoon
committee so in reality I don't
think we're we're giving
anything up especially since
these are temporary roles
especially under the conditions
that we have today madam chair
there was a a bill on Tuesday
that came from appropriations
which we you know we allow that
to happen because the bill to
come directly to the committee
we also allow our to the floor
we also allow that in the last
eight days by rural
but during this time in the lead
up to that a minimum of twenty
four hours it is all this this
says so that what happened on
the floor on Tuesday doesn't
happen again which is.
The paper I have to work off of
paper and a majority of of the
folks that that.
Maybe call maybe older than that
and then Representative how your
Martinez who are still very
young you know he's got my hair
style
the majority of folks that are a
little older will work off a
hard copy I write I write all
over my hard copy for notes so
what is happening since these
notes in the it are not going to
be presented to us in committee
they're not gonna be prepared
for us on the floor.
I had to prepare these myself
staff or myself is going to have
to prepare these to look them
over and if there's some sort of
change the committee substitute
a a an amendment trying to read
that.
If it gets upload in a timely
fashion.
The bill right yes on Tuesday
James but straight from the.
Committee to the floor that is a
possibility or from committee to
committee
and when we tried to bring up
some questions try that we
couldn't even debate or that it
there there was a if we if I
would've seen it in advance the
appropriations bill I would have
questioned why we were in the
feet bill giving two hundred
thousand dollars to the courts
it didn't seem to make any sense
to be in the feet bill so
because of the way we're gonna
be handling things because bills
can go from committee to
committee the way this is set I
think I really think twenty four
hours is too low I think it
needs to be at least forty eight
hours.
As to allow it seems to not get
lost in in the process and and
and I I hope I explain that from
a logical standpoint.
Madam chair parted briefly
respond yes go ahead just to
clear up the confusion
the
we take out my hand the bill
will never eight one to go from
committee to committee that's
not how it's set up it will go
from the committee to the floor
where it will be like messaged
out that's the way it's going to
look and then it will be
referred to the next committee
with the motion are out with the
committee report and voted on
subsequently but it will not go
just directly from committee to
committee so I just wanted to
clear up what may be a
misunderstanding thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Ely
that does clear that because
that was not clear prior that
was something that was discussed
in the lead up to Madam chair of
the session
but that being the case of a
madam chair another question for
Representative Eli on this.
in that practice when it goes to
the floor if we leave the third.
Item three.
Of this amendment intact it will
sit on the
House floor for for twenty four
hours before it can be
moved from the house floor
correct sure to third meeting.
To to reading that's correct.
So but but to go to a committee
madam chair it could be referred
right out.
To a C. as in other committee on
the same day if it came in the
morning we have a limited floor
session madam chair then it
could be read out and referred
to a committee in the afternoon
is is that what what you're
saying it could happen.
Correct.
So madam chair that is exactly
why I believe item to still need
to remain intact so that a bill
can't even be reviewed by a
committee by by the next
committee.
before it is passed on I think
this is a minimum as to what
should be done I think once
again I think it should be much
greater than twenty four hours
so I would hope not.
That that we could get this I
think we have to do something so
that so that particular scenario
cannot happen thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Any other.
Questions anyone else wanna.
Why am.
I don't have any other hands up.
So
just so I'm clear leader
Townsend where we stand
right now is this is a partial a
friendly.
amendment of which I think
probably needs to be
separated.
but that's about as close to
being friendly as
as Representative Eli and I can
get this parcel.
chair if I may yeah I move to.
Adopt.
For section three.
Of the amendment.
Can you sections wanted to still
before the committee.
Okay madam chair I have a first
in a second on adopting number
three.
is there any objection we want
to go to roll call.
Any objection saying no
objection
We will adopt number three on
this amendment and the rest the
amendment is still open madam
chair I would move to table
items wanted to from the
amendment.
Thank my doctor motion to to
table items wanted to of this
amendment.
I'll second and it would you
call the rules.
Motion to table sections one
item number one and two on
amendment point two one nine two
three two points to.
Representative Chasey.
Yes to table Representative
Cook.
No.
Speaker it all.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo up.
Representative Gaydos yes to
table.
Representative Johnson yes to
table Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative my S..
And I I believe Representative
masters may have gone to start
his committee
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No table.
Representative night noted
terrible.
Representative Rehm.
No the table.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
the table.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes.
Representative Townsend noted.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo.
Mr Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Chair.
Yes and Gabby I know
Representative my Estes is
trying to get in that's why you
can't vote.
I see him hold on one second.
Representative my S. are you
with us yes thank you thank you
so much I vote yes technical
difficulties policies.
Chair Eli yes.
The motion to table number item
one and item two on amendment
point two one nine two three two
point two do passed at twelve to
five with one excused and just
as a point of clarification
madam chair is it okay if I
submit this Legislative Council
services for them to draft a new
amendment that includes only
item three from this amendment I
think that's an excellent idea
thank you madam chair.
Okay leader Townsend what what
once next.
Public testimony as how we have
it referred to.
It is.
Two one nine one one nine.
I believe the.
Right do you have that in front
of you.
Are you get.
Chair.
Can you read it in place here.
There are like to disconnect
One two one nine one one nine
point one short consideration.
And it
States.
Concerning public testimony on
page ten lines eight and nine
strike at the discretion of the
chair.
madam chair we we believe that
this
I'm.
Language could mean that the
chair would have the discretion
to not have public comment
we believe that current
rules allow for the discretion
of the chair on to how to how
public comment will be handled
so we believe that if that that
this is unnecessary this
language that's in here at the
discretion of the chair is
unnecessary if
the purpose of of the the
current language in the bill is
meant to continue the discretion
that the chair chairs each
committee has.
But this is in there it appears
that the discretion then could
include whether or not public
comment could be at.
Could be denied altogether in
with that madam chair I think
Jim you're gonna you gonna stand
for questions on this one
absolutely I'm sorry I just
couldn't get my hands on it.
Thank you our chairman Elijah is
a friendly amendment.
No madam chair is not.
Right we'll go to
Debate Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the rules committee.
I.
I guess I just object to taking
away the chair discretion to me
it's it's through look like what
we've done where we keep
enacting legislation to remove
two additional discretion.
And I really think that the
chairs.
Positions as
Based on their experience and.
Based on their ability to manage
a situation there are chairs
who.
For example may take public
comment in certain ways and
try not to have a hearing last
twenty four hours no I I just
want to stand in opposition
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair maybe that
it is the city's your
if if Representative Ely were
to.
yeah.
That I'm sorry and it just to
our
answer just a couple questions
as to the purpose of this at the
discretion of the chair and if
he believes that currently.
That the chairs do not have
discretion as to how debate or
how public comment.
is received in each committee it
just seems to me that that that
discretion that Representative
Chasey says she wants to keep it
is in current.
Raul and so I'm I'm trying to
figure out what's the necessity
of this what how is this
different madam chair then how.
The discretion that is currently
held by committee chairs.
Madam chair representative
that's correct that is the
current practice public
participation is at the
discretion of the chair on the
differences is we don't have in
our rules we have the meetings
being open to the public we
don't have anything about public
participation not that I could
find and so what we did was we
wanted to make sure that we put
into our rules what we've always
done to allow public
participation but at the
discretion of the chair and so
all we're doing is is putting
the rules which already in
practice.
Madam chair and and
Representative earlier the
argument was made that sense
current practice was in place we
didn't need to do anything now
will I am hearing the exact
opposite.
Argument I'm but let me ask this
question madam chair this might
be easier my guest a quicker
resolution and and that is a
Representative if you like.
Under this discretion do you
believe that that H. share could
have the discretion to have no
public comment even if it means
are available cell phones
on soon with with this
discretion go all the way to the
point of excluding public
comment Madam chair your under
our rules to ensure is always at
the discretion and so we're not
changing anything and and I I
think what's happened is is that
we just wanted to make sure
given the fact that these
regional meetings that the
chairs felt comfortable that
they have the authority to kind
of governed how those in
meetings would go on I don't
think there's any account to
give the chairs additional
authority it was really to lay
out that they're in charge job
the public comment including the
manner in which done and you
know they want to use chat they
can use chat if they are in
one I have some other way on the
Public communicating these can
be open to that and we wanted
the chairs to feel comfortable
that they would be given that
authority but there isn't any
attempt to give the chairs
additional our powers and if
they wanted to yeah I think the
church probably could say no
public comment I have I
shouldn't Judiciary on state
government that's never happened
I can see what we could thank
the public would be upset most
those committees but you know it
can happen particularly does
happen I think it would during
the last questions session where
the chairs could probably get to
a point where it's like we're
trying to move legislation in
their limiting public comment or
even restricting it to work
movie and I have seen that
happen and that's just part of
the legislative process so yes
teachers have that power.
So so madam chair
Representative Eli.
Absent of rural.
doesn't
House practice come in to play
as to how we of.
Governor cells.
Yes yes except that because this
is new technology we wanted to
assure the public that we are
open to and want to continue
with public participation so
this is an affirmation of those
principles and I do think it's
important to assure the public
that this is not an attempt to
limit public participation and
that's why junior to assure the
public we're not doing that so I
think on a principled ground
it's important to do that so
madam chair that was very very
lawyerly speech about one
hundred does not address the
public at all madam chair this
direct addresses the chair
here's to me what work putting
in place is something that does
give given extra powers to the
chair of each committee and if
all they determined that they're
having trouble with technology
or whatever that they're going
to limit public debate and we've
been told that from the
beginning of us being forced in
the Santa Fe for the next sixty
days that are we that this is
gonna be more transparent than
ever it's going to be more
inclusive than than ever and I
this language
is not transparent this language
is not inclusive I think that
and it we can allow past
practice to rule and I think
that that that is the reason why
we are looking to strike this
language because I think it it
puts it codifies the ability of
the chair to ignore.
The comment if they so choose
thank you madam chair.
Thank you any other comments
there's no I don't see any other
hands.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I think
What we are trying to do there
is just.
To prohibit.
The exclusion of the public
input.
And I I can't think of a time.
in my ten year.
In the capital or a committee
where we have.
excluded.
Public impact.
Maybe there has been one
hundred.
A provisional boat or something
of that
Type in committee but I think it
would be who both of us minority
and majority.
To come together and work to
make sure that the public always
has a place at the table.
And so that.
I think everyone agrees that the
chair should have the ability to
structure.
Debate amendment but but not to
the point of excluding.
People that want to participate
that's that strikes at the core
of you know our ethics some and
our transparency so I would
encourage the members to
support.
This amendment because I think
it's a fair amendment.
And if you will accept a motion
I will move the did pass.
I'm if before accepting that I
have Madam leader Thomson as a
as a committee chair I would
probably echo on a chair Chasey
that to me by removing that
discretion we might not have an
ability to say put a time limit
on
testimony or in other ways
even towards the end of the
session when you're you're
hearing a bill it's been have
it's been through many
committees and you now need to
limit
ten from each side or half an
hour any side or something that
in order to manage and get
through an an agenda out those
are are common practices that
don't happen early in the
session and I would say we don't
happen much in my committee
because of work and health and
Human Services is often the
first place bills heard in the
house and so are we do maybe
take more testimony but I think
you would remove all discretion
by removing that about how
that's handled so that's
That's my comment and and
concerned about removing that
so we have a motion.
SSE motion to table chair.
Thank you all all second that
let's call the roll on a motion
to table.
Sorry.
Motion to table amendment two
one nine one one nine point one.
Representative Chasey yes the
table Representative Cook the
table Representative speaker it
all.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
It
is not Representative Fajardo.
Okay.
Representative Gaydos yes the
table.
Representative Johnson yes the
table.
Representative Louis.
Representative my S..
Representative my S..
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative night more
noticable.
Representative Rehm no to table.
Representative Romero.
Yesterday.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes the table Representative
Stapleton.
Representative Townsend but did
you yes this is Representative
Stapleton okay sorry I had to on
mute.
Yes to table.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative my SS.
Yes to table.
Chair.
Yes.
The motion to table point two
one nine one one nine point one
do pass with two excuse eleven
and bureau and I again.
Hey thank you everyone leader
Townsend we're next.
Yes of I think that of
Representative Montoya is up.
Thank you a new share actually
and
we can excuse a Representative
Cook again he had to to go deal
with us for a bit he sent out
because an emergency family
emergency so I'm gonna be I've
got a couple of minutes and I'm
caring and I'll be carrying.
Representative Cook amendments
as well so those are the number
that I'm going to and I like to
submit for consideration is
point two one nine two three
three point one.
And I believe this is now
Amendment to to house resolution
one.
Committee amendment to that.
House house resolution one.
this
This amendment is to determine.
In a.
Virtual session that when we are
actually convening the
legislature madam chair that to
be compliant or within what are.
Is the the.
Clear reading of the
constitution would be that
when we do can be a four session
that we would be that every
member would be with in the
capitol building complex so the
the exact language would be on
page.
For line seven.
After the word means insert from
within the capital.
And on page eight line nine
after the word means insert from
within the capital purposes.
Just to make sure that as we do
our job that we remain in
compliance with the constitution
had several conversations with
the the.
The bill drafter are to the bill
Representative Eli who's caring
this resolution.
And
It has been suggested to me a
two things and and one of them
is that whereas line on page.
On page two
winds
Starting an online ten.
Saying that the constitution of
New Mexico requires the
legislature to convene at the
seat of government.
On the third Tuesday of every
January and.
R. four section eleven of the
constitution next provides each
house may determine the rules of
its procedures.
That somehow by changing the.
A definition of the word present
in rules.
would somehow change.
Presence and then we in the
poorest sections of this stuff
resolution we've we've been
introduced to a new term which
is functional presence.
and madam chair it's also been
As stated to me by
Representative are masons has
now redefined the presence as
well and madam chair I I believe
that's perfectly fine for the
majority of committees that
needs.
Across the state.
but where it appears by masons
and by rule we're trying to
change.
the meaning of presents which it
it states that when we convene
will be at the seat of the
capitol and so on.
This is also from what I
understand from not just
Republicans in the Senate this
is exactly why
the Senate Democrats are
apparently throwing caution to
the wind as to house Republicans
are and somehow not being
Worried about.
Corona virus but madam chair
yes
would deal with what we believe
house Republicans apparently
what Senate Democrats and Senate
Republicans all believes that
the clear reading of the
constitution is that presence
is is
Is
somehow changed to virtual
presence and and that to me that
that there are several problems
with that.
Someone could be at home madam
chair
at their home in el Paso or at
their home in Albuquerque or you
could be outside of a you can be
a vacation home outside of the
state.
nothing even requiring you to be
in the state of New Mexico to
participate so madam chair that
is the purpose of this is not
just so that folks not not so
that were forcing people into
the building for some sort of
advantage but that so what we're
stating is that we need to be
in.
In the capital to do our work
and and it's been masons of
which has been stated to me is
has redefined.
The the work presents that's
been for committees not for for
other things so with that I
would hope that this is a
friendly amendment as to
protect.
The integrity of the Legislature
to intact protect integrity of
in any the bills it may get
passed out of the house and and
potentially signed by the
governor.
With that there are still
questions thank you
representative and chair Elias
as a friendly amendment it is
not madam chair.
K..
All right we'll go to members of
the committee Representative
ring.
Thank you madam chair and
Thank you Representative Montoya
I think I think this is one of
the most important.
It's that we need to really look
at because
I I think we all would agree
that the constitution applies
during this pandemic.
We can't just set it aside.
So when we look at article four
section one of our constitution
which has been harshly spoken
about it says the legislative
power shall be vested in the
Senate and house of
representatives which shall be
designated the legislature of
the state of New Mexico and show
shall hold its sessions at the
seat of government so what is
the seat of government.
Is that you know what is it well
as able to find a nineteen
seventy one attorney general's
if you're that's kind of on
going.
Us having a remote session.
And I'm gonna read part of it
here it says Attorney General
concluded that neither care nor
proxy voting was constitutional
because the phrase members
present.
As used in the constitution
means physically present.
So I I think that is a real
correct our problem.
And I think that we have to go
ahead and have our session as
the Senate understands that
within the roundhouse I really
believe this means that for but
you know definitely within the
seat of government would be
within the round house.
There's other sections that also
apply to this you know again
we're under article four we look
at section twelve all sessions
of the challenge Shelby public.
If we look at section thirteen
during their attendance at the
section of their respective
houses no immunity for speech
debate from.
White so let's say the you know
for a different location.
I think that we have to be
physically present at the at the
roundhouse
section fourteen.
Neither house show German to any
other place other than where the
two house houses or city or
seated if you will.
So
Section seven also says a
majority of either house shall
constitute a quorum.
But the last number may be
compelled the attendance of the
apps of members that's our call
of the house.
Section seventeen no bill shall
be passed except by a vote of
the majority of the members
present.
Now I agree that you're trying
to go ahead and change the
definition of presents.
But I think that the
constitution and then the
attorney general's opinion or on
point of where we must have our
legislative session.
And with that are you know I'm
going to support this amendment
I think that we have to go ahead
and hold it Santa Fe and in
particular in around house.
And I don't know if anyone has
any comments or questions of me.
thank you Representative the
speaker egolf your next.
I'm sure we reckon through yes
you are now on the table.
Okay
all second would you the call
the roll for a motion to table
madam chair madam chair up there
the there's hands up.
Yeah there so I my apologies we
still have hands up will finish
of that and then take up the
motion Representative leader
Townsend.
Thank you
Madam chair representative your
amendment.
Your amendment flies in the face
of.
Our.
All.
Colleagues in the Senate.
Can you explain to me why.
We might be able to defend.
Ourselves to the public.
That the Senate believes and
acts.
With them there chambers and we
must.
Or we can't do the same thing
then how do I how do we how do
we justify not meeting at the
seat of government.
Madam chair I believe that
question was directed toward
representative Ely and and it's
resolution are not then then
that is present is that correct.
Yeah but but to your point what
I was asking you Representative
a monthly as how would you how
could you help could to the fan
the difference.
Well I've heard it earlier if
you're wanting to be in the
capital of your reckless and
don't believe in masks
I I don't I don't think that was
meant to apply to.
Senate Democrats but that that
in in applying it to house
Republicans I I think by
extension that's what they're
being told because they believe
that they need to be in the
capitol not because of the
flaunting the pandemic.
Mr leader but to good because of
the constitution and from what
I've heard from several several
Senate Democrats is that the
clear reading of the
constitution and beyond that now
as a representative Dreamcast
pointed out the interpretation
of the Attorney General is that
we need to be for the purpose of
convening the legislature for
the purpose of.
passing what legislation on the
floor that we hate that that
that you can't change the work
present and that's what we're
trying to do here
is is change the word present to
functional presents and and that
I think it is is a big flaw in
this in the overall resolution
but what what's what's part of
your question to our
Representative Eli the
attention.
Yes
If I may madam chair
Representative Eli was in this
how can how would you how would
you believe.
We should
I don't know that defender is
the right word but how would we
represent to our constituents
that are appears on the Senate
meet in and the state government
and I've taken the position
that.
That is constitutionally
obliged but we don't I mean
don't you think the two houses
ought to act in concert.
The representative Ely we can't
hear you.
This one can you hear me now yes
okay thank you
my technical experts and.
so
yes first well I can't speak for
the center I don't know the
sense to use body madam chair
leader you know something I
don't know I talked to a couple
members over there who voice
different opinions I get that
but I don't know as a body
they're taking a different
position while I am comfortable
to tell all of you that it is
constitutional for us to be
appearing remotely on and I have
it's a long discussion I'm happy
to share with you before we get
to the house floor but the
bottom line is is that this
record is has had a practice of
deferring to house rules and
House procedures and this is no
different the fact is is that
there is a case many of you know
were only entitled to per diem
under the constitution and yet
we receive retirement if we opt
for
because this report said that
was okay because it wasn't
compensation which just points
out that not withstanding clear
language in the constitution
Supreme Court will bend over
backwards to accommodate the
house in this case all all not
only is not just Mason secretary
starts the analysis the fact is
is
it all it our purpose
everything that we are doing and
I'm just reading from my own
notes all of the infrastructure
is in Santa Fe the members can
be seen simultaneously the rules
are amended here at all
everything should be reflected
in journal is enrolling grossing
that provides with the bills
passed signed by officer signed
by the governor all of it is
being done in Santa Fe on the
fact is is that the Supreme
Court has acted in a similar
fashion if you would look at the
constitution regarding the
Supreme Court you will see that
they are to meet at the seat of
government at all times and yet
the Supreme Court has had
virtually.
Meetings repeatedly not all of
their members are in Santa Fe we
are all trying to work through
this pandemic and I think I'm on
solid ground in saying to you we
do not have to have our members
sitting isolated in Santa Fe
during the course of the session
because the constitution
requires it does not that is not
the language the constitution
and I am happy to share with all
the members after this meeting
our including the minority my
complete analysis on that but I
am comfortable that we're in
good grant of we do not all have
to be in the seat of government
we certainly don't have to be at
the capitol as is are suggested
in the motion it would mean you
could never remodeled the
building so I I I can't imagine
that the members would be now
but we don't have to meet in
Santa Fe and so are I want to
assure the members of this
committee that we are on solid
ground in saying that our
members the majority can do not
have to be methadone thank you
madam chair then and one of
comment on this point go ahead.
Madam article four section one
of the constitution.
States that we quote show hold
sessions at the seat of
government.
Close quote.
It does not say that members
must be present in fact we're
president isn't even in the
constitution.
On language that is even more
restrictive than that as
Representative Eli mentioned the
Supreme Court has been holding
hearings with the justices of
the Supreme Court.
All over the state.
one justice is in Santa Fe.
And we are going to be
operating.
I will be in the chamber
conducting are presiding over
the each session we will have
floor leaders here now we will
be holding our sessions at the
seat of government.
It talks about the legislature
holding sessions it is not talk
about members of the legislature
building within the city limits.
And even in point of fact madam
chair and we had all I think all
of one of the members of the
house we're in Santa Fe when we
adopted the rules to allow us to
go to remote participation
further strengthening the
position that we take and
finally madam chair to the
point.
I don't believe that any I don't
know who would have standing to
make a claim that anything we
do is constitutional but also I
don't know what the damages he.
Madam and so I think the this is
a I H. is the complete.
Red herring.
The strawman argument.
She realized analysis I think is
thorough and correct and I think
you'll like some of the other
amendments were looking at this
is really elevating.
Style over substance.
It be nice if we could.
It is some of the substantive
issues session thank you.
Thank you and Representative
Rehm you have also had on that
point.
Thank you madam chair and this
question is more to
Representative Eli can you
direct me where in the
constitution it says the Supreme
Court must be present our
president is something that I
was detail in and several other
sections here a minute ago.
On.
Actually our Representative Rehm
what I said was it's the same
language our with with the
exception
so our look our language in
article four section one
pertaining the constitution says
and I'll just quote the last
portion of it says that we shall
hold its sessions meaning the
legislature the seat of
government article six section
seven for the Supreme Court says
the Supreme Court it also has
the language a short term hold
session of the sea a government
but it adds language for the
Supreme Court where it says
shall at all times be in session
at the seat of government is the
speakers just pointed out many
of you know this record is held
our hearings in Roswell in
Albuquerque if if they were not
allowed to do that
then on I I mean having done
that they clearly you're not
reading constitution is
requiring the presence of its
members are in Santa Fe if they
did I frankly their language is
more restrictive than ours the
constitution because it says at
all times and we don't have
that.
Representative Eli I think that
the constitution is real clear
about the seat of government and
what presents beans we also have
an attorney general's opinion
that's detailing that the the
only way you can be there is
physically be there physical
presence and I don't know how
you get around that you do I
mean I I hear what you're saying
but I don't know how you
actually get around that.
I'm Madam chair representative
Rehm I don't have that Attorney
General opinion frenemy but I as
somebody once famously said the
attorney general's entitled to
his opinion the fact is is that
we're facing a pandemic we're it
is dangerous for members to be
away from their homes out of
their homes in the seat of
government that's what we're
trying to avoid and now we have
access to technology that will
allow the public to CS not just
hear us but see us in action in
real time simultaneously doing
the people's business there's
nothing in the constitution
requires a majority of our
members to be present and
certainly was soon the public
can see what we're doing so I
have no problems telling you
that if you are reading the
Attorney General opinion is
applying today and the pandemic
and the technology that we now
have I don't think the Attorney
General at that time was Senate
president and I can't see it
happening so I I just I'm not
relying on an Attorney General
opinion I'm looking at the
spring court and nations and
it's a constitutional Mexico.
Madam chair I'm.
Representative Townsend.
Yes
Representative replied do you
believe that the speaker and the
leaders must be present in order
to convene and to do the
business of the house or is that
just.
it is that two of.
Able to be done remotely.
On madam chair we are I I
haven't analyzed and I really
haven't I don't think it hurts
that they do it because it
supports the argument that the
people's work is being done in
Santa Fe but is that required I
don't think so but I really
haven't done that kind of
analysis I've done it based on
house resolution one and how
were operating and I haven't
heard stood out to be able to
answer that question.
Okay we have one other before we
take up the motion
Representative night for.
Thank you madam chair
Being a a member who doesn't get
to me real fast this issue may
not affect me in particular but
it does seem to me that the
issue is.
Important for us as a body and
important for us individually to
have every assurance that the
actions that we take up.
Are done in accordance with the
provisions of the constitution
and and I think the issues
raised have highlighted.
Some differences of opinions
from from scholarly lawyers.
And I certainly could could
weigh in with with my opinions
and and read the sign language
are but staff to latter is.
It's an issue.
And it seems to me that that we
ought to at least secure our.
One of those opinions that
representative from Santa Fe
County points out from the
Attorney General it may be an
opinion but at least it's more
of an opinion that hold some
weight or at least more weight
than that and
my opinion would be and
it leaks would give us some
guidance on that point because
it's obvious that there is a
difference of opinion between
the two chambers yeah on this
very issue.
And so I thank you
if we.
Embark on a course that.
Is.
Allowing promoting
Well people to participate in
the proceedings and vote.
Somewhere offsite out of the
capitol complex I would inside
roundhouse because I'm out of
the annex and I consider that
part of the capitol with the
capitol complex I think it
behooves us to.
Formally asked for an upper
Attorney General opinion and and
see if the patient year of our
some advice to us are fairly
early on in the session.
That way if if the opinion of
the Attorney General is such
that the.
That is not our proper.
Then we can redo whatever votes
were taken but did not follow
that prescription.
If we do not
get that opinion and what we do
that then.
We are likely to see some.
Some issues arise from people
who may not white particular of
bills I get past them and would
challenge the efficacy of of
those are.
Statutes so this this issue
Yes an important one contract
is critically important in my
mind and I would just maybe
encourage leadership to to
make some enquiring of the
Attorney General and and see
where we can go our guests and
alternative would be maybe
save you can get a declaratory
ruling from the programs for in
court but I don't know if that's
going to work in light of what
they're doing right now and I
agree with the the gentleman
from Santa Fe County that are
the spring court doesn't
necessarily look at the words
that we write and statutes
restaurant Gordon necessarily
look at the words written in the
constitution but I will remind
everyone they're supposed to
thank you.
madam chair to the to the to
that discussion this represents
sort and I understand it's a
motion on the table
to what Representative Nighbor
just discussed
Earlier
This speaker Egolf mentioned
that.
Who would have damages and who
would have standing and quite
frankly any one if we pass
legislation.
that they believe is harmful to
themselves.
Our I believe would have the
ability to claim damages and
standing before a to to bring a
case if they believe that this
is a.
A.
That done in a way that they
were hampered which one agree
another I would imagine the very
first thing that would be
brought up was their ability to
interact with the Legislature
advance so I understand there's
a there's a motion on the table
but I I do believe that.
This is risky at the very least
if there is a potential question
the a a a an attorney general
opinion that is sitting out
there and that it is clear that
the US Senate.
Is acting.
As to what their belief is
I I think it's risky for us to
proceed where there could still
be social distancing people
could be in their offices they
can be separated from one
another
it was not a more hazardous than
it is for us to go to the
grocery store or to go anywhere
else and this is our
constitutional duty so
On top of that I'm just
questioning the whole idea of of
an entire.
Session what we have limited
four sessions maybe numbers
aren't even attending
as to the idea of of we're
paying per diem for people to do
this and per diem should be for
the expense of.
As it were for room and board
for the cost of meals and
lodging and we're we're doing
this in a way where some we'll
be using exactly for that and
others I potentially be able to
the
Back at their home maybe not
even say thank you madam chair.
Thank you we have a motion on
the table table Sir.
and yeah I mean.
Yeah thank you madam chair I'm
sorry at a couple other the that
I want to ask Representative A.
B. Y. so this is an opinion just
a month or two ago from the U.
S. Supreme Court and I dealt
with opening up of churches send
a kind of paraphrase it it says
from justice Gorsuch.
It is time past time to make a
claim that while the pandemic
poses many grave challenges
there is no world in which the
constitution R. O. rates color
coded.
executives to re open liquor
stores and bike shop soccer
practice gyms fitness centers
the Senate larger out of box out
of larger out of state box
stores.
And the Senate and not this
house and it was referring to
the church if if that's from the
US Supreme Court how do we
answer closing our legislature.
I'm.
Thank you.
I I I I again I.
Yeah let's
let's call the roll for a motion
to madam chair.
Point of order I eat you know I
have the floor another person
may hadn't came in and began
talking I didn't want to
interrupt
speaker to our Representative
Townsend I just want to follow
up on what I at.
Representative Rehm it if you
can
finish up quickly yeah and you
had to help you with that the
floor and we have a table our
motion pending.
Thank you madam chair I have
that question and I ask
Representative Eli how we
respond to it and then I have
one other case I want us how we
respond and Representative that
has nothing to do directly with
the motion those before us and
so it's a whole different case
and circumstances and so I think
we should move on you have one
last point.
Madam chair I think the other
part of our rules is is that a
tabling motion will not cut off
debate.
Continue
it but we're we're debating this
amendment so.
Other point.
Yes I the one I I was so I don't
have to read it again those
representative Ely understand
what I just read read to him.
Representative Representative
This is we are having a hearing
on this amendment and what you
have raises a question is not on
this amendment so if we could
move on please.
Madam chair I think it is the
next one is a actually
ruling in nineteen thirty two
out of Utah on the constitution.
Do you want to discuss that or
do we're not distressing the
constitution of the New Mexico
we're discussing the
constitution of New Mexico in
this particular amendment.
Madam chair does representative
Ely want to respond to just a
score ships ruling on the
church's.
Madam chair I'm happy to if you
wanted to I can give a quick
response go ahead we have a
federal system Madam chair
representative bringing US
Supreme Court is not going to
govern the rules the New Mexico
state house representatives
that's our state Supreme Court
that's the authorities so that
decision has nothing to do with
us nor would a decision Utah so
they just have nothing to do
with what we're doing in this
case presents or not.
Well I I mentioned that if we
took the case to the New Mexico
Supreme Court appeal that it
would ultimately end up at the
Supreme Court but let me move on
so with out of Utah in nineteen
thirty two they determined
constitutions did not change
with the varying tides of public
opinion and the desire the will
of the people there and recorded
is the same and flexible law
until changed by their own the
liberty of actions and therefore
the court should never allow a
change in public sentiment to
influence them and giving a
comes constructs shin to a
written constitution not
warranted by its intention of
its founders.
I don't know if you have a
comment on that or not
Representative the law.
Madam chair representative again
you taught us having to do with
us and and the fact is is that
our Supreme Court has really
been very accommodating towards
house rules in house procedures
it's why the Supreme Court is
allowing many of these members
to collect retirement even
though the constitution clearly
says just per diem it's in there
and so I don't want to tell you
but the practice of the spring
court as bended referred to our
legislative bodies on matter
procedure I think will be it
will not be any different with
regard to are conducting our
businesses to seek government
under house resolution one.
Thank you madam chair for
allowing me to finish my
questions.
Thank you
I think believe now we can go to
our roll call on a motion to
table.
And I'm sorry madam chair who is
the second for the motion by a
second.
Thank you.
Table amendment point two one
nine two three three point one
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey is excused
thank you Representative Cook
excused as well correct.
Speaker and all.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo out.
Committee thank you
representative neighbor.
So I Representative Gaydos yes
thank you.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative my ****.
I believe he's also on another
committee.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
But noted table.
Representative night noted
double.
Representative Rehm.
Table.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes the table.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Townsend noted.
Representative my **** yes.
Still checking that no one else
popped in okay Mr Armstrong.
Yes the table.
Chair Eli yes.
The motion to table enrollment
point two one nine two three
three point one do you pass
with.
Three excuse eleven in favor and
four against.
Thank you and our Representative
Montoya what one is next.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to submit
Point two one nine.
Two three six point one.
Sh the second proposed amendment
to.
House resolution one in roles.
Committee this.
Amendment madam chair just it is
it
strikes.
A limited four sessions.
From the resolution and I would
like to.
Present this for consideration
however prior to I would like to
ask Representative Eli.
just it just maybe a couple of
questions as to and maybe they
make this a amendment not
necessary if I'm able to get
some understanding of this but
madam chair I'd like to ask
Representative Ely couple
questions that's if that would
be appropriate.
Representative Eli.
One of the so far madam chair on
the is not friendly but I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Eli for the
purposes of
The lines that we're looking to
strike on page five one
seventeen to twenty five in page
six lines one to twenty four
establishing limited four
sessions and how they were to be
handled and who is to be there
How
Representative Eli is a quorum.
To be determined with a limited
floor session.
Madam chair representative
that's an excellent question the
speaker will still be required
to have a quorum and so thirty
six and so the court will still
be required so that we what I
was envisioning as is the
speaker was called the call the
body into session for the
limited for session there would
be a quorum established and then
on you know as members wanted to
observe or you know whatever or
be a committee and observed the
same time and multi task they
could do that but with the
assurance that wall things were
going on for both the majority
and the majority that there
wouldn't be any substantive
motions so but it's an excellent
question is one that we actually
had talked about but it Corman
thirty six would be required.
Thank you madam chair to that
point on the previous vote.
Representative my asked us
was in another committee.
And the came back to vote
apparently I'm I'm I'm just
trying to figure out how once
again do we figure simultaneous
presence to maintain a court.
No
chair.
Representative I'm not really
trying to follow your question
at any point there can be a what
I would describe as a virtual
call the house which is in house
resolution one and so you would
determine that the way we would
in order session except it's not
a call of the houses we
considered in the past from
people there where the surgeon
arms goes and gathers everybody
up locks the door they call to
make sure this court there's not
a quorum Dan business would stop
people could then
let the sergeant ours the
speaker however we have a the
roll know that they are pressed
so that's you would establish it
through virtual means.
So madam chair and
representative Ely as I'm
looking at my screen right now
with the right the Brady bunch
display.
I'm looking and I'm seeing uh at
least three.
Actually it's just changed.
There's one.
Just a picture of someone.
there are several other we're it
has a name but we have no idea
whether they're there or not I
think everybody during zoom this
year has attended a meeting
where they had to go to the door
to talk to someone I think I've
heard that I've got a plumber
here
And or that type of thing and
it's immediate what we once
again over the question of of
presents.
Presence is very key to quorum.
And and so.
That's the problem that that
we're having on on our side of
the aisle is we're we're trying
to say and by and by the way it
says sign in in the in the.
Resolution assessed
simultaneous.
President.
And and I and I just think that
that is really
or it's fairly abuse as it is in
the capital were folks will
wander out of the floor and.
and had had offsite and then
rush back in but this literally
depending on how many computer
screens you have.
You're able to be in more than
one place at one time visually.
And that's a.
I I think that's one of the main
problems that we have so I you
did answer my questions I I
thank you for that
Representative Eli so I am going
to go forward with this.
amendment and and and madam
chair the just prefects
explanation of this amendment is
to do away with.
Page five
line seventeen to twenty five in
on page six of the resolution
lines one through twenty four
which.
determine in.
A limited floor session can go
forward
and and that's I I believe a
problem because of these very.
Questions of presence
and quorum and I and I just in
in an effort to to go virtual we
are we are having to ignore so
much of what a legislator is
supposed to be doing and
in my mind maybe L. a little
less
of an issue maybe not to the
same degree of an issue in the
committee but whereas the
constitution has as as we
mentioned in in the last
amendment has more of a approved
prescription of of presence I
think this is a bigger problem
so I know how much of the debate
we need to have on this but I do
have the the minority at this
point I would like to propose
the language in the resolution
that allows for limited four
sessions.
And and and particularly for the
reasons I just described thank
you madam chair.
And I move the amendment for
discussion.
The table okay we have a motion
to table
Representative Rehm is your hand
up on this or from the previous
amendment.
Madam chair against not up on
this thank you okay take it down
thank you leader Stapleton.
Second the speaker moved to
table I seconded.
Thank you I have no other hands
raves would you call rules for
motion to table.
Thank you madam chair and I know
that the second was
Representative Stapleton I'm
sorry who is the.
Speaker thank you speaker if all
okay.
The motion to table amendment
point two one nine two three six
point one Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Speaker egolf yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative my asked us yes
please.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yet.
Representative Montoya.
No to table.
Representative night.
table.
Senator Rehm noted table.
Representative Romero.
Yes to table.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
We will.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Townsend.
Noted cable.
And I just want to confirm I
have Representative Chasey cook
and the heart of excuse for the.
Thank you thanks Armstrong yes
the table.
Chair Eli yes.
The motion to table amendment
point two one nine two three six
point one it does pass with
three excuse eleven in favor and
four against.
Thank you okay Representative
Montoya we have two more to go
which ones next thank you madam
chair
I would like to submit for
consideration
the to to number on on this
amendment is.
But two one nine two five six
point one.
And madam chair.
Is one of the.
Maybe one of the other
amendments would have passed I
wouldn't be bringing this one on
but in light of those not
passing yes amendment adds
And such.
Two presents to the word present
in front of it on page four line
seven after as in Burke and
inserts the word visually.
Sliq goes to the point as I
mentioned earlier that
We could have a an icon a
picture of someone we could have
just the name of someone showing
up on the board and we're
considering that to be presents
that is a very very very very
low standard as a matter of fact
we're saying by phone as well
but
everyone who has kids at home.
During the COVID and are
attending school.
my my six year old grandson.
Has the minimum requirement of
having to be on the screen and
it not be a still shot at the
moment he moves out of the
screen he is considered to not
be present for the for the sake
of attending the elementary
school kindergartners have that
same have that same standard.
Adding the word visually here
for the work present would mean
that
It wouldn't keep someone from
having to computer screens in
front of them and being on both
computer screens but it would
mean that they were in their
chair and listening and to the
point of debate this is where
this really goes especially for
the minority we we don't have
the numbers I can't quit your
members to vote in a certain way
all we have is the ability to
debate and president point.
And when we are.
Trying to debate and I can't
even tell if there's people
there that as a whole point of a
of even calling Corman to
question and in reality I don't
see any changes here that would
allow a quorum to be called more
than once an hour.
so and and call that quorum
somebody could easily just a
return back to the room get a
tax table you they're calling a
quorum and you can just click
back on again even though you're
attending another meeting you're
sitting in a in a
Other committee hearing rather
than paying attention that is a
real disservice madam chair to
the voters and the constituents
that we all represent this is a
major the matter of fairness
this is not even something that.
is is particularly something
that
Just harms the minority but this
is something that madam chair
harms the public because
something that's important to
even though may not be portent
to some members of this
legislature there are definitely
members in our communities that
are expecting us to take their
concerns seriously and by just
leaving a picture of yourself up
Closing the screen so so you can
leave the room temporarily or go
do something else I think that
is a is it is a grave disservice
to our constituents and I don't
think if if if our if they if my
six year old grandson can do
this I I would think that the
members of the legislature could
also do this so I I would hope
that I could gain at least some
support folks who were I know we
have legislators who have kids
and grandchildren
At home and are attending school
and they know very well this is
the standard for for school
children so I would hope.
I'm not not because of the
minority because of the
constituents we all represent
that this is something we can
all support thank you madam
chair.
Questions thank you
Speaker egolf the table.
The motion tabled our
leader stable ten second.
Thank you
I I don't see any others but I
would like to say
Representative when we're on the
floor of the house we are often
people move to go to the
bathroom going to lounge moved
around and are listening to the
session and come back in when
it's time to vote or they're up
for speaking it doesn't mean we
aren't paying attention or not
listening and I would say around
my house I can put in my your
budget and get up and move
around my house and
and go get a drink of water
whatever you don't need to see
view of me walking around the
house but does not mean that I'm
not listening and paying full
attention I think it's pretty
equivalent so.
I just one last small point and
before we go to grow
that there is one more point I
didn't bring up and that is the
point of voter of a of of our
and integrity of the vote.
Floor
there's nothing that allows a me
to tell member I I can't make it
over there in time press my
button.
there's nothing without seeing
the person on the video stream
that would prevent someone else
to vote for them because there's
just a button that we're gonna
be using at home and and with
that a still shot
or a blank page as we're seeing
right now many
there is nothing that protects
the sanctity of the vote and I
think this year of all years the
same to the well is something
that we should be making sure
that there is not even a a a
can't of impropriety thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair.
I just.
Madam chair my question really
ought to go to the speaker
because.
It's ultimately of.
But it's going to have to make
this determination but.
Yes.
What we when we look at the
board which we see folks and
particularly.
A leading up to above.
How how can we.
Have some assurance that it's
only members voting for that are
are present the doing that the.
you know.
There's a look little bit of
concern there because on the
floor of the house of course we
checked everybody out our people
there are are the sergeant of
arms staff and the members and
was.
It was told to me early on you
don't ever touch anybody else's
buttons for any reason and
Howard how are we going to.
Be able to monitor that are
specifically house speaker going
to be able to to.
Have some level of assurance in
that regard.
Chair for me the you have to
have a username and password as
well as VPN access from whatever
device you're using to get into
the system where our virtual
voting.
System is going to work so.
And you know I and I am.
I don't think that at thank you
meeting to accuse your
colleagues of wanting to do
something fraudulent
but I I have fees in confidence
in all seventy members of the
house to make sure that they're
the ones that are pushing the
buttons to vote.
We have zero evidence that
anyone would try to vote in any
other way I can't even imagine
why someone would want to allow
that to happen.
Madam chair and Mr speaker I'll
see I know that there and I'm
certain that there are quite a
few members on both sides of the
aisle who've let their grand
children push their buttons to
the so I do know that that has
happened I've seen it
Republicans and Democrats my
daughter push my button one time
for me on something that we're
putting on for the house so.
What we we weren't hold off
incomes from floor ever
interested that was okay
issues were resolved reach you
time I just this is a problem is
a password protected system it's
doubling cryptid.
because you're the VPN which
gives end to end encryption as
well as the secure website
within the.
Virtual private network council
I think we're you creep will
protect.
Thank you thank go ahead.
Madam chair of certainly I was
not to suggesting that folks
would do that I'm just asking.
If because it seems like this
visual
The member would win.
Some are level of assurance
there that would not be present
if we don't have that visual of.
Certainly.
I don't know how else to say it
but I think that's what this
are.
This amendment does is try to
give us all some assurance that
the.
The members that are we saying
there photos on the board of
their present their lives it's
not just a photograph for our
you know some members
I mean I I sent my office
listening to the debate night
lunch.
Here the today already.
But it will be possible for me
to have have just walked out of
the room and not listen to
Representative Brett to debate
and not actually been president
and that visual confirmation let
us know who's actually there and
who's not so I would support the
and movement
but that Sir those are certainly
here to to considerations that I
think this goes to thank you.
Thank you Representative I was
gonna say when my kids were
little they all pushed my
buttons a lot only not on the
floor of the house
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I I think
on this
Integrity of the vote I think
there's one other thing and I
think that what we should do is
we should have if you're gonna
vote remotely you go ahead and
say like in the first special
session the location you're
voting from I think that's very
important.
Anyway that's my comment thank
you thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair you know I
I I work day for into the
session and I just like a little
disheartened by
You know assuming the worst in
people
I prior to the pandemic I used
the same platform maybe once I
hated I dislike it.
My job is about meeting with
people shaking their hand given
in hog stricken a couple coffee
drinking a beer if it's later in
the day having lunch together
can do that anymore so I've
actually gone pretty good at the
end zoom I can tell you that
there are different we in
Bayern's that I mean working
environments primarily where you
know folks will say you know
it's it's protocol if we're
doing a training for me to be
able to see you and not have a
picture or sort of go off and go
off camera completely I told the
case by case basis now I will
tell you this much I've been
registered for six years
and nobody on here with a
straight face can say that
member sometimes.
float over to the job.
During its three our floor
debate of both parties.
Nobody can say with a straight
face of folks are going to learn
how to maybe take a little nap
because we've had a long three
dates.
Nobody says of folks you know
don't go out to their office may
be there a little bit sick of
being around sixty nine other
people plus staff they're gonna
go take a little break.
I say that because we are acting
like somehow the folks who are
not on camera are just.
Doing the possible worst.
And not paying attention to the
to the preceding I like the
chairwoman having these air
pockets that I can I've gone to
the bathroom a couple times I've
gone to get snacks a couple
times a couple times I took
myself off camera others I
didn't you see me walking away.
We're arguing over something
that quite frankly is just
completely relevant
and it is heartening we're going
down that road four days into
the session folks let's elevate
the debate.
If any of you need to go off
camera because it's gonna lead
you've got little kids like I do
and you don't want to see my
little kid come over here and
get all over me and you know me
and kissed me and some other me
and I smother him back it's okay
for me to not make care more.
Chance to so I'm probably paying
attention.
You know what often times every
once in awhile maybe I wanted a
little bit because my gosh the
debate sometimes can get a
little bit you know.
discarding so let's stop
assuming the worst.
And that is why I'm gonna vote
against this amendment madam
chair thank you madam chair
brief response and I'm done just
a brief response thank you go
ahead thank you madam chair
Even when not folks are in the
room I I know folks that I know
sometimes that they're not
listening to minority today
because you can tell by the
vote.
We just present such a clear.
Presentation with such logic and
then don't get able to anyway
it's it's even harder madam
chair to get the votes of the
opposition if they're not.
thank you madam and and I think
the one thing that I've seen in
soon much more than at the
capitol is even if I leave the
floor because of my position I
go to my office and have a
conversation but I have the
volume up.
and listening to what's
happening on the floor and the
moment that something is is
about to break I I you see
members running back in.
With this all you have to get a
text from someone else that it's
time to vote this is that how
you vote and the and I and I I
just think for the purpose of
what we do.
This debate issues I think it's
a very important for
The New Mexico voters are New
Mexico constituents to know that
we're engaged and I and I when I
see this in zoom and anyone
who's experienced soon and as
soon fatigue knows that
The ability to now is a lot
easier when you're not there
some thank you madam chair.
Thank you our representative up
at let's
later Stapleton's call for the
question thank you and we're
going to do that right now
again the would you please call
the roll for a motion to table
I think were on point two one
nine two five six point one.
Thank you madam chair motion to
table the amendment mentioned by
madam chair Representative
Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Speaker eagle.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo out.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
And I'm sorry Representative
Johnson did you pass or say yes.
I said yes yes cable thank you
thank you Representative my
Estes yes.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
The table.
Representative night Burt
noticable.
Representative Rehm noted table.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
the table.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Mr Armstrong.
Yes the table.
Chair you might yes.
The motion to table amendment
point two one nine two five six
point one passes with two excuse
eleven in favor and I against.
Okay thank you and the last
amendment Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair I am.
I'm gonna ask a once again our
Representative Representative I
a couple of questions before I
even
submit this amendment to see if
it's even necessary
so thank you madam chair
Representative you lie she can
turn with me
on the resolution to page four.
Line north winds nine to
seventeen.
Seven dash one dash to.
There's a question as he do you
the the use of the word may.
For the purpose of being
considered president the
speaker.
Majority floor leader in
minority floor leader may be
physically present in the
chambers during any regular
limited for session and the
members of the appropriations
and finance committee may be
physically press president and
regulations at regularly
scheduled hearings provided that
the proper social distinction
distinction measures and.
Representative protocols are in
place.
I'm not sure why that's even
necessary.
Aren't they already are allowed
aren't members already allowed
to be on the floor aren't
members if the chair of a
committee or decide to do so
allowed in a hybrid type of
setting to be able to do that
I'm I'm not sure as to the
necessity of line of the the
seven dash one dash to I mean
unless.
maybe in the interpretation or
it says may that we're presuming
that the others may not and and
an earlier discussion that's not
what I've heard is that to other
members may not be present on
the floor of the house.
Okay could you explain that to
me as as for the nexus necessity
of seven dash one dash two on
Madam chair representative this
was to make clear who could be
president is that what course is
described physically as opposed
to what and so we want to make
clear that that included not
just in speaker Jordan New
Orleans also.
It's a members the
appropriations and finance
committee because they have so
much great work that
we thought it was appropriate
for both sides that they be
allowed to be physically present
supposed to discourage.
So Madam chair representative
Ely does that mean others cannot
be present.
Madam chair representative it
doesn't mean they can't be
physically present it means for
purposes of conducting business
on other members have to be are
are using the computer or their
iPad or other electronic devices
your telephone.
Madam chair
representative Ely but that's
not what it says it doesn't say.
Thank you Mr president and they
have to be using those devices
it says that they may be
physically present and and
that's my problem is if if what
we're saying is may are we
tacitly saying everyone else may
not.
That madam chair
Representative may just be that
it's getting late I'm I'm maybe
I'm just explaining it well what
we're saying is is for those
people listed in rural seven one
two they can be physically
present and participate
physically is supposed to work
reflect everyone else is going
to have to be virtually present
that doesn't mean they can't
come and be there but they won't
be counted
for purposes of presents unless
they're on the computer or iPad
electronic or telephone device I
don't know how else to make it
clear to you we're just trying
to lay out what what the
exception to that section to
physically present these members
may be physically present for
purposes of defining them as
president and participating in
the deliberations of the
committee so for.
Sure if I can I'm going to maybe
explain the thank you another
aspect of this imagine when we
do a roll call at the beginning
of the session.
The the floor leaders
can it be considered you know if
there are we can push the button
on the desk
and they will be considered
president.
For the purposes of corn by
being there in person they need
not demonstrate their presence
by virtual participation other
members as we've been saying all
along will be participating in
the debate.
Through an electronic device
whether they're physically
present on the floor or not.
So the the word president in
this rule has the defined
meeting within the rules as
president for the purposes of
establishing a quorum were
present for the purposes of
participating in a debate were
voting.
There's no restriction and we
said all along that
there did no one has the power
or the authority to are a member
of the house from being
physically on the floor of the
house.
Thank you madam chair and Mister
speaker so just once again point
of clarity and I probably will
not be submitting this amendment
at this point.
There is nothing in seven dash
one dash two that would be
interpreted as.
When one.
From being.
President in body.
But they would have to be
virtually.
On a device but nothing would
keep them from being in the room
is that correct Mr speaker.
Madam chair that is one hundred
percent correct okay madam chair
I will not be submitting.
Amendment.
Madam chair I would do passing
house resolution one as amended.
Thank you I have a due pass all.
Okay we got lots of seconds.
we want to call the roll please.
At.
Okay.
And I'm sorry madam chair as a
point of clarification
The first and the second came
from.
On the speaker move to that
first and what else did the
second everyone else.
You can put that later
Stapleton.
Thank you.
I think Representative never
seconded.
I don't even know what we
seconded.
Get into do you pass.
R. one as amended.
Representative Chasey.
Representative.
Representative Cook.
Speaker egolf.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo now.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative my **** yes.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative on.
No.
Representative night very well.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Okay.
I'm sorry Representative right.
No ma'am do not.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes as amendment.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Townsend nope.
Vice chair Armstrong.
Yes thank you so chair Eli yes.
The motion to pass house
resolution one as amended do you
pass with two excused eleven in
favor and I against.
Why was the.
All right thank you
Thank you members for
The debate today and I believe
with that we are adjourned.
Thank you.
We just during the meeting.
Thank you.
Hi.
