We will we left off on house
bill two fifty four
for them to get some amendments
so Representative Senator
I got a text from representative
Patricia Roybal Caballero and
she said I need to be let in his
the panelists oh okay.
You know do not okay.
Okay there she is okay.
Representative whenever you're
ready go ahead.
Thank you sorry I was waiting
and waiting and taxing everybody
so excuse all the text that I
sent everybody
thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
we're here upon back again upon
instruction to introduce some
changes amendments
and I think actually a
substitute that Senator prepared
and I'll go ahead and on if I
may madam chair turn it over to
Senator Sedillo Lopez to make
the presentation go ahead
signature thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero
so we took very seriously wanted
I'd really thank everyone for
the discussion last time we took
the the F. I. R. and the points
that were made in the discussion
very seriously and we have a
committee substitute is your
process to
To just present the substituting
and somebody make a do not pass
motion in the I'm not sure what
your processes yeah I I will
move the substitute for
discussion thank you can go
ahead thank you so the committee
substitute address some of the
ambiguities and then I also need
to explain things that the FIR
mentions that we didn't change
and why so for example the FIR
suggested is necessary to
conduct an investigation to
determine what great bodily harm
or death was used we did not
change that because the issue is
not whether the whether it
happened
law enforcement conduct
resulting in great bodily harm
or death is a condition priest
preceded the triggers a
procedure set forth so you don't
have to prove that all you have
to do is alleged that those of
you in one school might remember
you know that the burden of
proof and an allegation and then
the burden you know the burden
of pleading and the burden of
persuasion all you need is the
leading right you just need to
make the the finding and so that
was not change the allegations
trigger the investigation and
that just happens every time the
police investigate every single
shooting and it's so it's so
that was just
unfortunately I don't know why
the for me that point because
it's like obviously there's no
investigation prior to the
investigation and then
So
The F. I. R. noted that is
applied to park Rangers well the
body camera does not we we
didn't change that and that's
because this is not a body
camera bill it's a policy
question and we thought well you
know we talked about and if if a
park ranger shoot somebody they
should be investigated in the
and of course the park Rangers
know don't normally do an
investigation but we thought of
a park shooter at a park ranger
shoot somebody the governor
should be aware of at the AG's
office should be aware of it so
that we did not change that.
and then.
Addresses more I did not change
things but
So then subsection be said that
notification must recover
quicker within twenty four hours
And we didn't make any changes
there because def includes death
resulting from great volley in
injury or other in custody death
so I mean that was also very
clear you know twenty four hours
The honestly this is another
kind of thing that if it's
twenty five hours nobody's going
to have a heart attack or the
death doesn't occur immediately
but there's great bodily harm so
we just twenty four hours to see
if you know how time runs an
investigation is just a
reasonable time for notice to be
given
now this is the we did change in
custody death to concede to
The to be consistent so every
time we use of the in custody
death it's it's as in custody
death instead of instead of that
The FIR says also said that
the reporting requirements
complete with it Representative
so we change that by removing
the requirement for the
disclosure of the demand law
enforcement officer information
because they did that was a good
point we didn't intend for it to
conflict with April but if you
read if you read carefully I
thought that was a good point we
have to sentence it says nothing
in this of this subsection as
somebody pointed out it was in
another subsection nothing in
this subsection shall be
construed to limit the
exceptions disclosure of it
brought because I believed it
was to the whole section but we
were specific every time there's
a disclosure it brought applies
and we had no intention of
undermining abroad and then
The the FIR first said that it
was unclear how the relevant
prosecuting authorities
determine is unclear when the
hearing should occur when we
change that to say that the dust
have original jurisdiction when
they declined to prosecute the
AG has jurisdiction but it is
still having the AG coming in
the concurrent jurisdiction I
just threw said people off what
we need is the agency will be
there right on the scene
immediately I'm the FIR said
that that the DPS in the NPD in
the PTA had issues of language
nothing
messing up in the subject
section shall be construed to
limit the prosecutorial
discretion of the relevant
prosecuting authority we.
We we didn't change it because I
because this was something that
Y. worked out with the with the
Attorney general's office and I
felt like I should talk to them
about the change with the you
know because I just hated to to
not and I I basically had a few
text but I didn't work out the
language but we intend to the
idea is to have a strong
preference a policy preference
for of preliminary hearings for
the open hearings and not the
grand jury process but we did
not want to take away
prosecutorial this discretion so
that's the intent is boom the
should be in a permit in a
preliminary hearing loss also
known as a probable cause
hearing open to the public
rather than a grand jury that's
the preference but the original
draft had all of these hearings
a requirement that all of all of
these hearings occur in
preliminary hearings and the the
Attorney General correctly
pointed out you can't interfere
with prosecutorial discretion
under both the constitution and
the ethics rules so that's where
that language is there I IBM I
hope that I believe that can be
interpreted policy preference
for the hearing however the the
DA can make a different choice
but I understand the concern and
if I can get better language I'm
so we're certainly we are
certainly open to it and then
The issue the the the firm had
issues with the term independent
investigator and
we felt that that was all point
of the bill that the incident
that the they invest that the
investigation be independent so
we didn't change that.
The FIR had issues
With the A. dust and have of
having concurrent jurisdiction
and again we try to change it to
make it clear that the date that
the AG's office comes in
original jurisdiction with the
DA it's kind of weird though
because it sounds like it's a
It's forty issue and right now
the sorties reversed the the
DA's office can seek the help of
the AG's office that's that's
the norm now and what we're
trying to do is make it so that
the AG comes in automatically
early on and the reason for that
is the district attorney I mean
the Attorney General shared with
me that often the investigation
is not independent it's kind of
not done very well then the
prosecution sometimes are issues
of the prosecution and then they
ask for help and so that's why
the AG one of the reasons the AG
supports well questions that's
too strong what I will read the
text you from the AG's office I
don't I don't want to miss
Representative what he said but
the one of the reasons he's
interested in this bill is he
told me anything would be better
than the way it is now but I
will read the text you if you
ask me about about the level of
support by the AG's office
then great bodily harm we ended
up changing it to mask matched
the definition twenty dash one
dash twelve
to make it clear I told you that
that came from the from the from
the police department I call
them and talk to them and they
said and I said well you know if
this is like what you work with
all the time.
Why is this so in clear and they
said well.
I will get to the to them
excessive force includes great
bodily harm because of somebody
step their toe it's not
excessive force and you know
they felt it was circular you
know great bodily harm is
coupled with excessive force you
know you don't have a claim
unless somebody's really really
hurt so so they didn't the the
the the state police was very
clear about the definition but
we just changed it to because of
to address the for and also
because people here have
questions about it that I the
representative said question and
then we did not change the
definition of peace officer
because that's what we meant is
is any any peace officer in the
state
yeah and and we define peace
officer to include the shares
Department police and and the of
people hold the custodians in in
the jail the officers in the
jails and the prisons all of
that so if we wanted a broad
broad definition
and then because it it's a it's
a policy issue we wanted a broad
definition and then
The FIR said that the bill would
require federal officers to
comply and I was surprised is
another kind of surprised
because it's very clear from
eighteen nineties cases that the
the state cannot
The federal officers are and use
from state prosecution when
they're acting within the scope
of their of their federal forty
so it just doesn't it does not
apply to federal officers so
this the FIR is just wrong I can
cite you the basis that was just
incorrect and then that for
raised the FIR raise concerns
about
That about being able to
prosecute instances of great
bodily harm or death involved in
the failure to comply with body
come.
I can laws.
those comments in FY was the
failure to to comply with why
can was is not a crime so
there's nothing the prosecution
can charge him with and again I
think that this was a confusion
the way I read this is the
prosecution can investigate an
instance of great bodily harm or
death even when the body camera
footage is lost they're not
investigating the loss of body
cam footage they're
investigating the great bodily
harm or death so that issue is
relevant to the to this bill so
those those are the major
changes I hope that they the
Soto says I the the questions
and comments that were made last
time I thought the discussion
was really good we have worked
very closely with the attorney
general's office and this and
the department of safety the
state police on this bill
because they they're the ones
that are asked to do something
on this bill
I did have a few conversations
with
With different other members of
the police force who have
reached out to me but the bottom
line is
this is about trying to.
Restore and this is what I told
them this is trying to restore
confidence in our police
department and because of so
many incidents even having one
recently very close to my
district not right in my
district but very close to my
district on San Matteo is is
very it undermines called the
public confidence in the police
and.
Having the perception the
perception that the police
investigate their own so it's
not a fair investigation and the
prosecutors don't like to
prosecute people that they work
with every day undermines the
continues to undermine
confidence so for me and what I
tell police officers who are
concerned about it is this is
about restoring confidence my
father was a and undersheriff
amble into County
I honor the work of police
officers this is in no way shape
or form an attack on police
officers this is just changing
the way investigations are
handled so that they're better
quality investigations and
because they're better quality
investigations they will restore
public confidence in our police
departments I society that does
not have confidence in the
police department is is
dangerous and so that's what
this bill is about it is a
simple procedure bill that bills
on what we have here in New
Mexico doesn't create a new
investigation commission doesn't
create a new mechanism it just
improves how the procedure for
investigating and prosecuting
the cases in in and also for a
public disclosure by having the
reporting requirement so that
increases transparency it
increases timeliness and
increases accountability and
with that I stand for any
questions.
And I appreciate the
conversation and thank you for
proving the bills thank you
senator and representative and I
should've stated this before we
are not taking public comment on
this bill we heard public
comment with that Thursday all
the days run together I think it
was.
Okay so so we are we will take
questions from the committee and
let me see Representative
Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and senator
welcome back thanks so much for
all of your hard work and and
for your openness and being able
to discuss the bill
offline as well and I had a lot
of questions so I appreciate you
being able to responds to some I
just wanted to because there's
there's so much in this bill and
because there's a lot to cover
what you and I had a discussed
in something that might be
helpful for me at this point
because they're so there were
some changes made in some
changes that warrant
and we had heard a lot from the
public previously Rick regarding
a situation that that perhaps
could have been prevented and
particular on responding to an
active police that where the
public wanted it wants a
response wants to
an understanding of how these
investigations will go and what
it will yield as far as being
able to to have gone through the
project as a native process that
you're recommending now
if we if we were to take sort of
a a case of understanding can
you give us sort of an example
and walk us through how your
bill would change what current
situation and what it would be
able to to model moving forward
Madam chair representative and
senator.
Madam chair thank you that is
that is that we had a really
good discussion about that so at
least it was their is the case
that I told you just I vowed to
do something so that what
happened to our family would not
happen again so she was killed
with twenty one bullets by three
sheriff's office sh.
Shares officers in front of the
R. V. that she was staying in
front of her home.
the family described that she
was running down the street and
they shot her from all from the
three different sides and till
she she fell on the ground and
was bleeding
That's what the family
described.
That was police action that
resulted in the death that would
have triggered an immediate
report to to the attorney
general's office and the the
governor's office that this
happened.
That that of course didn't
happen because that would be
required by the bill and then it
would have triggered an
independent investigation in
that particular case the
sheriff's department
investigated their own with some
involvement with the multi
disciplinary task force
it out even the bill permits a
multi disciplinary and multi
district I'm sorry multi
district task force to to
continue to have an
investigation however
it does require a report every
three months.
It is been eighteen months since
she was killed there would have
been six reports.
Well I believe that the probably
wouldn't have been six reports
because when you have to do a
report you kind eight move on
something you don't like to
write a report that says we're
still working on it and we're
still working on it because
that's embarrassing you have to
you know so I believe that just
having to write the reports
themselves would have made to
push people
in that case has been
transferred to the AG's office
fairly recently.
that would has occurred to
immediately of the AG's office I
think has had the case for three
months so that would have been I
guess I reports by the dust of
well no they would have been six
reports of by either the DA's
office or the J. the AG's office
and I also believe because there
would have been an independent
investigation and an independent
district to the AG's office
right there with the Attorney
General with the Attorney
General I believe that that
there would have been more
movement on the case
either there would be a report
to a final report saying that
for whatever reason they believe
that the shooting was justified.
Or they would have prosecuted
the officers for the crime of
what they that was committed.
Whether it was
Manslaughter
you know whatever whatever crime
that they would they would have
made a decision that there was a
a crime and they would prosecute
them and there would have been
some consequences unfortunately
because there were no body
cameras.
The family is left wondering how
their four foot eleven sister.
Who was approached by three.
Sheriff's department officers.
After a mental health call ended
up with twenty one bullets in
her body.
So that's how it would have been
different.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Senator
and so I'm just on the point of
when the investigation gets
commenced so can you just walk
through where in the bill and or
in the committee sub that is so
that we're clear on how that
gets
how they gets commenced in when
and who's in charge of
investigating I think part of
the ambiguity right now is how
that how that sort of lines up
and then who gets to be put in
charge of that process
when it gets when it does
commence if you will Madam chair
representative inside the bill
doesn't micro micro manage how
the police department handles
our investigation my
understanding is investigations
it begin immediately no delay
there's nothing nothing in the
bill that micromanages the way
they conducted however on page
three section II line ten the
department of public safety
Shelby this default primary
investigative agency charged
with investigating instances of
peace officers using deadly
force so that's the difference
is and and I can according to
the Department of of safety
public safety
There in many in many parts of
the state they already do this
because many parts of the state
do not simply don't have the the
lab capacity or you know the
capacity just because of the
lack of equipment to do the kind
of investigation that is
necessary for these kinds of
cases so.
I'm sorry your finish hi all
that.
The madam chair and and
Representative thank you for
that but I I want to kind of
just step back a little bit
because US and important
question and you talked about
when this commences and so the
comments is twenty four hours
within twenty four hours of the
great bodily harm or death.
And no it's you that's just a
report.
That's what I'm saying that's
the when the reporting process
begins so I'm not sure if that
was the the not though
investigation were you asking
about investigation of the
reporting
Madam chair representative role
metal maybe I should maybe I did
I I my my apologies let me just
clarify madam chair
representative Senator I'm
looking at so if when there's an
incident that may have occurred
when does the investigation
comments of that incident and
where is that in the bill.
The bill does not address that
issue.
That issue is a discretionary
issue and standard practices
will apply.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Senator
so on that point on page three
when it does talk about section
either department of public
safety shall be the in the fall
primary investigative agency
madam chair Representative and
senator does that mean if the
public safety department
department of public safety so
for our state state police does
that mean they would still be
investigating themselves madam
chair representative and senator
you know that is a very good
question because the problem
with the
Where is it in the department is
a little.
So if there it members who are
uses.
So when the lead when the
department of public safety has
a shooting members of an outside
agency shall be required to
assist and that's to bring an
independent person an
independent
Investigator in so that they're
not solely investigating their
self a minimum of two agents
from the attorney general's
office or another competent
investigative agency shall work
with the investigation in
conjunction with the department
of safety public safety so the
AG's office comes in and another
investigator from another
department comes in so that
they're not solely investigating
themselves and this was again at
the at the request of the
department of state of safety
not because they wanted to to
necessarily basket themselves
but they have all of the
sophisticated equipment and so
there wasn't an agency that they
could punted to to investigate
them at all times they couldn't
say like Albuquerque you know
still investigate the GPS or the
AG's office it would just be a
decision made by the AG's at the
time that there is a department
of of public safety shooting
and so that the only difference
is because they have the most
sophisticated equipment and
madam chair and and
Representative I would call the
particular language is real
important on page four line
three that the senator was
referring to it says shall be
required of an outside agency
shall be required to assist and
that's very important we didn't
use
any other kind of language and
that's really a key point
because that we meant was meant
to address exactly what you're
asking what if it is an incident
involving department public
Safety and our state police so
that's why that's an thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and senator I
just have a one additional
question just on the you could
clarified about the preference
for the preliminary hearing over
the grand jury so thank you for
clarifying that Madam chair
representative and senator the
only a question that I was
wondering the continuation of
moving forward on a given case
is is how the evidentiary
discussion of works if there is
proper evidence does that or
does not what does that or does
that not warrant the
continuation of
the the investigation or the
continuation of the process to
look at holding accountable
police in that situation.
Are you asking about the chain
of custody of evidence or is
that with the question is about
and I'm not sure what you mean
by the evidentiary Madam chair
representative we clarify so
what the only thing that I'm not
clearly understanding is that if
the evidence that is presented
may or may not show proof of
You know deadly force bodily
harm did the different
definitions that you proposed as
as to what would continue an
investigation will the evidence
can be Representative warrant
that and we'll move on it is
that where the determination is
made about where the whether or
not.
Probable cause hearing yes of
course I I believe that's what
you mean so the way the way it
is is evidence is collected and
then the district attorney has
to look at the evidence to
determine whether they believe
the evidence of rises to the
level of probable cause to
believe that a crime is
committed and then that is
presented to the the judge at
the probable cause here I come
probably because I guess it's
it's really the technical court
term because when I did it it
was we call the probable cause
hearing but it's a preliminary
hearing where the evidence is
presented in a public forum the
the officer has a chance to
respond and then the judge
determines yes I believe there
is probable cause that a crime
has been committed can committed
or the judge says no you didn't
you didn't prove that there was
probable cause that a crime was
committed and it's either
dismissed or continued is is
that what you mean.
Okay yes it's that.
I think it might be for.
What.
It's oversee it is that that
hearing that that determination
is made about whether to come to
continue that the evidence is
reviewed and the decision is
made.
Representative or more we did
hear you you don't have video
but we did hear you thanks for
your it is my internet just cut
out some statewide college and
reference Grumman Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you senator
I think it just more than
anything I think there might
just be some vagaries that I'm
not qualified to be able to
assess I welcome judiciary's
look at this hi absolutely
support the intent of being able
to distribute the
investigation so that we aren't
getting into
You know the tricking us of of
self investigations and and and
and to I think what the intent
here is to look at the the
realities of what's going on in
our community and address those
issues into so thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
think the only saying that word
that I'm still hung up on and
still trying to get through our
analyses on is looking at the
preference on the choice for
public process rather than a
grand jury and whether or not or
dictating prosecution when
evidence doesn't warrant it and
just looking at how we can
manage some of how that is is
work through the day the bill
and through the committee
process so as long as we can
commit to doing that whether it
be here in the future madam
chair representative I
absolutely support the process
thank you madam chair of their
response to that yes.
That is why that language About
Nothing this bill still
interfere with
With prosecutorial discretion is
there for precisely that reason
if they think if the prosecutor
can say I'm not taking this case
to the grand jury I'm not taking
this to a public hearing the
evidence is clear that this was
a justified shooting and then in
this bill he will have to he or
she would have to explain that
publicly now it's interesting
there are on the.
On the district attorney's
website in Albuquerque the
Bernalillo county district
attorney they put up little
blurbs about about their cases
in the investigations and
however you don't see too many
about police but I think that in
that nature you know what I mean
this is why we think that
shooting was justified.
And and and I just think that
would respond to the public the
public wants to know why was it
okay to put twenty one bullets
in this four foot eleven women
on a mental health call why.
Thank you.
And thank you Representative and
Senator I don't have any other
questions okay I will entertain
a motion.
Madam chair I move the pass
actually you can't because you
were the last one to speak
that's one of those.
In rules that we have and so I
will entertain a motion from
someone else madam chair I will
move it to pass.
Right here second.
I will seconded that.
I was reminded of that in the
committee last week at one of
those roles that that makes
sense he and I tend to forget
but I was reminded and so I'll
try to follow things as they go
so we have a motion of our
actually let's go back we need a
motion for a do not pass on
house bill two fifty four but I
do passed on Committee
substitute for health bill too
is that the the bill the motion
you want to make Representative
Barreras yes it is thank you
madam chair thank.
And that madam chair though is
that we have it correct okay
Allison will you take the role
please.
Representative Harris yes.
Representative Lord now.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Vice chair Mero.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
So by a three to two you have a
two passed and thank you for our
for coming back.
And we will now go to
Representative lord for House
Bill to seventy nine and I just
just there are.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say thank you madam
chair on the committee for
allowing us to come back and
clean up and make some necessary
improvements thank you so much
well good luck in in judiciary
you you have my sympathies.
I've been through Judiciary at
the in the in the Senate I I
know Judiciary thank.
We are okay Representative Lord
we have to seventy nine and
before you start let me remind
people that don't raise your
hand yet I promise everyone will
get a chance to speak we will
have a one minute timer when it
comes time for public comment
but I will and we will also do a
poll and I will let you know as
we come up on those so don't
don't don't you don't have to
rush to get your hand raised you
may not be on the side I say
first so just hold on but I do
promise that everybody who whose
hand is raised will get their
equipment to speak so go ahead
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
looking to make sure that all
the expert witnesses are and
here that's correct yes they are
all here thank you Allison for
being on top of things yet thank
you Alice and I appreciate you
I'm so before we get started on
this bill before I get into the
technicalities on H. B. two
seventy nine I just wanna
explain first at this is to make
gun stores gun ranges and
fireman's fireman structures
essential and I want to tell you
why I'm bringing forth this bill
before we get into the
technicalities of the bill.
So when I was working as a radio
and a radio station host on keep
a radio here in Albuquerque I
worked with Langston pollens
he's a great man I love him he
moved out of state because of
how things have turned out and.
Working except our but he told
me a story before we went on the
radio and it really touched me.
His great great grandfather.
Was living in the south.
And a group of men came to Lynch
his family.
Now all the other.
Black people in the community.
Unfortunately couldn't protect
ourselves and they did end up
lance his family did not because
they were the only family and
that community that had gone.
They were able to protect
themselves during what I would
call a state of emergency.
Think back to my great
grandfather Charles Herbert
Davis I was put up for adoption
I've mentioned this before and
when I did find my birth parents
they told me I was Norwegian
German no surprise also Jewish
and native American so that
piqued my interest so I did my
ancestry on DNA and twenty three
and me and it turns out that he
was not native American he was
black and I'm very proud of that
and I cannot imagine what it
would be like for him and that
era that same time frame but
thank god that he had guns
available to protect himself.
I think about my Jewish
ancestry.
And I think about how horrific
it was that they didn't have
guns to protect themselves and
how that may have gone
differently if they did.
I think of all the people who of
all genders who are in
relationships and the
relationships go bad and there's
abuse in those relationships and
I cannot imagine what it would
be like for them to want to get
a gun to protect themselves and
not have the ability to do that.
If guns are not conservators are
not considered essential.
I have and I mentioned this
before a man who.
Has been harassing man who
slashed the side of my car
followed me to Starbucks and
slash a side of my car and you
and I know as politicians how
scary it can be when people make
death threats because this man
has threatened to kill other
people as well all other
politicians and I can't imagine
how scared would be if one of us
wanted to buy a gun and that was
not available to us.
Those are the reasons why that
level of importance of all
people to be able to protect
themselves and we the people
have been in an elbow right to
defend ourselves.
It was so important that our
founding fathers put it in the
constitution basically because
they were in a state of
emergency and that time.
What I want to do is I want to
propose that gun stores be
available.
I want gun ranges to be
available I want concealed carry
instructors to be available S.
actually during a time of
emergency.
Because the governor well we
have I just I want to bring up
with HB one thirty nine and I
want everyone to be aware that
even Democrats are on board.
With taking back some of the
power nobody should have all of
the power in the state to make
decisions we never voted for
Tierney would never vote for one
person to have complete rule
over all of us.
And because our governor has not
sought counsel with the people
she has not checked in with them
she hasn't checked with us the
legislators who speak for the
people.
H. B. one thirty nine as a great
bill they'll be coming forward
and that is has statement
Representative by Democrat
Daymon Ely and a Republican both
on board.
To make the governor checked in
with us where she can't have
unlimited power.
Nobody and I'm saying that even
it was a Republican I would not
want a Republican to be all
powerful.
So right now.
The governor has declared that
breweries are essential but not
bars.
She's declared abortion clinics
are essential but my husband who
is a veteran can not get into
the V. A. and cancer runs in
this family and he need to
cancer screening he can't get
in.
It's not fair.
We need clear definitions of
what of this what is essential
and what is not.
And I'm gonna bring it before
the legislators because we have
to determine.
What is going to be fair during
this pandemic and at all times.
The gun stores gun ranges Farm
trainers the only to be
essential to our second
amendment rights have access but
more than that we have the right
to defend ourselves and just
like Langston's great
grandfather.
He had the right to protect
himself or we do too.
And that's why I brought this
bill forward.
I also try to get this out today
I don't know if anybody got that
that the firearm industry trade
association because a lot of
times will have gone bills and
that the people there in the
trade don't have a chance to
speak because today we're
supposed and three and then
we're supposed to have this
committee at three fifteen and
there's all kinds of people set
up to talk but the problem is
that they have jobs and they
have lives so I'm going to speak
for them so these are some of
the people on here our Gary
Olson with Easter plan sales I'm
gonna probably messes names that
brands guns and am on Hobbs Los
ranchos gun shop in Albuquerque
a Ryan Burt with calipers.
David low for with low first
scions I'm Terry Nelson with
firearms training institute Ron
Peterson with Peterson fire arms
San Juan wildlife federation
Farmington Neville Rodie without
Dourson of Santa Fe robin Gordon
Blanchard Walter Brecht us with
BMC tactical army guy a goes
with a B. Q. guns Mike Nelson
with mags indoor shooting range
Bluewater armory Steve
Williamson our safety Williams
Jessica Fisher William are seen
now with the liberty fire arms
and striker shooting world all
stand by this bill and with that
I'd like to call upon my expert
witnesses and I have four of
them I would like to start with
Dr John Lott if you would please
introduce yourself and your
expertise and talk a little bit
of our bill would be greatly
appreciated thank you.
And you have done you yourself.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate you all being here
and I appreciate the chairman
and and Representative floor.
The forty states that have laws
that prohibit seizure of guns
during emergencies six states
have laws that allow those
seizures and for states and the
district Columbia have no such
laws on the books these laws
passed largely after the after
mask for Kate Katrina
in in August two thousand five
New Orleans police confiscated
about one thousand two hundred
guns are a week after the her
team's landfall New Orleans
police in order to to rule that
no civilians in New Orleans
would be allowed to carry
handguns or shotguns or any
other type of firearm.
Private security guards were
exempted from this rule.
Police are extremely important
in stopping crime my own
academic research indicates that
they I believe that they are the
single most important factor for
reducing crime.
The problem with confiscation is
that police and national guards
during an emergency like a
hurricane are already stretched
very thin cell phones and phone
service was spotty at best
police who are facing threats
were largely left on their own.
Every police confiscate firearms
during that period of time only
increased the burden the police
already facing doing their job
during an emergency.
Yes if my research my academic
research convinces me of
anything it's that the most
vulnerable people those who are
most likely victims of violent
crime and those who are
relatively weaker physically
particularly women the elderly
are the ones who benefit the
most from being able to own guns
for protection.
We've seen done sales across the
United States increased
dramatically over the course of
last year and the simple reason
for why that occurred whether it
be during the Corona virus
initially or when the riots were
occurring and that is police are
extremely important as I say but
either they weren't allowed to
do their job or they simply
weren't capable of responding to
all the things that were current
are you had prosecutors who
worked arresting people are
won't are prosecuting people
many had many convicts being led
out of jails and prisons across
the country as crime rates
increased and police were able
to respond many people believe
that it was necessary for them
to respond in some way to
protect themselves from the
police were able to be there.
In addition to the laws that got
passed after hurricane Katrina
across the country.
Some states like Florida and
Texas actually liberalized other
laws making it so that when
states were more urgency were
declared are you.
The Los regarding hearing guns
concealed were temporarily
weights
Congress also passed something
called the disaster recovery a
personal protection act and what
that did was it prohibited both
the federal government and any
localities including state and
local governments that receive
federal funds from confiscating
firearms during periods of
emergencies.
Act there is a cause of action
private right of action that's
in of the two thousand six
federal law that allow for
remedies allow for compensation
for people it allows for
attorney's fees are for
individuals who have there are
what are otherwise legal
firearms confiscated during
during emergencies so that
raises questions about what type
of legal liability the state of
New Mexico my face because New
Mexico is one of only six states
in the country that have the
type of the ability to Compton's
to confiscate firearms during
periods of emergence thank.
Anyway I'm happy to answer any
questions you might have but
New Mexico stands out as being
an unusual state.
The entire rest of the country
and and in terms of federal law
in terms of how it treats
people's ability to going to
send themselves during times of
emergency.
Thank you so much talked a lot
and I like to call now upon
Kodi.
Why isn't asking did I pronounce
your name writer to mess it up
again Hey your debt it's Cody
was nuski okay I'm close thank.
so I'm Cody was nuski I am the
director of mountain states
legal foundations Center to keep
and bear arms thank you so much
for having me here today.
I am a second amendment
litigator by trade specializing
in second ma'am issues
jurisprudence and study I you
know I want to thank
Representative Lord for asking
me to discuss this bill
I'm I'm not here to advocate for
or against its passage but
rather just to provide insight
legal analysis.
About the contents of the bill.
and and looking at it the most
important or the most
interesting factor was.
The bill doesn't grant any new
rights it doesn't.
Create any new obligations
instead it just removes certain.
Choices from the table for the
governor in certain instances.
The provisions that are amended
and added by the bill.
Reiterate the governor can't
engage in certain.
Actions that might be deemed
unconstitutional and that could
expose the state in New Mexico
to litigation and costs
associated with litigation
The provisions of this bill
recognize the existence of New
Mexico New Mexicans natural.
Fundamental rights I and
reiterates their ability to
exercise those rights at certain
times
I'm like Dr lot as a litigator I
I plan to kind of just look at
the provisions and and give a
little bit of an analysis and
background about those specific
provisions and it if the
committee's rules allow I'm
happy to answer questions.
As I go in order to kind of keep
that that straight forward.
The first part of the the bill
is a is the deletion of section
twelve ten eighteen a I.
And what that does is
essentially removes the
governor's ability to prohibit
the possession of firearms
outside the home.
During a state of emergency.
Now Mexico does recognize the
ability to to carry firearms
outside the home via both the
constitution as losses as state
court cases and.
While New Mexico allows for open
carry in some localities it
really has a robust concealed
carry system in existence
New Mexico's concealed carry
system is one of the more
stringent in the nation it
requires individuals to undergo
a certified training course that
required which has in person
live fire instruction.
Wires individuals to undergo a
background check and it also
requires individuals to undergo
refresher course every two years
to maintain that permit now the
overwhelming amount of evidence
indicates that concealed carry
holders are just generally not a
danger to their state or their
community and with New Mexico's
requirements it's very easy for
the state to continually check
on those individuals and ensure
that they're still meeting the
state's requirements for
carrying firearms now there's
there is not a legal basis for
depriving those individuals of
carrying firearms during a
declared state of emergency like
the one that we we've had in the
one that we had last summer.
And really it just by removing
this provision it just
reiterates that do individuals
in New Mexico can continue to
exercise the rights out outside
the home page is a knowledge by
the New Mexico constitution as
well as within the federal
constitution and it's going to
continue to protect those rights
of New Mexicans writ large
especially those in more rural
communities.
although it didn't deal
specifically an emergency
declaration there is actually
New Mexico court of appeals case
dealing with a complete
prohibition on firearm carriage
and The New Mexico court of
appeals found that that violated
the New Mexico constitution
again that was not an emergency
declaration however it would
inform any litigation against
an order that prohibited
individuals from carrying
firearms even during an
emergency.
so that is the only dilution
that occurs and how this house
bill and the rest is in addition
which is a subsection B. if
anybody has any questions on the
deletion I'm happy to answer
those are I can proceed to the
addition.
Our our our for our format is we
allow the the what experts and
to do all their testimony and
then we'll go to the audience
and then we'll go to that there
are committee for questions
thank you madam chair thank you
so much.
so the additions are split into
two categories that are
relatively similar each of which
has subcategories because of
course they do.
The first is preventing the and
subsection B. prevents the
governor from.
Closing Farm manufacturers
retailers ranges training
facilities and preventing the
transfer of firearms during an
emergency declaration again this
doesn't grant any special rights
or privileges for treatment it
just merely recognizes the
existing state of both state and
federal law and prohibit certain
actions so B. one would prohibit
the governor from restricting a
manufacturer distributor
wholesaler supplier retailer
from off from operating or
otherwise conducting business.
A number of course including the
tenth circuit have which we said
and have recognized that
inherent in the right to keep
and bear arms is the right to
acquire firearms in actually the
an interesting function here is
that New Mexico's code is what
truly makes firearm retailers
essential businesses in this
state in particular over and
above because in two thousand
and nineteen New Mexico amended
its firearm transfer laws to
restrict firearm transfers to
mostly being all conducted by
federal firearms licensees in
person.
so that amended prohibited
certain private transfers and
and other words and in order to
buy a firearm in New Mexico the
vast majority of New Mexicans
are required to go in person to
a retailer undergo federal
background check to purchase
that fire and the function of
that system really is what lands
to this problem or this
consideration that firearm
retailers truly are essential in
the state of New Mexico because
if there was a closure order it
as was ordered into twenty
twenty it completely prohibits
New Mexicans from purchasing
firearms in total and that kind
of prohibition is really
susceptible to legal challenge
and in fact was challenged in in
twenty twenty.
Yeah which litigation wasn't
ever fully resolved by the court
but really this particular
provision would go towards
addressing that
That problem of in person
transfers and by ensuring that
retailers distributors are open
and operating in some capacity
even during an emergency it
would ensure that New Mexicans
have some access to
constitutionally protected
property.
Subsection B. two deals with the
sale or transportation of
firearms again this and as well
as ammunition again this doesn't
create any new right it just
ensures that New Mexico system
which already heavily regulates
the transportation and sale of
firearms ammunition and
components remains in operation
in some form during an
emergency.
The tenth circuit hasn't tangled
with the question where again we
set hasn't necessarily tangled
ammunition question on the ninth
circuit has and has stated that.
Ammunition is protected under
the second amendment or has
nearly complicity stated the
fact that.
Some form of ammunition is
protected as firearms are so
again this just ensures that New
Mexicans can continue to
exercise the right in some form
during emergency declarations.
the next two sections B. three
and B. for deal with shooting
ranges and training facilities
and I think it really helps to
look at them kind of in concert
and the key is that.
There are certain training
requirements in the state of New
Mexico in order to ensure that
individuals have concealed carry
permits can maintain those
permits in the state of New
Mexico but beyond that eight
farm owners should be training
with their firearms individuals
that are new purchasers or even
those that have at our
purchasing there would ever
number firearm should be
training in order to ensure that
they're safe and that they're
comfortable safely operating
those firearms so keeping range
is open ensuring that training
facilities are open to ensure
that individuals are.
Maintaining proficiency and are
safe.
In the operation of their fire
the right to train has been
recognized by the U. S. supreme
court as well as the seventh
circuit and it is very important
component of the ability to keep
and bear arms which is protected
federally and by the New Mexico
state constitution and as I said
with that training requirement
that's inherent in the concealed
carry requirements for the state
of New Mexico it makes it even
more important because the state
of New Mexico cannot condition
an element of carriage on
training and then
simultaneously prohibit
individuals from training.
That almost goes directly to a
case that was addressed in the
seventh circuit.
And the court.
Interestingly saw that
requirement inside is really an
ability just to or an attempt
really just prohibit in that
case ownership not just carriage
but really just an end run
around prohibiting ownership so
I think those those two
provisions look together in that
same way
I the next section is added
essentially does the same thing
that but just for the department
of public health instead of just
the governor to ensure that.
Neither the governor commission
order nor the department of
public health can do the same so
I I don't think I need to go
through those individually.
Aside from from what I to
southwest so.
I think I think that the
character of the bill in
actuality as as I looked at it
and what the legal effective it
would be as I said really is
just to remove a certain amount
of
Option off of the table but it
really does not grant any rate
doesn't grant any special
privilege it doesn't really
treat anything any differently
than it would currently be
treated other than ensuring that
the state of New Mexico wouldn't
be pulled into an additional
potentially costly litigation
over one of these questions and
so with that I thank you very
much and I will return it to
Representative Lord.
Thank you Cody ways new ski.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair like to pull up my next
witness will be tarmichael are
you there are you available.
I am can you hear me yes we can
hear just fine thank you thank
you madam chair committee
members my name is terra Mitch
that I represent tens of
thousands of NRA members in the
state of New Mexico and on
behalf of them would like to
thank Representative lord for
bringing hostile to seventy nine
forward we're in strong support
of this legislation.
COVID nineteen illustrated that
in times of crisis or
uncertainty Americans buy guns
for protection and other lawful
purposes.
As concerned citizens across the
state turn the federal firearm
licensed retailers to exercise
their constitutional right to
purchase and own firearms New
Mexico refused to designate FL's
that's their acronym as
essential businesses and those
establishments were ultimately
forced to shut down.
This is contrary to the US
department of homeland
security cease a guidance on
essential workers are that
guidance included workers
supporting operation of firearm
or ammunition product
manufacturers retailers
importers distributors and
shooting ranges us essential.
Because the New Mexico
legislature passed a ban on
private firearm transfers and
twenty nineteen that essentially
forces all gun transactions to
be processed by at the Phils
licensed retailers.
Honest citizens during the COVID
while the Stallis agency were
closed had no legal options to
buy farms at a time when we
needed them the most
additionally many of these
retail establishments also house
indoor shooting range facilities
these are facilities that are
not only used by local law
enforcement and the military but
also by private citizens seeking
out gun safety training
resources.
States COVID nineteen public
health orders were
simultaneously anti second
amendment and anti firearm
safety.
We urge you to pass house bill
two seventy nine to prevent
future executive or departmental
emergency orders from denying
law abiding citizens the right
to purchase no firearms under
the US of the New Mexico
constitutions and to allow these
businesses to continue serving
the safety needs of New Mexico's
military law enforcement and
private individuals thank you.
Thank you so much star thank you
madam chair like to bring and my
final expert witness and that
Zach fort.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Zach worked
I am the president of New Mexico
shooting sports SO Association
collectively we represent over a
thousand New Mexicans
who are gun owners gun store
owners firearm range owners and
firearm instructors both for
civilian and law enforcement I
like to think on behalf of the
New Mexico state Representative
Lord bringing this bill forward
we believe that this is
important legislation for a
number of different reasons for
the the first reason is it
protects New Mexicans access to
their constitutional rights and
ensures equal rights for New
Mexicans during the COVID
shutdowns that occurred early in
twenty twenty New Mexico was one
of the only states in the
country that did not declare
firearm stores to be essential
organs so while New Mexico said
they had to close our neighbors
and Arizona Texas and even
Colorado said firearm storage
could remain open so people
could access their rights in
addition to this newer fire
motors tend to be far more
diverse than existing firearm
owners so this is all this bill
would also ensure that those
newer fire owners have the same
equal access to firearms that up
firearm owners own their
firearms for number of years
also have.
So we believe that is why it's
important to ensure the firearm
stores remained open and New
Mexicans have access to their
constitutional rights during an
emergency to speak about the
training requirements
We will we strongly believe an
advocate of that people should
seek out firearms training from
qualified instructors that our
position it always has been our
position but at the same time
people cannot seek out training
in person it is very hard to
receive a call instruction that
they need we have my
organization did is put out pre
resources for people that they
could view online but there is
no substitute for in person
hands on firearm training no
we're not asking for any type of
special treatment we know there
would still be social distancing
requirements so one so for but
we believe that it's important
New Mexicans access there right
and
Mexico to be able to access
their rights even during an
emergency and that the training
as an element of that to ensure
safe firearms handling of those
more hearing firearm and also
fired in the home as I said
thank you Representative Lord
purposes rings before we support
this bill.
Thank you Jack and thank you for
my great expert witnesses thank
you madam chair with that I
would like to we go to the poll
now is that correct okay thank
you will be going to the to pull
and people calling in from
please I would like you to lower
your hands if you have raised
it.
I I promise you everyone will
get a chance to but we we go in
a certain order and if your hand
is raised so please vote in the
poll.
Okay.
Okay that looks pretty stable so
we have thirty four in support
or seventy two percent thirteen
in opposition so I'm.
As we will first go to the
opposition so if you want to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
Okay.
And that that's why I ask you
not to raise your hand until you
got direction so we will start
with Marshall Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Marshall Martinez
executive director a quality New
Mexico the statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization with all due
respect equality New Mexico
stands in fares opposition to
this legislation we've heard
dozens of pieces of anecdotal
evidence that access to guns and
ammunition makes people safer
despite these stories it is
proven patently untrue
especially for members of our
queer and trans community in
fact most of the LGBTQ community
in our state feel inherently
less safe because of the
presence of guns we reject that
in a time when New Mexicans were
coming together to hold each
other in community to provide
access to food shelter company
though in the virtual and
digital spaces to prevent
isolation to claim the promise
with this legislation that what
was missing was access to more
guns and more ammunition what we
believe there can be healthy and
important dialogue and debates
on gun ownership and gun safety
we believe the promise on which
this legislation is founded is
inherently untrue and we oppose
the legislation thank you.
Thank you Marshall and I forgot
to say there will be a timer and
after a minute you will be cut
off so please watch the timer
and when when your time is
coming close to an end please
wrap up.
So next we have a round of this
call we.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is Brenda school in New
Mexico president of New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence having
John what as an expert witness
is beyond offensive and if any
committee members want factual
evidence that shows this
promotion of fake news I'm happy
to find that.
During the pandemic.
We do not act attacked others
I'm sorry we just.
There there was a surge in gun
sales thanks to the NRA
instilling fear in our country
the consequences of this will be
a surge in gun violence and
suicide by firearms food is
essential waters essential guns
are not essential during the
crisis this bill is only it
enabling the corporate gun lobby
in our a to sell more guns guns
when our children can't go to
school during the pandemic.
It would be ridiculous to say
that you can also go you it's
okay to go to the shooting range
to do training thank you very
much.
Your next we have on the eve.
You'll need to unmute yourself.
Thank you yes we can okay thank
you madam chair I'm gonna Mexico
system avid hunter gun owner
business owner
And during these kind of times
when we have it reduces our
times are somewhat presents
awards restoration across our
great country.
Here in the last summer in the
school peaceful protests that
erupted businesses being
destroyed lives being destroyed.
People have in their businesses
are their cars they're all
burned.
Time like this this is one
Americans need to have the
ability to a firearm.
To access to access to purchase
one to purchase the munitions to
be able to walk outside your own
carry one outside of your home
put in the vehicle transported
to protect your business to
protect your daughter lives five
miles away or something like
this revised so you too to limit
This and first of all give the
governor the the supreme
forty two this is ridiculous not
one questions that are but to
further impede our second
amendment constitutional rights
during times of emergency is
ridiculous and I urge you all to
vote no on this stand up to
tyranny thank you.
Barbara chatter G..
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm speaking
against house bill two seventy
nine for the special particular
reason that we're right now
working our way through the
current at pandemic but the next
time that we might need or where
the state might be in a
situation where the governor
needs to issue other public
health executive orders we
cannot really determine what the
situation will be in those
conditions so the car about a
special a special consideration
for firearms and ammunition
doesn't seem appropriate to me I
think that they should be you
should be treated in the same
way as any other kind the
services or sexual or activities
that require consideration under
particular emergency situation
thank you very much I hope you
will vote now.
Okay thank you okay.
Right now if you are in support
of this legislation please raise
your hand.
Okay we will start with an
antennae.
All right you pronounce your
last name and to me.
It's your it's just like it's
spelled.
I made it a whole different way
so that's all I get it's all
good I just want to say that
The right to self protection is
a god given right and during a
time of emergency it's it's
specially important to have
access to this right especially
when you can only legally buy a
firearm through a a FFL you
can't buy a firearm anywhere
other place I mean we have and
T. for running around burning
stuff down we've got criminals
being let out of jails because
of COVID
And it's just a bad situation
and people have a right to
defend themselves gun rights are
women's rights guns right gun
rights are gay rights gun rights
are men's rights everybody has
the right and legal gun owners
are not the ones going around.
Causing mass shootings.
So we need to make sure that we
have access to our guns and
ammunition during states of
emergency and thank you for
consideration this matter please
vote yes.
Okay Representative.
Mexico could not this.
He is able to hear me.
Yes yes great thank you so my
name is recognized as I'm also a
member of the LGBTQ community I
was also a congressional
candidates the first
congressional district and like
many of you in this committee
our politicians are subject to
the threat of violence and I was
going to gun owner during the
COVID process I I've stocked up
on on more resources and that
because of fear of my life and
while members of the legislature
get the privilege of having
protection of fences and
security and other resources
citizens of New Mexico are left
defenseless during the COVID we
saw situations like we said
before about violence on the
streets we've seen allegations
of elected officials suppressing
police response and through this
legislative session we've seen a
relentless attack on law
enforcement continuing to
restrict their ability to do
their jobs effectively and
protect public so we're left in
a situation in the state of
emergency where we are on our
own and this governor should not
have the sole discretion to
infringe on our constitutional
rights thank you.
Valerie worked.
Good evening mac and chair
members of the committee Valerie
work that registered lobbyists
for New Mexico farm farm and
livestock bureau we stand in
strong support of H. B. two
seventy nine and are thankful to
the sponsors for bringing it
forward our members should have
the ability to continue to
defend and protect their
families their farms and ranches
and their private property
regardless of an emergency a
restrictions such as a pandemic
we ask for your support in
passing H. B. two seventy nine.
Next we have Thomas other.
The analyst for the speak.
Okay Valerie is to be no no is
it.
Is it.
Can you hear me I'm I'm yes go
ahead begin here Jon.
Chair and committee members my
name is Thomas author then the
legislative affairs officer for
the New Mexico shooting sports
association which has been
representing New Mexico gun
owners and shooters since
nineteen thirty five we strongly
support H. B. two seventy nine
HB two seventy nine prevents
future executive or department
of health emergency orders from
shutting down farms
manufacturers retailers and
shooting ranges and denying law
abiding citizens are right to
purchase own and use firearms
during emergencies is when our
constitutionally guaranteed
rights matters most is during
those times when law enforcement
is likely to be overwhelmed and
slow to respond to quote from a
former Democrat US Attorney
General Ramsey Clark a right is
not would someone gives you it's
what no one can take from you
please vote to pass H. B. two
seventy nine thank you.
Very here's part person here
send.
Go ahead you're you're unmuted.
There is there I am here yes yes
okay my name is Gary Pierson I
am a disabled veteran and just a
year ago after moving back to
New Mexico I had not the ability
to walk I just regain that.
At the time I want to park in a
handicapped which try to park in
a handicapped place a gentleman
got out of his vehicle walked as
a normal human being into the
facility I was able to walk I
ask him if he could move he even
threatened my life if it hadn't
been for me having a firearm in
my vehicle to able to defend me
and my sons I would not be
sitting here I find it
outrageous that I come move back
to Mexico for fifteen years.
And that we have to legislate
our second amendment rights back
into existence in the state I
support HB two seventy nine and
I hope all you will as well.
Thank you Louis Sanchez.
Madam chairman can you hear me.
Yes go ahead okay well thank you
madam chairman and committee
members I.
It really appreciate this system
are to be decided by district of
Columbia versus Heller and this
and the Supreme Court actually
said that this actually allows
all Americans was as parable
arms for purposeful lawful
purposes for self defense and
actually as a disclaimer I am
one of the owners the calibers
of New Mexico which we have
three stores but neither here
nor there I heard the other
participants in this and say
that.
Well let me just get to the
point.
In our store you had Democrats
Republicans black white brown
members of the LGBTQ have come
into our stores and the fact of
the matter is is that New
Mexicans are scared and and and
it you know they have a right to
be because of the incidents of.
Last summer and we support
wholeheartedly support H. B. two
seven nine and the reason being
is that all New Mexicans as
Americans have the right for the
second amendment rights and we
as gun members of America and
the student community read
please passed H. B. two seven
now with.
With Representative Lord thank
you.
Next we have Mike Ferrell.
Hello madam chair yes.
Hello thank you madam chair
Representative Stephanie lord
thank you for presenting this
bill most of you know me as Leo
but I I go by Michael as well
I also am support of this bill I
too was a victim during the
COVID nineteen
pandemic
with the use of a firearm I had
purchased a firearm for awhile
awhile back Caballos the they
had it on back order when they
finally are able to give it to
me I pass a background check but
they told me I was delayed the
time I got to my firearm.
COVID had hit and she had shut
down the store I wasn't able to
receive my fire arm for several
more months.
Finally when I got to the store
to receive at I turned around I
told him you know what it's okay
I A. B. funded.
And I got my money back but I
had to wait several months past
the pandemic in order just you
know to receive my fire I'm the
batch so I'm hoping that you are
for it and realize that it has
caused many problems as well
it's against the constitution
United States thank you for
listening
Have a good evening.
Gardner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Keith
Gardner and the rest lobbyist
for the national shooting sports
foundation I think it's
important this bill is not
viewed as something that is pro
or anti gun is simply ensures
that all New Mexicans are able
to exercise our constitutional
freedoms during a declared
emergency say what you will
about the text of the second
amendment with the right to bear
arms is a constitutionally
protected rights and we should
be clear on that matter because
the legislature banned the
private transfer of firearms in
twenty nineteen the right to gun
ownership necessarily begins at
the gun store counter for New
Mexico residents when gun stores
are forced to close access to
this freedom closes this is
simply wrong the government
cannot act as if
constitutionally protected
freedoms don't exist no matter
the supposed justification the
farm industry the only industry
that makes and sells explicitly
protected constitutionally
protected property it should be
the last one ever considered for
closure however during
Leicester's mandated school
closures places like liquor
store invectives were leveled
the gun stores were not please
passed house bill two seven nine
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Jamie Fraser rate.
Thank you madam chair committee
thank you Representative lord
for bringing this bill.
I read you to support house bill
two seventy nine to prohibit
restrictions by the governor of
the state department of health
can see operation or conduct of
business by firearms or
ammunition related businesses
this would be consistent with
the guidelines of the USDA
Justice vision cybersecurity and
infrastructure security they
recognize the consistent with
the protection of the second
amendment the firearms industry
in all its manifestations it's
part of the essential
infrastructure in this nation
this bill would allow would
follow those guidelines and help
to secure those rights
guaranteeing protection in both
US and state constitutions this
is not asking for special
privileges.
This is asking for those
businesses deemed essential by
the federal government.
To operate the same way that big
box stores are selling things
which are quite frankly not
exactly essential and not
protected by a constitutional
amendment thank you for.
Stephen Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thanks
committee members and a special
thank you to step forward.
This time that we're going
through has been difficult in a
lot of different areas.
And I am surprised with.
That we have to actually pass a
bill.
To maintain what should never
have to be under discussion.
In twenty twenty I had to do
something I'd never thought.
I would do because I never
thought I would have to.
And that was purchased right.
And
terrorism insurance for my
business here in more Mr.
Businesses in downtown were
ravaged by violence.
To actually not allow citizens
to protect themselves as the
writing insurance does my
business.
To protect myself my family.
And those around me.
The only thing you can do this
passes bill.
Thank you what's that I'm sorry
Allison with that the.
Yes.
Thank you have you spoken I'm
sorry I kinda lost track of
things.
I did but I just wanted to
correct myself by of the raise
my hand in the long group okay
okay that I but I spoke in
opposition I'm not I'm actually
for those bills I apologize I.
Out of ram with a very poor
reception at eight to support
this bill one hundred percent
original the past okay thank you
we'll go on to Steven Garrett.
Madam madam I think you just
okay sorry I apologize.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and a special thank you
to Stephanie lord
This.
Bill being proposed is
Frighteningly necessary that
we're even having to do this
Is also a sign of the times are.
I'm a business owner and
Moriarty New Mexico and I did
something that I never thought I
would do because I never thought
I would have to do it.
And that was purchased are
writing and terrorism insurance
on my bills.
As you allow me to be able to.
Insurance companies were not
shut down they were deemed
essential and that was to
protect my business.
We have to pass the bill in
order to for me to still be have
the right even under that in the
same emergency to be able to
protect myself.
This bill is necessary.
To show and limits that the
power
To our constitutional rights.
This is.
Very in.
Thank you Elizabeth Hans.
Yes thank you very much for
allowing me to speak today
I would just like to say that on
Facebook I am the administrator
of the pink pistols Albuquerque
page there is also another pink
pistols page called Duke city
ping the souls between the two
groups.
We represent.
A hundred and forty one of your
constituents who are L. G. B. T.
Q. of plus and.
Who want to the right to defend
themselves additionally I am a
criminal defense attorney for
seventeen years and I can tell
you that of right now with the
way the gun situation is only
the criminals are getting guns I
have a client right now whose ex
is going to kill her think she's
been a killer and she can't get
a gun but I bet he has no
problem getting it done and so I
would just urge you to please
limit the governor's power.
Representative the people of New
Mexico thank you very much.
Okay problem Martinez.
Yes.
You have.
thank you the lower.
No I largely.
Build up but three
The.
For the right.
It.
What what.
You just need to
This.
Very
Very
I.
This who are.
Well I.
What we.
Thank you.
Okay don more.
Hello thank you well my name is
don more and I own a local farm
training company in New Mexico
and I'll make it as quick as
possible but as many of said
self defense is is our rights
and.
There's no other right to that
is more important than that but
even a step further work a lot
of us are talking and thinking
about specifically Albuquerque
New Mexico or you're you're more
populated areas such as Santa Fe
and things like that but we have
to think about rural New Mexico
to where not only is a farm self
protection but it's also the
same as a grocery store where
you put food on the table.
Firearms are essential
instructors in training
facilities ensuring ranges and
things like that should be
essential as well
because you don't want somebody
to have a firearm that doesn't
understand how to use it during
events during this pandemic
people have for purchase
firearms and I personally have
had expectancy offices where
somebody registered to learn how
to use that farm safely it
couldn't do so.
Because of it being canceled so
thank you I support this bill.
Thank you we have cubby
Gonzales.
Hello everybody my name is Kobe
Gonzales
New Mexico native I was actually
born here in New Mexico I've
been living back in the state
for close to a decade now.
in which we're a high have a
servant community I have worked
in the security industry for a
long time and I'm also a
spokesman for the legs in movie
we support the voices of over
two hundred fifty thousand
people we want to just stand up
and say that we support this
bill one of things that I think
we've seen through this pandemic
is that you know Americans want
to practice their second
amendment rights.
And it's unfair it's not it's
unconstitutional it's unfair.
That criminals have the ability
to go and legally purchase
firearms carry firearms well we
have the people who are supposed
to be sworn an oath to protect
our constitutional rights from
enemies foreign and domestic and
they're pushing back in the
becoming more tyrannical leaders
we just want to say that it is
it in our right to be able to
defend ourselves just in these
last few months I mean last
month alone there were seven
homicides and the thirty six.
Mary E. lane summer hill.
Very E. lane you're on needed.
Go ahead.
Very E. lane are you there.
Okay we will pass over her and
go to Lorraine the the color.
Madam chair.
Committee members and god bless
you Representative Lord for
bringing this forward.
I call you tonight from a small
town in southern New Mexico
named John bidding on.
Close to the Texas New Mexican
border.
I'm single I have of my ninety
two year old mother that lives
with me on our small farm.
And I have also been a survivor
of domestic violence.
I'm also the district thirty
four chair for Dona Ana County
and I beg you to please please
please please pass this bill.
I need to be able to protect
myself and my mother.
crime is rising here in the
board land.
I've had to install cameras on
my property.
Because of break ins and
threats.
I just need to be able to
protect my family.
And.
Please I just thank you please.
This bill thank you madam chair.
Michael Cerro.
Hello madam chair.
Yes we can hear you
I spoke earlier.
I guess I accidentally hit the
raising and I'm so sorry about
that
but also I just want to add a
really quick if I can my no you
yeah I'm sorry you had your time
we have to move on thank you
okay we will have staff with
them.
I'm here that you're going.
Yeah I'm just I'm in favor this
bill just because the fact that
I live in rural New Mexico
myself I have a seventy eight
year old mother.
I have a brother that is those
got a drug problem and he
threatens my brother a lot.
In the event that I would have
to protect her against him the
police would not get there in
time.
Furthermore you know this is a
constitutional issue this the
constitutional rights.
And I would hate to see us lose
constitutional rights.
What we need these
constitutional rights to stay in
place the state New Mexico we
need to uphold the constitution.
I don't think there's too much
more I'd say about that madam
chair but I'm afraid that this
bill does pass and that we will
be able to continue with our.
Are god given constitutional
rights thank you.
Galaxy eight twenty please
introduce yourself.
So galaxy eight twenty go ahead.
Yes ma'am my name is K. blood
still I'm a co owner of roses
guns and more and more rarity.
When we were.
during our shut down last year
on our business cards we have
our personal cell phone number
so people can get hold of us
because we're here to try to be
for the community.
If you can't catch are ours you
called me and I.
I come help you out.
Of.
People called us while we were
shut down twenty thirty times a
day and all I could do was get
their name and phone number and
contact them once we were re
opened again and people very
panicked over all of this we
went through a whole lot of
that.
And it was so hard to tell them
I couldn't do nothing for.
This bill really needs to pass
so people can.
Continue with their two way at
any time they need their
protection there's not enough
police to handle everybody and
I'm all for the police but
there's just not enough they
can't get to enough people.
Of so people need to protect
themselves please pass this bill
thank.
Okay we're gonna go back to Mary
Elaine's summer he'll.
More Elaine you will need to I
need yourself.
Okay it more you lane must be
having some technical
difficulties were not hearing
her let's go on to right.
Yes ma'am I don't thank you for
this opportunity was what
opinion.
In my on the yes.
Thank you for the opportunity to
voice my opinion this whole
shutdown thing the the law
enforcement also uses really
stood down the.
What people very panicked we
were go I was so going to the
store and the gun store.
Thank you for crying because we
constructs their guns because
that's what we we fixed guns
only so guns and they're very
panicked I appreciate the that
you all put this forward and I
wholeheartedly agree with thank
you.
Okay thank you Felix where a.
Felix you will need to unmute
yourself.
Hi madam chair.
My name is Felix get our
problems and that that is the
New Mexico and crying because
they support each featuring
nine.
If you could please I know this
is a constitutional issue at all
as well hello my rights to be
to get away with an executive
order in as I have to say thank
you.
Okay looks like that's it for
public comment madam madam chair
if I could interrupt I have one
person who says he can't raise
his hand and it's and I I
apologize for putting in like
that it's Nathan dial do you see
him in there.
It's a phone number of a nine
one zero.
the niece I do not see a nine
one zero phone number okay thank
you.
Sorry I see three phone numbers
but none of none of none of them
meet that criteria so I'm sorry
okay and that he may be calling
for work but thank you
appreciate that okay okay thank
you so now we will go to the
committee for questions.
Can I make a brief statement
before.
Are you I'm sorry okay I know
it's been a really long day and
madam chair I really really
really want to thank you for
keeping the stability with this
I truly appreciate that with
people that are calling in I
want to thank all the people
that did call and and I I want
to remind everyone this isn't
really a pro or anti gun issue
this is our ability to access
our second amendment rights so
please keep that in mind when it
comes time to vote that New
Mexico has an amazing second
amendment and our constitution
as a second amendment and I just
want to make sure that everybody
has access to their second
amendment and that includes
purchasing and hopefully than
getting training so thank you
for that I appreciate everybody
who's called in today and
support thank you.
Thank you Representative Lord I
have Representative Pettigrew
with questions thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative bringing this
bill
I I do need to seek
clarification on something that
one of your efforts
Representative and madam chair
Please define the disaster
recovery protection that.
As was discussed in expert
testimony thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Pettigrew do you
remember which one of the
experts that was that brought
that up.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'm gonna
assume instructor John what
causes one person.
Thank you I thank you madam
chair if doctor John Lott is
still on available if you could
answer that question please.
Right what I heard that he
wanted to ask about it but I
wasn't sure exactly what he's
asking about with respect to it
the federal law was enacted in
two thousand six I'm happy to
provide Representative Lord with
a link to to the loss of it she
can pass it on to the other
representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and thank you
doctor specifically you
mentioned the disaster recovery
protection at as it related to
gun rights and as it related to
the I'm going to say.
At the federal level the way the
if if if my nose for correct
madam chair and representative
of
It.
Through the disaster recovery
protection act Congress actually
made law that.
Kept that made it illegal.
To seize guns during a state of
emergency.
Know what what the law
specifically says it prohibits
federal employees or any
entities including state and
local governments to receive
federal funds are and other
relief workers from is
confiscating requiring the
registration over prohibiting
the possession of firearms
during a disaster or emergency
that's that's the reading of it
and if you have.
Your guns confiscated or are
prohibited prohibited from
possessing a firearm during
those conditions are there's
private rights of action and the
remedies that can be granted by
the court as well as our
damages as well as attorney's
fees.
Just a reminder for the
witnesses to go through the
chair please.
Yes thank you please make sure
that your address madam chair
thank you.
Sorry thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
thank you doctor lots of that is
is is madam chair if I read
section one of our constitution
our but.
The state of New Mexico is an
inseparable part of the federal
you and the constitution of the
United States is the cream on
the lan.
So as I read that naked read
section six those were well
which is our right to bear arms
would seen madam chair and
representative.
And expert witnesses to the.
For us to to go through some of
the things that we've gone
through over the last twelve
months would certainly violate
some of the yes federal law that
has been active since two
thousand six so my.
Rechten in that that assertion.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I'd like to read for
to any money witnesses that we
care to answer that question
thank you.
Madam chair I I can try to
clarify that it doesn't.
Deal specifically with the
closing of gun stores it just
says that you can confiscate our
anybody's firearms you can't
require registration or prohibit
or prohibit the possession of
firearms during the disaster so
if somebody already owned a gun
it could be taken away from them
but there's nothing in the two
thousand six act that that.
Imposes penalties on either
state or local governments that
closed down gun stores percent.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
thank you doctor lots of that
clarification.
I think we won't just found one
good reason for the public
health order
So the two thousand nineteen
madam chair law that makes far
are retails.
was a law that was enacted one
of the expert witnesses talked
about that and and.
Opinion and I think it was the
record the gentleman from
Colorado
The.
Based on his interpretation from
the litigator standpoint two
thousand nineteen law that New
Mexico enacted actually this in
in effect made farm retailers
essential because.
Requiring people to go through
an FFL to receive the farms
madam chair representatives are
expert witnesses and my
understanding that correctly.
I thank you for the question a
madam chair like to defer to it
sounds excuse us Cody that are
sorry the representative was
asking Kodi that question.
Madam chair that that
characterization of my legal
opinion is accurate there are
very few exceptions to New
Mexico's transfer law and as a
result almost nearly every
transfer in state of New Mexico
has to being conducted in person
by a licensed federal firearms
licensee I and that transaction
would also require a federal
background check.
Again all of which would be in
person.
Thank you thank you very much
for that answer thank you madam
chair for.
Some latitude with my questions
In in Madam chair representative
and expert witnesses did I
understand correctly with the
tenth circuit which is a circuit
we fall under brief without a
pen.
Madam chair I would like to
defer to any my expert witnesses
alerted and worked a little time
okay if you don't have just they
can you can stay in our Kodi go
ahead are you over eighteen okay
need to direct them but but you
don't have to keep.
What what time it is getting
late and ran out probably Friday
and other parts of the body as
well yes thank thank you madam
chair appreciate has been a very
very long day so Cody please or
or or whichever expert like to
step up to answer that question
please.
I can Representative Lord thank
you madam chair the tenth
circuit opinion is slightly
different in that context it
doesn't there was not a case
that was before the tents are to
my knowledge that preceded
looking at specifically the
categorization of firearm
retailers as essential and
nonessential there is a case
that was heard by the tenth
circuit in two thousand thirteen
related to ammunition
and as well of the right to
acquire fire and in that opinion
a concurring opinion filed by
judge of the Cerro said that
that individuals have the rights
to acquire firearms which is
inherent in the need and the
right to more items and they
also have the right to train
with those firearms so the tenth
circuit's position or that tents
are its opinion concurring
opinion in that case dealt
specifically with the
acquisition of firearms as well
as the training fires.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you
expert witnesses for your time
Representative I believe you put
forth a good bill it's awful
bill and
thank your expert witnesses laid
out the will will define case on
on why this is so critical and I
for one support your bills thank
you very much I go back to you
madam chair.
Thank you.
I am not seeing any more
questions so I will entertain a
motion.
Chairman commission for do pass
on school to seventy nine I
second.
We have a motion for it to pass
and the second
I
like to.
It not tentative motion table.
Okay we have a an alternative
motion at alternative tabling
motion do I hear second.
Madam chair I was second okay
the tabling motion takes
precedence so we will vote on
the table the motion Allison go
ahead.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Absolutely now.
Representative Pettigrew.
With explanation.
I share more.
Yes.
Explain the.
Madam Thompson.
Yes.
So by a three to two vote you
have it there bill was tabled
and we will go to Representative
Pettigrew to explain his boat.
Sure I and I appreciate that
opportunity
this is disappointing
I
might have.
I think that was somebody left
there my company I think it was
an error.
This is this is disappointing
Act I
already debated my points but at
the end of the day I think this
needed to go through the rest of
the committees and and have time
on the house floor four people
understand.
Of the depths of what's going on
in understanding how New Mexico
decisions are actually against
sin abrasives to federal law
which is very well that we were
all given and and gave us to on
January nineteenth disagrees
with thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero to explain
her about.
Thank you madam chair so I
apologize I think it was my
mute button I guess I'm having
internet connection instability
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward one more obsolete thanks
for that.
More owns to an emergency
situation.
Representative Romero could I
suggest that maybe you turn off
your video that may give you an
at bat with sorry can you hear
me internet connectivity yes you
are cutting in and out there I
think you will be better without
you madam chair it's off.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I apologize for
my internet issues right now I
think everyone's trying to
stream Netflix in my
neighborhood.
Madam chair representative
that said while I absolutely
support a robust response months
to the public health emergency
that we are currently and madam
chair representative I do agree
with the advocates on the risks
involved and currently what we
have seen in the data is that
there have been no problems with
accessing firearms across the
country madam chair
representative in fact there's a
huge a surge in excess as some
of the advocates for and against
have stated madam chair
representative that said I think
the biggest issue that we're
facing in our state is the right
the rise in suicide rates and
unfortunately madam chair
representative I feel that in
the emergency that were and that
is something that we will have
to continue to combat and why do
not support this legislation
madam chair.
Thank you we will move on is
let's see.
We will move on to house bill
two eighty three.
Thanks.
If we can find Representative
lane Representative there there
yes okay I'm out with them we
can put that promote
Representative Lane I think I
probably could do it but I'm
afraid I might keep him out or
something and I don't want to do
that.
So.
Okay there he is and
Representative lane do you have
expert witnesses who need to be
allowed in.
Thank you madam chair a no I'm
flying solo of the State okay
all right just don't let your
engine catch on fire and flat
out over Denver please.
Thank you madam chair yeah that
that was impressive job of those
pilots the state that many lives
I was glad to see that madam
chair committee good evening I
know you have a very long
laundry list so as much as a
lawyer to be succinct I think
that would be my goal this
evening if I could turn the
committee's attention to page
seven of the bill of H. P. two
eight three that's really the
only changes is on page seven.
So given the committee just a
couple seconds to turn the page
seven.
And let me just explain that the
two changes that this bill makes
so we're all aware of the New
Mexico film tax credit and what
that piece of legislation does
it's now law is it it seeks to
stimulate our economy by
providing film tax credits to
production companies and and
others that come and and film
movies in New Mexico.
But there's no description
within the text of the existing
laws to what types of movies can
see a film tax credit.
And so you know this is one
thing that I think I had
concerns about after all we're
talking about taxpayer dollars
and how those taxpayer dollars
should be funded to to put forth
the staff films and so.
There are two new subparagraphs
subparagraph four in
subparagraph I.
Subparagraph for it is is the
attempt to essentially try to
define the under undefinable
which is you know pornographic
films and let me explain work
where these definitions it
within subsection subsection
four came from so I didn't I
didn't create these out of thin
air of these actually come out
of federal statute.
There's a federal statute that
defines sexually sexually
explicit conduct and it does so
with exactly as I've laid out
here the only thing that high I
mated.
From the federal statute is
there's a portion of that also.
Thank you.
Representative you are not muted
could you please New.
I'm playing no thank you madam
chair appreciate that
and so this this definition only
applies the actual sexually
explicit conduct in the reason
why limited to actuals because I
don't want to.
precludes waxay rated R. films
were maybe there's a there's a
steamy love scene and there's
nudity but there's not actual
sexually explicit conduct so
that's the reason for the were
actual and why I think that's
important.
and then with regards so that's
subsection for is is just
seeking to preclude.
Films that have actual sexual
explicit conduct from receiving
a film tax credit.
And then subsection I really
subsection I came about and I
learned through this process the
motion picture association is a
private entity and we cannot
quote their rating systems and
state law this is something that
I learned because the simplest
way to deal with subparagraph I
disable of consistency seventeen
rating.
that it doesn't receiving
Mexican taxed for FY I I learned
from our bill drafters that
we're not allowed to do that as
legislators so all subparagraph
five uses the exact definition.
That the the motion picture
association uses to define NC
seventeen films and so that's
where that that language comes
from.
and again there's nothing in
this bill that that preclude
someone from you know filming
pornographic films in New Mexico
or NC seventeen films in New
Mexico there's nothing in this
bill that preclude someone from
from acting or starring in a
pornographic film all this bill
does is says you know you're
you're free to do those things
but you're not gonna receive
taxpayer dollars in order to do
so that's that's really what
this bill is tempting to
achieve.
Now
There were some email
communications with the Film
Office.
In December of twenty twenty and
I think based on the fact if I
are the Film Office is going to
speak out against this bill on
public comment.
But
It is my understanding that as
of December twenty twenty no
film that's has received a
reading above a rated all or has
actually received some credit in
New Mexico and so this this bill
would just hope to preclude that
from happening.
and and this bill does not
affect films that receive no
rating or do not seek a rating.
and so it's only actual sexually
explicit conduct or those films
that end up receiving an NC
seventeen rating.
And there's also some discussion
I'm I'm sure the committee
review the F. I. R. about sort
of a practical problem of how do
we how do we as a state know
what rating a film was gonna get
because often times a tax credit
is applied for and received
prior to the film writing being
issued
and I you know I think that all
that we we need to do is just
have one the taxpayer files a
state tax return they include a
statement that they agree that
it's very.
Happen to receive an NC
seventeen rating that they
agreed to amend their tax return
I think that would be a strict
for way to resolve that issue.
And when it comes to you know
actual sexual explicit conduct
you could also have just a box
on the tax return that says I
survived the film's not
containing.
Actual sexually explicit conduct
as defined in and then it would
cite this law.
so really it in and really those
are those are my comments like I
said all tribes but really the
the the reason for this bill is
just for us to remember that a
tax credit is taxpayer dollars
in trying to hone those tax
dollars towards stimulating our
economy
with with lots of different
kinds of films but does some
should not include pornographic
films or NC seventeen so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you we will go to the
audience we will go to a poll
first if you could put the pull
up Allison.
Please please vote.
I'll give you a few more
seconds.
K. it looks pretty stable so we
have three in support or twenty
percent.
And twelve in opposition or
eighty percent.
Or Allison I'm the pope went
away and then came back did did
something happen.
You madam chair looks like
accidentally re launch it you
made a long again to get a
better result yeah why don't you
go ahead let's let's try to that
that's okay no big deal we're
being gentle on each other.
So please go ahead and vote
again.
We had a little bit of a
technical glitch.
Okay okay so now it is three in
support or sixteen percent and
sixteen in opposition are eighty
four percent so we have that and
now we will go to the audience
and if you are in opposition to
this bill please raise your hand
you could do that I'm it click
on participants in it will show
you a place to raise your hand
and a reminder that we will have
a one minute clock and it's
pretty much a hard stop at one
minute so and please watch the
clock and not in time your your
comments accordingly so we have
Alex Thomas first go ahead Alex.
Thank you so much for giving me
the time the speaker tonight's
my name is Alex Thompson on the
western region director with the
international cinematographers
guild IATSE local six hundred
and I'm speaking against HB two
eighty three local six hundred
represents all the crew working
in the camera apartments on TV
and film productions.
And I'm speaking on behalf of
the thousands of members their
work and live in the western
region including all of our
members in New Mexico.
This legislation is frankly
unnecessary.
Because the motion picture
rating system is in place and
provide parents with the
information needed to determine
if a film is appropriate for
their children.
I'm I also want to point out
that HB two eighty three is
simply a job killer our
productions are required to
produce a film and then receive
a rating afterwards if they are
unable to determine what the
ratings going to be they're
going to move to their work to
different areas that do not
stifle artistic expression doing
this during the middle of a
pandemic when our members and so
many New Mexicans are looking
for work is the wrong thing to
do thank you for your time.
Thank you next March so
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee again I Marshall
Martinez executive director of
equality New Mexico LGBTQ civil
rights organization I would draw
your attention to the bill
language patently to adult for
most children under the age of
seventeen and this is according
to the MPAA LGBTQ people are
incredibly familiar with the
sexism homophobia and
transphobia that has been
rampant in the rating systems of
the MPA in his recent just two
thousand fifteen a film
depicting depicting two adults
came at with no nudity or
physical of knowledge mint of
their relationship was rated are
reading considered patently to
adults for most children under
the age of seventeen among the
myriad of problems with this
bill passed members of this
committee to consider the impact
of such a policy I'm queer and
trans used in New Mexico well
thank you and does not support
this policy even if it did so
exclude sexual conduct the
problem here is that the MPA has
struggled to right films fairly
without the lands of homophobia
sexism and transphobia and in
our view that's predictor of
future behavior is past behavior
thank you.
Thank you more important that we
have when J..
I thank you madam chair for the
opportunity to share my opinion
of opposition regarding HB two
eighty three my name is Wendy
Johnson I'm a resident of
Albuquerque and work steadily in
the film industry for about
thirteen years I started my
career during single motherhood
and it's continuing well into
grandmother hood so I just want
to describe that I'm like a lot
of you and I care very much
about what my little ones are
exposed to.
I do think the bill is
unnecessary since in addition to
the protection and information
offered by the M. P. R. system
which already arms parents The
New Mexico film office also has
a process in place to decide if
a film is eligible for a rebate
they cannot approve any film
with adult content or sexually
oriented films that would be
harmful to minors in the history
of New Mexico film incentive
program no film that fits that
description have even received a
rebate although the intent of
subparagraph I may be to
encompass the language of NC
seventeen it also creates an
opportunity for opportunistic
moral interpretation some are
suggesting that New Mexico would
somehow be able to subsidize it.
Next we have Cat Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Cat Sanchez with gold futures
within the work that we do by
and for women and people of
color is equity with the LGBTQ
lands of concern with this bill
lies specifically on page seven
subparagraph I we know that the
MPA has double standards and
film ratings this has been
documented by Oregon professor
John Lewis and was also made
into a documentary in two
thousand six films with sexual
content receive harsher ratings
that include LGBTQ issues
likewise there are ratings
double standards between films
that show male pleasure versus
female pleasure we are leading a
tax credit the definition that
we know has been used to further
double standards in film ratings
within the system set up to
reinforce those same double
standards with such big language
and reliance on existing double
standards this bill would
continue to stigmatize the sex
lives of LGBTQ community members
and women and then value pilots
over so LGBTQ issues we urge you
to oppose H. B. two eighty
three.
Thank you next we have amber
doxing.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee The New Mexico
film office is not supportive of
this proposed hospital to eighty
three rating systems and
professional organizations such
as the motion picture
association currently exist to
rigorously analyze content and
provide standardized ratings for
films and television productions
which thereby inform parents
guardians and caregivers about
content audiences in viewership
for children and teenagers
readings can not be determined
and telcos production is
complete and prior to
distribution by which point the
production company has already
filed to claim a tax credit the
current full not does not have
any content restrictions of the
film department would not be
able to deny projects
registration based on content
this time any statutory grant
authority to the Film Office
would need to be consistent with
the first amendment principles
the film division and the
department of tax and
Representative do not have the
expertise to predict
predetermined ratings and
audiences and nor can we
determine what the final
commercial product will be thank
you so much.
Thank you
we have eight Pecos.
Good evening thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Liz rate goes on the
president of IATSE local four
eighty and I speak on behalf of
thousands of below the line and
workers in New Mexico we oppose
this bill as it would negatively
affect jobs in the state the
bill as drafted contains
language specifically on page
five and six lines twenty five
and one of the state is not that
states it is not intended to and
does not violate a provision of
chapter thirty article seven
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
please note that New Mexico
Mexico chapter thirty sections
one through ten would already
prohibit no this made.
In New Mexico to include pro
demography or anything greater
than NC seventeen or anything
related to harming minors so
additional impact is redundant
and unnecessary thank you.
Thank you we have Brian Balmain.
Thank you madam chair
I'd like to actually just
offered reasonable quote to
speak to the notion of a mall
conscience being the driver for
such an underhanded piece of
legislation I offer this quote
by the great author Joan Didion
from her estate on morality when
we started feeding ourselves
into thinking not that we want
something or need something not
that it is a pragmatic necessity
for us to have it but that is a
moral imperative that we have it
then just when we join the
fashionable madman and then is
when the standpoint of hysteria
is for in the land and then is
when we are in bad trouble
please oppose this bill thank
you so much.
Thank you and finally we have
Kerry wells.
I'm madam chairman and the rest
of the committee I'm The New
Mexico Film Office again is not
supportive of this proposed
house bill two eighty three the
ambiguity in the language of
this bill could lead to concern
and decreased interest in New
Mexico as production location
this bill would damage careers
of our film workforce and our
businesses in New Mexico for
example by creating
significantly significant
ambiguity and uncertainty and
limiting the studio's ability to
produce planned content in New
Mexico this bill could trigger
an adverse business Clemente and
potentially the termination of
such partnerships this bill
could also dissuade future
businesses in this industry from
investing in New Mexico.
This bill could lead to severely
decreased direct indirect spend
in New Mexico by the film
industry decreased jobs
decreased revenues for
businesses and decrease tax
revenues across New Mexico thank
you.
Okay thank you very and now we
will go to people who are in
support if you are in support
please raise your hand.
Okay so we will go to Anthony.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
I I appreciate the concerns of
the opposition to the bill
What I would say to which is
that.
The jobs created by us
subsidizing the film industry in
Mexico they're very expensive
jobs there's very few of those
jobs compared what we would have
gotten by bringing in state
manufacturing or any number of
other jobs
the way I see it.
The sooner we can stop using our
tax dollars to pay for this
kinds of kinds of things the
better off we're gonna be in the
long run I want my tax dollars
to be used for something useful
not something immoral thank you
for your time consideration.
That looks like all of the
public comment
Representative lane did you want
to wrap it up or do you want do
you ready ready for questions Mr
chairman I just address just a
couple things that we go to
questions thank you very much
appreciate that manager so I
just wanted to clear some
programs I use is the definition
for NC seventeen there is a
different definition for rated
R..
And and frankly based on the the
public input I'm not married to
subparagraph I do intent is not
to.
try to you know Steiff in the
type of films that are that are
filmed here in New Mexico
that may affect different groups
I desire all.
I'm really what part of this
bill is designed to do is to
prohibit filming of you know for
graphics films from receiving
taxpayer dollars to do that
that's what subparagraph for
really accomplishes
and so I you know I'm I'm happy
to to work on this bill to to do
away with some paragraph I.
and this bill is actually not
redundant if you look at the
film tax credit and all the
sections there is a specific
section that deals with child
****.
But it doesn't have anything to
do with adult **** so those
bills is not to be done it again
the ideas is we're not seeking
to suppress our seems stress
ideas of people are are free to
film you know pornographic films
in New Mexico we're just talking
about the use of taxpayer
dollars in order to do so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you so are there questions
from the.
Okay hold on got a switchover
okay Representative Lord yes
thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative Lane you
pretty much just answer my
question because I've read
through this I've talked about
this bill and people need to
understand it's it's the tax
this is what we're try talking
about the tax and it deals
specifically with **** and not
artistic or anything like that
in my correct on that is just
dealing with strictly ****
correct.
Madam chair so subparagraph four
yield with actual explicit
conduct so it wouldn't it
wouldn't be depictions of sexual
explicit conduct it's it's
actual sexually explicit
conduct.
Thank you and that would also
make sure that there was no tax
dollars being given to anyone
that was making child **** is
that correct.
You
madam chair there is there is a
separate subsection that deals
with child **** child ****
obviously is a felony my next
bill and so it dresses that it's
not a crime and nor should be to
film adult consensual **** all
this bill does is says you can't
do so with the use of taxpayer
dollars thank you I think that's
a that's a great balancing it's
a great idea I don't think that
anybody should be getting tax
dollars for **** so thank you
for bringing this forward I
yield my time.
Being no further questions.
I'm sorry I was ready to make a
motion okay I'm I'm sorry I'm
hearing from some other I heard
some other I have got
Representative Romero.
Sorry I I.
There's another capital outlay
me be going on the back of
policies madam chair I would
like to move to table.
Thank you I will second okay so
we have a motion to to table and
house bill two eighty scratched
it out two eighty three.
So Allison will you take the
role please.
Representative Ferrers yes the
table.
Representative board no to table
with comments please.
Representative Pettigrew.
I was and I believe he is gonna
let me know beforehand he was he
had something else that he had
the two couldn't is it excuse
let me just put it that way
okay.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes to table.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
By three to one this bill was
tabled and we'll go back to
Representative Lord for to
explain about thank you I just
have a brief committee and that
I just cannot believe that it's
still going to be located do tax
dollars for **** I just can't
wrap my head around that and I
just want to make one comment
madam chair to the
representatives for once I would
really like you guys to stop
tabling all the bills that have
Republican on him and just vote
on them at least give us a
chance thank you.
Representative alright I will
remind you not to impugn the
decisions of your of your
colleagues and and the I will
say the reason that I voted
against this is because it is
redundant that's what we heard
from the film office and that's
what we heard from our analysts
so I'm please do not politicize
our decisions thank you we sure
thank you very much appreciate
the time tonight before the
committee I know you're very
very busy and I I actually very
much appreciate we scheduling my
bill thank you and and
Representative Lane in that it
in this committee I believe in
all house committees we really
do try to hear all bills now as
it gets later in the session if
if we are your first committee
we are not going to hear you
because you are not going to
make it all the way through so
as time gets later but I I I'm
proud of the fact that this
committee and I think all the
other committees and the house
really do try to at least give
every bill its first hearing and
as I said as we get later in the
session when you have four
committees in front of you when
you've got four days left we
know it's not going to make it
so you may not get hurt but we
will and while I'm on my soapbox
a little bit I'm just gonna just
gonna unfortunately probably
break Representative Lord hard
that provided time is nearly
just suggestion I'm please do
not try to set your clocks if
it's something says we're going
to start at a certain time and
that hopefully that are ready
that things go along and so we
we we do the best we can but but
in order to be here at three
thirty we would have had to cut
off debate on a bill the for the
three hour so that's just how it
goes you can never predict how
long anything that's gonna take
but thank you Representative
Lane thank you have a good night
everyone you too we will we will
move on to house bill two eighty
six which is representative.
My S. that's and I don't know if
he's in the participants.
Here I am.
Okay.
I'm still looking for you over
here in Europe this is too weird
Representative Maestas I just I
was sitting behind you the whole
time exactly exactly.
Right in front of me okay
Representative my at this we are
ready when you are.
Thank you very much madam
chairman of all members for
staying so late in working so
hard.
this is house bill two eighty
six and if I may madam chair up
could you move for discussion
the committee sub.
Yes please give us the two oh
two number thank you very much
House consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty six.
Zero five zero point one so it's
two two zero.
Zero five zero point one okay
thank you yes I will move that
that committee set up for
discussion.
Thank you and all the great
thank you madam chair audible
members are great to be in front
of this committee this evening
We just go to the notes that I
just.
You know law enforcement in this
state is highly professional
highly respected it's our
cousins our sisters our
brothers.
and we need to have a better
process in New Mexico.
For officer misconduct
investigations.
The the officer is entitled to
it swiftly and efficiently and
we need to create a system where
the citizens can be trusted.
And believe in it and so
streamlining of the process of
officer investigations and
holding officers accountable
frankly for both that misconduct
if substantiated is the key to
public trust the key to breaking
down this barrier of us verses
them that sometimes happens in
some of our local law
enforcement agencies there was a
Kael be channel four report
September fourteen on this issue
a subsequent ko B. report on
November first in which the
reporter Nathan o'neill
interviewed of the chief of the
municipal chiefs association as
well as the Attorney General the
Attorney General of described
this process as a train wreck
the chief of the that then chief
of the municipal chiefs a
gentleman from Farmington
described it as sense point and
I quote there is a problem no
doubt about it our Law
Enforcement Academy.
Is this agency that's kind of
floating underneath the
department of public safety but
connected to the attorney
general's office it has a
director which did I did an
analysis on this bill and the
law and has a law enforcement
academy board chaired by the
Attorney General of the state of
New Mexico it has two tasks the
law enforcement academy
certified trains and certifies
officers.
But also is responsible for
suspending a revoking officer
certifications if it determines
that misconduct to a certain
level has occurred the first
part it does fantastic.
It does fantastic there's about
seven Law Enforcement Academy
statewide with some of the
larger agencies in my hometown
there's the Albuquerque police
department academy bears the
burden of County sheriff's
academy but if you're from a
smaller town or or your you
moved to New Mexico and you want
to be a a police officer you go
to the law enforcement academy
in Santa Fe even though Law
Enforcement Academy doesn't
train every single officer it it
creates the culture and and it
set the tone for law enforcement
here in New Mexico.
The law enforcement academy
should not have a dual role it's
it's a conflict of interest in
my opinion it should have one
role and that is to train to set
the tone the the the and to
certify police officers in the
state of Mexico what this bill
proposes to do is take that in
investigating misconduct and
move it to another agency and
that's what we need to determine
as a legislative body before
this legislature is over but at
the time of the table be report
there was a approximately a
hundred thirty act backlog cases
in which these peace officers
are left hanging wondering
what's going to happen in their
career
and and that and that these
investigations were not we're
not happening it's a Hodge podge
of within the statute and within
the rules it's it's it's it's
our fault as a legislature for
creating this also this bill
simply wants to avoid
duplication of officer
misconduct cases
the statute is silent with
regards to the Law Enforcement
Academy director at as it
relates to the police.
Misconduct cases convoluted
statute that doesn't make any
sense that that's in different
sections a law so here is what
this proposal is is that the the
Law Enforcement Academy simply
trains and certifies officers
are however the investigating
the misconduct of officers goes
to another state agency and our
and that's state agency in in
the state of Mexico is the
regulation and licensing
department every single
profession in the state.
Gets its license and is
regulated by the light
regulation and licensing
department with the exception of
lawyers teachers and peace
officers
in my opinion they should all be
under our LG but simply put of
madam chair audible members we
include section twenty nine dash
to dash one
Twenty nine dash two dash eleven
with regards to disciplinary
proceedings and we simply put in
the magic words regulation and
licensing department.
it talks about in surface in
service training on page seven
we put in the magic words by the
regulation and licensing
department under twenty nine
dash seven dash thirteen the
suspension and revocation of
those certifications we put in
the magic words the regulation
and licensing department
and we utilize the uniform
licensing act
and of.
You don't officers are
obligating police agencies are
losing police agencies are
obligated if there's allegations
of misconduct to report it.
To the law enforcement academy
Law Enforcement Academy has
dented supposed to do this
intricate.
A responsibility here is the
flow chart of how misconduct
cases are are supposed to be
handled in the state of New
Mexico and we need to streamline
that for the benefit of the
officers for the benefit of the
of the of the other person's
making these allegations this
also includes the tele
communicators which are kind of
the tele communicator
certification as a nine one one
operators and things of that
nature and that's what it does
and that's what it does
We are.
You know the law enforcement
agency still determines whether
the claim complaint is valid or
not and then I would be remiss
to not explain section eleven on
the bottom of page fourteen it
repeals two sections of law one
is nine dash nineteen dash
eleven which is the up up.
The peace officer advisory board
which is no longer needed in the
structure and it's it's a I
don't think a lot of folks are
uncomfortable with that.
But where the big problem lies
and where the the main
opposition to this bill lies in
page fourteen lines twenty two
dash twenty four and that is the
repeal of section twenty nine
dash fourteen dash eleven it's
entitled the.
Yes officer employer employee
relations act it it puts in
state law.
Do's and don'ts of investigating
police misconduct it handcuffs
police agencies it handcuffs are
sheriff's and our mayors and our
police chiefs with regards to
investigating misconduct it's an
archaic statute that should have
never been in there in the first
place I believe sixteen states
currently have that there's two
or three states this yes you're
trying to remove it
it's it's tough for officers to
to deal with because it's always
been there but even if we take
that out of state statute has
really changed the game they're
still the protocols that peace
officers utilize this this
language was cut and pasted into
collective bargaining agreements
which will always be in there
but it is a contradiction.
And the axes of America to have
police out to have government
agents shielded from the
citizens in state statute and
that is why that must be
repealed thank you madam chair
with that'll stand for
questions.
The institute for adoption if
there's.
Madam chair I second that is
there any opposition.
Okay hearing line you have a you
have that S. sub I'm and now we
will go to the audience
a poll so Alex if you could put
up the pole.
And you can vote in support or
in opposition.
A few more seconds.
Okay so we have eight people or
forty two percent in support
eleven people or fifty eight
percent in opposition so now we
will go to the audience for
comment and just a reminder you
will have one minute I will ask
you to be civil and do not down
on downgrade or denigrate
whatever anyone and I'm getting
tired I'm who knows what works
Mr using so so if you are in
opposition to this bill are you
can go click on participants and
raise your hands and I you will
have one minute to speak and it
will
The the clock will be up and and
essentially it cuts you off at
one minute so please watch the
clock and as you get as you get
down to a few seconds please
wrap up.
And in opposition we will start
with Miguel Gomez go ahead
Miguel.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee and and
chairman Maestas thank you for
this opportunity
I'm it's my great honor to
represent the men and women of
the New Mexico state police
association and although we
appreciate the work that the
chairman my essences that on
this legislation and he and I
have to say that he's been
working with us and and has
asked how to continue working
with us additional number of
issues that the New Mexico state
police so session asked in
because those issues remain we
stand in opposition to this
legislation and we would ask the
committee to to leave this
legislation in this committee at
this time and so we work to
those those issues we we again
we appreciate the words that
that chairman has just started
yes yes comments with and and
and instru is that the the
minimum of New Mexico state
police are your neighbors your
family
and do do a wonderful job and we
just want to continue working to
make this legislation better for
all thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we will go to
John Willoughby.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me yes we can go ahead thank you
for the opportunity madam chair
and Representative Maestas I
think it's really important I'm
kind of flabbergasted we just
had to do pass on to fifty four
which sent criminal
investigations and officer
involved shootings to the same
entity that we had so much high
hopes of efficiency for that is
in the law enforcement academy
board of the law enforcement
academy board does this work
because they're law enforcement
professionals how are you going
to identify conduct if you don't
understand how a police officers
trained I also find it really
alarming it just concerning that
just because I'm a police
officer does not mean I lose my
constitutional rights when I am
the agent of the government
being interviewed and
investigated by the government I
don't lose due process appeal
rights the officer's Bill of
Rights has federal case law like
wine Goddard garden in
Lauderdale it allows officers to
use the bathroom and not to be
accosted read what he's actually
trying to take out of law it is
not some huge protection and I
will remind you not one chief of
police not one from the state of
New Mexico is standing as an
expert who says they're
handcuffed when accountability
is that at stake for law
enforcement thank you.
Hi Mike well when.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Mike pro and I'm a retired state
police officer and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico New Mexico municipal
police chiefs association
we appreciate the Representative
bring this forward we have
worked with him on other issues
however we disagree on this
particular one we are supporting
Senate bill three seventy five
which creates a certification
board made up of nine members of
which no more than I should be
from the same political party
and must include a retired judge
who will chair this chair of
municipal police officer sure
tribal peace officer an attorney
in private practice practices as
a plaintiff's attorney in more
of civil rights Representative
struggle defendants an attorney
in private practice
we're represents public entities
and civil rights claims an
attorney employed by the public
defender's Association we feel
this is a better board rather
than regulation licensing to
hear these type of issues thank
you.
That's all we have been
opposition now if you are here
in support please raise your
hand.
Okay we will start with Diane my
cash.
Hi good evening I'm Diane the
cashier the need on chairman
committee I strongly support
this bill for its taking of
suspension or revocation of
police officer certifications
out of the hands of the public
safety advisory commission
putting those decisions in the
hands of the regulation and
licensing department allows for
these decisions to be made by an
entity that is not closely tied
to law enforcement for me could
help remove the nagging sense
that as it is now the people
making the decisions are too
close to the problem and likely
to be biased in their decisions
whether consciously or
unconsciously thank you and
please vote yes on H. B. two
eighty six thank you next we
have the.
More from Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee more for Martinez
exile.
Connect can you hear me do you
know what hold on a second March
okay the to of that time or was
was off it's it's like got in
the basketball games we have to
reset the shot clock so.
I know I didn't even get a laugh
from my Representative Maestas
the must be frozen out there
there's a smile okay it was a
basketball reference for four
four RBI my court buddy.
Okay go ahead Marshall thank you
madam chair members of the
committee Marshall Martinez
executive director of equality
New Mexico statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization to give
people have a long history of
experiencing violence and that
includes at the hands of law
enforcement as a reminder the
Stonewall riots the beginning of
the modern LGBTQ civil rights
movement was the result of
consistent abuse of queer and
trans people by police the road
to reconciliation is long and
we've been walking in alone for
far too long and let me be
abundantly clear we know that
not all law enforcement officers
are overly violence toward queer
and trans people or anyone else
in their communities we do
believe that members of the
LGBTQ community can never
rebuild trust in law enforcement
we will never feel safer in the
presence of law enforcement if
there are not better mechanisms
for accountability transparency
we support any attempt to review
licensure training and
investigation for law
enforcement officers as a way to
rebuild trust in our communities
and rebuild safety for queer and
trans people thank you.
Thank you Marshall and we have
Barron Jones.
Go ahead Barron.
Aaron I don't know what you are
muted but we can't hear you.
And you are.
You know what we will go on to
Elaine my Estes and hope that
you can get your technical
issues work that worked out so
so can we go ahead with the
lane.
And we'll come back to bear and.
Hello can you hear me.
We can hear you go ahead okay so
are madam chair and
Representative thank you for
having me here with you all this
evening I want to speak in
strong support of this bill as
it impacted member of the
community this bill to me is a
common sense
piece of legislation that
Is a step in the right direction
and I just want to thank
Thank the sponsor for bring it
forward thank you.
You.
We will go back to bearing.
Thank you good evening madam
chair members of the committee
apartment but my my phone wasn't
plugged in my name is Barron
Jones I'm the senior pot public
policy strategist ACLU of New
Mexico we strongly support ace
B. two eighty six of and as
always thanks thank and
appreciate the sponsoring in
this life saving these
legislation you always does we
support this legislation because
we see it as a cue to radically
police culture as negative
negatively impacted members of
the state's black indigenous and
people of color communities and
places member of the law
enforcement community above the
public that they are charged to
serve this proposed piece of
legislation is a good start
toward achieving the type of
Clovis accountability needed to
restore that trust has been
eroded by police violence
because it removes protections
in state law and make it
difficult to discipline police
offices when they put a lot by
late the old they take to serve
and protect as a black man who
have experienced homelessness
does police misconduct and
violence violence and the ACLU
of New Mexicos senior public
policy strategist representing
Representative Ely is weren't
thirty thousand members anchored
you all support this piece of
smart legislation thank you.
Okay that's all for public
comment so we will
Representative Maestas do you
have anything you want to wrap
up before we go to the committee
for questions.
No thank you madam chair stand
for questions okay.
So.
But the okay I'm sorry I'm
trying to keep track of my phone
it turns out that the the north
annex is being do comment guys
not that there's COVID there but
it's being cleaned so two of our
members have been
kicked out of their offices and
I'm not sure where they I'm
hoping they will be able to get
back on but we will go ahead as
we have we still have bills to
get through so are there any
questions from the committee.
Thank you Representative I have
a couple thank you I'm.
Yes.
Standard curriculum for the law
enforcement academies or is it
is that like you have to have
you know eight hours of blanket
six hours the blank or is there
a standard curriculum.
Thank you madam chair
of Representative Thomson yes
there is a wonderful curriculum
it's actually in state statute
we need to pry revisit that and
give the law enforcement academy
some more flexibility on but
the.
The curriculum.
I'm trying to see if it's part
of this bill yes on page six
twenty nine dash seven dash
seven point one there's a little
bit of the curriculum touch
while in service law enforcement
training that's actually the
training that happens at the
at your respective.
HSD because being an officer and
and particularly the last you
know we just put so much
responsibilities on these
officers frankly because of a
lack of a behavior health
infrastructure and and just the.
You know things that that we're
not taking care of you know all
the burdens of of not just
criminal activity but all the
burdens of all this other stuff
is falling on our law
enforcement sisters and brother
so they had they go through
training every two weeks their
training training training
they could always use more
training
the the the Senate bill those
referred to three state I have
some fantastic language with
regards to training.
But I'm trying to find the
statute but yeah that the
findings in statute and also
that that's OK Law Enforcement
Academy okay that and then at
the end of the thing is I
noticed there is a small fiscal
impact is that in H. B. two or
how do you not that that's going
to hang it up here because we're
not the Appropriations Committee
but I'm just curious if you have
figured out the appropriation
for some FTEs that R. L. DZ.
Thank you madam chair
representative I have not yet
there is a slight impact RLD but
it's I think believe it's offset
frankly in the grand scheme of
the budget but I don't have
those numbers for you today okay
thank you are any other
questions from the committee.
Okay seeing none I will
entertain a motion and remember
this is the substitute bill this
is that this is a test to see if
you've been paying attention.
Madam chair you you got me
because I I actually had it
right this time I think I thank
you madam chair I move a do not
pass on house bill two eighty
six and do passed on consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for two eighty six.
Good do I hear second.
Second that okay.
It's.
And that was a perfect motion
that was a perfect motion she's
trying to show off today she's
going to us earlier so I have a
motion for a do pass in the
second Allison what you call the
roll or I'm I'm sorry are we I'm
Alison still here okay go ahead
can you hear me yes we can okay
all right Representative
Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Lord Allison both
lord and Pettigrew are excuse.
Mr Mero.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
So by three to zero you have a
do pass on the committee staff
Representative Maestas thank you
madam chair of the members have
a good evening and
and Representative my S. this I
have to tell you I have taught
my granddaughter that's fine for
football and whenever she sees
you on the screen sees your your
issues these your helmet than
she does that provide for
football marvelous marvelous
thank you madam chair.
Okay.
We have now we have yes
Representative brown in the
participants.
All and Representative Lord you
found a new home.
Good.
Let's see I'm.
I apologize that we literally
got kicked out because rain for
comment yeah Representative
Pettigrew let me know so you
work excuse but now you're back
so I do not see Representative
Browning here.
Representative Lord you'll have
heard her cell phone number
Representative Brown is sick and
has the stomach flu okay so is
representative remain here.
I
believe he was going to take
over for all of this.
I did not see him.
Okay and I don't.
I apologize let me see if I can
get a hold of him because he was
supposed to cover this bill
since she is sick
I don't envy her.
Representative Lord you can let
him know that we could go ahead
with your belt if you want to if
the Iraqis caught up in
something else and he can get on
after we do yours right we're
not we're not opposed to jumping
around on the agenda okay yeah
if you want to do that we can
just let me make sure we need to
bring in my my expert Zach four
he was in earlier okay we will
bring him in and and
Representative Lord why don't
you go ahead I have
Representative rings bell I will
call him and see he said he
sitting in there.
Isn't it he says oh wait he's
called me said Senator hold on
one second.
Here and read our calls are.
Okay.
Gabby were you saying something
yeah madam chairman the phone
with him he says he is in the
meeting somewhere.
Representative do you know what
name he is listed under
participate I did a search for
redeem and he is.
He's not in there under around
Representative.
Okay okay if you can hear me
Madam sorry he's talking to me
at the same time he said he's in
the the one of the what's
happening so he's waiting to be
put in and his you might be an
interest or.
It is his phone number and in
four four seven seven let me
double check care positive
trying to do multiple things
here it's one same time.
My phone wants to mark.
Hello let me check.
Still there Representative right
what is your phone and.
Or digits.
Okay hold on.
Madam chair it's getting even
more confusing he says he's out
of bias phonies and by his
computer at and I don't know why
we can't see him Representative
wanted to tell him to raise his
hand perfect okay hold on one
second wait hold up.
Madam chair I do see someone
named owner I don't know if that
could possibly be and that's
what I was.
This is.
I don't see any hand raised.
And madam chair if if you
were in a waiting room I am said
as the host right now that I
would be able to see.
C. hammer I'm asking for
permission to to get into the
hearing.
Okay yeah he I'm tired.
I'm trying I apologize to my
headset I'm trying to listen to
him and you and there's a delay
so it looks like he went in he's
sitting out there he can't raise
his hand so probably what it's
going to take if somebody can
send him the link records in the
link to get in maybe he's in the
wrong room I don't know what's
going on there.
For.
Madam chair representative I can
go ahead and email him the only
thank you Gabby go ahead and do
that thank you so much for that
I think Representative Lord what
I'm.
That will give him a minute or
two and then if if we can't get
him in and located we will go
ahead with your bill thank you
so everybody take a few deep
breaths and a few next rules
and.
Coffee if you need it.
And madam chair if we can't get
to my my bill is very simple and
straightforward to okay.
You know what Representative
Lord why don't we go ahead with
yours it's getting late I'm we
are getting.
Probably punch drunk and so go
ahead with your bill I agree and
that one so money is really
simple madam chair and and if we
can make sure we have staff in
here too because he's my expert
advice on us yes this one is a
very super simple what what has
happened is is
In our conceal carry statute
there allow thirty days once
they get all the information
back but the reason we brought
this forward is because some
people it's taking up to a year
to get their information back
and it's just and it's not due
to comment this is just a
ongoing problem that it takes so
long to get the information back
that's really not fair some
people said they expect to start
all over with the concealed
carry process so all we're
asking and we think we're giving
him ample time is that when you
apply for concealed carry you
got ninety days to process at
that and that's not unusual time
compared to other states we're
just in a cave got ninety days
please get this all in order and
then from there they have
another thirty days to get their
apply back and then I don't know
if you're familiar New Mexico we
think it's in the state of our
lives in the house a refresher
and every two years you have to
care for so they were to have
all your information they don't
need anything from you you just
get it done they get the the
paperwork done and that is also
taking a very long time for us
in to reply back within sixty
days
without madam chair and like to
have my expert please Zach for
make some committee and this
going back.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak about
this bill tonight as we are
getting late I will try to keep
my comments very brief I also
like Representative Lord said
this is a very simple
straightforward bills I would
not characterize this bill as
pro gun or anti gun or pro
second member anti segment of
this bill is neutral with
regards to firearms what this
bill does it is A. pro
government responsibility and
accountability bills so
currently under New Mexico law
under the Mexico concealed carry
act I should say.
Our New Mexico department of
public safety has thirty days to
issue or deny a license once
they have all the information
and the background check for the
concealed carry permit apple
application are out person is
appointed avocation is receipt
however there is no limit on how
long background check can take
from my understanding from
talking to a former Mexican part
of public safety employees it is
a re it is a reason brought in a
reasonable amount of time to
complete the background check it
should be within a week usually
so what this bill would do is it
limits it to ninety days total
so thirty days from when the
background check is complete but
ninety days total we believe
that this is a reasonable amount
of time for New Mexico part of
public safety to do their due
diligence and ensure that the
application person applying for
the license has met all the
requirements secondly this bill
would add a sixty day limit for
a renewal application currently
there is no time limit for a
renewal application so this bill
would just merely put in a sixty
day timeline that for someone
who is applying for a renewal of
like I said this bill is it's
neutral we are not changing any
of the requirements to receive a
concealed carry permit in New
Mexico this bill is merely
putting additional time
constraints to make sure the
government of Mexico public
safety I should say is
responsive and accountable to
people who are applying for
licenses so with that I will
you'll board thank you.
Thank you and thank you madam
chair I just say one more thing
yeah what would Jack was talking
about we I actually did a poll
and asked people how long is it
taking you to get your concealed
license and it's anywhere from
month to over here so there it
doesn't seem to be any
consistency like with most other
states with most programs you
apply for something the other
problem is and and I'm not
blaming them because I
understand how hard it is to
sometimes stand top of things we
can't ever get a hold of Zach
and I will try to call them we
can't reach them and you can't
email them and they're not
replying to emails or phone
number so when people do apply
it's just awful limbo nobody
knows what is happening so
that's why we brought this bill
forward again it's not a pro or
anti to a it's just we're trying
to put a time constraint on them
to make a decision on this thank
you not opened of questions okay
thank you Representative Lord
okay we will do a poll.
So Alex if you could put up the
pole.
Madam holidays I try to launch
the pool and the previous fall
was up so give me just one okay
okay.
I did get a text to ask if we
could take down the pole and I
said I don't see it so it's the
gremlins again Recession
gremlins yes madam chair the
pull is up now okay thank you.
A couple more seconds.
Okay so we have fourteen people
are seventy eight percent in
support and for people are
twenty two percent in opposition
so we will go to the audience if
you are in opposition to this
bill and would like to speak
please raise your hand go to the
participant but and not you can
raise your hand there.
Okay I do not see anyone in
opposition okay same thing if
you are in support and would
like to speak please raise your
hand.
Okay just a reminder to watch
the clock and we will start with
Anthony.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lord committee
members
I I ask you to support this bill
because in reality our
government should be accountable
to the people and what we're
looking at here is people who
have gone through and taken
their concealed carry training
they are tested and they're
ready.
You know to be licenses conceal
carry and then the government
turns around and drag their feet
with getting back to them with
their their license and.
You know I feel that's unfair
and you know that government
does need to be accountable to
the people.
So thank you for consideration.
Okay thank you we have more
dial.
Yes ma'am I'm can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
I'm I don't know what happened
last bill for some reason all
and buttons despaired but is
more downtown understand your in
reference to the concealed carry
permit in New Mexico.
I'm gonna do is to address as a
whole to remind the committees
when they're voting against
anything to.
Limit the second amendment is
that we still have twenty nine
of the thirty through counties
that have shown that they want
anything in support of the
second amendment but yet and
even the polls that you give
the show seventy eight percent
pro and every time we bring
proof of legislation that.
That rural New Mexico and I have
to extract rural New Mexico as a
pro second amendment.
Please remember that twenty nine
of the thirty three counties
still want pro second amendment
so please.
Don't table this.
Senator committee and vote your
constituents not your party
thank you.
Thank you and I will Jamie
Frasier page.
Thank you madam chair.
Representatives I'm Jamie Fraser
Division vice president of New
Mexico shooting sports
association and a retired
California police officer.
I am strongly in support of this
bill it holds an agency of the
state government accountable it
gives what I believe to be
reasonable time to accomplish
their ends.
And removes the burden of.
Long periods of anticipation of
while waiting for the license.
People applying have gone
through their training they've
spent their money and their time
and it seems only fair that they
be given
as expeditious handling at the
hands of this agency as possible
thank you through time.
Okay that is all for public
comment Representative Lord did
you want to respond to anything
before we go to the committee I
know thank you it it's pretty
straightforward we're just
asking them to reply in a timely
manner it is all we're doing in
this and again it's faster
systems with COVID this is been
a long history of them taking
some time to get back to us and
so I'm open to question thank
you okay Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative lord for for
bringing this to our I I agree I
believe that this is a a
bipartisan bill and and I think
it's pretty straightforward my
my only question is when it
comes to the background check
just because I want to make sure
the ninety days is a is a
reasonable amount of and how
long does it take to get a a a
background check back.
Stephanie Stahl meter time to
talk but you made a hand demands
question Stephanie.
I apologize I it not only did I
get muted it shut this thing all
over my screen and I had to go
back and find it yes please Zack
Ford if you would answer the
question.
Madam chair representative
Burris that's a very good
question so in my conversations
with the former New Mexico
department of safety employee of
the background check recently as
can be it can be done within a
day other no interviews the need
to be does part of background
check they typically make sure
that someone is not a prohibited
possessor or there's some type
of domestic violence order of
standing against them to make
sure they are a they can legally
possess a firearm state New
Mexico in addition there are
also you cannot have drunk
driving require a drunk driving
violation it within a certain
number of years actually goes
beyond just merely someone who
can't legally possess a firearm
so this requirements for a
concealed Kerry license in New
Mexico actually more strict than
the requirements for firearm
ownership in New Mexico so it's
nearly it's a look in the state
at state and federal records to
see if someone can legally own a
firearm it should be able to can
be completed within a week.
Thank you Representative and
Zach I think that are that makes
the the ninety days very a
reasonable I think you have a a
good deal here thank you.
Thank you.
Where did I see your hand
before.
I think my question got answered
thank you okay and I just I have
I hopefully it's just one
question do you have a sense of
why it taking so long is it is
it shortage of people is that
you would do you have any idea
why it's it can take up to a
year.
Madam chair I could speculate on
that I think it used to be more
streamlined when it was under
the state police and it was
moved to a different department
and that may be part of it as
act you have anything you like
to add on to that.
you know unfortunately this is
an area that I and I don't have
a lot of good information on and
you know I guess my is my phone
calls to New Mexico for public
safety and went unreturned a
number of other instructors
which unfortunately led to an
environment where some rumors
that I do not believe we were
work grounded in reality began
to faster because of the lack of
communication the people had and
I heard all sorts of reasons why
people speculate about taking so
long but unfortunately I do not
know.
That's totally fair I don't
expect you to tell me rumors
yeah and thank you madam chair
we we actually did try because
you know I always ask you guys
have you found out the answers
from that department is that we
did try to reach out to them and
we just can't get a hold of them
so it's very frustrating would
have left of her their side of
the story but I'm just going off
of that time frame to begin
again are based on what other
states are doing and seem to be
able to get there is done in a
timely matter so thank you for
that question okay thank you I
will entertain a motion.
Madam chair I'm over the past.
Do I hear second ice.
I second madam.
The second.
I think Representative Lord did
the second I did okay and madam
chair I'm only asking this
because it came up in commerce
and economic development
committee that can Sanchez
second their own legislation or
is it just amendments they can't
second.
That's a good question I have
not that's not something I've
heard so just to be safe I will
second just thank you for we
don't have anything come back
and I will see if I can find
that answer
okay thank you so much I
apologize no that's okay I
appreciate people making sure
that we do things the right way
I I am definitely not one who
will thanks I do not make
mistakes because I make mistakes
I'm very very routinely and I I
appreciate people who are okay
gently point me in the right
direction so our Allison is.
Yes.
What is Allison taking taking no
madam chair I am taking all.
Yeah okay go ahead Gabby go
ahead and take the role I mean.
For the past on house bill three
oh six Representative but at us
yes.
Representative Lord yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Excuse thank you madam chair
representative vice chairman of
Madam no.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
I you have three in the
affirmative wanted the negative
one excuse okay thank you so
much for that mark we do have a
due process and the carefully
I'm thank you thanks for being
here and hopefully we can now
locate Representative Rehm.
I just sent him a text I was
trying to okay there we go okay
Let me see promote to panelists.
That's my first time I promoted
someone to panelists I learned a
new skill today so.
Representative right well come.
Your favorite committee.
We we got guys walked out and
came back so okay yeah that's I
we just we have grand ones so we
are now on our last.
Bill for the night
HB two ninety three
Representative Rehm do you have
experts you need to be permitted
in yes district attorney Diana
of loose okay.
So Gabby will promote her to our
panelists.
I am changes promoted misleads
okay.
Okay there I see here so
whenever you're ready
Representative Rehm.
So what we need to understand is
what we're actually speaking
about and so on I know it's late
I'm gonna try to go quickly over
it so I'm gonna go over some of
the past famous rapist if you
will
Arthur Gary bishop he operated
tell nineteen eighty eight and
he had been exposed while
growing up to provide free and
he ended up murdering five young
boys and sexually assaulted them
Dennis Rader was called the B.
T. K. strangler and he went
ahead and
And that was because it was
blind torture and kill.
And he had ten first degree
murders involving sexual crimes
John Evan Corey here's this guy
needed twenty four rest.
And the he he was in jail and
for fondling a five year old
Are being coral.
The Houston mass murderer.
Our.
Is a thirty three year old what
tradition in Houston and he had
two accomplices and they have
the our kids twenty eight young
boys Sion Houston area in the
seventies.
one from Canada in this one's
interesting because it's female
Carla Homolka and she and her
husband kidnapped and raped
three young girls in murdered
them.
I use this one just from South
America because of the it's an
example of of how dangerous
these people are Hey girl Alonzo
Lopez are it's believed that he
had murdered and sexually
assaulted up to three hundred
and fifty he was convicted of a
hundred and ten.
Let's see.
Wayne Williams he's twenty nine
our children that he killed in
the of land area.
One you'll probably remember is
Ted Bundy Ted Bundy killed
thirty women.
Are you ni at twelve of their
heads as trophies sentence
apartment.
It's not uncommon for these
individuals to keep trophies.
Our was.
Trying to get the ones that are
here in the U. S. for you.
When we when we bring it a
little more home to us so here
in New Mexico we had Terri
Clark.
Clark in nineteen or eighty four
sexually molested the six year
old.
He was in process well in
September of eighty four he also
tried to a doctor three other
women and was convicted in
eighty six he was out on appeal
and in eighty six the one I have
been kidnapped being no way in
court.
She was nine years old he rape
murdered and shot her three
times in the back of the head.
He was sentenced to death in New
Mexico well in nineteen eighty
eight.
there was a move at our
legislature which was house bill
fifty one you keep these most
violent individuals behind jail.
Women are prior to his death
sentence being
Prior to his execution I just I
should say he said you know if
you let me out I'll do this
again anyway these are the
individuals that were talking
about and that's why we're
increasing the minimum sentences
or these individuals in prison
and with that I'll go ahead left
to miss loose
Have a state.
I'm madam chair anyone else is
having this problem but I can't
hear Miss loose.
State madam chair I can't hear
we can't we can't hear you you
are not we're.
Okay now you're muted.
No you are not muted but we are
not hearing you.
Could I maybe suggest that you
get out of the meeting and then
come back in and we will
immediately promote you to our
panelists again it's it's but
with the one trick I know it's
that I can to turn your computer
off and then turn it back on so
that's what we'll start with
that and if we still don't get
anywhere
I'll let someone who knows
something try to do it so so we
will wait for second for miss
lives staff.
To re enter and hope that things
are.
Working for our.
I could be like the speaker and
see if anybody has a joke.
I think it may be a little maybe
maybe that's your job refereeing
to entertain us what we're
waiting.
Madam chair I am letting ms lose
back into okay.
Let's keep our fingers crossed.
Okay she says she's back right
thank you okay yeah and also
were also represented a chair
representative black could not
get any there so she's just
watching on the go on the
website to go home or bad no
that's it no I've not not to no
Representative I at Rachel black
yes I Black I got the right.
Never mind it is late I'm just
gonna show up it is that not I'm
black and brown it confuses me
and so Mr Lewis go ahead and
let's see if we can hear you.
Right now all we can not hear
you.
If she has a set of headphones
but also if you look at the
little arrow next to the mute
button there's a select a
microphone options.
And it may just be that it's
coming from a different source.
Madam chair that's absolutely
correct if you go in it if you
can hear this if you go in and
you're using a microphone and
you're not used to it it'll have
a little but you have to click
okay.
Can you hear me now if we can
thank you.
Should I call you
What what they call a mat.
Would you not geniuses but the
squad that goes out from each
squad I know very well.
Thank you to the geek squad it's
an honor thank you madam go
ahead Representative I mean miss
Lewis.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you and thank
you for the tech support I know
it's late I know you're all or
retired it's very patient if you
I'm briefly two things that this
bill are doing our one it's
increasing the minimum mandatory
sentence for criminal sexual
conduct contact of a minor and
criminal sexual penetration I'm.
Right now there is a three year
minimum mandatory sentence you
might ask why increase penalties
this time when we're working on
criminal justice reform because
what we're talking about are
individuals that are the worst
of the worst those there were
named by Representative re I
appreciate him bringing this
legislation because our most
vulnerable victims who have been
on the big to modest at the
hands of horrific people on
those predators this increases
it to five years the Senate's on
the second degree maximum is
fifteen thank the difference
between right now three and
fifteen is discretionary I'm
when you think about the topic
crime and what is happen to an
individual I'm there were only
saying three years I'm at that
sometimes for victims I'm it's
kind of a slap in the face that
that's that anymore that that
person can have to server
understand the sentencing scheme
for first degree is eighteen
years all of it is mandatory so
if you're going just from that
one level of degree and for a
child that's the difference
between age thirteen fourteen
one here you go from having to
serve eighteen years to only
having a mandatory three years.
The other portion of this bill
it deals with have been trolling
Han Spence Matt increasing those
are once again we're talking
about he we've already committed
a felony they are it's been
within the ten years at the
finish their sentence and it
would be increasing this
penalties once again the people
that we want to have
incarcerated in New Mexico are
the worst of the worst the bond
offenders I and those are the
people that this bill is
referencing and with that I
would stand for any questions
thank you.
Representative Rehm are you
ready to go to the audience.
Yes madam chair I think we're
ready okay.
Gabby let's go ahead with the
poll.
So please feel free to our.
To vote out.
Okay.
Give you a few more seconds.
Okay so we have I'm.
We have six people or forty
three percent in opposition and
eight people and fifty seven
percent in support so we will
start with the opposition if you
want to make public comment
please click on the participants
and then raise your hand and I
will call on you and just a
reminder
we you have one minute
so we will start with Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of.
The defense lawyers association
we appreciate the sponsor in its
advocates however we
respectfully oppose this
legislation I would direct a
committee detention to section
three of the bill on this
committee did passed H. B. one
fourteen which addressed Vigil
fender sentencing and sought to
give more discretion to our
judicial bodies so that they can
address the different
circumstances of why someone
might find themselves with
multiple felony convictions this
section actually goes against
that it actually goes against
the national movement to
eliminate mandatory sentencing
and give more discretion to our
judicial body so that they can
identify and observe things on a
case by case basis before
imposing mandatory sentencing
structures for that reason madam
chair we respectfully oppose
encourage the committee to do
this thank you.
Thank you Rikki Lee Diane with
cash.
I'm getting a I do urge a no
vote on H. B. two ninety three
extremely horrible cases
highlighted in the introduction
to the bill are appalling but
they don't account for the
entire region this bill either
Corran a motion don't seem like
a base for legislating as
compelling as it feels it might
seem like finding ways to
incarcerate people for longer
and longer periods of time would
be a way to fight crime but it's
not an easy fix and expensive it
doesn't fix anything extending
already provided for periods of
incarcerations have not been
shown to reduce the to decrease
recidivism order increase public
safety more time in prison can
actually decreased positive
outcomes when people are finally
released and almost all
incarcerated folks will be
released at some point all of
the crimes articulated this bill
already have prison sentences
attached might need sentences
might Wallace in the believing
we are increasing public safety
but it's a distraction it's an
ineffective strategy in an
expensive one it could end up
costing us millions of dollars
with no real benefit thank you.
Thank you Diane Barron Jones.
Yes once again thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is parents also the CEO
you've New Mexico I'm for the
reasons stated we stand strong
opposition of this bill and
would like to sort of push for
that enhancing criminal
penalties not shown if there's
no evidence showing that
enhancement of criminal
penalties on we do some the the
issues we we we state address I
thank you so much and are you
all so support to vote in
opposition to this bill excuse
me is really late thank you
much.
Yeah thank thank you very yeah
we're all getting a little out.
I guess I'll just leave it at
tired so now if you are in
support of this bill and would
like to speak please raise your
hand.
Okay we will start with AmTrust
straddling.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
My name is under stress
straddling madam chair and I am
in support of this bill I come
from a county who has at that
has experienced
a tremendous amount of violent
crimes of repeat offenders.
It is appalling that these
people of these different
organizations are against this
bill strictly for economic
reasons for how expensive it is
there are victims that I know
personally in this area in San
Juan County who have had
terrible experiences due to
repeat offenders we cannot keep
revolving doors going we need
this type of legislation to keep
them incarcerated to keep our
cut community safe thank you for
your time and letting me speak.
Thank you and next we have Jamie
Frasier page.
Thank you madam chair
Representative as a former
police officer.
I know all too well.
That while longer prison terms
may not.
Reduce recidivism well
personagens carbureted he cannot
she cannot perpetrate crimes if
they were a bit chilly
perpetrating.
Increasing the sentence by two
years may not seem like much but
that's two years of additional
time that the streets will be
safe from people who prey on
children which is probably one
of the worst crimes any of us
especially those of us with
children can imagine so I urge
strongly urge a do pass on this
bill thank you for your time.
Thank you and finally we have
Anthony.
Apologies madam chair he seems
to.
He's back.
Thank you madam chair.
Sorry about that as we said it
is late madam chair committee
members.
I ask you to support this bill
I don't see anything wrong with
keeping.
Files behind bars for a couple
more years because if they are
behind bars they are not out
committing crimes and that is a
worthy use of my tax dollars
because I think we need to
protect our children and not
create more victims thank you
for your consideration of this
matter I yield my time.
Thank you okay that's it for
public comment Representative
Rehm did you have anything you
wanted to add before we go to
the committee.
Then we.
Okay Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and this
is awesome we're getting the
closed caption underneath and
that's great for my husband who
so hard of hearing so I truly
appreciate how that got back on
their I'm so I do want to ask
madam chair some questions on
this is there a cure for peta
files.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord no and what we found is
while some are receptive to
treatment and we do have
treatment in our prisons others
are not if you look at Terri
Clark you know he said that if
he was released from prison he
would do it again and so
Some of the worst or not
rehabilitative the when we look
at sex offenders in our
community.
We find and and I went to a
seminar with the legislature on
this when there is a perception
that law enforcement is watching
them when you have strong sex
offender laws and rules that
resurfaces some rates are driven
down.
But would usually find is those
that are more receptive to reset
is there's a our our or to the
educational process and therapy
are tend to be in the low ten
percent area and those who are
not receptive to the therapy all
right you get up into the twenty
percent area.
Thank you for internet question
and thank you madam chair.
The reason I ask a question is
already knew the answer so I
have a degree in psychology I
said before and we studied a lot
about child sex offenders and do
the.
To seize your to say they're the
highest rate of repeat offenders
and I just happen to look at the
stat from the Virginia criminal
sentencing commission that
multiple studies have found that
the average peta file has
molested over three hundred
children in the lifetime.
I really wanted to sink in.
That the average rate of file
has molested over three hundred
children in his or her lifetime.
And I just keep thinking about
how to years of them being
locked up a little bit longer
would lower those numbers.
Also has renewed the justice
department's bureau statistics
that sex offenders are at least
four times more likely than
other criminals be arrested for
sex crime.
And that forty percent of them
are likely to do it again.
And rather than just read the
stats I'm just going to go by
what I know from all the studies
that we did.
Is that sex offenders are repeat
offenders they re offend I don't
know why there is no cure but
there isn't there's no cure for
peta files there is no cure for
serial rapist the minute we let
them out they do it again.
So I look at this is this is two
years.
Longer of a sex offender that
can't do what they do because
there is no way to cure them of
what they do.
And I do appreciate this bill
because as you'll find out a
reoccurring theme I I'm not a
fan of the sex offenders and I'm
not a fan of child molesters and
I have no problem with them
being in there longer I really
don't because.
I just want to stress that again
three hundred children is the
average amount that they molest
and I was quite.
Shocked and saddened and.
I just keep looking at this
number three hundred children in
their lifetime.
Three hundred.
So what price are we going to
pay I I think giving them
another two years this.
I'm gonna keep my committee that
because I I I have a bit a great
to stand for sex offender so
thank you very much for bringing
this bill forward and I I do
appreciate it thank you.
You madam chair and
Representative Lord I supervised
a sex crime unit and the family
crime unit and.
It was it was interesting to
provide offenders
speaking about they had an
uncontrollable urge now I would
like miss Lucy who is prosecuted
to weigh in on this as well.
Madam chair and representative
I'm I'll give an example of a
case that are prosecuted where
I'm the New Mexico state police
I'm I and I kick unit worked at
it was I started out as what we
call a child ****.
I'm they believe the person had
live victims they they did all
of the work they can never find
any live fictions and I thought
well maybe they got some Intel
on right before they acted on
that.
We argued for jail time.
And there was no mandatory for
that crime for sexual
exploitation of children.
I'm the judge instead place the
person on probation.
Within a period of two years
that violated their probation
not only with having child porn
but with actually molesting two
children his own two children
that he still had contact with
in his home.
I'm your worst fears came to
light that he said that he
started doing it when he was
restricted from other children.
This is what we're talking about
the worst of the worst thank
you.
Madam chair did have another
question if that's okay
I I did want to say I remember
when we were studying at
psychology it's like a clock and
all the sex offenders say the
same thing they feel the urge.
They feel that urged urges very
strong they act on urged there's
a sense of relief and then
there's a sense of guilt and
shame and then it goes around
again and it never stops they
get the urge they go after they
abuse and it's it's a just like
it's like a clock goes around
and around and around and
around.
And it's a compulsion I'm sick
OCD that they cannot stop there
is absolutely no cure for that
So I just want to say again
thank you.
Because we're not talking about
a group of people when I talk
about somebody who got high got
drunk did something that they
should have done stole a car
we're talking about people that
there's something no cure for
and we we.
And it's I don't know it it's
unfortunate sad but the only
option we have is to keep them
locked up longer so thank you
that's all I have a yield my
time.
I don't see any other questions
but in my reading of the bill
this is much broader than child
molesters is that correct.
Madam chair and you are correct
a child offenses are one portion
of it and habitual offenders
those are individuals that
continue and they're released to
re offend so we're directing at
at the at the repeat offenders.
Thank you I'm seeing no more
questions I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair at the table.
We have a tabling motion to
right here second.
Madam chairman second the table
okay so Gabby it was
Representative Romero with the
motion and Representative but I
just with the second will you go
ahead and take.
The role.
Madam chair thank you.
Motion to table house bill two
ninety three year Representative
but at us.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord.
Now.
Madam chair representative
pedigree so excused yes thank
you for asking.
Hi Sir madam.
Yes to to.
Madam chair Thompson yes the
table.
If one member excuse three in
the affirmative and one in the
negative thank you
Representative bring your bill
has been tabled.
Thank you.
I think we will lock all of
COVID.
Call it an evening and we got
done before nine o'clock so no
one gets all.
