Members of the House roll call
is about to begin.
Members please rise for today's
indication offered to us by
Representative Castellano.
asked to work through us for the
power of the Holy Spirit.
Phyllis was physical and
spiritual injury so that we can
be the best leaders we can be.
Representative Montoya would you
please lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Progress are Representative Rod
Montoya.
Members of the masses speaking
please leaders to salute
Mexico's flag.
Jennifer early on.
Speaker.
Generally
Speaker.
The same point.
Thank you Mr speaker I
understand where the limited
floor session right now and I
so I'm supposed to also be in
that committee so potentially at
least one of our votes would be
a down in that committee will
communicating with him via text
he's able certainly to designate
someone to stand for him during
committee reports session but if
you'd like to you know we could.
However you like to stand so you
can return the committee that's
that's perfectly fine
so.
Can I have a couple of minutes
to reach out to him and or would
you just want a Texan if you've
been talking to my text maybe
that would be quicker.
certainly provide for you this
to rely on Representative Dow
city you can go back into
committee and we're not like I
said we're not gonna have any
votes you're not gonna be
Jennifer earlier.
House Bill ten introduced by
Representative Figueroa Garrett
at a and Sweetser and act
relating to broadband and acting
coordinator of state broadband
programs providing for planning
establishing the connect New
Mexico fund providing for grants
requiring reports raising the
for federal or other funding
assistance for broadband
infrastructure or for the
purchase of broadband
infrastructure to ensure that
the application and purchases
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
thanks appropriations and
finance.
House bill twelve introduced by
Act enacting the cannabis tax
act creating the cannabis
control division in the
regulations and licensing
licensing department providing
duties creating a cannabis
requirements.
Revising section of law related
to cannabis creating a public
education campaign creating the
community grants reinvestment
fund creating the community
county can cannabis Tax creating
the Municipal Cannabist Tax
providing for distribution from
cannabis excise tax revenue
amending the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act providing
making appropriation house bill
twelve.
As well having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee that's
taxation and revenue.
House bill seventeen introduced
by Representative upon an act
relating to controlled
substances and acting the
cannabis regulation Act enacting
regulatory advisory committee
creating a cannabis regulation
Fund establishing the medical
cannabis assistance program
creating a low income medical
patient assistance fund
making appropriation house bill
seventeen Bill seventeen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee events taxation and
allowing persons to leave
infants and safety devices for
the surrender of infants under
certain conditions without
criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse of a child
those devices providing limited
immunity for operators of those
devices requiring the children
youth and families department to
issue rules to implement the
Committee and see Judiciary.
House Bill to fourteen
introduced by Representative
laws nineteen sixty seven
chapter two forty two section
one as amended which provides
for reduced minimum wages for
persons with disabilities House
Fourteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee and labor
veterans and military affairs.
referral to treatment services
for certain enrollees requiring
practitioners to obtain and
review certain reports if the
prescribed.
treatment for persons under
their supervision subject to
available funding and resources
House Bill to fifteen.
Bill two fifteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
an act relating to domestic
affairs providing sanctions for
willfully.
And unjustifiably interfere in
with visitation or time sharing
requiring training for
committee and Senate Judiciary.
House Bill to seventeen
introduced by Representative to
them and potentially leading to
higher education amending the
It's.
government elections in the
Indian Affairs.
House Bill to eighteen
introduced by Representative
the duties of a student loan
servicer giving administrative
responsibility enforcement power
to financial institutions.
Division of the regulation and
bar or equally our of our course
equally providing right for co
signers including notice an
access to information providing
and unconscionable trade
practices creating a private
right of action providing
penalties creating the student
loan of loan bill of rights
development committee then see
Judiciary.
House Bill to nineteen
introduced by Representative
Garrett and potentially leading
to public education requiring
appropriation house bill two
nineteen.
Bill two nineteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee fence
appropriations and finance.
contract in the hospital funding
act allowing the issuance of
certain bonds for county skilled
nursing and rehabilitative
rehabilitation hospitals and
acting the twenty twenty one
emergency House Bill two twenty.
Bill two twenty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee events Judiciary.
education changing assessment
requirements for students in
kindergarten through second
grade House Bill to twenty one.
Two twenty one having been read
introduced by Representative
Thomson and Ferrari in senators
Lopez and Hemphill an act
relating to special education
and acting the special education
concerns providing access to
student educational records
providing for the
confidentiality of records
providing potential actions for
non compliance requiring an
Sir appropriations and finance.
House Bill to twenty three
introduced by representative
Thompson and potentially leading
to motor vehicles creating the
law enforcement officers in full
the nontraditional communication
or disability registry hospital
to twenty three.
public works and capital
improvements committee that's
Judiciary.
four.
House Bill to twenty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee as local government
notice clarifying requirements
for required public notices
revising requirements for
publication in the Spanish
language House Bill to twenty
five.
committee and state government
Alexion's and.
Strike that the house will to
twenty five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
bash an act relating to grand
juries providing that lawful
competent and relevant evidence
is evidence admissible at trial
permitting the target of a grand
earliest days after which a
target me testified allowing the
District Court to determine
compliance with section thirty
one dash six special Levin NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being a
For a violation of that section
House Bill to twenty six.
Bill two twenty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
House Bill to twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero and potentially
leading to public education
defining ethnic studies
requiring ethnic studies that
local governments land grants
and cultural affairs committee
and education.
the transportation project fund
House Bill to twenty.
House Bill to twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the transportation public
introduced by Representative
Castellano and act relating to
land grants agency the recess
amending and enacting sections
of chapter forty nine article
of natural resources providing
for civil and criminal actions
and penalties updating
provisions of chapter forty nine
article four NMFA nineteen
seventy eight so that the
similar to the same definition
powers and provisions for land
grants versus governed pursuant
to chapter four article one NMFA
and Senate Judiciary.
amending the real estate
recovery Fund Act clarifying
procedures increasing recovery
limits house bill two thirty.
House bill two thirty having
And state government Alexion's
and Indian Affairs.
House bill two thirty one
introduced by Representative the
with an act relating to
close or consolidate polling
locations making technical
changes house bill two thirty
one.
S. one to thirty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
state government elections and
Stapleton and act relating to
public schools and acting the
public school ventilation
improvement act creating a
capital improvement program for
public schools and elation
systems creating a fund
and school personnel during the
Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic declaring an
emergency house bill two thirty
two.
House bill two thirty three
introduced by Representative
Castellano.
An act relating to education
requiring the public education
department to assist schools
districts in providing internet
Yes.
Two thirty three having been
read twice by title.
Is order printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
Ortiz in Pino Lopez and to heck
and act relating to guardianship
requiring office of guardianship
to strengthen oversight of
guardianship service program
thirty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
state government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee then
some proprioceptive.
Mexico insurance code house bill
two thirty five.
House bill two thirty six
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero and act
relating to public finance
enacting the public banking act
certain investments prohibiting
conflicts of interest creating
the state banking fund requiring
the state treasurer to deposit
and maintain a certain amount of
public money in the public bank
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
and Senate Judiciary.
between the New Mexico school
for the deaf and public schools
allowing from the New Mexico
school for the deaf to provide
services to deaf and hard of
hearing students who attend
House Bill to thirty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the health and Human Services
Committee events education.
natural leading to public
finance increasing transfers
from the fire protection fund to
the fire protection grant Fund
providing that the fire
protection grant functional not
underserved areas house bill two
thirty eight.
House bill two three nine
introduced by Representative
Gail Armstrong an act relating
to mining.
Reading the provision of W. mine
resources committee and state
governmental actions and Indian
Affairs.
House Bill to forty introduced
health and Human Services
Committee.
House joint resolution nine
introduced by representative
that allows essential household
electric internet natural gas
water and waste water
connections to domiciles upon
the enactment by a majority vote
House joint resolution nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
And Judiciary.
Representative Lewis a memorial
supporting strengthening
relations between Mexico the
United States and Taiwan in
trade the exchange of visits by
officials in supporting Taiwan's
and cultural affairs committee.
House Bill to forty one
qualifying water projects from
the water project fund for
qualifying water projects that
serve mutual domestic water
systems and urgent need House
Early on.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house we go to the
next order of business reports
of committee.
No objections so ordered thirty
three.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
natural resources committee to
is been referred house bill
seventy six has had no
consideration report them with
recommendations that I do passed
and then for the state
House bill one oh three.
Do pass and thence to the state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
Mr speaker consumer Public
House bill one eleven do pass
and thence to the Judiciary
Committee.
House bill one fourteen to pass
Affairs Committee.
Boards we interpret for severity
two.
Four has been received.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to
Affairs Committee.
House joint resolution agree to
pass an answer for the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
consideration point in with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended immense refers to the
state government elections in in
in Affairs Committee.
House Bill eighty five do passed
and then referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety three.
Do you have an answer for the
Mr speaker state government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill fourteen has had it
under consideration report same
answer for the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one twenty four do
passed as amended an answer for
to the Judiciary Committee.
for house bill ninety eight to
pass.
Reporting vendors.
recommendation that it to pass.
House bill fifty seven as
amended to pass as amended.
to is been referred house bill
eleven has had it under
consideration for them of
recommendation that it do passed
as amended in answer for to the
Mr speaker health and Human
Committee.
House bill seventy two do passed
and then referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety seven two
taxation revenue committee
reports have been received.
German earlier.
Mr speaker.
In the house we go to the next
Gail Armstrong an act repealing.
Session twenty two dash one dash
fourteen NMFA nineteen seventy
eight being lost twenty nineteen
The council to forty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee dense Education.
appropriation for the New Mexico
department of agriculture to
implement the farmers market
double up food Bucks program
house bill two forty three.
agriculture and water resources
committee thence appropriations
and finance.
one hundred anniversary House
memorial I House memorial I
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
House joint memorial to
introduce by Representative my
Mr Morrell to having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee.
The gentleman from.
Bernalillo.
one more
actually announcements
miscellaneous with
injection so ordered.
House bill twenty four
Representative Sariñana I had
referred the bill to the
Education Committee then said.
Health and Human Services.
committee house bill twenty four
Representative Sariñana remove
the a health and Human Services
referral and add.
Appropriations and finance.
for the same reasons I'm
removing the health and Human
Services referral and adding in
place there of a referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
And house bill one one six.
Representative Thomson house
bill one one six representative
a referral to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
And adding in lieu thereof
referral to the appropriations
and finance committee house bill
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Representative Garcia.
These committee reports.
we're we're just doing we're
we're just reading and the
report of the committee.
manifest itself seen that
historically we've done
motions to adopt committee
reports on a voice vote or is
votes on the committee reports
and
Investors objection will
continue to do them as we've
always done them.
thank you.
And also point out for those a
participating on zoom your
online voting system does have a
members which to do it
And things as choose the
generated going into a chair
Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
the transportation budget so I
am hopeful that folks will tune
into this very
and clear attempts to get the
quote of the day in Santa Fe New
Mexican hopefully that works out
for you.
Thanks to the gentlelady from
Bernalillo chairwoman Thompson.
and public affairs committee
will be meeting on sale at one
thirty please be there and be on
time thank you members know next
my Martin's you're a labor and
military military Veterans
Affairs committee will meet at
twelve o'clock today two o'clock
More as an ask for the
gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have a major democratic caucus
the meeting tomorrow February
on the speakers table it has a
house bill fifty five it has an
asterisk there that if you
Legislative Council that that is
the likely not a proper way to
handle this that until the
committee poll reports are
the of with the absence of a
Representative Townsend leader
Townsend was going to bring this
up but I I don't know how we're
gonna have another floor session
I just wanted to bring this up
at this point so that they can
be addressed I'm not looking for
bills are on the calendar to
give notice to members and they
have been out of committee and
again this is pending adoption
in a vote on the committee for a
year out of the room we did have
of.
On this topic so I understand
that you're mistaken just
informed the chairman or CEO and
the body that we vote on the
Members we will schedule home
finally back there's a eleven
for another limited floor
session.
recess until eleven o'clock on
enough of their very forced.
Thank you members appreciate
your
your work today.
legislature's website and and
let's just talk of
also mention for the members
that as of Friday over two
thousand five hundred New
Mexicans had logged into
committees with hundreds of
people participating which is
great so we're motion to Sen
recess to Levin AM Thursday have
