Present, we have quorum.
So, um, just so you'll know, um,
sponsors, we will hear you, uh,
present.
Briefly, when you tell me you
stand for questions, then we go
to Zoom and our flavor and then
to the audience and then we'll
come back to you when you tell
us, so you may begin at any
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you members of the committee.
And um this is the first time
I've been in this committee
room, so.
That's OK, don't start because
then you'll
get me going, you know that.
Senate Senate Bill 127 amends
the Barbers and Cosmetology Act
to add an
has experienced significant
growth, contributing to the
state's economy and job
creation. Placing unnecessary
restrictions as a negative
impact on current and Senate
Bill 127 seeks to declare not
subject to licensing similar
Exemptions exist in other states
with robust film industries such
as Georgia and California.
In fact
No other jurisdiction. This bill
seeks to align New Mexican
standards.
The scope of work for a makeup
artist and hair stylist in the
film or television industry does
not include what licensed
aestheticians or cosmetologists
provide.
This industry, these industry
make up and style hair. They may
apply makeup to enhance and
create wounds, bruises,
injuries, or special effects to
create characters such as
monsters, aliens, and witches.
And Senate Bill 127 seeks to
modernize New Mexico's
regulatory framework to better
accommodate the unique needs of
the film industry.
Regulations of the industry must
balance economic development.
Withins.
Thank you, Representative. Do
you have anything.
Um, was it when we brought in
Netflix and it's really
important to me, but I just an
extra in the movie in my next
life.
I was in
Um, some really cool, um.
New productions.
Thank you and Senator, you stand
for question. Very good. Anybody
in the audience who wishes to
oppose this bill. All right, no
one in opposition, uh, anyone
who wishes to speak in favor of
the bill.
You may stand up and the mic
will be held for you.
Thank you.
A madam chair, a distinguished
committee members. My name is
Steven Mullen. I am the
International Alliance
Theatrical Stage Employees,
business representative for
local 480. Uh, we represent all
the uh craftsmen in the that
make the movies, including hair
and makeup, and I just like to
encourage you to support this
bill because it would, it did
not have it, it could incur an
undue uh disturbance to how we
do business and uh just
disrupt our ability to bring
productions here since hair and
makeup is such a key component
and sensitive component to the
making of movies. If it wasn't
to happen, it could create an
uncertainty that could very
likely discourage productions to
come here and uh that would be,
of course.
Not conducive to what we've been
trying to build here over the
last 25 years.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, um.
Now we'll hear from the
committee and I already started
building a list and first on the
list we have representative de
rasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and Representative,
just quick question, what,
what's happening now?
Madam Chair Representative, so
the reason that this bill is
coming forward right now is that
the barbers and cosmetology
board did makeup artist, and
they've never said, they really
do not type of of skill that it
takes to do perms. They just
don't do that.
And so the industry got nervous
that they could potentially go
after others, and you'll, you
should, you should see that we
did have an amendment that we
took out motion pictures as when
we presented the first time joy.
The Santa Fe Opera, all of the
little theaters around the state
are in jeopardy too, and.
And that's not what they do. And
so that's what we're trying to
protect those individuals in our
community who have jobs within
the film industry. And Madam
Speaker.
Senator and representative, so.
They have to learn these skills.
I mean, you, you're not just
getting your neighbor to go, go
start doing hair and makeup. So
the skills are coming from
somewhere.
How are they skilled to do that
then, Madam Speaker. Yes, you.
You may pull up a chair and sit
there with the senator. Thank
you.
Hm
Uh, the industry is very
demanding and the.
The training takes years for
them to develop quite often
starting with maybe working with
extras on, on lighter type of
applications, but the art is
Ancient actually. We've been
having it in in entertainment
and even before that for
thousands of years. So a lot of
these skills are passed on from
one expert to another, and since
it is very artistic and the
relationships with the actors
themselves becomes very
personal, and that kind of
sensitivity and trust amongst
the actors is how they build
their reputation.
Um
There's
a huge difference between
aestheticians who deal with in
care as opposed to what they're
doing, which is, you know, of
course, um, like she stated
earlier, various types of
applications as well as
prosthetics. And the industry.
It's like I said, very demanding
and very uh.
Sensitive to the health, the
actors themselves are very
sensitive to their health and
Probably above and behind with
any common consumer or even
expect.
Um
The uh
The local.
Uh, hair and makeup artists have
been developing their reputation
to the point where we have
actually award winning hair and
makeup artists, one who's
actually up for an Emmy, uh,
the, uh, for, uh.
Production called Loudhouse, and
this, she's been doing this for
over 20 years, and it took years
to get to that point. Anything
else I can elaborate on?
I'm sure just, no, I think I, I
just wanted to know how they got
that skill. Do, do they come
from other states and other
states doing this to where
they're licensed uh look.
Everybody's tired. I'm gonna
make it fast. You wanna go home.
I think you guys have a late
session tonight. So I'm, I'm
just, I don't wanna.
Hammer this. I just, they're
coming from other states.
I'll just run real quick through
it. I think, I think what
anybody would be concerned, I
would think that the higher paid
actors and actresses, I'm sure
that they're gonna
Expect certain standards.
Um, but then there's all these
extras and stuff like that.
They're guys are just, hey, you
know what, I'm gonna be, I wanna
be in a movie and get paid.
50 bucks to be in a, an extra or
whatever, um, and walk down the
street or whatever and maybe
they do something. I just want
to make sure. I think my biggest
thing, we just want to make sure
that we don't get away from our
health standards. I think that's
my biggest thing, you know, a
home that.
You know, has, I don't know,
whatever is in clean and goes on
or causes a eye infection or
something cause you need to
clean your makeup. That's the
kind of stuff that, you know,
that, that the cosmetology board
and the that.
That, um
That industry or that that type
of of industry would have, I
think.
And again, this is probably the
wrong place to for me to do
this, but I mean,
I don't know if you guys would,
would have some sort of, even if
they had.
A health class
That
Said, he said, look, you gotta
make sure these are the
standards and maybe not all
cosmetology.
But in the House standards if
they had something like that.
And possibly, Madam Chair, where
they um.
It was something that we can't
do here, um, but maybe something
that could be adopted on on the
floor.
That'd be something that you'd
be interested in your senator,
first let me point out,
so with the cosmetologist and
the aesthetician, they're seeing
the public.
So you and I go in and see them,
and we have a responsibility to
the public when they're on the
set.
The production company has the
responsibility. And so if
somebody were to get injured on
the set, the production company
would be liable, whereas in the
public, we're trying to protect
the public who's to have
treatment. It's not that I
wouldn't be, it's not that I
would be opposed to it, but it's
a whole new licensing, and I
would prefer to think about that
in the interim and be willing to
kind of talk with you about what
that might look like
that's fine, uh, senator, again,
I'm not trying to beat it up. I
think my, my biggest thing is
that health and then
the other, the other thing is
because if they did get injured,
I guess workingman's comp or
whatever they have to take care
of that, but um.
to avoid it rather than dealing
with it later. Um,
And
Is there any way, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator Representative that
you see that.
This could
Be used in other ways, I don't,
it doesn't, I guess it wouldn't
bother me if they kept their
health centers and stuff, but
they say, you know what?
Um, they start
For conventing
Life insurance and say you know
what?
I do stuff for the movies I can,
you know.
And I'm not talking about just
for Halloween, I'm talking
about, hey, I want get you your
daughter ready for to be really
specific
and, and when we first started
having these conversations, I
said, well, what about terrorism
and,
and, and, and people's parties
and you know, just doing makeup.
It's like, no, let's not add
that in, so we're really
honed in on Madam, um.
Senator and, and uh
representative if that's the
case.
Is there anything in your bill
that says it would have to be on
site. I think that would would
that be something that you'd
maybe so that we could break
that
says it has to be on site, but
I, I'm not sure that on site
would be a good definition
because when they do theatrical,
I mean, it it does say.
In motion who are employed. So
we're saying they have to be
employed by the theatrical or
cinema cinematic, and so whether
they do it in a truck and be
they have to be in.
Madam Speaker, um, Senator
Representative, if this was
really, I thought I was gonna
see like 50 cosmetologists
sitting on those things going.
No, so, you know, I, I, I think
I'm OK with this. I just, I had
those things to just kind of
check the little boxes and get
those.
Answer. Thank you.
Thank you and thank you for
clarifying, Senator. It's very
clear in the title employed and
then it does. Um.
All right, um, we right now we
have Representative Johnson and
then Representative Reed.
Anybody else?
You know, when you were talking
about combed.
No.
Madam Chair, I moved you past.
Right, but I'm gonna go ahead
and take the motion in a second.
Is there?
And then we'll um hold the vote
New Mexico, um, while other
states, you know, would be
gaining that employment and so I
want, um, that's my question.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So let me just
assure you that if Tom Hanks
were to come here for a movie,
he would more than likely bring
his own person, someone that
he's worked with for not always
is that the case, but for the
locals, but we have a lot of
these local protection I used um
hair and makeup artist, like
they're here and.
Quickly, please.
the, the productions actually we
we're employing about 90% local.
Um, the hair and makeup and even
with large actors, a lot of our
local artists are of that
quality.
And that skills that they are uh
They are used even on top
actors.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and so
it sounds like 90%, like you
said, 90% are local, but these
largerists or they just, they're
not, Madam Chair Representative,
New Mexico?
Madam Chair. He's not, he's not,
it just,
well then when you know,
one at a time and through the
chair, please. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative, it's very
rare that someone does, and I
use Tom Hanks because we, uh, I
mean, he's my star.
Love Tom Hanks, but, you know, I
kind of think him at the very,
very top of the food chain and
we don't have that many
individuals that are on set that
are in, you know, supporting
care.
Those are the people who use our
local folks and
Representative Reed, um, when,
and I did this for a very short
period of time. There was a
group of people that we would go
into their little trailer and
they would.
Propose
Like, you know, you have to wear
this and you need a little bit
of blood cause I was in night
shift and I was also in Breaking
Bad, by the way, um, so, uh, but
they would, you know, they would
prep us, they would prep our
hair, they would prep our, our,
um, and so there was a, a
designated place in the
production where we knew we had
to go in.
And they would outfit us and
then they would do our makeup.
And our hair and these people
take a lot of pride in what they
do. I mean, they are
professionals.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, so.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
what we're trying to do is they
did the research and there's no
other in this industry to be
licensed.
OK, so would allow out of state
people to.
Thank you. Are there any other
questions, uh, Representative
Garcia?
Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, uh.
Within the local talent.
Do they have the capacity
ability.
I actually
I had to think about that for a
minute. I actually asked them if
they could, um.
For instance, on here, uh film
Madam Chair and committee that
I filmed day uh they were doing
prosthetics, which is what
you're speaking of and those
were local, uh, hair and makeup
artists and they're on top of
their field and do work on such
productions. I don't know
specifically if on that
particular production, but on
similar and equally complicated
type of uh prosthetics and
that's good to know, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
All right, so, uh, is there,
