House
For ACA are one Representative.
Sixteen on the golden on.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House education substitutes for
amendment or substitution.
Thank you.
Thank you all of the members of
the debate amendment fund House
my background problems the
state's going on the board in
November.
grandfather was a considerably
hand.
the reduction in the biz later
years in Las Vegas Mexico and
And so my dad madam chair was
Berman
In a little town called phone
number of this but it was the
most of us
education is the key.
Senate Mexico's growth in the
use of New Mexico they need to
every single new Mexican.
addition to our families
extended families our
For this presentation to get on
the ballot
Thank you aspen dental.
Includes
No that's not funds this
resolution devoted massive
amounts of resources not only.
But K. all those children doctor
says child persistence of bombs
that are.
Is adding.
The government's most important
manager better social emotional
skills.
Representative Robert.
wants to.
Madam chair was just one percent
of the liability from
the doctors that economic
And so I look forward to this.
This program over time on by we
are one of the experts were
written but from there on the
all and Sanchez represents the
of the bishops and Mexico and
instead of saying Joseph
children and also signals of
children of.
Energy and Division website and
in spring during during the
struggle so this was the the
nuts and bolts of the of the
inside because that's.
Madam chair.
The documents that has.
What
education is seven eight seven
cents billion federal data
conservative lands.
to higher income through job
creation going to worship also
not have to spend more money at
both doing with part of the so
that's one document another one
is all of our own manager owners
on this you're not to be outdone
increased investments in early
childhood education in New
Mexico doctors we have under in
Barron's whatever on the farm
and they included.
in early childhood education and
talk to it except about in the
form of human help when this.
What we're doing as well as the
expenditure by the government
and education on and what I.
What we as a state funded
education at the state level
this is a very students had
protection and the means of
education Ms and live event and
whereas the same chosen.
The currency
and suppression of fun well if
protected and fostered become a
source of wealth.
Intelligence.
judge what the mission to fund
public schools for those that
have about that opportunity
thank you madam chair of the
board of the debate
G. house joint resolution one
this is
an important day I think we for
for the legislature
HR one proposes an amendment to
This has to be one of the most
that it pieces of legislation
that will see this year and and
I would propose that it's one of
the most better piece of
That is ultimately a decision
for our borders it is not for us
to make today we are simply
In H. R. one is to be used in a
very targeted way and that
targeted ways early childhood
education.
This includes services like high
We know the value of investing
in its early years there's no
dispute across the political
spectrum as to the value of
making this investment we know
it's a good investment.
insuring a much brighter future.
In other words.
Invest in the playpen today and
save.
seen this bill a total of six
different times.
Every single time it has passed
institutions from all across the
state from urban settings for
rural communities supporters
include organizations like New
Mexico voices for children C. H.
it'll take say one.
Also in support.
The national education
association of New Mexico.
Growing up New Mexico formally
known as the United Way of Santa
Fe County.
renowned pediatricians The New
Mexico conference of Catholic
bishops and many many others.
Keep in mind.
additional distribution and that
includes eighty one percent of
voters will identified as
Democrats and sixty nine percent
Your vote today is about whether
or not we let the voters decide
on increasing the distribution.
If we send this to the borders
and the borders saying all.
And the distribution doesn't
increase it really is that
simple.
But if they say yes and they
recommendations from governor
Michelle on Gresham's council
for racial justice.
The council was convened over
the summer with experts on race
the tragic murder of Mr George
Lloyd.
The council was tasked.
With recommending to the
governor ways to help improve in
This proposal is not a silver
bullet.
Much has been done as my
colleague stated earlier to
And her entire team we created
an early childhood Trust Fund.
most important work of shaping
young leaders of tomorrow.
House joint resolution Madam
speaker is the missing link.
increases or to the political
whims of Washington DC.
Madam speaker today we have
before us the opportunity of our
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker and not the
gentleman the gentleman yield.
Yes Madam.
better place for children and I
have a
I have an interesting take on
this having been working with
kids with young children for
probably the last thirty years
toddlers.
Mostly in their homes with what
we call the program the family
infant toddler program so I have
twenty years experience of
months of age you may have heard
her this morning when I was
trying to talk it was nap time
so one thing I always hear is
tomorrow who are the children of
today.
We are not going to make a
difference as much of a
difference in tomorrow's
heard of that there adverse
childhood experiences and there
are things that that happen to a
child things like untreated
mental illness or substance.
of those kinds of being
give you a score on aces and New
Mexico children have higher A.
scores than any other state in
stress over time particularly
intergenerational dress it's
called epigenetics and when a
family has lived in poverty or
can break the cycle we're not
going to break the cycle we're
not going to make a big
difference for the kids until we
we get.
Parents to a point where they
one of my co sponsor said to see
if that's how they want to spend
their money and let me tell you
that is a good way to spend
their money
Having worked in early childhood
them things around gross motor
development but but we also
teach them things about how to
cope and so that there is a
you babysitting or those kinds
of things you don't know what to
do the baby start screaming you
try to do everything you know
how to do but if we haven't
given you the tools that's very
parents
It you can hear all the money
things you can hear and and it
makes that I mean we will save
money some of the things that
on child abuse we're talking
about about saving money on a
lot of things
this is I believe it at my heart
I believe that is that investing
makers of tomorrow and it till
we break the cycle of poverty
and substance abuse and child
abuse we are not going to get
the bang for our Buck that we
throw away another generation of
kids saving our money or I don't
know what or if we want to
invest and then we will we will
not need as much money in the
Lewis thank you Mr speaker Madam
speaker I'm sorry.
thank Nico my co sponsors
representatives my SS thank you
Education saved my life I am a
member of the public of act and
then I had my daughter when I
was fifteen years old as a
sophomore in high school and I
that I could do to help others
within the tribal community.
Education has helped me become a
recently born on January fifth.
And.
When we take a look at what this
investment will to.
future I I love that folks are
talking about this as an
investment that will go to the
voters to decide.
education in New Mexico is a
priority.
By investing in our children now
this is the only way that we're
going to get off the top of the
We will see the benefits
throughout the state when we're
talking about some of the issues
that we have to address later
These things can be addressed
early and I think the co
sponsors especially because I'm
seeing this legislation
throughout my eight years here
And currently experiencing this
pandemic
Knowing that our kids even the
youngest of our kids are working
Once this gets to the voters
they now will have an
opportunity that inside how the
people's money will be spent.
This is going to benefit the
future of New Mexico in so many
ways that we can imagine I I
educators are community members
but also from our tribal leaders
who also know that especially on
the road reservations kids don't
other services that can be per
the legislative such as home
visiting early education these
just to get out to voters and
have our voters decide how they
would like to invest their
money.
education seriously and we're
moving it as a priority so that
it can benefit everyone
throughout the state of New
Mexico thank you madam chair.
a there's a couple dozen co
sponsors but at this time will
stand for questions after one
for patients my grandfather to
be one hundred years old so all
County and Andrea Romero.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
the general.
A yes.
house joint resolution one not
only is this the best investment
or one of them I should say
because we also have a important
housing component to protecting
Heckman from the university of
Chicago for every one dollar we
invest in high quality early
childhood education our society
budget of between seven and
parents have been going through
I can imagine that that is going
to get exponentially larger
Madam speaker and gentlemen for
getting children out of poverty
out of the
Challenges that we've all seen
he our state and of course some
talk a little bit about some of
the gains that we get that
across our government in
particular you know that is that
we are spending money on
Thank you madam speaker delay
from Santa Fe.
Yes No that we talk about the
economic aspects of justice just
expanding this program in
addition to the benefits to the
infrastructure of our state will
be one of most sought after
professions by our young people
as we have to have been
you're correct I mean he
You know he evaluated and talks
about the right of return for
investment in quality early
childhood development for
disadvantaged children in seven
to ten per year.
productivity and a reduction in
crime of the need for government
services.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen the shortlist that
the participation and lower the
cost of foster parenting of
course child abuse and neglect
was brought up earlier domestic
violence goes down special
crime or drug abuse or
perspiration because of that
nurturing and opportunity for
children to have early childhood
stand in strong supporter of
house joint really resolution
one and giving it to the voters
is about exactly what we're
trying to do across government
to save funds and reinvest in
our our budget and and know
where we've saved because of the
lives that we've saved in the
process so madam speaker
fund has grown by one billion
per year since we first started
talking about investing in early
childhood education using the
nearly two twenty two billion
return on investment this is so
common sense that it just.
It blows my mind that we're
still doing this even in the the
three years I've had the honor
Thank you the gentleman from
Bernalillo Andrés Romero.
Thank you madam speaker will the
can you I I've heard you all in
the past talk really eloquently
about the developmental stages
that the these children are at
Thank you madam speaker a German
from Bernalillo just a quick
comment and I'll turn it over to
my president of the as but I
mean for all of us who have the
learning of their brain is just
overwhelming relative to later
years but the our proposal
minister don't really always
to be eligible for kindergarten
zero to five Representative.
Thank you gentlemen and and
madam speaker and and gentleman
from Bernalillo
eighty percent of the brain
delay for any explain adverse
childhood experiences of
children in New Mexico
experience among the highest if
not the highest rated races in
perhaps they're in a situation
where the parents are have a
drug use disorder maybe have
unemployment maybe there's a
child's brain development.
Without.
Intervention without positive
interactions for that child.
What is happening is that.
As the child grows past the age
of three.
That those synapses stopped
connecting as much as they were
and what you end up with is a
teach kindergarten teaching
children who don't even know how
to use the bathroom teaching
children who can not hold a
pencil teaching children who
and one seventy still to this
day way too many New Mexican
children don't have access to
those services.
That becomes a problem that's
why we have high rates of
I appreciate that answer because
you're really pointing out
something that is particularly
important is is how quickly
these students and these
their schooling from K. to
twelfth once they transition out
of early child.
Thank you madam speaker all all
learned how to forge
relationships with one another.
Families that have support
systems that are built in either
through their childcare system
through their provider through
Monday one Madam speaker yeah
and and gentleman and you know
again they're not learning how
to hold the pencil they can
actually recite the alphabet for
madam speaker and gentleman can
then teach the child you can
develop your own relationship
with the child and you know most
importantly you know that when
systems to ensure that that
child is taken care of you don't
have to go Madam speaker and
gentleman home after your work
day at the school and wonder.
ways you can really see the
impact of those early
investments ones that child
enters that question.
that that thank I'm so one thing
that really happened if people
have said if you're around
toppers the language development
is huge I mean our whole future
happen really really early I
mean my granddaughter is getting
or words every day every single
day she comes up with new words
and that will help one thing
care they just don't have a
language rich environment and
that really really affects the
brain when you were born we have
a whole lot of stuff going on in
pathways that we don't you so
one of a good example of that is
why people who grow up speaking
some of the Asian languages
can't pronounce els because if
and from wherever they may be in
daycare they are going to be
behind from day one and there is
there is a specially no way to
catch up if you haven't heard
years ago that played language
samples and in English we could
all hear those things but when
they started having other sounds
in other languages we couldn't
Rain there's also extra
connections but it doesn't need
and if it's not getting language
some of those connections are
paired off in a really
difficult.
system to be able to understand
and produce language I just have
a quick story a family member
and I won't name names
What
well anyway I will just say he
where are you right to babies no
they don't understand the words
but they hear your sounds they
start to understand the words so
that's what we're getting at is
to teach people to be parents
one reading to them in utero I'm
really can help and so that's
that's going to be a big part of
this program is teaching parents
to be as I said before to be
thank you Mr speaker in general.
And madam speaker and gentlemen
and gentle lady I I really
appreciate you gentlelady
bringing the aspect of about
parents as well because having
new parents what developmental
stages are children our child
was that in what we could do at
those different stages so and so
that was anticipating my next
this constitutional amendment
been making its way through the
legislature.
Thank you madam chair zone from
increase for K. through twelve
but it it went down the I I and
now it's down to five no explain
why it's much less than I later
in the debate.
in the house we've had maybe
close to thirty hours of
committee hearings and when you
throw in the two thousand
thirteen debate.
On now I think of the
populations much more
comfortable with the the one
percent distribution we know the
fund is continuing to grow.
ballot and I I would so that's
what we're deciding here so it's
been a while but basically the
past four years this particular
resolution.
childhood education and and.
If that had been the case and
had it gone to voters and voters
would have approved it we would
be in the ballpark of two
grade where we could really
start seeing the effects of what
you all are talking about and
what the research is showing
that you're building
up for a brighter future in
being able to to understand and
navigate the world in front of
them and all of these wonderful
research right now with our
kindergarten students with our
first grade students so that's
why I think this is and has
continued to be one of the most
all New Mexicans in this state
so with that I appreciate you
bringing this all forward in
being so knowledgeable and
having such vast expertise in
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker and
see this before us and I I can't
stress enough how important this
is but I'm gonna take a little
bit different
angle to how important this is.
intervention most of my clinical
career was in us are working
with the geriatric population
and the effects of chronic
disease.
And.
the childhood adverse childhood
experiences contributes to that
long term chronic disease.
And this is because.
like the flight or
fight or flight kind of response
where there's actually
a biological response that over
of.
A lot of research out there
about the time between.
Childhood adverse experiences
And we talked this morning on
podiatry.
And the impact of
not doing preventive care on
diabetic feet.
Our instead of our even trading
at at this point on in this way
and.
That that's what this is that is
exactly what this is.
parenting and and social
supports and an education for
those early years.
L. helps to counteract the
estimated by the diabetes Assoc
market dive uses of station
almost two hundred fifty
thousand diabetics in New
Mexico.
eight percent of the population
is obese and that's a three fold
increase in the amount of
obesity and in a matter of
twenty five years.
So the the and the effects of
diabetes heart disease obesity
is and strokes.
issues from
it is also a contributing factor
from obesity and so many of the
the issues that I've dealt with
early intervening early with
children to try and counteract
the effects of those adverse
legislation that I run is
prevention of of disease and
early intervention to try and
prevent the more costly effects
the body that that's not just
like the economic impacts long
term economic impacts the long
to turn around our high cost of
health care and management of
chronic diseases we have to.
again allies standing very
strong support of this
resolution thank you.
the representative from Travis
The.
Sanchez.
Madam speaker yes.
Several questions of.
And early two thousands.
correct.
Thank you madam chair gentleman
from Travis and in Ontario yes
with the New Mexicans maybe
back in nineteen fifty seven
point you know way ahead of its
time so in nineteen
in two thousand three rather the
people raised it from then four
point seven to five point eight
Sure.
Mexico taxpayers get for that
investment what improve
A benefit.
And.
Based on.
I've heard I've heard.
The citizens of New Mexico.
A benefited with.
Thank you madam speaker Jonathan
Chavez any of that all of this
really believe the legislature
created the three teacher
licensure system for teachers
increase teacher pay
madam chair developed from each
other City of federal.
We five years later we suffered
the worst economic downturn in
terms of financial institutions
in our lifetime.
Out of five point eight
institution and and as a recall
as I mentioned but I'm speaker
John from Java city of their in
Doing a one percent last year
because we no longer continue to
grow after the crash
with regards to specifics on K.
through twelve about a.
Madam speaker.
Can you point to a specific
student outcomes.
A performance measure that
that I'm not I'm not a teacher
I'm not educator
but I know that
Just like anything else like
anything else remodeling a
sponsors could answer that but
I'm not I'm not educator.
Madam speaker and the.
I.
Issue.
Better educated quite to the
contrary.
My issue is.
Wisely.
That educational background
today.
A as a percentage of state
taxpayer income.
Which is higher than them.
Texas.
California and I can go on.
So.
Yes.
Here we are today.
The better the educational
outcome.
I children.
But this.
He
That we.
As as a legislator all of us me
included.
We have a plan.
Representative what do you say
to that.
Thank you madam speaker is
available Java city of federal
law
The spending of the money from
the from the fund is an
appropriation process it's the
legislative process.
Thank you mark it allows us to
We don't have to spend all.
The money that we don't spend
enough fiscal year can remain.
Through the enabling act that we
hope to do next year will remain
in the investment account
speaker gentle from Travis any
of that all
no pre K. the LFC would we pre
K. for children every six
dollars to the dollar return for
or repeating
our kindergarten of those first
first I wanted to great so I
think we do it right we can help
we can capitalize on that
We just want to have access to
those additional dollars on.
You know what we're capable of
building up that system.
with that said.
Do you.
A green that we need to.
Better the education of our
children.
We're gonna.
the same kind of number will
will come about from the.
But if you ask those same
people.
Because that's about what this
value is to every taxpayer in
New Mexico.
What the outcome of that hello
of that election would be fair.
Thank you madam speakers Jarvis
if they don't know it's a great
madam speaker gentleman's I was
able to and that's an argument
that that looks at the funds and
says that the fund magically
went away.
If the funds vanish from the
face of the earth.
gap which right now it's
in current school year is a
hundred thirty six million
dollars from the investment
count in the general fund for
government services primarily
for education and then every
We would pay less taxes if more
of us in fact rate a little
higher taxes through higher
incomes.
No more small businesses have
greater investments of our best
in early childhood education we
were right.
In the future.
We can all pay less taxes
individually because our economy
will be larger collective.
and I both know that the that
the risk associated.
Without taxes going up.
Has them the risk associated
Our our.
More
than either one of us might
agree.
At the present time.
Is not that the teacher.
President.
What does it do.
Or
Representative and
Madam speaker goes back.
To the family.
Deprives to be.
Mothers and fathers.
Opportunity.
And if we have more.
Pants.
The church.
To night that family structure.
Trying to address the symptoms.
Of the problem that you and I
are failing to adequately
address.
We need to provide a platform
for businesses.
To grow.
To establish careers.
Here on the house floor.
But.
I would be happy to.
Mexico to become we're right
back here.
Five years from now just like we
were in two thousand and three
from a few hundred million more
continue to try to tax our way
out of it and it's not going to
work Representative thank you
very much for your time.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
And thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen and thank
you to both of our sponsors for
bringing this critical piece of
legislation forward once again
our communities and our children
and our future and I thank you
for your dog ID persistence in
getting it done so I look
forward to passing this bill
Mr speaker and and I'm I'm
actually glad that I'm following
on the last comments because I
want to talk a little bit about
the science a little bit about
the social science and the
individual benefits of two two
kids have having access to early
education and care and that's
one of the other kind of pieces
to this right is that these
education providers so and
Mister speaker and gentlemen
we've already heard a number of
people talk about you know the
social emotional health benefits
struggling with dyslexia or
speaking issues or you know
early issues they can actually
have early interventions can
learning to be able to read or
to process information in a way
that that that that child and
that person's brain is is sort
of set up to do you literally
these are about the well being
of humans would you say that's
true Mr speaker and gentleman.
M..
Madam speaker and and Mr and.
You know the other aspect of
impact that we've seen to
families and not having a place
for kids to be during the day
it's impacted you know the
ability of parents to work it's
aspect of all of this is the
wraparound services the kids
receive and families receive in
places of education and care and
this body last year unanimously
passed a bill to address and
school lunch program so that
thousands of children could have
and in some cases the only place
where kids have access to a hot
meal so madam speaker and
gentlemen could you tell us a
little bit about why it's also
don't my my co chair of the when
the funds for that sorry for
interrupting some of my students
but it's tremendously of
advantageous for a family to be
a family that may be away from
visiting of also we receive
prenatal care.
So those first six months are
tremendously important things
like that they do not experience
children it helps parents to
become their parents simply
become better savings and have a
more productive society in a
Bernalillo absolutely right and
look you know to to expand on on
some of that conversations well
Families are struggling.
We know that.
We don't families are working
not knowing if you're going to
have a place to live next month
all of that contributes to the
please tremendous amounts of
toxic stress in family and in
children.
So many of us as parents
struggle we struggle just to get
by.
Those of us that are in you know
Is what back in today used to be
the village that raised many of
you.
You know if you grew up in rural
You had a little school down the
street that you went to your
add on tools and aunts that live
right next to you maybe you
lived you grew up on a farm and
and the OAG thousand appeals and
that the US providing that
support.
That's gone now we don't really
have that that's why this type
of funding source to expand what
services it's called everything
else that's in law today to
provide for early childhood
education for children.
To to point madam speaker or Mr
speaker whichever one it might
absolutely critical to the
development of that child right
now we've got the infrastructure
we've got the framework.
But we don't have a permanent
sustainable funding source.
goal is you know.
This is one way to permanently
as of simply on early childhood
and we don't have to raise taxes
gentleman both both gentlemen
from from Bernalillo county.
You know and I think building on
that I want to talk a little bit
investment and families and
family structure and the ability
of families to thrive so let's
talk brass tacks about the
economic.
And the reason why is because
they had to be home to take care
of their children.
It is having a demonstrable
of the benefits of having
universal access to early
childhood education and care is
what happened in Washington DC
when they made universal pre K.
maternal participation in the
economy.
So when we have a place for kids
to be.
We have a more thriving economy.
Then to make critical
investments and early childhood
programs.
And Mr speaker and gentleman you
know could you just speak a
Madam speaker Mister speaker Joe
lady
first and foremost I using this
amount of money into the current
these facilities have wages that
respect the point of the work
further more if using this
amount of money to the system
would allow us my opinion to
providers across the state and
they're very making I mean you
know it's it's it's a it's it's
both a blessing and americold
many will stay open because we
expand that funding I so that so
that the pie you know each slice
that goes in different direction
one minimum wage jobs are not
going to make it so maybe either
both parents have to work or if
it's a single parent household
maybe that person has to work a
couple of extra shifts every
child whether that in the
basement of the you know church
somewhere whether it's in a
strip mall with the private
child care operation whether
it's in somebody's home through
families to be able to go back
to school you know particularly
those young parents maybe they
had kids in high school maybe
they were unable to get a degree
get Madam speaker and and
generally.
This kind of funding source
it's substantive enough that he
could be targeted particularly
lack of of of of services this
is funding that can go to help
support those systems come up in
a targeted quality driven way
Pueblo I won't name I did a lot
of football but I worked in the
Pueblo I'm and we we did what
was called child fine where we
would set up we would take the
day and set up and you hearing
one one mom who came in who who
fund was to and he had from
behavior.
And he was bending her date
helped her get his behaviors
under control he started in head
start would be turned three she
went back to college we have now
has a graduate degree in
have the support she needed to
be able to manage for fun given
his behaviors under control so
that he could go and be just be
a regular kid in the head start
I think if we hadn't intervened
I wouldn't have been surprised
if you would have been abuse he
was a tough kid
and things turned out really
life better we say tax dollars
and and and he is really giving
a lot back to the state of New
Mexico that if we hadn't stepped
in at that early age I don't
Thank you madam speaker and
gentlemen and gentle lady I
think it's clear.
You know listening to the debate
this ability to take resources
which we already have as the
Invest in our families and their
ability to thrive and frankly to
develop and build out our
economy and a more vibrant
So madam speaker gentle gentle
lady I want to say you know to
the comments that have been made
we are forty ninth and fiftieth
in every single associate socio
the most important investment we
can make in the state and I
wholeheartedly support this
joint resolution and I look
forward to getting it past
thank you Mr speaker.
Representative representatives
from real reverse Santa Fe and
gentlemen and gentle lady
Sanchez please yield.
Madam speaker yes.
Thank you gentlemen so I mean
Madam last time we heard this
bill that that was my second
I'm pretty sure about a hour and
a half to two that the the three
hours eligible again three hours
of my life to hearing this
debate publicly on the house
that we're able to continue to
have this discussion because I
think it is relevant and it is
worthwhile to ensuring that
those that are either for or
against it have an opportunity
discussion today.
So my mother
who recently retired after a
fifty four year career as an
Was was my is my rock and and is
my is by
thank you she was my teacher she
was my favorite teacher not just
because he was my mom not just
a solid foundation a solid
educational foundation that
helped me with my entry to
that she understood and she knew
how to teach our public children
and at that point in time she
did not only just teach public
children but our head start
resided in the town of
Bernalillo.
But.
My mom was really the only
native American teacher that I
had in my life her simple
practice to educate our
types of of taglines now that
seem to be very popular in many
of our discussions in the
legislature today my mom I would
Mr execute that lawless the.
In the five decades of her
teaching within my community now
becomes my vision now because my
passion.
gentlemen a question that I'd
like to direct to sponsor
Representative Martina section
and Martinez is back before I
was a member of the house of
And can you can you remind us
all of what you mentioned to
them as to why they were in
trouble part be part of this
gentlemen
yes I I remember that day very
fondly I I was able to present
to a group of leaders from from
our pueblos across the state.
was the fact that you know New
Mexico.
The land.
The proceeds from that land that
are in this fund.
We're taking away.
They were taken away.
Through systemic oppression.
A systemic oppression that
continues to this day madam
speaker and gentleman.
Our our our political leadership
throughout the last hundred plus
years of statehood has fallen
way short.
Of investing.
Thank you Representative and
other members of this
this on the legislature
Representative.
By making this additional
distribution in targeting it.
And through the leadership of
our early childhood and Care
Department and a professional
that they have in the department
to ensure that children in your
community and others like yours
The sins of the past but we can
be sure.
To invest and again very
conservative a conservative
should be are the.
One percent is what we're asking
for all this ever growing
frontier for those services
services that folks like you
have plenty of incredible
leadership and incredible
knowledge.
In indigenous communities here
in the state.
This is the kind of sense
substantive permanent funding
that can go in and support those
types of operations those types
and girls all across New Mexico
but specifically where they are
needed most.
No yes.
of today is just as effective
and and impressive as the way I
remember back in twenty sixteen
when after the first time and
that is why since that point in
Lewis mentioned that many of the
problems tribes and nations in
New Mexico I've also included
their support in this endeavor
as well and this initiative as
well because again it goes back
Yazzie in the era of educational
moonshot.
The vision that is the
linguistic and cultural
education paradigm shift.
Martinez it is our hope that the
state of New Mexico can now work
with the tribes to develop a
genuine.
A genuine partnership to share
Bernalillo county thank you so
much I look forward to
supporting this initiative.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Thank you very much.
You know I've been listening
very intently to the
In these discussions for your as
long as I remember
And I've been elected which is
going on my I'm in my fifth
term.
and.
At the beginning of my tenure.
And then.
These discussions have been
invigorated and continued and
Madam speaker is introduced.
And I want to start because I'm
a mom I'm a mother.
And I'm.
Since I've been elected.
a lot of things in your life.
To be a mother that's the first
change but then to be a
So when I in the end and then
Madam speaker also had a was
blessed to work many many years
directing
not a lesson it's it's a life
Something that you learn to
respect Madam speaker when you
become a mother or when you
Our our treasures.
Children are not our problem.
treasures so just as you would
with any other treasure what do
you do you protect that.
Why because we want to make sure
they have a future.
discussion because I don't want
to reduce these discussions to
money and investments.
They don't belong in these
discussions.
what belongs in these
discussions.
As this bill dictates belongs in
the hands of families belongs in
the hands of the voters in New
Mexico to decide.
What we know and that is that we
know that in order to free or
children from cycles of poverty.
We have to create and implement
foundation for productive
futures we want them to come out
of their cycles of poverty madam
speaker.
As has been identified by
poverty and we have to ensure
that our treasures.
Are protected in the future.
With cycles of opportunity.
grandmother it saddens me when
we have to resort to having to
field
Discussions around.
And gentlemen and gentle lady's.
The other perspective that I
want to come from today is as I
We built early childhood
education which we've already
begun to do that with our new
department.
And situated.
In the manner that we know.
associate their mental health
within the context of their
families their homes and their
communities.
Them into.
Our future.
And I'd like to you and I like
this quote
Because it's really a it really
researcher I teach higher ad and
I'm constantly looking at these
kinds of things and studies and
research material to help me in
Will not cause mental health
problems.
If we respond to them early.
That
Embodies the whole science of
child development and why it is
that we incorporate the science
Not only this but another
another piece of legislation and
it talks about.
How to nurture that child.
Mental health.
to do so in order to avoid the
pitfalls.
Madam speaker.
What we've seen.
Can be extreme mental health
issues.
good mental health are the
following madam speaker.
Unconditional love I'm family.
Safe and secure surrounding.
And appropriate guidance and
discipline.
childhood and and rolling out
our commitment.
Our support.
And our funding.
What our children are already.
Gaming.
In their family and community
the care taking child
development approach.
Setting will gain them through
These are proven.
Proven studies proven data that
on madam speaker and I just want
to.
To raise the other issue that we
don't know.
but that is not always
Development.
And.
incarceration.
homelessness.
Please about the whole.
Relation to early childhood
That's a great question madam
speaker and
Representative and co sponsors
yeah you're you're absolutely
a more resilient child
particularly in situations where
New Mexico already struggles
with childhood hunger New Mexico
already struggles with
directly linked to adverse
childhood experiences of the
generation before us right
Those you know three or four
The state and as was mentioned
earlier that.
Constantly ranks at the bottom
of the good list and on top of
the bad news is.
But think about the proposal in
front of us.
This is one of the most targeted
ways to invest the people's
money.
other chamber or or any serious
policy maker will ever say that
we should not investing services
because we all agree that sure
right.
The question then becomes how we
hear no no no not the fund not
the land grant Fund not this
funding source we will we said
well she was an alternative.
thinking outside the box right.
That there hasn't really been I
think AP detailed source to to
Building introduce word building
because we're you know we're we
don't engineer children here
right but when it comes to
raising children that are going
to be resilient.
kids children who can deal with
the social stressors of college
life or perhaps the social
stressors of just might be
generally B. choose not to go to
and whatnot.
The the the pressures of dealing
with employees if you have your
own company that resiliency has
experiences as babies and
through the early years deal
with those social pressures by
self medicating right whether
Losing a job incarceration and
guess what the cycle starts all
over again.
Right and we're two or three
cycles into this
the solution again not a circle
not a silver bullet not been
easy fix but certainly an
important piece of that.
I'm looking at the and I ate
national and health a study that
thank intervention strategies
need to protect prevent aces
from occurring and if they do
with the researcher out of
Sanford I believe who reported
in her research that you can
have it worse I believe about
behavior including higher
smoking rates higher tobacco use
right hi your heavy drinking and
higher higher other risky
trying to prevent are critical
critical and and to be and I
will be perfectly honest I have
through those things because we
are not taking care of our young
children.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
The something that is close to
my heart as well.
But you brought it up and I want
to commiserate with you and
and I don't wanna cry but
A young twenty year old nephew
committed suicide.
That have.
The family.
The community.
School.
They could have complemented
each other.
And shared.
And how
how that could have made a
difference and that's why this
is so very important to me.
A child development here it.
Takes a wholistic.
And shared resource approach.
And it involves madam speaker
working with schools working
with the social service agencies
and entities.
And language.
Associated with that child.
Cultural traditions.
perspective because what we do
know also Madam speaker is that
most of our families living in
poverty.
communities of color.
So this approach.
Is.
Absolutely imperative.
Madam speaker.
The processes and systems and
have attempted to the race Madam
speaker and gentlemen and gentle
populations that are living in
poverty and communities of color
that make up the vast majority
of the state.
And why is this so very
important well it is.
Because these were so very
important.
Traditions that my nephew was
trying to associate with and
connect with.
He had difficulty connecting
with his identity.
With his racialized identity
I'm having these types of
approaches.
In our state of New Mexico
given.
conveyance we are majority
minority state.
He said that over and over again
we're reviewed viewed by the
problems associated.
Or.
Inequities I should say
Take those into consideration.
When we're looking at
groundbreaking legislation
That.
Know
and understand best madam
speaker.
What they're facing.
experiences we cannot dismiss
the importance of passing on
this piece of legislation
including and into the hands of
of those families and those
their treasures for their
children their Chargers futures
so.
Madam speaker gentle gentle
lady's.
To making sure that we work
towards.
Breaking down these and equities
the systems of inequity and this
That will be taken.
That I know and believe.
That for my grandchildren.
constitutional responsibility to
making sure it's in the two.
Burnley in the way we do
business in our state in every
Do not give this a second
thought.
Do not diminish the importance
of what this means for the
future of our state.
speaker thank you.
The gentle lady from Sierra
County.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentleman please feel.
Speaker yes.
Thank you I'm first I just want
comments that have been made
about the strength of children
being raised in a healthy home a
healthy community or even high
quality early childhood
programs.
I don't think I keep it a secret
that my family began with
another unplanned pregnancies
when I was nineteen years old
And reduce my hours of college
and and I found a job where I
could working into a room with
My Baby J. left.
could afford chart and stay in
college.
And I began to learn how
important early childhood what I
was a business major at the
time.
And went on to complete a degree
I want to make a difference
because of the research much of
which has been expressed and
shared on the board today.
The most intentional.
Investment that I can make in my
no investment no ownership is
always question my integrity of
why would stand and speak on
this I think it's been resolved
but I started a nonprofit where
Right away I got involved with
the legislators because at the
time.
Mexico is paying more for stray
dogs in animal shelter and they
don't it's very intense forty
outcomes of high high quality
early childhood.
And today we talked about mixed
delivery models that beautiful
understanding the value we
wanted to make a twenty million
dollar investment and we were
going to target children who
need the most.
And today we are spending over
And so I listen to the testimony
in both of my committees
actually went to commerce and
then again in education and I
heard the sponsor say that our
investment has gone up and has
These reserves the right of
return is for targeted
investments children who need it
most.
What we've got in the state in
families who need it most Mr
speaker and Representative
Martinez.
I don't question that we nearly
childhood investments that's not
And that is to a mixed delivery
model correct me if I'm wrong.
A mixed delivery model
throughout this.
In our home visiting programs in
areas is that correct miss madam
speaker Mr Representative
Martinez.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady that that you know that's
the from the fund to good early
childhood programs and services
and even then again we're not
voting to increase today we're
voting to send this to the
committee that is my number one
priority it has been the last
two years I've been on there and
you will continue to be a quite
frankly
talking to the members of the
think anyone anyone is talking
about providing universal
you know as as Michael sponsor
mentioned earlier this isn't
families as needed and is one it
can access.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank Representative has for
that either you or
Representative finances could
you please coming what is the
the question before us is to
provide for an additional
distribution from the fund for
early childhood educational
services administered by the
state is provided by not.
state can absolutely true and
every bit of evidence in this
study is targeted to the most at
risk family we talked about a
exposure to substance exposure
to domestic violence there's if
you could go on and on and what
would happen to children's lives
investment to do we know which
of those dollars are going to
the twenty percent of the
children who need it the most.
madam speaker agility I suspect
in funding or in childhood I
would also say sometimes we can
on that funding twice right it's
K. five plus funding and we
count that as early childhood
Well All thank you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you Representative you know I
would suggest that the data and
outcomes spending going up and
visiting it high quality early
childhood infant mental health
parents have psychotherapy the
current plan that we passed last
year.
and the families and children
who need it most are left
behind.
So so the the point that I'm
trying to get to is that.
There's no dispute.
that I think what people are
asking is how do we assure the
dollars go where you're
suggesting it will go.
And look at the F. I. R..
And I don't think it's changed.
The continued conversation has
been the congressional approval
that is needed.
And if you were to five year
olds could potentially be
considered for programs who
miss madam speaker.
Representative Sanchez.
Why do you believe that the
congressional approval needed
for that I thought was in and
out of the bill.
As the lands that were granted
to the state upon statehood by
the federal government
it's essentially a pact we have
with the federal government.
In my opinion it's
money derived from State Land
but that aside there's possibly
twenty one beneficiaries from
the distribution of the land
grant permanent fund the largest
deem as provided towards our
school system in New Mexico when
of when we are going statehood
of.
Rolled around you know hundred
congressional approval to do
that.
We're not creating additional
beneficiary.
We're merely increasing the
by the by the creation of the
early childhood education and
care department that are common
schools include early education.
And so just to be more specific
On another document funding in
ninety seven when we
change certain aspects of the
fund would be compatible with
two thousand fourteen as you
recall when we removed are
changing beneficiaries on and
nothing would preclude us
frankly Madam speaker jolly from
background elements are nothing
would preclude us from one of
Thank thank you madam speaker
and thank you Representative
Martinez so they have to tell us
who it goes to and right now it
can only go to twenty one
designated beneficiaries and
from the Congressional Act The
are going to go to the early
care and education agency just
now you said those dollars are
going to go to the twenty one.
Designated beneficiaries of the
from Congress we still have to
have the twenty one thank you to
come in schools and benefits
varies so they'll each get a one
percent increase their
distribution.
How did the dollars reach any
our system is your to I.
Is currently funded through CYFD
your age HSD and ECECD agency
how will any of the dollars.
agencies for distribution to the
existing uniform X. model thank
you everyone who advocated for
this next delivery model how
The twenty one beneficiaries are
individual beneficiaries they
include of the school for the
deaf school for the blind the
notion Mexico New Mexico boys
will what what what if the
voters approve this resolution
each of those beneficiaries will
receive six percent distribution
as lawmakers to put in the two
ends of the SCG and K. twelve
system.
That additional one percent
goes into actual twenty one
different funds what is defeated
so right now distributions from
the permanent school fund well
into the current school fund
which is the essentially the
uses you know things of that
nature so what we would do is we
would take that one percent
additional distribution which
would be approximately a hundred
seventy million dollars
early childhood educational
programs we would take that and
instead of going to head for K.
through twelve it would go to it
the other beneficiaries there
one percent would not go to the
early education department more
of that one percent would stay
in that particular institution.
Thank you madam speaker thank
different answer but I guess let
me ask this Madam speaker
Representative my S. that does
the amendment allow the use of
common school funds for child
the and the resolution the will
of the voters are early
childhood educational services
So I don't believe so.
Thank you.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around how this is going to
occur so it's not an present
that goes to the common schools
the current twenty one any fishy
Allows in section sixteen thirty
six they talk about.
Shall be placed to the credit of
the funds created for respective
purposes maintenance act and
may be institutions are name so
how if we can go to Congress and
are not a problem to go to
Congress why did you the bill
removes the congressional
approval.
and number three
You know we've been.
The number three this is how it
occurs your previous question.
establishing the budget shares
to allow us to be on the state
we had a very paternalistic
relationship of the federal
government at the time and I
still do to this day because
constitution so the institution
that we're talking about is a
common.
That's the magic words of the
Ferguson Act some of the boards
in our constitution the common
And and the waste distributed is
distributed in monthly transfers
from the land grant permanent
fund to the general fund to
those various departments is the
same way we allocate all state
monies to all state agencies
across the board we do a budget
gets a transfer of funds monthly
and this this is to generate
higher and higher returns it's
not one big transfer on July
first or July first madam chair
their expenditures also that's
how it would occur
and so that one percent would be
transferred monthly based on
what it is that particular year
and how we appropriated.
state law the warrants from the
state treasury of the same it's
just that it's just it'll be a
line item within that department
from the land grants from.
who could back up this assertion
with statute and documentation
on bass that repeatedly since
commerce and Education Committee
I haven't received it yet
Even though I've asked there's
been no evidence of any one
other than the people for.
Advocate for the bill that this
is actually allowable and the
to the existing next model it go
to the I love in Wisconsin is
talk Representative Thomson is
talking about serving families
year to three in the home.
parents are observing their
receiving consultation and their
learning are based alongside
their child how to continue
those interventions when that
one hour therapy session or
thirty minutes of the session is
We talk about the women owned
and operated for non profits
that are managed by women or
board of a parent run board in a
local tribal communities and how
we're we want to celebrate
those.
And so madam speaker I move the
house permanent ones too how's
Education Committee sub for
House going revolution one you.
permanent one to house Education
Committee sub for the house
right resolution one the new and
that through a two numbers to
one nine eight four three point
I don't have it the.
For scanning the document.
Because she on there like you
of.
All right I believe that a I
believe it's up now on the
point two one nine eight four
three point one.
immense as you mentioned I
meeting for for number
where are we in terms of posting
the amendment on the website.
designated persons to make a
point of order.
Thank you for that clarification
but we still need to address the
issue of whether the amendments
on the website thank you.
Thank you madam the.
then it is very simple.
I have followed the guidance.
For over a decade.
To turn to turn general.
The recommendations of the LFC
recommendations of LAFC
I am simply on page one line
twelve after the word Mexico
simply inserting the word
subject to the approval of
Congress on page four winds ten
straight State.
twenty two and twenty three
insert the following even
proposed by this resolution
shall not become effective
without the consent of the
United States Congress.
And members of this body.
needed in order to assure that
this goes.
To the intended beneficiaries
zero to five.
Children zero to five.
And the non traditional not
all the Senate does.
It is zero pass.
It's very rare that we go to a
Constitutional the other people
we are about to do something
could occur.
Of destroying a few different
diverse infrastructure.
A program throughout the state
located in each of our
communities think of the
That will no longer be able to
do that.
For the funding will be read to
redirected from them unless we
get the language right.
Sanchez is the amendment
friendly.
Thank you madam speaker general
daily from vented Sierra I
didn't hear the number.
was rescinded by the Attorney
General that actually wrote it.
The legislative finance
committee FIR is and the
educational subcommittee FY ours
incorporate various opinions
agency so I find her arguments
completely unpersuasive and the
amendment completely unfriendly
and divisive and disingenuous
then at.
The speaker and president by my
County not by my name.
Thanks
Thank you madam speaker thank
you Representative from
Bernalillo I just decided that
I'm going to go ahead and push
back when my integrity is
questioned intentions are
The gentleman from San Juan
County Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair and get
away from that I don't want your
I'm trying to get some
understanding here.
For the current beneficiaries
providing early childhood
services.
I'm.
provide early childhood services
through the program.
Four year old pre K.
three through grade is
considered early childhood so
thank you for address program on
the phone to pay for finances if
you could consider.
I would assume the public ready
for action and.
The serial has opportune
provided early childhood
services.
It.
Common schools are
include the state funded
Early intervention might invite
you we are and families and
behavioral health agency.
Provide services through
Medicaid it's diverse mix but.
believe that's the correct
protocol okay.
your back on the speaker.
Okay well I I want to share with
you that we are having great
difficulty hearing the gentle
to find on the floor.
Madam speaker.
Representative and one.
Express as the intended
beneficiary of what's been
discussed today what's been
discussed is.
Before I homeless domestic
currently provided to the
current twenty one if you're no.
All.
Thank you madam speaker.
The for the program.
For me to say negative so maybe
it doesn't like my comments.
When with the dollars actually
get to our children that are
desperate need of these types of
services thank you madam
speaker.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you representative from
I'm sorry I'm sorry I didn't
hear your your question.
We do have a seeker I was asking
Thank you for that repeating
that question Sanchez in to hear
the question.
Madam speaker jelly from
provided all of us here Jon and
year for the.
For the fiscal year beginning
July twenty July first of twenty
twenty.
Thank you madam.
Okay
the other gentleman from San
Juan County represented a movie
tie ins.
Thank you madam speaker.
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan thank you.
unfortunate the court frankly
madam speaker that we're not
able to use our microphone to
almost four thinking intend to
try and.
also madam speaker generated
This all of those.
Russian.
side or.
amendment has maybe been lost in
all of that side for this
question.
So if I could
could I ask that this be a great
job.
That that our constitution
basically saying what is a
requirement if we take money off
of.
Permanent one.
Is that correct.
been recommended for over a
decade throughout the process of
this bill being introduced
interviews sure that we follow
the correct protocol.
We are able to get the dollars
Shiri.
About us speaker and generally
we passed the.
bill.
more flexibility since the
dollars came out of that are
coming on the general fund and
speaker gently.
if you are interested in.
Zero eight.
So
I I guess I'm not seeing any
which I quite frankly
Is is offensive to hear the
questioning of the members
reasoning behind bringing a
piece of legislation forward
and then they cannot go to the
into intended location for which
as you stated so I'm not sure
where you're all three motives
are but you have stated over and
speaker gentle lady for a good
purpose to help children in New
Mexico is that correct madam
speaker gently I'm gonna stop
one second here may I suggest
when one of your close together
communications it was that was
suggested to me that attack
people.
Adam speaker this is
Representative but there is
Representative Montoya muted
himself and I can hear
everything now so that think
that worked we're good to go
What
the lady and gentleman.
All.
Yes.
that you use your headset the
have her computer muted.
German.
Madam speaker can you hear me
now.
Yes.
Representative.
Thank you.
Representative.
mantra I I believe in and when
To support this amendment so
that dollars can go.
Okay thank you madam speaker.
Yes.
The gentleman.
And because of for.
Are you okay all right.
I see no debate additional
debate on the amendment.
all right is it is the clock
ready to run.
Voting is open.
Yes the table means the
amendment as tabled a note to
table means the amendment stands
The vote is now closed by a vote
of thirty nine to twenty four
the most the amendment is
tabled.
Your call.
Thank thank you madam speaker
I'm sorry.
If you.
many of which have been
mentioned by those supporting
the bill.
And I've been holding committee
Committee something different
times that we are to trust.
That you will do you think you
will do.
And to trust and to wait.
If you're enabling act will do
what you promise to be here.
I have nothing more continuing
concern.
For the young families and our
communities the children were
victims of abuse and neglect.
For the families were struggling
Speaker Egolf.
Yes thank you.
madam speaker I don't have.
Extensive.
reflect on at the slight.
Modification to a a well known
phrase which is our fifth time
is the charm.
Truly remarkable advocacy and
dedication to the children of
New Mexico shown by the sponsors
of this legislation I all the
will be sent.
To the voters I am thinking
right now of the moment when now
former Representative Jim
sure that we have the support to
get this measure over to our
colleagues in the Senate.
When I reflect on the
one hearing after another in in
means to so many scores of
thousands of families in New
Mexico.
Two years ago we talked about
launching an education and then
shot.
childhood education carriage
early education trust fund in
direct investments this is the
one piece of the puzzle that we
haven't yet been able to get off
that successful programs
critical programs wonderful
programs that we have in the K.
five.
sometimes a costly remedial
measure because we don't make
the needed investments before a
child enters kindergarten.
better way for us to spend the
great wealth of our great state
then by besting in our youngest
New Mexico.
for their child this is a
message that they're legislature
here's the.
it there legislature cares about
their struggle in this
At the kind of future that they
hope for their children and that
we all is there legislators
hope for them as well.
happened all this I hope that
when we look back and this vote
will rank as one of the most
kinds consequential if not the
because they they deserve that
will shut and a great future and
that this is how we deliver job
as speaker
and gentleman thank you so much.
Thank you madam speaker and
members of the house I was going
to make a long speech on that
how this came about and it's in
eighteen years and I think we're
probably the closest we've ever
been to making a significant
difference and I just urge
everybody in the house to vote
The representative from San Juan
County Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you madam chair
a lot of your your
you recall and we discuss this
bill
the the budget book and we're
spending about four hundred
fifty million dollars on early
childhood development presently
include
A plus which goes up to third
grade but but it is substantial
with maybe some tremendous
strides in this area knowing
about a hundred thirty seven
million dollars on these
programs and it is gonna have
steadily over the last six years
in fact it's gone up three point
pronounced
we think when we so for that big
financial crash in October of
two thousand eight we really had
recent history of tapping into
this fund
of back in two thousand three
was a twelve year program it was
sunset it
left that alone
the land grant permanent fund
would have grown another one and
a half billion dollars and from
you recollect that we've had
this discussion before.
Madam speaker delivers on one
yes the if you don't invest the
funded education if it will be
Well obviously and I appreciate
that gentleman
from from Bernalillo a point is
this is fun was was fitted for
two billion dollars a year on
education I think were twenty
fifth in the nation in terms of
spending per pupil and now we're
just not getting those results
in and I know we're all
and all my kids want to form to
schools and they did very well
and Education there was was good
in fact I understand San Juan
gentleman I just.
Just expressed my concerns that
that
we we are funding early
that four hundred fifty years is
funding third grade
The former eleven four hundred
fifty million dollars a year
we're doing it out of the
general fund
which I think is prudent and I
to spend those dollars wisely
so.
We have to be very careful that
we we don't target this money
and and why why for those who
successful in their educational
career and they all they all
gone to college and and the gun
quite well so thanks to the
blessing but it is volatile only
gas is down prices are that
about thirty two percent last
year that was referred to as
reflected in this year's budget
concern is that we're not going
to get the necessary permits and
drilling permits and and what a
waste to the the the production
a lot of uncertainty in the oil
and gas industry is you know so
thank you gentlemen it's always
and all of your much time thank.
This
Thank you Mr chair Mr speaker
with the gentleman from
Bernalillo county yield.
Mr speaker yes.
investment deals with the state
investment officer so.
All the discussion regarding
investment was with respect to.
Your.
Thank you Mr speaker.
You see on the map Chavis
need to invest no need to invest
in infrastructure broadband
human capital we need to invest
just like a business would buy
new computers and and the new
this portfolio portfolio with or
without imposing the state land
office to gas revenues.
but
Educating kids for the early
with generational curses and we
believe by spending an early
childhood is is this some
investment if not the best
investment you can make of the
fund.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker a German from Lincoln
child is no that is incorrect
and thank you for the
come back and it's sincere but
if you look on page four you
look on page four in the same
one of the very old meter
reading this earlier in the
educational services that's
lines eight through ten and then
we put in a section H. just so
folks are clear
as used in this section early
so in my opinion there's no
wiggle room at all.
But I will stand shoulder to
shoulder with up.
With you and others to ensure
that that the constitution is
and contacts I see that that
language was all stricken by an
amendment and the committee is
that not correct thank you a
And due to the so instead of
going back to committee and
correcting at we corrected it in
a committee substitute in house
education but now that amendment
but now thank you for that I was
Miner and that's going to be on
the record but that was not
It was an error.
Mister speaker I would suggest
Utilize those dollars for early
childhood education one of those
institutions happens been
institution of the my community
Freshman year of high school
through their second year of
college so Mr speaker and
gentleman House New Mexico
military institute supposed to
was incorrect is no longer valid
need to change that in house
education so what goes to the to
the Senate and to the voters.
Will not be picked up and the
schools distribution that
additional one percent we'll go
to early childhood education
services however in in in your
five and they will love you
spent over that institution of
the region's deem appropriate
that the money going to need me
or you just have more state or
for the for the department of
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
really concerned because the
information provided to us have
that language stricken and now
you're saying it's there and now
we're we're saying that the
education yet you just said that
they could spend that money so
how do they do that under the
terms of your legislation.
I believe you're on mute
through eleven others through
more of the amendments and
contacts are paid for the
context of for the folks
listening at all Mister speaker
resolution one which it is a
clean copy of what was
introduced money is section
three which referred to the
conditional approval for the and
now Mr speaker John from we get
into this which is the house
Education Committee substitute
for HDR one on lines four
million dollar more.
One five additional annual
distribution shall be one
percent.
distribution from the permanent
fund from the permanent school
fund Shelby for early childhood
educational services in
Minnesota state so there was
some confusion a couple years
And and the I know that the the
general and you had a similar
concern and we show them the
legal analysis and he was
satisfied with it each
think you know you that this is
not.
Not between now and the both
maybe but.
But there is no
thousand seventeen
All beneficiaries benefits.
The legal analysis that that
goes with it all right it Mr
other permanent funds derived
from lands runciter confirm
And so yeah everybody gets a one
percent on.
question Mr speaker than a Mr
speaker and gentleman what was
the value of the formative Fund
in February of twenty twenty
December thirty first.
And then it crashed crashed to
about got seventeen point three
in the months of March a March
and April.
markets but money spent on early
childhood development there is
no crash.
There is no recession.
there is no loss of investment
and it closed at twenty one
point six billion December
thirty first and today as
confirmed by associates it's
gentleman that shows you the
water fluctuations that can
occur in the markets from time
to time let's look at the Page
that that's a basically a four
of ten billion dollars.
You have a number of changes to
this language which you did not
Lincoln Chavis the floor is in
other words of the fund goes
below ten billion
Then the fund ceases to be
distributed what we did is we.
floor from five point eight
billion to ten back in two
thousand fourteen is a recall of
the constitutional amendment.
Involving fifty percent cap on
it four investment so yeah we
resolution Mr speaker so the
questions go up the probably in
the range of sixteen to
seventeen billion dollars of if
we stay consistent for what we
And still have to improve this
additional one percent of
drawdown thank you Mr speaker
John from Travis link and I
think it's because it would up
would be half a billion dollars
percent would be half a billion
dollars there was really no
thought process the fund is.
Rolling.
Unbelievably by leaps and bounds
but it actually is going to be
seven a half percent and this
past year.
Through like two billion dollars
so
to the market in our lifetimes
the second largest shock to the
market elections.
Is what you just spoke about Mr
speaker John John speaking back
our lives and back to back and
the fun continues to grow
continues to exceed distribution
and we continue to a champagne
toast every year.
Because.
People who sat in the seats
years before us.
All the.
Wisdom and setting aside.
The loss of.
Those finite resources.
When we start increasing the
drawdown.
That the fund should be for
those future generations so.
that we would pass on if we have
food at a four percent or five
percent right
you that when you get.
The on the five percent range
your
compromising the integrity of
that corpus and that's why I
enunciated but our track record
or track record of investments
is you all of us.
NMCA that the number of times.
and a lot of other areas and
until we can show the people of
New Mexico oppose so called
investments are worth the money.
Publicado be holding us
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Is
Thank you Mr speaker honourable
members before I close I just
want to say
That the gentlelady from Randy
dot was your order intake reason
constitution will not be
followed by legislative towards
particularly when it's the will
of the voters is causing a lot
of anxiety in the community
that's what I was referring to.
Do not pass.
Passenger has education
substitute for House toward
Thirty seconds to close.
I am
four minutes from halftime three
heading into how's Education
Committee substitute for House
Members are
generated from Representative
placing House Bill fifty two on
final passage is been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
fifty two establishes the
This is that house bill fifty
two as amended do not just.
House Bill Clinton to.
Representative group.
Representative.
Five hundred sixteen in front of
CENIC and Bill Clinton has duly
passed the house.
this all session thanks
committee hunting claim Senegal
and.
Representative Chatfield on item
thirteen.
Mr speaker house bill eighty
nine is a very simple bill it
just that the box on your income
tax return if you should be so
fortunate as to be one of those
Will be donated to the healthy
soils program at New Mexico
stated University.
they're currently.
practices that are good for
healthy soil.
As soon for questions Mr
speaker.
Unfortunately senior debate
gentleman close.
Speaker of the house bill in
line do now but.
Yes that's right I'm sorry June
I.
And it.
Okay as we mentioned you miss
that opportunity.
Good luck.
Sentenced to close.
It's been a sixty seven from
zero to negative.
The next order of business
because it's junction so clear
to me.
with our recommendation as
Amanda.
And then this referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted on twenty
moment just as to.
Hey.
Committee report was adopted
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This is.
I have asked the chief clerk
tune from sure some additional
headsets from members who don't
have one I would need to word
the session for the rest of the
session as our Supreme Court has
decided on a five nothing ruling
that a house resolution one will
stay in place the issue their
We do our best to to make it as
easy as possible again I I said
yesterday I am personally
envious of the quality has said
Representative Scott seems to
work well great audio quality so
Francine give recommendation are
the there are some
announcements.
No Representative Garcia.
is the most speaker you very few
questions Representative
Chatfield on whether this was
his first bill and as you recall
it's not.
And the whenever a rookie song
falls on the reading of one
of those the if if you can
recall zoom in for him to do
is the most Baker the tall dark
and handsome and lovely.
Local government land grants and
And and we'll kind of clear our
agenda so members and presenters
That's the answer that any
Services update as to the
whereabouts of captain Janeway.
re run in my pajamas
because of the heavy schedule
and the high level of bills that
we've been running on the floor
very well if you can find wishes
please please let us know
from the general.
Representative Thomson.
please partners but one thirty
four on the back thank you Mr
speaker.
Representative Lundstrom.
eight thirty AM about one item
on the agenda that deals with
higher at the end tomorrow
morning thank you.
The evening everyone health
transportation public works and
capital improvements will not be
meeting until Tuesday at eight
AM and will we have three items
on the agenda and we'll just go
This is the gentleman from us
and representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker the leading
the members your health
Representative Estes.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house commerce committee will be
meeting tomorrow Saturday at ten
Chatfield and how's Joanne moral
to myself.
Two thirty five is not here
tomorrow thank you Mr speaker.
speaker you're House Judiciary
Committee we're going to be on.
Afternoon I look forward to.
They're trying to do a
formality.
I beg your pardon.
And yes.
We've been having seven and a
half of an hour meeting.
Mr Chairman representative
Andrés Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
educate can committee will meet
tomorrow at eleven AM we'll see
you there have a good evening
everybody.
Mr speaker go ahead with the
committee reports and I can do
mine at the end please.
hear two cannabis bills house
bill twelve and seventeen we
have a hard stop at one thirty
so I'm hoping we can get through
but will get as far as we can
tomorrow at ten.
No I have we've got will lose
members to other communities.
One thirty.
From Santa Fe Torrance Valencia
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will not be
the same time thank you Mr
speaker.
Chavis.
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
speaker thank you very much.
Generating.
Members next week we are
planning to have two days of
All I'm sorry Mister speaker I
couldn't can't figure out how to
take my hand down thank you.
Okay.
We plan to begin the third
meeting session on Tuesday at
eleven AM.
And I will go into the evening
will operate the same as we did
eleven AM Tuesday will go until
the evening.
and then also we will have a
third meeting on Friday will
start Friday morning at nine as
we did this morning and will
with the regular were limited so
next week Monday Wednesday
Friday communities.
Tuesday night eleven AM floor
In the last eight introduce
legislation.
have built introduced that's a
good point are limited for
session will be at noon on
Thursday.
So it was familiar with the
limited four sessions at this
point but if you want to
have to meet on that day for the
last a bill interested please
and I'll make further reminding
of continue to refer to my
folks.
fiscal impact house bill two
three two the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee is removed House Bill
to agree to remove the referral
to the appropriations and
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Ms.
day those are watching at home
thank you for being with this
virtually through your work
there will be many committees
met in this weekend with the
