Representative Zamora.
Representative is now.
President.
Vice chair Herrera.
I'm here.
I am here.
I also see Representative what
all right what I see is based so
he is here.
Very well we have a quorum.
Appreciate that madam secretary
good afternoon thank you all for
joining us on a Saturday and.
so we're to get do we have for
bills this afternoon and just a
couple of announcements is that
I have a allow for more major
analyst as well as our minority
analyst to join us as panelists
on the zoom calls K. you all
have any questions or comments
for the just just because I know
it's tough in this kind of work
setting
that that we feel like maybe we
have a question we should be
able to see that something so
with that hopefully that will be
more helpful
we're there to do folks let's
then move into our work for the
afternoon we have first on the
agenda house bill thirty which
is represented and
Representative Chandler you
would please raise your but you
into our committee room at.
Representative Channa you're on
mute.
chairman I also have thinking I
know senator Wirth with me as
well as my other co sponsor
senator Leo how to mail and then
expert witness David Benavidez.
Very good.
So I see Representative on a
meal Mr benefit is if you would
please raise that we can provide
you.
And then
Madam said I was a.
That initiative Hochman Vigil
was demoted to or I guess move
to the attendees list so if we
can bring her back in.
Very good.
Thank you very much so
Representative Chandler.
Welcome.
Welcome Representative how to
meet welcome.
Mr Benavides welcome thank you
all for beacons and time for us
this afternoon let's then begin
Representative Chandler you have
the floor thank you very much
chairman it's good to see you
all committee members and it's
it's a pleasure to be presenting
on house bill thirty today.
House bill thirty amends the New
Mexico water leasing Act to
ensure that the state engineer
follow procedural due process as
required by the act as well as
our state and federal
constitutions.
Before I speak to the amendment
directly I would like to offer
some background.
As members of the committee
undoubtedly no water right
owners have a property interest
in those rights.
The owner has a statutory and
constitutional right to protect
their property interests from
actions done by others that have
the potential for impairment.
The right to protect and have a
hearing before a lease takes a
fact is an essential procedural
protection for all water rights
owners in the state the leasing
Act provides the process that
must be followed.
A few state engineers ago I'm
talking years a few years ago
maybe a decade ago.
Practice was developed that
circumvents the leasing Act that
practice continues to today.
Currently the state engineer
frequently relies on a
preliminary approval process
that allows immediate use of
water through a lease that has
not received final approval.
There has been no hearing even
when a protest of that lease
application is pending.
This practice violates due
process as well as the leasing
Act.
This bill ensures that the
office of the state engineer
complies with the leasing Act in
our state and federal
constitutions.
Mr chair that concludes my
remarks but if it if you would
indulge us we have Senator heart
of meal as well as senator Wirth
so I believe have a few comments
as well absolutely thank you
representative Senators either
one of you you have the floor
good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for listening to house
bill thirty this afternoon now
for centuries I think just a
played a critical role in our
great state with nearly seven
hundred functioning affected as
the New Mexico two hundred and
twenty of them right here in my
home county of Rio Arriba
they're not only part of our
cultural heritage but also my
community Senate district and
state so life flight our
communities receive an abundance
of benefits from the logging to
in a second they're a very
important part of our culture
and are important to the social
fabric of our resilient
communities as New Mexicans
we're raised in a knowledge in
that I think yeah and water it
just be that that water is life
and that we must work
collaboratively to share and
protect our scare since a good
resource I think it's are not
only intertwined with New
Mexico's rich Pueblo you Spano
and agriculture history but they
have also brought communities
and neighbors together for
generations the most unique
aspect of our such as is that
they require the community to
come together to make decisions
about water usage and to problem
solve.
Now I appreciate the hard work
that senator Wirth and
Representative Chandler have put
into getting an exception to us
that gives in the past and I
equally appreciate the hard work
of every New Mexicans who values
and upkeep service such a model
a model that brings everyone to
the table to have discussions
with those affected and to work
collaboratively to address
issues and most importantly come
up with solutions the a second
model of collaboration is an
example of active resource water
management and how we have
managed and successfully
maintained our respective
communities for generations.
All that is being asked Mr
chairman is that we continue to
work in collaboration the
purpose of this bill is to
ensure fairness and due process
of water lease applications to
the state engineer it's
important to note that this
legislation does not remove the
ability of entities such as
cities industries farms or
community water systems to lease
water water leases on import and
water management tool in New
Mexico but H. B. thirty does do
is help the state engineer
operate within existing legal
requirements and provides
clarity to introduce thinking to
least water about the statutory
requirements protecting existing
water rights HB thirty also
incentivize entities engaging in
water planning to meet their
water needs with that Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I yield the floor to
senator Peter Wirth thank you
senator senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr chair and good
afternoon everyone very much
appreciate
Having the discussion again
about this bill just a little
bit of history this is one
that's been around for awhile I
in two thousand and fifteen
I carried this bill it passed
the state Senate twenty nine to
nine and it never got a hearing
in the house again that was the
two year the house was run by
the Republican Party up but
again we've had this discussion
for some time and this is an
issue that really needs to get
resolved why do I say that
well since we've been here two
years ago there is a pending.
Action on appeal that involves a
major piece of water litigation
over exactly this statute it's
the Carlsbad irrigation district
versus our state engineer
involves the potash mine in
water leases that were issued.
What's what's being appealed
well in that case judge water
judge Raymond Romero in the
fifth judicial district Chavez
Eddy and Lea County a judge
appointed by Susanna Martinez
has ruled unequivocally that the
language in this statute is
abundantly clear you can not
issue.
Temporary leases when there is a
protest until that is resolved
and I I highlight this because I
quite frankly am really
surprised that the state
engineer is not at the table
trying to figure out a solution
here that allow everyone to move
forward I am very concerned that
the direction we're going and
based on the clear statutory
language and we can get into
that at the appropriate time
we're gonna end up in a
situation where the state
engineer does not have the
option to do a temporary lease
unless it goes through the whole
process and that process can
take a lot of time and you're
gonna hear a lot about that but
judge Romero was abundantly
clear the statutory language and
the regulations the state
engineer has imposed themselves
are.
We are you can not do what's
been happening under this bill
and so I really appreciate what
senator Hermio said and and I
just want to highlight I realize
you know the thank yous have
been kind of carved out of this
bill and that was worked on two
years ago but what happens under
the current statute when the
state engineer reaches out to
the impacted parties they can
reach those types of
collaborative agreements that
avoid formal appeals and formal
disputes but when they can't
reach the agreement they need to
go through the hearing and the
due process before they proceed
with the lease Carlsbad
irrigation district is the
senior water right holder on the
on the bottom of the page goes
revert and they challenge this
statute and they won in District
Court we need to get this passed
we need to clear it up and I'm
hoping as this bill moves
forward which I really think it
needs to move forward the state
engineer will change the
opposition to this and actually
sit down at the table and trying
come up with some solutions I
thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the opportunity nice to be in
your committee.
Thank you senator Representative
Chandler in the.
Just a few items Mr chair I
neglected to point out a little
cleanup item that's in the bill
and if I could do that and then
I'll point to an amendment and
ask for your guidance on how to
handle that Mr chair
also included in the bill is a
clean up that
to an error that occurred two
years ago when we presented this
bill to you in committee and and
we finally got it through the
house two years ago we created a
carve out for the SAG as I'm
sure many of you who are on to
the committee remember that Mr
chair
and what happened if you look on
page two of the bill lines
nineteen and twenty the
numbering or the lettering got
off kilter.
And we inadvertently eliminated
a provision
that have had applied to the
pueblos so section need
currently in our bill
talks about water use do under
an adjudicative Water rate
secured to a Pueblo.
That originally had been section
or paragraph do Mr chair but
when we when we did the
amendment we we neglected to
change that to to include a
paragraph E. so I want to point
out that this is mainly a
technical change and frankly
rectifying an error that we
created two years ago and are
drafting so just an alert to
that Mr chair and committee
members and secondly there is an
amendment that was delivered to
the committee a few days ago Mr
chair on I believe you're aware
of it I don't know if you want
like me to explain that now or
at another time I defer to you
Mr chair Mister chairman I move
the amendment for discussion
purposes thank you
representative will their
second.
All Representative Chandler
please talk to us about the
amendment yes Mister chairman
committee this amendment is two
oh two number it's two one nine
six zero one point one.
And what the amendment does is
it delays the implementation of
the language that we're adding
to to the statute for two years
to allow those entities and
individuals and the state
engineer who has been relying on
this preliminary approval
process to adjust and make
alternate arrangements for acts
you know through the leasing Act
and it we recognize that there's
been
unfortunately a proliferation of
this preliminary use process
which really frankly Mr chair
never should have happened but
in an effort to accommodate
people who have been relying on
it we're allowing a delay in
implementation of this provision
so that they can make
adjustments us on the state
engineer Mr chair thank you for
that opportunity very good that
the extent of the amendment
Representative Mr chair yes very
good is there any discussion on
the amendment first we have
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews on the
amendment.
You Mr chair members of the
committee at eight with that
change effective date are you
deleting the emergency
provision.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Representative yes I sorry I
neglected that by
By extrapolation I guess you
would say that's occurring thank
you very much and and by
through the amendment directly
thank you.
In New.
The.
Mr chair and
members of the committee
Representative Chandler I I got
lost in your discussion of the.
Technical cleanup in part II.
Can you.
I.
It is still applies to pueblos.
But I just wasn't I wasn't I
didn't follow what you were
saying you were fixing.
Representative Matthews and
actually Representative ten
before you go there that that's
in the bill itself that's not
part of the amendment correct
Representative Chandler.
Mr chair correct okay so let's
let's set itself Representative
Matthews you have further
questions on the amendment as
proposed
Mr chairman now and I'm sorry I
misunderstood because I thought
there was an amendment in part
II but I guess not and and then
by all means we will come back
to those questions so don't feel
like I think you're gonna be
lost without that so are there
any other questions regarding
the amendment as proposed by
Representative.
The man was the pleasure of the
committee.
Mr chair.
I move adoption of the
amendment.
Motion by Representative is also
by Representative Hochman Vigil
any opposition to the minutes.
Hearing and seeing none you know
have an amended bill
Representative Chandler so and
we're now back to the bill
anything else to add in regards
to the bill itself no Mr chair
but I'm prepared to answer
Representative Matthews question
when appropriate okay we will
come back to that question after
we go to the I have to go to the
audience Mr Bennett is I did
notice you had and absurd I know
that you're an expert to do this
testimony do you want to yes in
the same now arguing wait till
we come back for question and
answers.
Mr chairman I I just raise my
hand.
It's it's certainly up to the
sponsor whether she wants me to
to speak now to speak out later
in answer to questions.
Mr chair I think we're prepared
to go to the audience if that's
your pleasure very well
appreciate that Mr Bennett these
will have a an opportunity if we
I'm sure the leader on
Representative channel thank you
for the presentation that's not
go to the audience so those in
the audience all those in
opposition.
To house bill thirty.
All those in opposition to house
bill three hundred SQ number of
hands have gone up make sure
that you an opposition of health
bill thirty please raise your
hand and we will call you one by
one as you move down the list.
So the bit of ground rules
please be conscious of the time
permitted for our afternoon
session please do not be
repetitive.
With that being said Liz in
Taylor.
You know with this good
afternoon good afternoon Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am Liz Taylor I'm a
water lawyer in New Mexico and
I've been a water all your for
twenty nine years state and I am
here Senator Wirth ran the same
law school class
a long time ago and I in
opposition of the bill I'm here
representing of the San Juan
water commission from San Juan
County and select energy
services from Eddy County we
oppose the bill because it will
take away a valuable tool for
the state engineer to move water
around quickly both my clients
the water commission and select
use leases to move water to
supply water to various
industries including oil and gas
but also roads
and I would really like to just
address the issue that senator
Wirth raised in Representative
Chandler the the due process
issue
in New Mexico according to the
Supreme Court there is no
constitutional due process right
to a particular process that is
from the band's the state of New
Mexico K. twenty three New
Mexico Supreme Court zero three
three seven the issue there was
whether they had to follow a
hearing for a domestic well in
the Supreme Court said no in the
Supreme Court said that nothing
in the constitutional link which
indicates that all
appropriations must have the
same application procedures
rather it appears that the New
Mexico constitution gives the
legislature the power to make
such policy choices and create
different procedures for
different appropriations and I
would point out that
appropriations are at a higher
level then then transfers and so
if the legislature can have
different processes for for
appropriations it certainly can
have different processes for
transfers and that's what we
have here in fact there are
other sorts of transfers that do
not require a hearing the state
engineer has been.
Perpetrated the leasing Act to
allow preliminary approvals in
the state engineers
interpretation of his act is
entitled to deference and as Mr
Senator Wirth pointed out that
issues on appeal that hasn't
been decided yet and so
the state engineers
interpretation should be given
deference to allow these
preliminary authorizations and
as you already pointed out the
safety is have a special carve
out so I'm not sure why they are
here again
because they are protected from
what they see is harms from from
leasing Act I also point out
that that there's been no harm
no one has been harmed by
a preliminary approval issued by
the state engineer none of these
preliminary approvals Act even
after the hearing process have
been overturned and no court has
overturned a preliminary
approval saying that the state
engineer made a bad decision
Condition published as we have a
lengthy list of other folks want
to talk yes Sir I apologize for
that finally I would see that
just remember that the state
engineer examines each one of
these applications before
granting them and in fact as
denied them when they would are
of other water rights owners so
we don't need this bill and
please vote against it thank you
thank you let's go to Jim west
west your Jim good afternoon
you're with us.
Mr chair thank you very much to
Winchester here from the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
I PAM its members believe that
this bill HB thirty is an
attempt just to slow down of oil
and gas use of water necessary
to perform basic operations on a
well site in it not just hurts
oil and gas industry hurts many
other industries as well the
intent of the bill is is clearly
looking to strip the state
engineer of the ability to
administratively allow temporary
uses of water based on an
already established criteria and
that established procedure is a
full administrative process that
takes place through permanent
water rate transactions
by eliminating these temporary
non emergency water demands
through this expedited process
there is a loss of due process
to water right owners to file
protest to have a hearing in to
obtain a final decision from the
state engineer so for this and
many other reasons we do stand
in opposition of HBs thirty
thank you so much thank you Jim
let's move to Laura Riley Laura
good afternoon you with this.
Yes.
Chairman let date committee
members and Representative
Chandler I'm Laura Riley
representing just three sixty
and gavel and solutions our
clients include businesses and
entities in both agriculture and
extractive industry sectors are
concerns are with limiting the
flexibility of would miss of the
temporary leasing of existing
water rights office of the state
engineer currently considers
impacts on existing rights and
those parties who may be
affected by temporary leasing
this bill does not change that
what this bill does do is
created high barrier which would
be detrimental to the beneficial
use of water in these times of
drought and economic
uncertainty.
In the our agricultural
communities farmers and ranchers
currently utilize the leasing
Act that crop management and
income diversification this bill
will limit the market and
opportunities currently
available to our farmers and
ranchers in New Mexico some day
they gather by some of my
clients indicate that that every
culture of farmers and ranchers
are the largest sector currently
utilizing this temporary
Leasing Act and and for these
reasons many of the that this
action will affect.
many farmers and ranchers are I
thank you for your consideration
we do oppose this bill and hope
that you join me thank you.
Thank you all right let's go not
to get real.
W. with this good afternoon.
Good afternoon chairman Lindsey
and members of the committee
Gabrielle careful it's and I
work for COG operating which is
a wholly owned subsidiary of
Kanako Phillips I stand in
opposition to this bill and and
supportive of the comments that
were made by miss Taylor and the
others that came before me I
just wanted to add for you this
afternoon the concerns in
regards to the delay of
implementation for two years as
it's been stated there is a
court case the parties have have
taken their right and their
opportunity to ask the court to
decide this and I would ask this
legislature to allow the court
to continue to review this and
make the decision and then if
there are issues after that
final court decision within the
legislature should act but we do
have these three branches of
government for a reason thank
you very much for the
opportunity this afternoon to
testify thank you very much for
being with us just go to Ashley
Wagner.
Sweater Good afternoon you with
us.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
respectfully oppose this bill in
twenty nineteen Forbes ranks New
Mexico number forty eight for
the best state to do business
which means we were already at a
competitive disadvantage
compared to other states pre
pandemic but now that we're
trying to recover economy we
could be set back much further
compared to our neighbors in the
midst of the pandemic many
legislators reached out to the
chamber how can we help
businesses in New Mexico they
ask I have at least one
suggestion I am not passing
legislation that causes New
Mexico to continually be seen as
having an unstable burdensome
regulatory environments over the
years we've also heard a lot
about the need to build and
maintain our infrastructure but
according to the fiscal impact
report the department
transportation reports that
enactment of HB thirty could
cause delays in contractors
ability to use least water on
highway improvement projects
attention resulting in project
delays increase project costs or
even a loss of federal funding a
project timelines are
significantly affected I
respectfully ask you to oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Wagner let's go to
cast.
Yes good afternoon you with
this.
Right here on the county
attorney and Eddy County I have
with me today Jason birds use
who is our public works director
in charge of all of our road
projects out here and he's gonna
be doing the speaking primarily
but we are opposed to the house
bill thirty but let Jason is
here with me good afternoon the
chairman committee members would
really like to just reiterate in
India peas comments in your FIR
report just the delays and
increased costs of this bill
will call because do our road
projects and you've got to
understand that when we enact
this or when this happens was
gonna drive the cost of this is
the trucking what we try to do
is get this water schools we can
to the water our road projects
and when we can't get it there
we have to truck it which is not
only a cost at a time concern is
a safety concern we put trucks
on the roads longer for.
So in you know we always want to
try to get this water is close
we can roll projects is a vital
internet part of our road
construction.
You know the other main concern
we have is for our local farmers
and ranchers.
Who are are currently using this
source of income subsidize
struggling farms and ranch and
in the area who were going
through not only a pandemic in a
severe drought right now but our
knowledge industry bus and these
are the reasons why we're
opposed to this.
Thank you thank thank you
Jennifer your concept and Noone
is not go to a Missy.
Missy good afternoon you with
us.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
testify today my name is Missy
career and I am a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixty speaking on behalf of our
client Occidental petroleum
respectfully we stand in strong
opposition of HB thirty this
bill ignores strongly establish
an arty well researched and
establish due process proving
good actors in the oil and gas
industry like Occidental and
many other industries that leads
the world in innovation and
stringent environmental and
water use protections I echo
miss Taylor mistrial you and
miss Wagner the proposed
emergency provisions of the
transfer statutes failed to
provide an adequate substitute
because moving water temporarily
for economic or inviting or
environmental reasons often
presents no real emergency HB
thirty attempts to create an
emergency we're simply there is
not one thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you Mr president a concept New
Mexico then to Tiffany Rivera Mr
very with this.
Chairman Lente and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
afternoon to be Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in a respectful
opposition this afternoon I'm
here farm bureau we support the
sanctity of private water rights
as defined by state law and the
individuals legitimate privilege
to utilize these water rights
without undue interference from
government which this bill will
cost the legislation before you
today will create further
interference and cause undue
delay on all water lease
applications currently every
application gets due process
while working continue to be
done and water utilize as
hearings are taking place what
we during the protest process is
paid back at the office of the
state engineer find that this
water should not have been
appropriated.
The OSCE has almost never been
wrong when granting a
preliminary approval for a water
lease if this legislation passes
a protest will basically kill an
application as by the time a
protest is settled the need for
approval have passed the crop
will be dead and the projects
will be abandoned this
legislation removes a vital tool
that provides the office of the
state engineer the flexibility
they need to do their job lastly
these opportunities often find
farmers and ranchers the ability
to supplement their income when
production agriculture is not
economically promising leasing
also aids farmers here require
additional short term water
supplies during times of drought
I ask that you please go in
opposition to house bill thirty
thank you thank you Mr Vera
let's go to Matt Thompson.
Mr Thompson you're not with us.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members my name is Matt Thompson
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Apache corporation we propose HB
thirty because it will slow down
the off state engineers approval
process restrictive able
temporary uses of water not only
the oil and gas industry but to
many other industries as
described in the FIR such as the
highway improvement projects
mentioned by the swagger in the
Eddy County officials due to the
current backlog OSC anticipates
years of delays which causes
untenable delays in the oil and
gas sector for that reason we
ask your up we ask you to oppose
H. B. thirty thank you for your
time thank you Mr Johnson Mr
Mike bow and.
Mr Boeing you're not with us.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Mike following on the executive
director of the New Mexico
mining association and also
registered lobbyists for the
spell your teaching Conservancy.
Both organizations are opposed
to this bill certainly from
mining and we're very concerned
about unnecessary delays and
then the Conservancy district
are worried about the.
Tools that they use to get
adequate water to their farmers
and ranchers and districts and
the ways can also affect that
what they do down there so for
those reasons both organizations
oppose thank you very good thank
you Mr Bowen.
This summer this summer up I'm
sorry Rebecca it's giving me the
error message that in order to
promote you you need to
update your version as soon so
if you could update that so we
can make you a panelists and you
can come back and join us and
make that comment so we'll move
on then to the next.
Person who is a.
Okay that's good James.
James you're with us.
If you're you are muted you hear
me now yes we do okay I'm on
okay I'm a farmer down in the
Carlsbad and right now we've had
an application for the state
engineer to moose Water Rights
indoor well so we could use them
for fracking and what we've
heard is that application could
be even looked at until the
intrepid potash case was taking
care of by the state engineers
office in the I. S. C. and so
that meant a delay in getting
the application done the moves
the whole project you know end
of neck another couple months.
Also know the problem getting
the water down this digit we
were going to use so anyway and
also I've heard state engineer
testified that this bill will in
earlier hearing will delay of
put a lot more delay in to his.
Part of it here deland has the
doings in the state engineers
office of policy described how
he's sixty position short right
now so and he was talking about
the there or someone was talking
about the delay maybe a couple
years in the future before the
stuff some of these applications
could be so until it until that
in a perfect world the state
engineer should be able to do
stuff quick but it doesn't
happen and it does look like
it's going to happen as soon in
this H. B. thirty is gonna make
it much worse so with that I
stand in opposition thank you
thank you James and good
afternoon the thing go to the
then we're talking about which
is the state engineer self Mr
John Dantonio.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee of this
I wanted to say some some
factual makes the actual
statements and I really.
It took
a little bit of a sense of what
senator Wirth said that that the
state engineer is not at the
table I am at the table always
and I'm always willing to talk
I'm always willing to work out
of the tough issues and you know
as an example on this particular
bill we've met with the New
Mexico state association I think
three times if not more and
talking about how to how to move
forward.
Representative the what what I
want when I want to stress is
that.
It's a it's of this extremely
important tool not just from my
office but for the state of New
Mexico and our backup plan on
this whole thing is to work with
the stakeholders in the interim
to set reasonable conditions on
time and amounts and even
purposes abuse we've had these
discussions with Representative
Chandler
and you know it might my fear is
that the two year delay is
actually going to we're going to
get a run of preliminary
approval applications our office
just like any other decision we
make if we close the base and if
we do something else.
We're gonna get a slew of
applications that are come that
we're gonna have to deal with it
it's not going to improve the
situation my main concern is
some some projects that the
governor and her administration
of really want to develop for
and have some economic
development but one of the one
of the huge solar projects in
northwest New Mexico that are
intended to replace someone
generating station and renewable
power to comply with the energy
transmission act of I know
there's there's a delay in
implementing this maybe that
project could possibly go
through but for all practical
purposes there might be a
handful of in Providence
decisions steps that the state
engineer is made over over
hundreds of other ones that are
that have been made properly
they're small amounts of water
we do an impairment analysis for
that for the time and the
amounts and I think it's several
people said and I want to be to
put duplicative in my in my
testimony here but there's
there's a lot of folks are going
to suffer New Mexico deal team
we had to to preliminary
approvals this month on a
highway construction projects
down in the Dona Ana County area
and then this year but the
farmers enough because Bally
artesian Conservancy district
they rely on this in order to
pay back over diversions of
water and their five year
accounting period there's all
there's environmental uses there
is so what we're doing is is
were we're trying to eliminate a
the really what I consider and I
know the senator Wirth is and
Representative Chandler talk
about the the law piece and I
think what's more important here
is the policy piece on putting a
really good policy together that
restricts and takes into account
some of these in Providence of
maybe approvals that happened in
the past and quite frankly I'm
not sure there have been many of
those I know there's some of you
know we're trying to respond to
speculation.
And and and and hypothetical
concerns but in one of the means
I think yesterday I had with the
New Mexico state association I
asked them point blank it can
you tell me any any other
instance besides the real condo
issue which which was probably
one that's what was a bad
decision several years ago.
I'm gonna I'm gonna ask you to
conclude your comments as you
are public comment and we have
others that want to come as well
okay and that I just on that
point besides making a decision
of on that particular piece but
since that time before they were
able to come up with the in any
other instance in which acequia
was affected so Mr chairman my
comments there are I I am I am
at the table I will always be at
the table I want to work out
solutions that are best for New
Mexicans are best for governor
Lujan Grisham's administration
and we're here to work with both
senator Wirth and Representative
Chandler in in in putting some
really good policy together to
make sure that this is not abuse
so thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you
misstatement members of the
committee my name is Amy berry
and I'm the registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico oil and gas
association I'm also a native
New Mexican who like many of you
is proud to be raising my son
within a twenty mile radius of
where I was born and raised it
is for these reasons that I have
and always will be acutely aware
of what a precious resource
water is far state why the oil
and gas industry choose fresh
water is less than one percent
New Mexico we take that use of
water very seriously thanks to
your help two years ago we are
recycling and re using water for
operations more than ever before
that said there are operational
point during which the use of
fresh water is critical such as
the drilling and completion of a
while in order to protect the
environment that we all call
home industry needs to use fresh
water whether this bill is
immediately implemented or has a
delayed implementation it would
prevent us from doing that this
bill is essentially at early man
with tremendous impact on the
industry and state budget.
Oil and gas like most industries
is inter dependent on various
factors and other businesses
house bill thirty would prohibit
the use of water after the
preliminary review and approval
of the office of the state
engineer which would stop oil
and gas operations we will not
drill a well through a water
table using anything other than
fresh water is our shared
responsibility to protect New
Mexico's water and continue to
generate revenue for our schools
and the well being for each
other for these reasons name of
the strongly opposes house bill
thirty thank you thank you Amy
that's going to still be a still
be a good afternoon you're now
with this.
You're on mute Sylvia.
Bill Sylvia near yes.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and also members of the
committee our drinking water is
critical.
Without drinking water we cannot
survive I am a member of and I
essay gamma parcialmente.
And we need that water to grow
food and we always in New Mexico
need fresh and wonderful
drinking water there's very
little of it.
On the earth.
And there is very little of it
here in New Mexico so I am for
this bill.
I think it's a very important
bill and I think it protects New
Mexico in a extremely important
way I am for this bill I am a
pricey on day and I value are
wider I well I I value our our
ability to farm.
That's what we need we need food
and water primarily before all
of this thinks.
That's all I have to say.
Thank you and if I may once
again remind those in the
audience is that these are
comments in opposition in
opposition of house bill thirty.
So this you an opposition please
lower your hand.
Mr Santiago my SS estimates this
year with us.
You are you.
You're on mute Mr Mestis.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Hello my asked us with some
valley a regional association of
effective.
And that in Albuquerque.
Glad to see you again Mister
chairman.
As they are.
Here Gator within the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy district.
We draw our water in the south
valley.
From the diversion at the.
T..
That diversion of from the Rio
Grande not all the US there's
self valley the north valley
Bernalillo county and also.
Socorro County.
And and.
If water is transferred without
notice.
To.
The farmers in the county.
That folder Water Rights.
We will not with water that is
diverted for our second and for
the Pueblo of coach T. and K.
well and setting.
Will.
The.
Instead at the Slevin a
diversion.
And therefore the.
Carry water that we need to
continue here gain are feels
which have pre nineteen oh seven
water rights as well as primary.
A priority all rights of the
Pueblo of will be reduced so so
we support this bill this gives
us the opportunity to stop any
of these transfers to people of
sold their well water rights.
Hi
and a newly affect water that's
for us and this year.
You might just be really your
comment this afternoon again
when we are on on those that are
in opposition of house bill
thirty so we will know thank you
you are in favor house bill
thirty.
Thank you for being with us this
afternoon and we will also now
go then to the last.
Percent thank you Mr provision
of house bill thirty Tony
Trujillo Mr Trujillo.
Can you hear me yep thank you Mr
chairman Mr chairman members the
committee my name's Tony
Trujillo and registered lobbyist
for Freeport mac Moran there in
the copper mining company done
hearing Grant County and also
the largest private employer
southwest New Mexico I'm not
going to repeat all the reasons
why that have been given already
and why this bill should be the
table but just the know that the
the this bill were heard jobs
dot hearing in our area so we
strongly urge you to vote
against this bill was that in
opposition Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Trujillo let's now
then go to the audience for all
those in favor of house bill
thirty all those in support of
house bill thirty please raise
your hand.
Please keep your comments short
please do not be repetitive and
we will first go to.
The association hello you with
us.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I stand
in strong support of HB thirty
because protection of existing
water rights from empowerment is
a basic principle in New Mexico
water law H. B. thirty affirms
protections in the law that
require that any applications
that before the state engineer
full put cedars including notice
opportunity for protest and the
public hearing on protested
applications I'm very concerned
on how polluting industries are
granted access to permits
allowing gross over consumption
of our living waters without
meeting full community input or
public process this bill ensures
that I have an opportunity to
raise concerns about potential
impacts my water rights and
environmental health.
There is no harm that can come
from affirming their rights to a
public process especially in
matters concerning our state's
most precious resource I ask you
to please support HB thirty
thank you.
Thank you for your contents
coverage straighter.
Mr chair good afternoon you with
us.
Good afternoon chairman and I
just I wanted to
speak in support of H. B. O. S.
S. the bill SB thirty HB thirty
and
I I work in watersheds all over
New Mexico for twenty three
years and we know now it's very
clear that groundwater is so
closely connected to our surface
waters and any kind of
flexibility that allows
groundwater mining to court even
on a temporary basis during a
drought will affect streamflow
and sometimes impacting even
springs that feed important
water supplies for not just.
All or a sick yes but for for
wildlife so I I I I think is a
policy issue the state really
does does need just to continue
not making these exceptions for
these temporary permits and
uphold the law and then let the
hard conversations happen.
Thank you please support this
bill thank you Sir now moved my
aching my air you know with
this.
Yes good afternoon thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and Mike Flaherty what
this year career granted chapter
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state and we
support HB thirty the language
in the water leasing Act needs
clarification to ensure fairness
and due process in the way I see
grants approval of water lease
applications overseas current
practice of granting preliminary
approvals for water lease
applications without a protest
period and hearing is not
supported in current law this
illegitimate administrative
process has been abused and
exploited by commercial
interests it was not the intent
of the law to strip senior were
senior water right users to just
irrigation districts Peublo sick
yes.
If there is if if there is a
need for time critical approval
for water lease leases in New
Mexico coast procedures should
be developed through the
legislative rulemaking process
sees that considers due process
protections for existing water
rights we support each be thirty
and thank the sponsors for the
bill.
Thank you my let's go to Douglas
Douglas good afternoon you with
this.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I'm
Douglas Nico John hi minute
tourney and a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
environmental law center you're
choosing to support this bill
because it promotes fairness for
people who have water rights
that may be affected by leasing
of other Water Rights insurers
that the people who may be
affected will have the
opportunity to weigh in on
whether those proposed leases
are appropriate or will
adversely affect to prepare
their water rights we urge you
to support us feel through the
thank you very much thank you
Douglas have a good afternoon
let's go to apologize see a miss
Garcia you are now with this.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
speak my name is Paula Garcia
I'm a rancher and a gardener and
a second enough on north and
what I County and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico sic Association
I first want to clarify that the
twenty nineteen amendment that
was made to the water be sacked
was very important and it was
very helpful to the US I guess
but it only covers a subset of
leases in the instance of of
these into or out of an
individual a secular this bill
continues to address the broader
issue of due process especially
in our case when multiple
executives are involved in a in
a in a situation for where they
could be impaired by a water I
know here an example today about
about the upper Hanteo a sick as
where there was a approved
Water leased by the state
engineer that allowed to
diversion up above multiple
executives for their only option
was to file a protest however
they they did file the protest
but the state engineer had
granted the use of water right
away so the whole the protest
was pending the use of water was
occurring and that's the problem
with this and and that's a due
process violation HB thirty of
firms the fundamental protection
in New Mexico water law that
protects existing water rights
yes seconds in New Mexico or
some of the oldest after
published in tribes Water Rights
in New Mexico under existing
well we have a long history of
knowing that if there are any
new uses of water proposed that
might affect us we'll have
notice of that we can raise
concerns be a public process
this is apply to all water
transfers and since the passage
of the lease act does apply to
leases as well in two thousand
three as secular as we're we're
able to
update the law that requires
that any application go twenty
seconds well so I twenty
nineteen that language was
affirmed and added to the water
use the fact.
But in the big picture we we can
still be affected by water lease
application and that's why this
bill is still important to us we
rely on surface water that is
dependent on snowmelt through of
a intricate network of waterways
however under another practice
by state engineer or a new
interpretation that was made of
about a decade ago but the
leasing Act the state engineer
has been granting preliminary
approval which we have been
maintaining for years that is
not unlawful administrative
practice and judge Romero in the
fifty additional district agrees
with us and has affirmed our
position that this is an
unlawful practice judge Romero
ordered the state engineer
cancel those permits and that he
was not authorized to have
grant to them so that we know of
these to agree just examples and
Lincoln County.
Thank you for your comments.
Okay I'm finished Mr Chairman
just have one of us the
committee to please support this
bill thank you for your time
let's move on that depressive
the honorable.
Torrez.
Good afternoon you with us.
Good afternoon Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and Mr Mr chairman for
the opportunity to address the
committee on H. B. thirty.
my name is up Christiana Torres
some of our State on to on the
storm DH in Honda New Mexico.
I I use my senior property
rights which are dated to
eighteen sixty three to use and
irrigate my farm my story is the
same story I think for most
small farmers in New Mexico not
only in Lincoln County but
throughout New Mexico.
In twenty thirteen the village
of Ruidoso applied toward three
permits under the lease act
For a seven year lease to move
water upstream from the hunter
valley.
Luminary authorization was
granted by the office of the
state engineer on those three
leases and the important thing
to note is that despite the fact
that a hundred and twenty
partially on this.
Opposed and protested this this
leave this these leases and this
move.
And despite the fact that there
was a challenge to these leases.
The village of Ruidoso was
allowed to use water
immediately upon this temporary
authorization it is a sad thing
to note and I know for this
committee that this is not the
way things ought to be but the
small farmers we some of which
were able to hire legal counsel
others which proceeded pro se.
The ones that hired legal
counsel had to spend over
seventy thousand dollars which
to me is an outrageous amount
for small farmers and all
actually for anyone to have to
use that kind of money to try to
vindicate and protect their
water rights.
This litigation went on for
nearly six years so hearing was
not set for more than two years
this is not this month I'm gonna
ask you conclude your comments
please.
And the US I urge you to adopt
HB thirty I think it will cure
this constitutionally defective
process a process that was
overlooked in our situation and
hopefully this will cure grant.
Thank you Sir a reminder for the
audiences that we have a lake
the agenda this afternoon and we
have to have a number of folks
that want to comment on this
matter in support so please do
not be repetitive please keep
your comments brief next norm go
up.
With this chairman.
My name is norm gone I'm a
constituent of Representative
lettuce I'm retired licensed
water engineer.
There's nothing hypothetical
about my example of abuse of
state engineer approvals of
water leases.
When I was appointed director
The New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission in nineteen ninety
seven.
Then state engineer Tom tourney
assigned my highest priority.
To comply with the nineteen
eighty seven to create of the
United States Supreme Court.
The required New Mexico to never
again water to Texas on the
Pecos river.
I led the successful successful
effort from nineteen ninety
seven to two thousand one.
The settlement which reduced
water depletions in New Mexico
and got water through the last
damn in New Mexico for delivery
to the Texas state line.
Receive the bipartisan approval
of the New Mexico legislature
and was signed into law in two
thousand one.
State appropriations paid for
example meditation state
appropriations continue to pay
its on going expenses.
New Mexico is permanent solution
was partially on done by former
state engineer Tom plans leases
okay because river water without
due process the water leases
were fracking the Interstate
Stream Commission protested
Blaine fire the Interstate
Stream Commission director.
The water that was least would
not have been in the river had
the state in New Mexico not
expended approximately two
hundred million.
To achieve permanent compliance
with the amended decree of the
US Supreme Court.
The state engineer was
overturned on judge Romero's
twenty twenty and rid of Matt
Damon's on a petition brought by
Carlsbad purification District
owner of the last damn on the
Pecos river and prominent party
to the settlement the current
state engineer has argued and
remains on the wrong side of
this matter.
The New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission is on the right side.
These places without hearing
should never have occurred.
Please go to do pass of HB
thirty to stop these abuses of
the public and the law thank you
Mr chairman maybe Mr governments
go to Amigos bravos again please
you keep your comments brief.
Sir but then it's Mexico Amigos
bravos you with this.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee this is
Josie Pat on the executive
director of the Migos Provoost
organization is in its thirty
third year protecting restoring
the waters of New Mexico very
briefly I just want to say that
we think HB thirty will be an
important step to clarify the
legal requirements for the
offices state engineer to abide
by with respect to public notice
hearing requirements clearly
there's a problem here we also
like that it shows respect for
New Mexico's four hundred year
acequia tradition thank you Mr
chairman for your time today.
Thank you for keeping it brief
that's go ahead to Franciscan
solace misc dollars you with
this.
Good afternoon doctor land there
chairman and committee members
anyway my name is Frances
Gonzalez of the district twenty
eight coordinator for retake our
democracy and CD two chair for
other long to progressive caucus
I'm being tribal and from a
rural community I reside in that
area was proper extraction of
Freeport McMoRan is the main
employer are they have deep
pockets and with the lack of
water wells that are not having
needed one of our towns is not
able to now find a well and
their landing on water for
awhile as they say we're still
trying to find a water well that
will work
retake our democracy and other
lofted progressive copy strongly
support this bill to do past
thank you to sponsors for this
bill thank you thank you very
much is going to Caroline
Kennedy I'm sorry.
I think we're going to Caroline
Caroline Kennedy you are now
with us.
Thank you and good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee.
I'm a commissioner on the border
of last say yes to see this in
the bill as of students in Santa
Fe County which is a domestic
order slash acequia system
soaring approximately a hundred
eighty members all rights also
go back to eighteen sixty three
I strongly support H. three
thirty because it was sure due
process to protect the rights of
existing water rights holders
including those of community
water systems are safe use the
state engineer should not grant
preliminary approval of
applications for new R. uses by
water basically this will ensure
that existing New Mexico always
followed requiring that notice
be given to existing water
rights holders of such
applications in order to allow
them the opportunity to raise
concerns and protests that such
new short changing this could
affect their rights thank you
increased support this bill.
Thank you miss Kennedy less than
now go to don boost those.
On your with us good afternoon.
You're on mute.
Thank you very much Mr Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is don postos
I own a small farm here in
Espanola valley call Santa Cruz
farm and the commissioner for
the S. seconded Yano and
president of the Santa Cruz
stream association we have over
two thousand members at your
gate off of the subject to
stream and we stand in
opposition to help us build
thirty thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you Mr bush does
this go to in hand Roy ten.
Good to you with us.
Mr chairman committee members
thank you very much and I'm here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
and we understand that.
Water is a huge issue for all of
us we support farming and
ranching and food production
here in New Mexico and care
deeply about it as part of the
health and economy of our state
we do stands for this bill
because the value of water and
its use in New Mexico is only
going to increase and the under
further pressure for immediate
use and transfers we believe
that this is an important
measure to protect the use of
water and water rights and
through a due process as well
and so we do stand in support of
this bill thank you very much to
the Sanchez in to the committee
thank you miss role it's going
to present to read.
Clarissa Duran misdirect your
with us.
Thank you so much Mr chair and
members thank you to those who
spoke in support of house bill
thirty before me I'm a
generational resident of
northern New Mexico I am an
entrepreneur and daughter of a
father who own many small
businesses and granddaughter of
a rancher I would ask our
committee members deployed a
close attention to those who
spoke in opposition they were
individuals representing big
business government and those
who said they cared about
ranchers and agriculture but
none of them were ranchers or
farmers none of them were water
protectors or advocates for
Mother Earth and her right to
occur alive of complete
wellness.
I'm a big businesses coming to
an end the time to support our
mothers is here now please join
me in supporting all that is or
the highest good of life and
leave behind what is good for
profit thank you for your
consideration and bow of the
past on house bill thirty thank
you Mr ran that's going to Lane
amber lane connecting you with
this.
Good afternoon.
Chair and members of the
committee I want to just be very
brief and say that I am in
support of house bill thirty
I've been working on water
issues for more than twenty
years here in the middle valley
and if we don't get our rain on
the handle of these transfers
we're going to be and more dire
straits thank you very much
thank you Jackie Powell Jackie
with this good afternoon.
Hello Jackie you're with us
you're on mute.
I'm is this Jackie Pell let me
yes I can hear you now okay
sorry and a new to me my name is
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jackie Pelham a fifth
generation small farm owner on
the chose to stitch nor the
rated off of the Rio Ruidoso
located between read also in
Honda of west Russell we raise
apples and pears and cows I've
also been a two term county
commissioner in the past
representing this area as well
as my grandfather was this
Senator in the first
legislature.
mainly to protecting keep what
little bit of water we have in
this area I just want to
reiterate what Presley on Torres
said about
the preliminary approval we had
in this area several years ago
it was forty miles upstream that
affected about thirty five
to say is posted two hundred pro
protest and I want to say how
big a percentage that is of the
people that live in this area it
is a very narrow valley it takes
up
I in unincorporated small
community you know but one moved
going close after shown condo
That took several years if if
there were to be credits to be
paid back it wouldn't be in
water it would been paper
credits and so
I'm I'm in strong support of the
house bill thirty because
this was in great costs to our
small farmers and will never get
that water back in we've got to
be very careful with these
transfers for all communities
and all farmers thank you.
Thank you misspelled appreciate
your comments let's go nexus
Severino Lombardi Severino good
afternoon you with this.
Thank you so much chairman Lente
and members of the committee
honored to be here with you all
I am a present day here and to
my own the Martinez city but the
H. I am also on the board that
don bliss does referenced of the
Santa Cruz stream system and I
know he stands in support of HB
thirty I own a domestic well and
I'm a member of a mutual
domestic someone asked why our
psyche as at the table because
we understand that this is a
whole hydrologic landscape
everything is interconnected we
have to care take all of these
waters someone said no harm has
been done that is not true as
you've heard from previous
testimonies.
We cannot accept this practice
of the preliminary approvals
that is hitting our traditional
uses our priority senior rights
water rights holders a rural
communities against economic
development of industry
municipalities and the state we
have is a citizen it's hard to
understand that we're debating
following the law and people are
questioning that violating the
law are there insisting that
that is due process it is clear
what the law states were only
asking that it be followed
we have to ensure that in
honoring that were also
sustaining our rural economies
and not undermining them for
these reasons and the one spoken
before I stand in support of HB
thirty I hope you will too and
thank you so much for your
service thank you very much have
a good afternoon that's good
Robert up I'm not going to stir
up a doctor you know with this.
Good afternoon Mister Mr chair
and committee members yeah my
name is Robert up without you
staffed the Mexico acequia
Commission we also stand in
support of a of the Senate bill
as many of the other individuals
I mention this is really about
due process we want to just make
sure that that we have a fair
processes before in the water or
water issues are are tractors so
Mr chair we do send support
thank you very much thank you Mr
opened up let's go to Lynn
Montgomery it's not gonna be
with us.
You are muted.
All right I thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee
I'm a parcialmente down and see
this.
I'm very concerned about the
integrity of our our water
management here in New Mexico on
how we manage it and I think
that we have to have integrity
and all of that it is so
important to have that with all
all of rights and everything out
there and and so anyway I'm very
much in support of this bill.
Thank you so that we go to deal
with dread Mr Madrid.
You are muted.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
esteemed members of the
committee on my name is Daryl
Madrid I am a commissioner on
the list on this site is on
shaky on here in and watch in
New Mexico we have a priority
one or priority date of point
back to fifteen ninety eight so
I am also president of the real
the trauma secular association
representing over six hundred
farmers and ranchers along the
confluence of the real the
trauma below average you down so
we sent the stand in full
support of house bill thirty
because we want to make sure
that our landowners some have.
A week of due process to protect
their valuable water rights and
I remind respectfully reminded
committee that we're in the
middle of chronic drought so our
our our infrastructures already
fragile to begin with and we
don't want to have a cloud
hanging over here that the
office of the state engineer
come by past due process and and
take something that's very
valuable and precious to us
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Madrid that's going to my
Kearney to Kearney good
afternoon you're with this.
Hi good afternoon.
I'm in New Mexico residents
speaking in support of HB thirty
extractive industries and others
are currently using a loophole
and expanding regulation to
avoid falling to the process of
obtaining a lease for you
suppress Water.
Water is a scarce rediscover
some vital resource for New
Mexicans we're already seeing
drastic effects of the
ratification of the southwest
including New Mexico on our
landscape in our homes allowing
a reduction of regulation of
scarce resources recipe for
disaster the classic example of
economic and environmental
principal noticed the tragedy of
the Commons taught many first
year course HB thirty close the
loophole these industries are
using it is not creating
additional regulation simply
require existing regulatory
systems to be used as intended
members of the committee to
think of on Mexicans operating
on this measure rather than the
desires a handful of extractive
industries who are lobbyists to
fight to maintain loopholes in
regulation to boost their bottom
lines and deepen their
shareholder profits thank you.
Thank you Sir is going to marry
just gonna just merry good
afternoon you're with this.
You are muted.
All.
You know thank you thank you.
I am a member of again on this
one Sen asik asco you know New
Mexico task County I have
served as a second commissioner
or I have served for over twenty
six years I'm a rancher and
farmer together when my husband
Ambrose and that's a
Constantinian of water in our
just take just the ranchers and
farmers need this to continue to
use the waters for our
livelihood we have a scare some
watering us take us right now
people are having problems
because of drought.
They have to find ways to find
ways to make their living
because I think it's do not
carry enough water at this time
so we have to continue to find
other ways to make our living
because we don't have enough
grass for cows we have to sell
everything this is not right
groundwater is very much
connected to a second waters it
is important to have a protest
period and to prove the need of
our waters to irrigate our
lands.
Communities lower than us have
no water flowing down the river
it is very sad to see revert
reverse run dry so I am.
In support of this bill thank
you very much thank you very
have a good afternoon let's not
go to indicate amero Mr America
with this.
Thank you thanks chairman and
members of the committee I'm
here today as a resident of New
Mexico and having grown up in in
New Mexico on a on a secular my
father still your gates you
today that these fast track
leases are necessary for
economic development and the
more profitable uses of water
you to get the water they need
as soon as possible but I want
to tell you this New Mexico
policy makers of this is a false
choice we can provide the proper
balance and public policy
between economic development and
protecting was the need for
hundreds of years as a state New
Mexico has rural communities
that are already suffering from
inequities in where we want to
protect our way of life and also
have dignified livelihoods but
we don't believe we have to sell
our soul so that we can have new
development we ask you as
legislators to consider that we
not allow unchecked procedure
that prioritizes the convenience
of the applicant over the due
process rights of those of us
with existing rights industry
they need water have an existing
process which they can acquire
water rates they need but they
need to plan ahead for the time
it takes to get a state engineer
permit moreover the state
engineers office needs more
resources to address the
increasing demands on his agency
so that he can process permits
in a more timely manner
dispatches do not need to if the
staff just do need to be
modernized distracted right
balance and that should occur in
a transparent inclusive process
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr Romero that's going
to bend Shelton Mister Shelton.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Ben Salazar the political and
policy director for conservation
voters New Mexico really proud
today to stand in support of
this bill with all the community
water managers on this call
today I think that climate
change is going to force the
state of New Mexico to do more
with less and less water
supplies and listening to the
small family farmers present
this to have been to say we
manage our water resources for
generations one the best things
that we can do and they're
telling you there's a structural
problem with the system right
now I think it behooves all of
us to lessons we asked to
support this bill thank you
thank you Mr Shelton let's go
then finally to Herald Trujillo
Mr Trujillo good afternoon.
You are muted Sir.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you now yes said thank you Mr
chairman I'm Carol Trujillo I am
president yes thank you he slide
in more I'm also president of
the New Mexico Essick
Association and the professional
engineer the bottom line is we
need public and but you know
during this issues you know
we've seen damage to you know
people that in the read also
case you know that you know
really hurt the LESC as so we're
all in line
you know we the water is
connected to a community and a
sick as or irrigation system in
this case like interrogation
district is a community the
community to advance that stores
for their survival you know
there are serious implications
when a member of NSA Care or
irrigation district moved their
water out of the system the
burden of maintenance is
increased and the remaining
members and also affects other
communities real water not paper
water is not a resource that you
can easily move from one place
to another water may be
available one more but not in
another year people that get
this purposes drill a well and
it all of a sudden they have a
really good supply water will
the rest of us that rely on
surface water don't change will
make it harder to meet existing
and future demands we all the to
become efficient at the way that
we use water we need cities to
implement requirements for low
compression of fixtures and
industry to recycle for example
in the Rideau so K. why we're
may not required to at least how
they consume it our water in
their facilities you know in
terms of other industries you
know looking more seriously at
recycling water is good you know
this we cannot solve problems by
transferring water and having
the media use these as if they
are backed emergency.
Transfers the public must be
informed and this is going to
continue to become more more
serious as we deal with climate
change in the future so thank
you for allowing me to make this
comments and I support this
bill.
Thank you Mr Trujillo appreciate
all the comments this afternoon
let's go then I I realize that
senator Wirth has.
A COVID to start us off but
noted very briefly Senator and
then we will go to the committee
for I just want I want to be
real if I could thank you Mr I
just want to be quick I want to
apologize to the state engineer
who took my comment as implying
that they were never the table
they've been at the table we got
the acequia piece done as a
result of this I think the issue
though where there is a
fundamental agreement and
there's not been a willingness
to come to the table is that the
underlying purpose of the
statute and again that's the
frustration because I think it's
the actual language there in the
lawsuit that's problematic so I
just want to clarify and
apologize to state engineer for
that thank you Mr chair I
appreciate that thank you
senator let's not go to the
committee then questions
comments I don't see the hands
up as of yet which is shocking
to me.
We will begin then with
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews you have
the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and all
the folks to
Who testified
I was just in a hearing on
cannabis and are we had a lot of
people testifying on that and
and I came over here and found
out what the real controversial
issues are.
anyway I.
This.
This problem it sort of
This kind of really challenging
and I'm let me see if I can
them.
articulated a little better so.
At one of things I'm not totally
clear about how long are these
temporary arrangements made for
and it sounds as if for the
testimony that frequently
they're made for long periods of
time is it my understanding that
correctly.
Mr Mr chair
Representative you are
understanding that correctly for
example the
the Honda so area of lease that
that was approved leases that
were approved through
preliminary approval I think
that those leases lasted at
least six years until there was
a settlement resolved and if I
may Mister chairman Mr Bennett
VS are water expert may have
additional information on this
point.
Mr chair can you hear me.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes that's correct
well I will say that I'm I am
not.
Familiar enough with the Honda
situation to know whether that
six year figure is correct but
yes.
You know it's it's very typical
for
a on an application of the state
engineer for hearing to take
more than a year a couple years
longer than that and what
happens is is these these
unlawful Water these procedures
are in place during the whole
time that these of that the
hearing is taking place and if
it's going to get on done it
won't get on done until the end
of the hearing so yes I can be
in place for years.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that answer in
that information
Mr chairman
Eighty eight you.
Looking at the materials the one
that I thought of the department
of transportation needing some
water for for a highway projects
seem like a something that was
to me logically a short term use
and might need some kind of a
new media.
help in order to have happened
but then of listening to some of
the other uses it they don't
seem to be that way and I guess
my question is that you agree to
a two year extension of the
current system and am I correct.
missed Mr chair representative
that's correct to give
individuals have been relying on
this inappropriate process time
to adjust and for the state
engineer to adjust as well Mr
chair representative.
and Mr chair representative
thank you for the answer but I'm
wondering if in that period of
time it's possible to reach some
kind of a definition or statute
or rule making or something that
distinguishes between truly
short term use which may not
have any upstream or down
downstream effect and those
other kinds of situations are
are are you anticipating having.
But I'm gonna call settlement
negotiations with the state
engineer to try to fix this
problem.
Mr chair Representative it's my
expectation that that two year
period of time will allow the
state engineer to work to
resolve on this issue.
And Mr it.
Mr chair and and Representative
during this two year period the
state engineer is going to be
able to go ahead and issue these
orders.
And I'm just trying to
understand.
Are we gonna just have more
situations like we've been
hearing about from the essay
kias and so forth of more
problems created in the next two
years.
Or is there some prohibition on
adding new of approvals
wow they undo or they deal with
the ones have already issued.
Mr chair representative there is
no mechanism along the lines
that you described we felt would
be to Clint complex to try to
sort out but it is our
expectation that the state
engineer will understand that
these the pulmonary approval
process Mr chair and
representative is not in
conformance with what is
appropriate and he will exercise
appropriate
I guess discretion or restraint
in issuing
these preliminary approvals and
and that the I think many people
in the public and certainly
within the house Mr Chairman
representative would be
extremely disappointed if you he
participated in a process that
xcelerated the use of these
this process that has not been
approved by the legislature.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair at
Representative Chandler thank
you for that answer
And I will yield at this point
thank you Representative
Matthews this good
Representative Zamora
Representative one of those
research.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you.
Representative bringing this
bill forward.
I have a the statement to make
and then I want to proceed with
the questions
We would even in due process and
we all want to process but even
if we pass this bill to create
more due process.
For somebody to to transfer
water rights they're still going
to be disagreement with people
in the state as to what the
outcome is.
And it legislators.
I believe strongly in my heart
that we all.
And and.
I guess directing the the.
This statement to the committee
is is we have to look at the
whole state.
And not just an individual.
As to how it would affect the
state because even though we
represent a certain district we
still.
Make decisions that affect the
whole state so insane that.
I believe that that it'll it'll
just.
The late.
The
with a lot of industry.
And and that concerns me very
deeply I believe our state
engineer does a good job using
his discretion with the water
rights.
But I have I have a question for
you Representative Chandler on
emergency clause for farmers how
how would that affect farmers
with emergency clause.
Mr chair and representative this
bill does not affect the the
emergency clause provisions in
the leasing Act and if I just
missed stated anything I hope
one of my colleagues Mr chair
and representative will correct
me.
Maybe want to keep it honest.
I'm.
Mr chair this is David Benavidez
the sponsors expert and
I I I'm not sure if you talk
about the emergency clause which
has been removed in terms
legislation but
in the water leasing Act there's
one procedure there's not a
emergency procedure and and and
non emergency procedure in the
leasing Act.
Okay and and the Mr chairman
and.
Expert witness so so then in a
in a thrilling situation for a
farmer he would be able to apply
the emergency clause and get an
emergency well state save one
well went down
he could get emergency clause
and get a permit real quick to
save his crop.
Mr chair if I may defer to Mr
Benavidez.
Mr chair representative Simona I
believe that in the underground
water statutes that there is a
provision for drilling a
supplemental well or replacement
well within a hundred feet of of
your existing well
and so there are some provisions
of very limited having to do
with replacements of wells the
example that you gave where
there can be
a different process than under
the water leasing Act.
Okay and thank you for that
answer and then the on page two
on the section C. we have a line
twenty two there's a.
On the end of that sentence a
special water users.
To me that encompasses just
about everybody what can you
explain that to me
Representative ten thank you for
that question Mr chair and
representative and again I will
ask Mr Bennett B. this to answer
that question if you can.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Zamora there's actually a
statutory entity called a water
users association.
and I can't say to you right off
the top of my head what's a
section of the statute is but
it's in the same section that
has to do with I think is
addition districts Conservancy
districts and there's a thing
called us water user association
I believe that that's what
that's referring to.
Okay and then on the on section
B. Mr chair and representative
on section be online fifteen
well I guess you should.
You just started from line line
line to line fifteen.
In sixteen.
The.
Also read from thirteen line
thirteen shall be subject to
approval by the commissioner's
of the affected community did in
accordance with the procedures
for approval of changes in point
of diversion or in place.
Or in purpose of use is that
telling us that.
Where we see the water could
okay that.
Or my am I reading that wrong.
Mr chair Representative I will
ask Mr dent Benavidez to answer
this question he was very much
involved as you recall Mr chair
and representative and preparing
this working on this provision.
Mr chair Representative Zamora
you're talking about subsection
do of the of the existing bill
of course this this bill doesn't
change at all and so what it's
referring to is the existing
requirement that if of water
right is being proposed need to
be moved out of in a second or
into an acequia that they have
to make application to the
acequia at before going to the
state engineer and they have to
receive approval from the
secretary before other allowed
to go to the state engineer I'm
not sure if that answers your
question but that's that's what
that section does subject.
Mr chair Mr Benavidez I guess my
question maybe put a little
different is it just the place
that receive the water.
Make the up okay for that then
that that acceptable.
Mr chair if I may defer to
Mister Bennett needed.
Mr chair Representative
somewhere I might ask you to.
To try that again I didn't quite
understand your question I'm
sorry so so the question is if
the plates that receive the
water.
Okay the trends.
Action or the diversion.
The the plates that the water is
going to be taken from has does
that does that board the second
board have to locate that
new version also Mr chair
Representative some I think
you're right I understand the
question on my apologies so the
answer is that
if if in the situation of a
water right that's being
transferred from one acequia
into another second we don't see
very much many of these but
certainly it's possible that
that would happen both I think
is would need to approve it the
one we're sleeping in the one
where it's going to
if if on the other hand it's
being transferred into an
acequia but being transferred
from some other location like I
just a private water right not
an acequia then they would just
need to be the one approval
where it's going into.
Okay so so that my next question
to Mr Benavidez is then sure
that on the lot the end of line
fifteen should that be and and
or gore works there.
The letter the word or.
Mr Chairman represents somewhat
on
The order at the low at the end
of line fifteen for approvals of
changing pointed diversion or
place or purpose of use if
that's the or that you're
talking about I believe that
that's just I thank all the
different types of things that
we define and water lies being a
transfer
if you change your point of
diversion that's considered a
transfer or if you change the
place where the water it's being
used that's a transfer or if you
change the purpose of use that's
a transfer oftentimes it's it's
a combination of two or three or
or all of them
and that this is a transfer as
well and so this is just.
Restating what their policy is
in the law with regard to
transfers occur either to the
stranger or the sector that
everything anyone of those types
of changes it needs to go you
know to whichever entity has
that jurisdiction.
Okay ma'am thank you for your
for your answers Mr Benavidez
and Mr chair and representative
what kind of the lady you
foresee in in construction
projects irrigation in in the
oil industry with some other
Work that they do.
Do you perceive any any kind of
delayed.
Mr chair and Representative I
think there will be some delays
in terms of approving leases
through the traditional process
and I think we all need to be
working Mr chair and
Representative to ensure that
the state office of the state
engineer has the adequate budget
and staffing necessary to
fulfill all of their
responsibilities and I'm happy
I'd be happy to work with you Mr
chair and representative to that
end
the point here though is that Mr
chair is that the people who
have the potential for being
harms are the ones that are now
suffering due to any potential
delays and I think that Mr chair
is a backwards equation and so
that's what this bill is
intended to address.
Okay in and Mr Chairman
representative Chandler.
Could we may be.
A look at the state engineers
office and fund them better and
give them better tools to will
do a better job and as we know
we all know as representatives
and and I'm pretty new at this
job but.
I'm on my second term now and
and I've heard it time and time
and time again that we under
fund the office of the state
engineer.
What's your what's your your.
Input on that.
Mr chair on wheels
Representative are I believe we
do need to fund the offices of
state engineer and many other
departments across government
including the environment
department's L. education and so
on but definitely I agree with
you Mr some more that if the
state engineer and needs
additional staff to accelerate
his review process consistent in
conformance with the law I
certainly agree we should be
supporting the state engineer to
that end thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
thank you for that answer
Representative Chandler as I was
reading this bill and studying
it last night and in this
morning.
I wrote a little note that I
want to read off to the
committee and but before I do
that I want to make a statement
as to.
Senator huh meals
Testimony this morning.
Hi I am agreement.
With the effect yes and in this
bill what what it does for the
second but I'm not in agreement.
With what it does across the
board in the state of New Mexico
concerning excuse me.
Concerning.
Construction projects
oil and water oil the oil
industry.
The farming industry and and
then other industries are in
between which those are the
biggest but we just New Mexicans
give some authority to the state
engineer to have some diversity
in doing his job and as the
state engineer for this reason
the state of New Mexico.
Being a more diverse state when
it comes to water use I want to
encourage the members of this
committee not to vote for shoe
fits all bill.
And and I think that's what this
does is it is it's gonna tie the
hands.
Of different industries and I
think we is as representatives
can narrow something like this
down and get it better.
And make things work for the
whole state and not not her
industry on one side of the
state where we help on the
others and the with that I
conclude my statements and
questions thank you Mr chair and
Representative Representative
Zamora thank you for those
questions and comments we will
now go to Representative small
questions mall the floor is
yours.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Chandler thank you Senator how
to meal and thank you later
Wirth I to appreciated deeply
all the testimony here today Mr
chairman I have a couple of
brief questions first Mr chair
Sanchez
I've come to understand that the
the case you cited that was
decided down district court that
if on appeal at the court of
appeals and then if taken to the
Supreme Court if the verdict as
it was reach down to District
Court stands then it would
effectively and this current
administrative approach begun
several state engineers ago is
that correct.
Mr chair Representative that's
correct and I would be happy to
defer to my colleague let me
Senator Wirth who I know has is
very familiar with that case.
Yes thank you Mr chair I
appreciate the question because
I think that really does change
as I mentioned up front of the
debate on this bill this year
because there's a sense of
urgency we need to address this
and
I I again judge Romero's ruling
was so so crystal clear in his
interpretation of the statute
which is the argument we've been
making that I think again as as
a lawyer whose practice for
thirty years and I just feel
that that decision is going to
get up held so it just feels to
me like now is now is exactly
the time to see if there's a way
to craft a solution here that
addresses what the state
engineer said time amount of
water purposes of use just to
have that discussion because
otherwise we're going to be this
this this section of law is
going to be interpreted just
like it says in the books the
way it was worded and I think
that's really the challenges and
that's that's the issue before
this committee is is the
language in the statute is
pretty clear and the state
engineer said he believes the
policy is more important than
the law and that's the hard part
here is there is a loss and then
there's policy and the law is
pretty darn clear this bill just
clarifies the law so you're
you're correct representative
understood thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Chandler thank
you very much later Wirth.
that brings into the second
question which is Mr chair
Representative Chandler later
Wirth Senator had a meal
Given the potential legal
outcome which I've come to
understand could be in this
neighborhood of of one to two
years.
is there flexibility to work on
just the sorts of things you
said time amount use that will
provide Mr chair and Sanchez
additional flex the needed
flexibility for the diverse and
very important uses of water in
New Mexico many of which were
discussed here today.
Mr chair and Representative yes
indeed and I would encourage the
state engineer to do so ensuring
that he involves all of the
stakeholders necessary to come
to a well thought out in reasons
approach Mr Chairman
representative the problem with
the drugs that the state
engineers of years ago you know
some years ago adopted is that
was a unilateral decision on the
office as part it did not
include the array of people or
individuals or entities who
should be included in a
discussion on how we can manage
water in a way that's flexible
but also respectful of
individual rights Mr chair and
representative thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much
Representative Chandler
I think then that takes me thank
you those are my questions that
takes me Mr chairman to very
brief comments which is that Mr
chair
the many diverse interests that
have discussed this legislation
in support and in opposition are
deeply important.
I at this point Mister chairman
I'm convinced that it is
appropriate to move forward with
this legislation given the two
year delay down limitation and
that tracking with a potential
legal time line that if we run
into that cliff with no work on
the front end and fall off that
legal cliff after the Supreme
Court rules if and if that comes
to pass that we could be in a
worse situation and I would just
add Mr chairman I want to speak
very clearly simply for myself
in recognizing the importance of
the broader range of industries
including the oil and gas
industry whose processes.
Have brought enormous important
investment and resources to our
state who employ.
The thousands of New Mexicans
across a wide array of jobs in
whose continuing innovation and
work I tend to think is actually
part and parcel of how we combat
climate change in this
legislature has done that in a
number of ways we don't need to
go into today and so I think
that
They are not a a stakeholder to
be left out of this they're not
a stakeholder to be.
Rejected in the exact same way
as with the other stakeholders
who have taken time to give
COVID here today
are deeply important to our
state and I think with the
delayed implementation continued
in a vacation.
Technology and a commitment to
building the appropriate
flexibility with our state
engineer to respond with a
rapidly changing environment
that this is has the strong
potential to help us in that
area thank you very much Mr
chair thank you sponsors.
Thank you representative small
with except Representative is
out Representative DELLOSO is
yours then.
Mr speaker thank you very much
you may not want me to speak I
have settled down a little bit
did I I'm very agitated right
now but I will try to keep my
comments focused on what we're
here to talk about today.
Mr speaker of high with this
generation New Mexico that has
been and my family has been
involved in agriculture since
they settled in New Mexico.
And I am actively involved in
agriculture through farming and
ranching.
And of Senator Wirth can attest
to the knowledge he and I both
cleaned whenever Joe still was
in charge of this because of the
water committee.
And I took.
I would go up just about every
of once a week and he and I
would sit down and talk because
he was a member of C. I. D. and
I am a member of the Peavey of
the rate of the Artesia area.
Mr speaker.
Representative Chandler and
senator Wirth.
We would go back and we would
discuss going like this like
paying it like a tennis match
over what was good what was bad
what was good what was bad one
of the things that
Representative Representative
chairman stills tell me.
And the.
To spend earlier alluded to this
let's have a some integrity done
here.
Make sure that that's part of
what we're trying to get done
here.
And his comment to me one day
and he.
God rest his soul.
He also said.
There might have been a conflict
of interest whenever Steve
rentals Representative C. ID
while he was.
The state engineer.
And that really did surprise me.
Because he said it did raise
eyebrows an awful lot.
I.
I also take exception to a
comment that was made earlier.
Whatever the Republicans were in
charge I was chair of this
committee right here and we had
a good good committee we got
very good legislation passed and
we stopped a lot of legislation.
That was how do you on one
particular interest that would
not benefit the rest of the
state in my comment to my
committee every time whenever we
would meet let's do what's right
for all of New Mexico Mr
Chairman.
Representative Chandler and
senator Wirth this bill does not
do what is good for all of the
state of New Mexico.
Mr Chairman many not many years
ago it was the year that my
mother passed away she called me
while I was up here in session
and said can you tell me what is
going on over here off of Pueblo
road west of lake Arthur.
The Interstate Stream Commission
decided to drill five wells well
it is only supposed to be three.
To supplement the water that
would go into the pages revert
to satisfy and New Mexico's
obligation to the state of Texas
and to satisfy Carlsbad
irrigation district.
Whatever they did this they lost
circular best I'm gonna go fast
right here Mister chairman.
They lost circulation in one of
the wells.
To get all that problem stopped
they dumped eight semi loads of
drilling mud down into those
holes.
Trying to get that under control
whenever they did that it shut
off water.
To start teen farmers in that
particular area is sealed off
all the wells.
For about a seven mile stretch
Mr to Mr Chairman.
But we were they were using.
One straw.
All up water that they had
bought in the PVA CD base.
All the way from fort Sumner
down.
Farmers were in the middle of
their season whatever all this
took place.
And that this bill would have
been in effect at that
particular time those farmers
would not be in operation
because they would have not been
allowed.
To lease any water as best as
possible so they could finish
their crop year.
I understand what you're trying
to do here Representative
Chandler and senator Wirth but
this bill is not good for all of
New Mexico whenever I am reading
here.
Some of the pros and cons on it.
Farmers in my particular area
and down and C. ID.
Do have a five year accounting
period and sometimes.
At the end of that five year
cycle before the year is over
with.
They are look some of these
farmers do look for water to
lease from some other former.
To finish up their crop year
this would prevent them from
being able to do this.
Some of the things that are
least honor from the state
engineers office.
Include solar energy products
projects.
Our wind turbines think about
that as well D. O. T. they are
going to be stopped from being
able to lease water until they
go through this process do you
know what that's going to cost
the taxpayers of the state of
New Mexico.
The cost of those projects will
increase.
Three men Disley.
We also have to keep in mind
what of what is a group called
I'm sorry I'm drawing a blank
right here.
Down the Brantley reservoir.
We do have a protected species
down there and we do have to
keep that water going and if
they have to go back at least
water to protect the bloody nose
shiner they're going to have to
do that the same thing go
over on the western side of the
state.
Oil and gas is huge in our state
what do you think pays for our
education for our schools our
hospitals our roads the list
goes on and on what oil and gas
does pay for.
Mr beat Benavidez alluded to a
what of earlier about yes I'm
able to drill oil with one
within one hundred feet of where
our prior will was.
I do have artesian wells and
right now the cost to drill
those wells.
Is well over a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.
I we've we've got so many
problems with this bill right
now that it doesn't one size
does not fit all.
Mr speaker and Representative
Chandler.
I know that you have put it
you've taken out emergency
clause you have.
Who's this thing back was going
to be two years to be the
effective date is going to be a
twenty twenty three.
That Mr.
Chairman.
And Representative Chandler.
Are the the office of the state
engineer has done a good job.
And there have been few in there
that have not done such a good
job and I'm not going to name
any names but I will never mind
I'm not going to go down that
road.
We have to improve the water
needs for major construction
projects we have temporary water
needs for highway construction
projects we have leases that
allow or your Gators to pay back
over to versions.
We have the ever changing needs
of the oil and gas industry we
want to make sure that we're in
compliance with the.
Of.
Court cases that have been
decided that affect.
Every agricultural user in our
state.
And ladies and gentleman each
one of you eight.
Every day.
And you have to rely on those
farmers and ranchers to be able
to get that product to the
shelves for you to eat.
Mr chair Mr Chairman.
We can not.
Have this particular bill affect
every.
Water user in the state of New
Mexico.
Representative Chandler and
senator Wirth if this bill was I
aim to help those as thank yous
I'm not opposed to that but have
in this over reaching bill where
it's going to affect me as an
irrigator with senior rights.
I take great exception to I take
exception to what you're going
to be doing to the department of
transportation I take exception
to what you're going to do to
those people that do have the
right to lease their water to
the oil and gas industry because
you know what whenever they're
leasing that water that might
just help them be able to pay
off that note that they have
down at the bank or lending
institution.
But if there were changes made
to this bill I might just
consider support it as it stands
in its form right now there is
no way in hell I'm going to do
answer to all the water users in
the state in New Mexico that
this will affect adversely Mr
Chairman thank you very much
thank you representative so
that's good Representative
Herrera Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and I'd like
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill before the
committee and I'd like to thank
all of those all of our citizens
who testified both in favor
Representative and and against
this bill at I appreciate all
that information I guess I guess
the question I have is for Mr
bin Evita's and I'm just curious
how broad is the right of the of
the water right owner to be
involved in a lease that someone
else is proposing how how
exactly does that work.
Mr chair representative at a I
think that question does get to
the heart of this bill
let me answer it this way we
have thousands of water right
owners all over the state
farmers and ranchers in every
corner of the stage and their
worst nightmare is that they
will wake up one day and some
new water user will be taking
water upstream from them or
drawing water from the same
aquifer is down and threatening
to reduce their water supply
that's what every water right
owner in every corner of the
state worries about.
And that doesn't happen very
often and what prevents that
from happening is exactly what
your question is getting at what
prevents that from happening is
that embedded in our water loss
since nineteen oh seven is the
idea that state law doesn't
allow for new water rights for
repositioning of old Water
Rights
that would negatively impact
affects some existing water user
and state law requires that
before.
Any new water uses allowed that
existing water users will always
have notice and a chance to
defend their water right by
showing how how it will affect
come so that is even before the
water least act was passed that
was in water law one one from
the very beginning with regard
to new water rights and
transfers water it's then the
water lease comes along the
water lease act in nineteen
sixty seven and it has the same
idea in their no new water uses
under a lease and tell the
people who could be affected get
notice and an opportunity to
defend should find their water
rights and as we heard that
practice began without
legislative authorization
and when the state engineer does
this you as the person who's
being affected can't do anything
about it there's nothing you can
do about it you can file an
objection and the application
will get the side for two years
but in the meantime the state
engineer will not stop that
person who is affecting you and
you will be harmed during the
whole proceeding and so the
answer to your question is in
our laws you have a very broad
right if your water right owner
to know what's going on what's
being proposed in your area and
to act.
Protect yourself before before
any water is taking up a new
area and that's what this bill
is addressing.
Thank you I thank you Mr Bannon
the this and that.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Mr chair and death
thank yes I just have them I
guess I just have one more
question for the sponsor
Representative Chandler senator
Wirth there Senator had a meal I
think.
I think what we're trying to
figure out here is if you have a
legitimate emergency and you
have and.
The sacred right to that to your
water rights I mean that's how
we look at it in the north I
guess I guess that's we're
trying to.
That's we're trying to come to
terms with I and Representative
Chandler could you kind of
respond to that is that two year
delay is is that where you're
where you're looking to kind of
resolve these issues with the
state engineers office.
Mr chair and madam
representative so there's kind
of two parts to that question
I'll answer first it is my
understanding and I am no expert
in water law Mr chair and
Representative.
But there are emergency
provisions in state water law
that address certain emergency
situations madam chair and Mr
chair so that's one part of the
equation this bill is intended
intended to clarify
that the state engineer much
must follow the process in the
the leasing.
In the two year provision Mr
chair and settlement
Representative is designed to
allow the state engineer and the
various stakeholders to come
together to develop an agreed
upon approach to address
is situation where water may
need to be transferred on a
genuinely short term basis and
quickly madam chair and
represented Mr chair.
Thank you that's all I have Mr
chair thank you representative
thank you Senators thank you
Representative at a now to our
last speaker Representative
brown Representative ground
floors yes ma'am yes thank you
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Chandler have
just a couple questions and then
I'll make a few observations
first of all in in that show
Mr Chairman representative
Chandler what are you hoping to
accomplish with this bill.
First madam chair and
representative to ensure that
the state engineer has a clear
understanding that he should be
following the state we sing Act
the two year provision Mr chair
and representative is designed
to accommodate the state
engineers office as well as
those other entities and
individuals who have
unfortunately relied on a
process that frankly is not in
conformance with law.
Mr Chairman representative so my
next question was going to be
why did you extend the effective
date so I don't quite understand
what it is you're thinking about
that
you just somewhat referred to.
Given more time but why.
Representative Chandler you
muted.
Mr chair representative I I I'm
I'm sorry I'm not clear and home
explaining myself but the two
year up provision is designed
frankly to allow for a
transition to a process that is
in conformance with law we
recognize that there are Water
Lassie's right now who have
relied on a this process for
some time and it's unfortunate
that it has been allowed to go
on as long as it has Mr chair
and representative but the two
year period is designed to allow
a smooth transition that will
not abruptly disrupt we
currently holders and those who
have relied on the process I
hope that was clear enough Mr
chair and reverie.
Thank you Representative Mr
chairman.
Representative could you tell us
so I understand that in twenty
nineteen a second years and the
dentures were a ditch groups
were given.
It I guess excused from what
this bill is proposing in other
words instead of going through
the state engineers office were
transferable these are any
decisions will be made by the
secretary years of
commissioners.
So I find it very interesting Mr
Chairman it is almost as if
they're getting a pass.
My question is Mr Chairman
representative so what about
purification projects are date
where they have a a board of
commissioners what happens are
currently and would have been
under your bill with our state
your position.
Mr chair and Representative may
I defer to our expert Mr Bennett
Venus.
I'm Mr chair and hi
Representative Brown
In answer to your question just
to clarify something
As we know the state engineer
for many years has has.
And the person to decide on of
proposals to transfer water
rights whether they're leases or
whether their permanent
transfers in two thousand three
the statute was amended to with
regard to a set yes not not to
two thousand nineteen change but
in two thousand three and with
that said is that if water is
being moved into or out of an
acequia that the the acequia
commission would be the first
place where that decision would
be made and if the acequia
approved it would go on to the
state engineer's approval
process so what it did was
created a new approval mechanism
with regard to a secular Water
Rights being moved out or being
moved into a second and it
didn't affect any other type of
water right or or water energy
and all that happened in two
thousand nineteen with regard to
water leases is it said that
that that just in case people
weren't clear as between
permanent transfers and water
leases whether both of those
things had to go to the a second
if they were secretary water
rights it it and it clarified
that yes indeed if it is a water
lease than that same process
that was already in the statute
That we knew was for permanent
water I transfers would be
applied to a second so I'm not
sure whether that's giving a
pass or not but it did it did
add another approval with regard
to acequia water rights and then
the and the two I again the two
thousand nineteen amendments
just ensure that people
understood that of the process.
Applies when there's lease of
acequia water rights as well.
Now to your question about other
water introduce other water
water entities have do have
their own statutes
if you have a water right and
you're not part of water energy
and you want to lease or you
want to transfer water right in
you're not transferring into an
acequia then you simply go to
the state engineer I'm I'm not a
hundred percent sure for example
with regard to Conservancy
districts are irrigation
districts I know there's two
types of irrigation district
whether they have their own
process like I think you just
have now
where there's an internal review
of proposals to lease or
transfer water rights so I'm
afraid I'm not all that helpful
about answer your question other
than to say that I'm a statute
by statute basis for these
different entities some may have
incorporated some type of
internal review hi in in their
statute.
Thank you David it's nice to see
you
Mr Chairman representative so I
wish we had analysis on this
very issue I am concerned that
we we do have a lot of
irrigation districts and it you
know we're.
Generally the purpose of those
is agriculture
but the bottom line is has to be
a beneficial uses we ought we
know that the requirements there
for example there's the R.
Russell artesian basin and I
believe Representative self
refer to them and they do have a
five year accounting period and
you know you can't predict the
rainfall
you don't really know how much
water you're gonna need more in
a given year
so I think we're trying to hands
of your Gators and I don't think
we want to want to do that to
them I think that's going to
cause a lot of harm and a lot of
uncertainty and I think we're
going to see less agriculture in
New Mexico if this bill passes
and we don't have a clear
understanding of the
ramifications I'm at this point
Mr chairman Representative I'm
gonna just make a few comments
one of the concerns I have is
regarding the loss of water if
someone decides to lease to
someone else.
It was say it's it's in the year
twenty twenty one and they they
agreed to that arrangement and
then someone files a protest.
one of the questions is to
actually have standing court of
quote to file that protest and
I'm not sure it's clear here in
the existing statute but
it could take a long time maybe
even a year to if there's a
protest and it goes to hearing
and all that and that way and
you know there's no use of that
water pool under this bill it
would be settled
so and that is a determination
made by the state engineer after
hearing
that water is just not going to
get used.
And because they can't use it.
So I I think that's really a bad
outcome and and could be a very
big problem is the whole point
of having these water rights but
then to beneficial use.
So in some ways I think it's
almost a taking.
And it may be very unjustified
rebels that protest so I I think
that's a major concern I have
with the bill.
Mr chairman and
Representative and members of
the committee I want to talk a
little bit now about what
authority the state engineer has
to do temporary police are
transfer approvals.
And I think that's one of the
issues that came up in the
litigation and county and by the
way I do have a copy of of that
decision by the the district
judge and I said on his judicial
nominating commission and I do
not recall it ever being said
that he was Water lawyer or very
first in water lodges such as
say he didn't do his job in
hearing and and writing this
this opinion but I think we all
know that it's been appealed and
we really can't sit on rely on
this District Court writing
until it makes its way through
the whole process so I don't put
a lot of stock in that
but it is interesting reading
and it would appear Mr Chairman
that one of the issues may have
been not that it was an
adjudicated water right that was
in here but that it was a water
licence of some sort so that is
a little more complicated I
think that and that we know Mr
chairman so
The state engineer I believe is
looking at state statute to hang
his handout or being able to do
these temporary authorizations
and I'm looking right now at the
water use leasing Act.
And I think
It really matters the order in
which the statute lows.
so I'm looking at seventy two
dash six dash one and that's the
short title Water usually sing
Act next we have subsection to
section chairman it's
definitions.
Mr Chairman it says here under
this act owner means a person
who owns a valid Water right.
Let's see me as a person who
leases the use of water from an
owner.
So it's it's pretty clear
who's in the news involved in
this transaction there's no are
in there's a lessee.
And I think that matters because
though the owner has a water
right and when decides to lease
it to someone else that's
between them the state engineer
does get involved and we'll
explain that in a minute so the
next section is three so it says
owner may please use of water.
Four says Lassies application.
I yes approval so I'd like to.
Make sure all the C. points here
so it's basically owner may
lease water.
And then the lessee basically
has to apply to the state
engineer needs to apply and then
comes approval.
Mr Chairman what comes after
that is seventy two dash six
dash six it says application
notice protest hearing.
The approval comes before
there's a notice given but the
state engineer based on this
part of the statute apparently
does have the right to approve.
And let me just Mr chair just I
think it's a matter serrated it
says the state engineer shall
approve the application as the
applicant has reasonably sure
that is proposed use and
location of news is a beneficial
use and.
Will
Not if you're an existing right
so support and will not be
contrary to the conservation of
water and so forth so approval
is given.
After that there is opportunity
for protest and hearing so I
think the order really matters
and if that's what the state
engineer say I think I think you
he's right to ensure that way.
Mr Chairman what what this bill
would do is take away
That sequence and if it were
meant to be
protest in hearing the for
approval.
They should have been swept but
Mr chair at the point I'm trying
to make here is I think in some
ways house bill thirty muddies
the waters here and actually
makes it just need a little more
confusing because we already
have a statue here that talks
about protest hearing.
So in that respect I think it's
A little bit
I think very hard to to enforce
Mr Chairman also are mentioned
that the sponsor due to work
changing then Amanda
individually talked about this
would be quote unquote
clarifying.
This matter about leases and
amended to say providing and
quite a different word actually
if it were just clarifying and I
think that was the right word to
begin with but to provide is
actually more substance and
changed law.
Mr Chairman I know it's taking
some time here are going to try
to speed up just a little bit.
There's a concern that's been
raised that if there is a
protest and hearing and whatever
decision.
the state engineer makes there's
also an appeal process and it's
not clear from the way the bill
was written what would happen in
those cases does that mean
Until the appeal was finished
that that this abeyance
continues I don't think that's
where I think it really matters
that we know that.
Mr Chairman representative I I
really thought about this bill
take care and a lot of time to
do some research and to talk to
people who are in farming
ranching road construction
things like that and to some
extent those who were in the
extractive industries.
And I just don't think this bill
is necessary I I think there's a
process in place I think it
makes sense.
I think it provides the
flexibility that we need to when
it comes to the use of water
again life is not very
predictable.
And I'm very afraid Mr Chairman
representative that we all need
roads built in our in our
districts and I can see this
being used to stop those
projects to lay them and
possibly even loose readable
loss of state our federal
funding your time wise we have
to follow and so
I find it rather ironic Mr
chairman that this bill would
actually potentially hurt
heading straight for targets to
benefit endangered species
it would
I think really
The very detrimental to
enforcement actions where we
have farmers who are maybe over
Nibert and the need for quickly
get to pay it back and to make
it balance and this would not
allow them to do that and I
think it's going to create more
problems than it will solve.
Mr Chairman
And I'll just finish with this
is that this if this is an act
of war.
I think it will be used as a
bludgeon against our neighbors
you don't like all you do is
file a protest it'll stop
projects you don't like or
infrastructure projects
I I just think that it's it's
not necessary and we heard
earlier that the office of the
state engineer is very hard
nosed about determining if there
will be impairments and they
don't issue they're approval if
they think there will be and I
think they've done their job
very well and they have a tough
job as it is but I think you're
their workload will increase a
great deal because everybody's
going to be fired emergency
transfers whether they truly are
not because our when you need
water you need water and it
would be very expensive for New
Mexico this past with that Mr
chairman of yield.
Thank you Representative Brown
we are now over two hours into
this bill I do not want to
belabor the point though and I
do have a question for
Representative Chandler if you
would allow me to at first I
want to recognize all of the
attendees that provided a
comment both for and against
this important matter we
obviously respect your your
opinions and comments and so I
think each of us will take those
into consideration as we do cast
their vote but in regards to the
bill itself Representative
Chandler
I I've I've heard a lot of
rhetoric in regards to this is
really going to hurt farmers is
is at the end of the day house
bill thirty
against agriculture or is it for
agriculture.
Mr chair thank you for that
question I think it's for
agriculture because remember all
holders of water rights should
and be afforded due process and
that includes members of
agriculture who want to lease
their water and members of
agriculture who are concerned
about the possibility of
impairments so this bill serves
agriculture I think to the
fullest and thank you for that
question Mr chair thank you
Representative Chandler and and
I appreciate that that response
simply because of the mentions
made regards the people that
spoke publicly about this bill
lots of seeking as spoke up in
favor of the of the bill itself
and simply say it seems to be
that it would that go to support
and protect those that have
senior water rights water rights
simply in the state of New
Mexico with that being said
Representative Chandler.
Senator Wirth Senator how to
meal thank you for your
presentation this afternoon at
this point in time what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Mr Chairman representative small
I move a do pass of house bill
thirty as amended substitute
motion to table.
Right well there is a motion
made by Representative small
there is a table table in motion
made by Representative is L. the
tabling motion doesn't fact take
precedence so madam secretary if
you would please call the roll
on a tabling motion to house
bill thirty.
Representative Allison.
I would support tabling the
motion.
Representative Brown.
Yes to table.
Representative is now yes to
table Representative Hochman
Vigil.
No to table.
Representative Matthews no.
Representative small.
No.
Representative Zamora.
Yes to table.
Vice chair her era noted table.
Chairman.
Notre table.
Forty five.
Do we motion fails we're now
back to the original look
Representative we're looking to
for a new path and house bill
thirty is there a second.
Thank you.
Neil.
Madam secretary please pull.
Representative Allison.
No.
Representative Brown.
Representative these out.
No.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews yes
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Zamora no.
Representative excuse me vice
chair Herrera.
Yes.
Chairman.
Yes I support.
I will I do for Representative
you have a do pass all of all of
those are with this afternoon
thank you for sticking with us
thank you for the folks in the
ten is that with this thank you
all and have a great afternoon
thank you very much chair great
hearing thank you thank you very
much let's now move then to our
next bill on our agenda for the
afternoon
let's go then to Representative
McQueen and house bill two
hundred and and mind you folks
is that we we will be skipping
back and forth on the agenda
today simply because of the
other committees that are going
on right now and we want to try
to get folks fit in where we can
and so Representative McQueen on
house bill two hundred if you
would please raise your hand so
we can into okay there you on
the panelists this
Representative McQueen or
chairman McQueen can you please
let us know who in the attendees
list you'd like us to bring over
for your assistance.
Thank you chairman wanted joined
today by expert witnesses
commissioner Harry brand and
professor Disney's fort.
Thank you very much professor
for commissioner brown please
raise your hand in the attendees
list and we will we will work to
do you can join us as a
panelist.
Thank you very much and without
further ado Representative
chairman McQueen the floor is
yours and house bill two
hundred.
Thank you chairman Monday.
House bill two hundred is water
trust board projects in New
Mexico unit fund.
Which is another great title.
We want to call it the southwest
New Mexico infrastructure
investment and jobs act.
Which is more descriptive.
or I also thought about calling
it the enough is enough time to
move on act.
Because we spent fifteen years
and fifteen million dollars.
On lawyers and engineers and
consultants.
Trying to figure out how to
divert water the lower.
And the one thing that's clear.
Is that doesn't work.
There is no viable option.
So the bill those two things
first it makes it perfectly
clear that the money in the New
Mexico unit fund I'll explain
that in a moment.
Will not be used for
construction constructing in New
Mexico unit which is how the.
The statutory contract refers to
the human version so no he was
the person the money however
stays in that southwestern New
Mexico community church and
granted out go in the counties
so the so now that so that
doesn't change we're not going
to spend the money I'm more
lawyers more engineers or
consultants.
Trying to make a few of the
version work because of the.
Second names the water trust
board as the successor to the
long since defunct Southwest
Water study group to consult
with the Interstate Stream
Commission I just see which has
final decision making authority
on expenditure of funds from the
unit I.
So under the under the Arizona
water settlements Act New Mexico
was the way I like to think of
it is they are provided with two
pots of money.
There's the construction fund in
the unit put.
Construction funds not actually
Fund it's it's more construction
funding there was money
available on a reimbursement
basis if New Mexico built The
New Mexico unit I do thank you
for the first.
And that money was it was
approximately fifty six million
dollars from the federal
government.
To access access that money.
The New Mexico captain's team
will talk more about the.
Needed a record decision under
nepa by December thirty first
twenty nineteen.
That didn't happen.
That money is gone there were no
extensions that money is not
coming back so the fifty six
million construction funding.
Off the table.
But we still have to New Mexico.
And there's approximately eighty
million dollars in the eighty
million dollars that we can
invest in southwestern Mexico.
So under federal law.
The purpose of fun was for
paying the cost of the New
Mexico units or not war is
really important for other water
utilization alternatives to meet
water supply demands in the
southwest water planning region.
Which is great again catching
grant Dogo in the camps.
This bill but by doing that
allows us to move forward with
projects that will benefit thank
you.
And that's really all does it
it's really just Google page.
I'd like to address a couple in
in just a couple comments I
think you might hear when we go
to the audience.
One is the issue of whether or
not the New Mexico captaincy is
the successor to the long since
the frontier southwest water
study group which is mentioned
in federal law.
We've heard from them that they
think they are and they have
this the series of documents and
equipment and those.
The stretches back and I.
If you think about it thank I
think about this in terms of
myself.
When I when I bought my little
piece landing LCO I graduated
from guiding Bach.
But from a woman who own more
and he it and she divided it
into smaller pieces.
and she bought it from someone
else and so forth and so on back
to Spanish parent.
So there is a chain of title
because Buck owns the rights to
that property he was able to
convince me.
That is not the case with the
Southwest Water State or the
ability to consult it's not a
legal right to can be passed
from entity to entity.
The state is perfectly free to
to name a successor to the
Southwest Water State group.
We need the successor to the old
corporation commission right we
have the corporation commission.
That wasn't really working out
too well so we made it public
regulation commission changes to
these changes structure that
we're thinking maybe what change
that so is going from elected
body to appointed body into my
can you name to.
So.
That's the kind of succession I
think we're talking about.
The second thing you might hear
is that the New Mexico captaincy
is designated under federal law.
That's true they are.
Let me read Lee read that to you
it says and this is a federal
law the turn New Mexico
captaincy means the entity or
entities that the state of New
Mexico may authorized to assume
responsibility for the design
construction offer operation
maintenance and replacement of
the New Mexico unit.
And we're not billing investing.
So they were of that body.
That role hasn't because we're
not building in New Mexico you
can.
The third thing you might hear
is.
don't worry the New Mexico
captaincies gonna change its
focus there had some members and
and we're gonna work on.
Broadening the base.
He is just not the right entity.
To oversee or advise on the
Senator the money in the New
Mexico unit I.
The for three reasons.
First there so fixated on the
live version.
I mean they they've worked on
this for a long time they're
convinced there's a pot of gold
at the end of that rainbow.
They're not wanting to.
So in December of last year so
less than two months ago
actually.
A member of the cap introduce.
I will not be voting on any
authorization of any additional
funds for non diversion
projects.
Until there's a revenue stream
or outside funds made available
to the regional authority which
he things that happen to do as a
political subdivisions so they
wanted to reform the authority
which is that percentage I
powers agreement.
Create regional water authority
that has not happened that's not
happening.
The recently also circulated
third amended joint powers
agreement.
So they're currently they're on
their second in there trying to
revise it into a third.
In the third document which has
not been adopted.
Says that the construction and
operation of the New Mexico unit
remains a priority in the entity
remains the only body that can
undertake the responsibility at
planning any future New Mexico.
Again.
It's not happening.
So we the existing membership of
the captaincy really isn't
representative of the
stakeholders in the region it
does have member does
representation from each of the
four counties.
And some of the local
communities and then there are
other quite a few
representatives from so how are
conservation districts and
you're guessing districts but
the purpose of this money is
broader potentially broader than
your geisha and includes a
missile water supply projects so
the captain is not
representative and finally the
lacked the technical expertise
to evaluate and that these
projects.
Where is the water trust board.
Is.
It is where we keep all of our.
Water technical expertise from
across the state you madam I can
redo the members of the water
trust board.
It's an impressive list and that
does include public
representation.
So just just to sort of wrap up
this bill is two things it makes
it very clear that them the
state of New Mexico it's not
gonna waste any more money on it
you know the version.
And then it takes proactive
steps by naming the water trust
board to invest PED million
dollars in in New Mexico unit
Fund in to this forecast area
and make people's lives better
and get the economy right.
With that the chairman Lente I
believe Mister brown would like
to say a few words before we go
to the audience for question
thank you Mr chairman
commissioner brown the interest
of time please keep your
comments brief.
Will you so Mr Chairman good
afternoon and good afternoon
committee members and Harry
brown I'm the vice chair of the
Grant County commission to
monitor the in cyberspace with
you this afternoon I deeply
appreciate your service to the
state of New Mexico I'd like to
make perfectly clear that my
comments are my own they do not
represent the view of the
commission as a whole in fact
the commission has taken no
position on H. B. two hundred.
I would like to thank
Representative McQueen a of
course for the legislation
itself in B. for covering many
points I was going to make make
it much easier for me to stay
brief as you requested.
I needed an excellent job of of
setting things up.
But I would like to make three
points first the group does not
have to be the captain of the
this we're talking about the
group that is to provide
consultation of.
you consultation to the
Interstate Stream Commission on
non diversion projects does not
have to the committee second it
should not be the cap entity in
third the group should be the
state water trust board.
Representative McQueen I went
through a number of reasons why
it does not have to be the
captain of the and I would like
to just emphasize one point
which is that not only does the
federal law not to say that it
has to be the captivity the
federal law goes out of its way
to leave that point up to the
state.
There is no water settlements
Act mentions the cap into T.
twelve times everyone of those
twelve mentions is related to
either planning funding building
operating maintaining or
replacing a diversion project
when it comes to the question of
how The New Mexico unit fund can
be used for non diversion
projects it's not there we left
it out to me very clear.
They're leaving that up to us.
On the second point that it
should not be the cap entity.
I think it's important to note
that it was created capital he
was created in twenty fifteen
expressly for the single sole
purpose of designing building
and operating diversion project
you read the original joint
powers act that's what it says
is purposes.
Remember to join in that joint
powers agreement the member had
to endorse building such a
project and beneficially using
that water.
Three years later did the
captain need to realize.
For whatever reason that it
might actually wants to have
something to say about non
diversion projects and it
amended its GPA to allow it to
do that but only as
Representative McQueen noted
after obtaining records decision
which now is not possible
because they missed their
deadline.
They are therefore attempting to
amend it yes the third time to
deal with that problem.
What we are seeing is the
retrofitting of the structure
that was created for one
purpose.
In order to serve a different
purpose in my experience this is
generally a poor idea.
In this case it's clearly going
to be inefficient and likely
going to be unfair.
Why inefficient this group has
demonstrated does not act with
efficiency is spent fourteen
million dollars in five years
pursuing diversion projects that
from the get.
Almost everybody knew would be
economically infeasible sure
enough at the end of this
process the bureau of
reclamation federal impartial
agency said these projects are
economically infeasible.
Why and Sarah and this is
perhaps the most important point
from my perspective because the
composition of the captaincy is
biased it was designed for
diversion project was probably
designed very well the judge
organizations on there with a
handful of members who get a
voice in what happens to
decides.
They have whole counties.
Responsible for the health and
welfare of tens of thousands of
people.
And those voices aren't equal
the way the cabinet is set up.
What's worse if a member wants
to join and they're supposedly
us more members to join the cap
index so could be more
representative every one of the
fourteen voting members gets a
veto over a new member.
It is unlikely to me that this
process will be fast or that it
will be fair.
Lastly they would like to see
themselves set up to evaluate
projects that could benefit
their own members against
projects that will not benefit
their own numbers this sounds
like a recipe for unfairness for
problems.
The third point like to me that
the consultation group should be
the water trust board is frankly
the most difficult one for me to
make with a long history of
pulling together Grant County
for the common good right now
we're doing an amazing job
fighting COVID and fighting to
protect our county hospital.
But the water has proved every
bit as contentious as we all
know it can be.
Over the past decade being part
of this process fighting over
this money and this water has
felt like a family tearing
itself apart.
In just like a family it uses a
neutral family counselor to come
back together again I have
reluctantly concluded that we
need a neutral expert body to
evaluate the many water
proposals that are competing for
that eighty million dollars we
know of at least a hundred and
thirty seven million dollars in
proposals and that doesn't even
count one that I think should be
on the list the Grant County
regional water project which
could have another fifteen to
twenty million dollars there is
a lot of need here.
Sad to say trust in the process
of the captivity proposes to
implement has been severely
undermined by the past five
years.
I fear that asking it to make
these difficult decisions that
will pit use organs user County
against county industry against
industry is just going to
exacerbate the divisions in our
community.
The water trust board offers the
best alternative to this
continued interface we fighting.
It's not made up of local
shareholders which is a shame.
But at this time we need an
impartial body with experience
in evaluating water development
proposals to save us from
ourselves.
You very much for your time.
Thank you commissioner of
chairman the queen I think after
the presentation I I I think
it's time to go to the audience.
Yes chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman so we
would we're gonna go to the
audience for those supporting
those in opposition but what I
will do now in the interest of
time is that I will request I
will start a timer and allow all
those in favor of fifteen
minutes and all those in
opposition fifteen minutes so
with that being said all those
in favor I will call you first
please keep in mind that the
time you take will be
Iteration of those that also
want to speak as well I will
begin the timer as soon as the
first person begin so at this
point in time I will call all
those in support of house bill
two hundred please raise your
hand.
We will call on you in order.
Very well there's no one in
support they call for people in
support of a hospital two
hundred.
Okay so then that being said all
those in opposition of house
bill two hundred please raise
your hand.
Very well we have needed I don't
see anybody okay with that being
said we will then come to the
committee.
Let's go to the committee all
those.
I'm sorry we're we're we're
getting messages that they can't
folks in the audience can't
raise their hand.
The madam secretary then issue
with.
On my side I don't see anything.
As well as Representative as
folks in the panelists for can't
raise their hand either their
their option to raise and raise
it has disappeared.
and check on some.
Thank yes there's substantial
public interest in this bill I
would be shocked if.
There was no one who wants
participate likewise I mean the
way my my mailbox is full and
the I agree that's why
We need to get the option to
raise hands fixed.
Those are panelists list can you
look at your screen and see have
the option to raise your hand.
Representative small this.
You madam chairman.
Representative Allison does
represent as L. does okay so I
think we have we're we're okay
then a.
The chairman I don't I don't
have the option I had it and
then is disappeared and has been
replaced with the option to
record.
Okay I had the same problem Mr
chair very well we'll we'll
we'll we'll get that addressed
Representative Allison the thank
you have your option reason and
that's good.
Mr chair I don't have a question
I would just testing the system
yep we we see a thank you.
We'll get this addressed as soon
as we can equipment.
Yeah so I the coming over now to
try and fix it I don't see
anything on my part I know
Representative Herrera had an
issue with an earlier but it was
because she was a co host but
nobody else is a co host on it
and you.
Okay.
Mr Chairman representative L. Mr
chairman thank you very much if
the public is not allowed to
participate in this are if
there's a problem with our
system I think it's only
In the best interest of the
public but this bill office till
they do have that opportunity I
one hundred percent agree I I
will not continue we cannot have
public comment.
So that's the okay I see
somebody there with their
secretary hopefully they get
this fixed.
It looks like there's attendees
now raising their hands the
that's a good thing.
Maybe not continue to work but
it's a good thing that we will
now have public comment so there
you are Representative Matthews
I see you and those in the
attendees list again all those
in support all those in support
of house bill two hundred mind
you again is that the rules for
this the public participation
will include that we will have
fifteen minutes for both those
in support and those in
opposition so please be mindful
in your comments make them brief
and to the point and do not be
Representative repetitive as
this will take away from the
time of your
of your neighbor those I want to
speak as well.
That being said I will begin the
clock.
With Allison or exiting the C..
Although this support.
If we continue to have the issue
with this system we will we will
call the day and I don't want to
have folks.
Lose the opportunity because of
the technical issues so all of
the support we will begin with
Amigos bravos and again Amigos
bravos the folks will have
fifteen minutes.
Your time will begin now.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
Sorry I'm going first I know
there's a lot of public comment
so I'm going to keep my remarks
very short.
But my one disappointment with
this bill is that Representative
McQueen couldn't actually name
it the end of his enough Act
because certainly has been
fifteen years of the cap
internet spending money and time
flailing around trying to find
worthless diversion projects for
the Hillary ever have have just
been pointless
we do think the water trust
board would be the right entity
to evaluate these potentially
new and helpful projects for
southwest New Mexico and
we would encourage a do pass on
this bill thank you very much
thank you just go to do that
Carter.
Here with us to that.
Is that what you said hi my name
is Janet Carter and I I just
mainly have my hand raised to
support the bill I do support
the bill I agree enough is
enough it's time to move on and
work on projects that will truly
benefit the state and I do
support a past of this bill H.
B. two hundred and thank you for
your time thank you let's not go
to Dan Dan Roper Dan you're with
us.
Good afternoon chairman.
Then you muted your on your.
Using to that.
Sorry do hear me out yep okay
good afternoon I chairman
committee members I'm behalf of
trout unlimited and especially
our members in the southern part
of the state in communities like
Silvercity and damning and
director at the forecourt county
region we just wanted to express
our support for this bill and I
think that the bill sponsor and
especially commissioner brown
said it very well another three
points would highlight or just
our support for free flowing
river that's an amazing natural
resource our confidence in the
water trust board to be the
entity
to advise the I. S. C. and then
finally just echo the
frustration with New Mexico
happened to do today thank you
very much thank you very much
never gave us this again you're
with this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is again
Bosque is I'm a city councillor
in the city of Los crucis and
I'm also the founding member of
the press that the conservation
project I can tell you that he
was the lifeblood of southwest
New Mexico to place I hold dear
and in fact it's a place where I
take our troubled youths for
real your ability to experiences
out in the wilderness
unfortunately in the in the last
five years I've seen first hand
the wasteful spending of the New
Mexico cap entity squandering
more than sixteen millions of
dollars of funding that could
have gone to southwest New
Mexico communities on failed
engineering studies millions of
dollars of lawyers fees the
majority of those now in the
bank accounts of out of state
consultants that wasteful
spending was it met without
resistance time and time again
hydrologists engineers local
residents biologist elected
officials in more one the cap
entity that their massive
diversion proposals were not
feasible and of course they
weren't this is the single most
mismanaged water project that
I've ever seen and the cabinet
he has done the residents of
southwest New Mexico a terrible
disservice and we're now
demanding a change in a
permanent course correction
additionally the Hispanic
communities of the southwest and
south central New Mexico rely on
the free flowing in the river
for recreation jobs and so much
more so let's say that let's say
that way let's kill those who
would worsen once and for all I
strongly support house bill two
hundred and urged passage of
this committee for the sake of
the residents of the familiar as
of the southwest New Mexico
thank you thank you Mr Bosco
recruiter rich.
Great thank you
Mr chair and and
Representative that would clean
and I just want to say yes time
to put the our faith in some
creative projects that are are
are different and we know a lot
of the watershed resilience
techniques that we can start
experimenting with and creating
jobs getting people outdoors
we know that having won the last
free flowing rivers in the
country in the west.
Is a special thing so let's
capitalize on that.
Thank you.
Thank you very much that's going
ready thousand in the year with
this.
Maybe not as good of Carolyn
Carroll.
You are muted hello Carol okay
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Caroline for golly a long
time resident of the Silver City
area I would like to
respectfully remind everyone
that we are now living in a new
time an entirely new you talk a
time when anthropogenic climate
change is altering our planet's
climate scientists from around
the world have analyzed the data
they have analyzed changing
weather patterns glacial melt
alter jet streams and are
shocked at how rapidly our
environment is becoming unstable
the science is clear and
indicates a hotter drier
southwestern United States we
must wisely protect and
distribute our water
appropriately and justly so that
all people from grant Luna
Hidalgo encountering counties
will benefit from a secure water
supply please vote yes on H. B.
two hundred so that the greatest
number of New Mexicans have a
chance for a self reliant Water
future thank you the land is not
going to really celebrate me
thank you when you hear me now
Mr chairman again this is
Britney Fallon I am the policy
director for New Mexico wild and
here in support of this bill I
want to echo something that
Chairman the claim mentioned
during his testimony which is
that the water trust board is
comprised of water experts that
have the background to evaluate
water projects that occur all
over the state but something he
didn't mention that I want to
highlight is that the water
trust board also has a number of
agricultural representatives
that sit on it in fact many of
the members of the water
transport have background in
agricultural projects so there
will be ample support for work
on the healer river when it
comes to the agricultural sector
as well thank you for your time
thank you very much we're close
to halfway into the fifteen
minutes Patrice Mason your next.
Yes hello my name's actually
Patrice much and I'm a property
owner from the village of fuel
hot springs my property includes
Gilo river frontage and it's on
the Catrin Grant County border
of course I'm speaking in
support of bill two hundred on
behalf of many of my neighbors
and also my daughter alleges
Kirk who testified before the
New Mexico legislature in two
thousand fourteen in support of
the first bill that directed the
use of A. WSA funds for non to
personal term it's only now that
the New Mexico units off the
table no longer an option option
cap entity is no longer the
appropriate body to advise on
funder on the A. WSA water
projects we need new direction
this bill provides the right
oversight and a process to
achieve equitable practical
insights driven decision making
water projects southwest New
Mexico thank you the time thank
you.
In Japan yeah.
With this.
Yes Sir awesome Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you very much for your time my
name is Ankit Banja I am first a
father of three born and raised
New Mexico children has been two
and a high school educator and I
and then executive director of
the rest of their conservation
project and senior policy
director
of the national organization
remote the nose and I think you
all for your time I would like
to quickly remind members of the
committee of the recent
conservation the west poll that
clearly demonstrated how over
ninety percent in a May New
Mexicans agree that despite
state budget realities we should
continue to prioritize the
protection of our public and
state land water and wildlife.
HB two hundred provides us with
a solution to appropriately
allocate resources that are
already dedicated to water
projects in the southwestern
part of our state a region of
our state that is already too
often home to largely forgotten
communities to our elected state
and federal officials as a
solution HB two hundred provides
us with the diverse authentic
representation representational
option of Southern New Mexico
communities to lead the way in
addition to having the
organizational infrastructure
technical and expertise in place
and experience the best advise
the Interstate Stream Commission
on how best to allocate the
eighty million The New Mexico
unit fund they have the on the
ground relationships that will
prove critical in ensuring New
Mexico southwest New Mexico
communities have the resources
and capacities to charge forward
and so with that thank you with
you thank you for your time Mr
chairman what six minutes left
with Judy Calman Judy.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'll be very brief
my names Judy comment on the New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon society the healer
region is extremely important
both to birds and to R. thirteen
thousand members in New Mexico
and this bill will help insure
that scarce water stays in the
river and the decisions about it
or maybe wisely and by the best
available science so we strongly
support the bill thank you thank
you Allison you're next.
Yes good afternoon chairman
Lente members of the committee
Allison civic executive director
of the heel conservation
coalition based in Silver City
and I'm here to speak in support
of house bill two hundred I've
actively participated in Arizona
water settlements Act planning
for more than fifteen years and
we now have an opportunity to
use the remaining eighty million
dollars in funding to build
secure water supplies for
everyone in southwest New Mexico
while creating jobs and ensuring
our economic future moving
forward we need good governance
to guide this process and ensure
that the I S. C. efficiently
allocates The New Mexico unit
funds and we believe that the
water trust board has the
technical expertise in the
policies and procedures in place
to advise the ISC on how to
quickly and equitably distribute
the funds to eligible projects
in southwest New Mexico and some
of these projects include
municipal and agricultural
conservation water
infrastructure improvements and
watershed restoration we think
we recommend passage of house
bill two hundred and thank you
for your time today thank you
very much guarantee next.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee Gary Bennett cost
for New Mexico wild we have been
asked to read a statement from
the Fort Sill Apache tribe
the Fort Sill Apache tribe
supports H. B. two hundred to
preserve significant cultural
historical sites of their chair
call Warm Springs Apache
ancestor.
Additionally the tribe wants to
note that the water trust board
has multiple tribal
representatives well the cap
entity does not thank you very
much thank you Donna Stevens.
Afternoon chairman Lente and
committee members I'm Donna
Stevens the executive director
of the opercula watershed
alliance based in southwestern
Mexico and I'm speaking on
behalf of our approximately
three hundred members it's well
past time to start using the
eighty million dollars in the
New Mexico unit fund on critical
water projects this money needs
to be used fairly and equitably
for the benefit of all the water
trust board has the experience
to analyze proposed water
projects and develop those that
benefit the majority of
residents and patron grant
Hidalgo Luna County it's time to
move forward and to use this
money responsibly and H. P. two
hundred is a big step in the
right direction please vote yes
on H. B. two hundred thank you
done right there right thank you
chairman Lente and committee
members I stand in full support
of HB two hundred my name is
right there when I was born and
raised in damning and on the
head of the river and that place
was my Disneyland for a long
time I'm not a water turning or
water engineer I'm a past
educator and an administrator
the reason I stand in full
support of SB two hundred is
pretty basic The New Mexico cap
entity has failed miserably
sixteen years and fifteen
million dollars think about that
that's a child's school career.
As a school superintendent if I
had if I had a school failed for
just two years and didn't make
prompt changes be fired for
failing my community and
children this is a water and
social injustice issue because
the New Mexico cap into the has
spent all these years trying to
dam up the healer and divert
water to just a handful of
farmers in the verdant valley
these farmers continue to farm
as they have for a hundred years
it's time to equitably spend
this eighty million on local
communities and so and serve the
infrastructure needs Deming
Lordsburg early in Santa Clara
all have needs and the time is
now put the decision making in
the hands of the water trust for
as they have a track record of
diverse if diversifying the
revenue stream to the
communities that have the need
besides and maybe more
importantly there are twelve
member diverse board that
represents local communities
time's up I give them and asked
The New Mexico Kappa Energy
enough is enough thank you thank
you have a minute left and so
what I'm gonna ask for the rest
of the speakers and in support
of this is that you say your
name your entity and and and and
then we move from there thank
you very much is there any us in
the.
Yes I am Senator name prevents
the a lifelong resident of Grant
County specifically the mining
district and I support this bill
thank you very much is that a
great.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Greg
Peters public lands and wildlife
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico here's stand in
strong support of HB two hundred
we urge passed.
Thank you for.
Hello your muted.
I live in Grant County Mr
chairman and committee members
my name is Carol Martin I fully
support H. B. two hundred thank
you very much admire thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members making fire T. R. wild
New Mexico organizer with the
Sierra Club your granny chapter
and on behalf of our thirty five
thousand members we fully
support this bill.
Maria.
Sh.
I apologize my name is million I
can DO and signed into obviously
the wrong account I where I'm
with the how do climate
advocates both the need for the
bill thank you very much willing
to Jack Parker.
I already spoke once you're
appreciate you sorry about that
Dara Parker.
Are you there.
Once going twice right my name
is Sarah Parker and for many of
the reasons cited before I also
strongly support this bill very
good thank Representative
consolidates.
My name is Frances Gonzales I'm
from Grant County and I strongly
support is that your car will
patchy and Warm Springs it's
really important to protect our
healer river support H. B. two
hundred and thank you to the
Sanchez thank you very much and
the pain.
As in the Silver City and I am
totally in support of this bill
I've watched to cap energy
mismanaged fifteen million
dollars and I know the truth
Water trust where we do a much
better job.
To support this thank you Mr
paying we will now move then to
all those in opposition all
those in opposition of house
bill two hundred please raise
your hand we will call you one
by one same rules apply we will
start the fifteen minute clock
once the first person starts
speaking and so please keep be
considered of your neighbours at
once because well we will begin
with.
Mr Howard Hutchinson Howard
you're on.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I would like to point out that
on on page two line nineteen and
the following amendments are in
direct contradiction of page two
line fourteen through eighteen
and subsection eight because the
purpose is to implement the
Colorado basin project at which
a lot of people would like to
mention.
I would also like to say that.
When we're looking at these
issues.
The primary purpose of the
Colorado River basin Act is to
provide additional water from
the central Arizona project.
remedy the unfair education of
the Heelan San Francisco rivers
allocations in the US Supreme
Court case of Arizona versus
California.
What is not said in previous
testimony in favor of this.
Is the majority of the fourteen
million dollars that claimed we
spent on diversion was actually
spent on authorizing the nine
million dollars which is been
allocated already to non
diversion projects.
One of the things that.
We also heard was that we are
not the legal successor.
Well the state of New Mexico has
already recognized us as the
legal successor.
In several years of.
Appropriations.
The Interstate Stream Commission
has recognized the cap into TV
as the successor.
The joint powers agreements have
been recognized as valid and
our.
Recognizing that we are
successors.
So I'm speaking today I am
chairman of the San Francisco
soil and water conservation
district.
And I'm also a member of the cap
in to see.
I think that.
What the purpose that was.
More from the legislative
history.
Of congress.
The intent of Congress.
Is to how local representation
make these decisions.
And.
I I disagree strongly with the
assertion that the trust board
has any.
Solid tracks.
Upon which to represent local
southwest New Mexico thank you
Mr chairman thank you how are
let's go to Michelle frost
mission.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee the
shop operated on behalf of New
Mexico cattle growers we oppose
capital two hundred and it's
been stated it did the decision
it cracked are making from the
local elected officials that
citizens bank entity that have
no representation from the
southwest for County we've got
the decision need to be left at
the local level the language in
the bill also removes the
ability to provide planning
dollars in developing shovel
ready project for these reasons
in recent that have been
previously stated we stand
opposed to help build two
hundred and we thank you for
your consideration.
You Michelle next
year.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to me Rivera New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we respectfully stand in
opposition to this piece of
legislation today again New
Mexico from livestock bureau
supports the efforts of the
locally affected stakeholders
whose intention it is to put to
use for the benefit of those
local parties as much of the
remaining eighty million dollars
as it is available for water
related projects and studies in
southwest New Mexico we indeed
believe that the New Mexico cap
entity is a true successor and
the.
To the original southwest New
Mexico study group and should be
directly involved in the
utilization of the remaining
funds for water projects further
to reiterate what Howard and
Michelle mentioned we do have
concerns moving that authority
over to the water trust board
because of the lack of local
representation on that board and
its ability to address the needs
of the constituents and
southwest New Mexico for those
reasons we stand in opposition
to this bill today thank you
guys for the time to comment
you Mr chairman that's ever been
dishonored Becca.
You will are now not are not
with us you still have the old
version of of zoom so please
update and you can.
And then you can come back and
comments so that being said we
should all the comments from the
public at this point in time we
will go to our Committee for
questions or comments first on
my list I have read
Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative mobile so as you
admit thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you
Representative McQueen for
bringing this piece of
legislation some really
fascinating issues at play here
Mr Chairman representative
Chairman queen I'm just trying
to wrap my head around the
federal jurisdiction verses
other state issues with regards
to this proposed piece of
legislation so can you can you
tell me what is the and then cap
and to T. a federal entity was
it created by by federal
legislation.
Mr Chairman Representative
Hochman Vigil no it was not
created by federal legislation
it was created under New
Mexico's joint powers authority
act the person two GPA it is
named in federal law as as being
responsible for the New Mexico
unit and no no server to spew
that that
it is not the decision maker but
it's it's not that in let me
clarify that we're talking about
is the successor to the
southwest thirty group which is
also need another area of
federal law in the cap entity
being in charge of the base unit
is one thing being the successor
to the southwest study water
saver is another and in any
event.
What the federal law says is the
I. S. C. who is the decision
maker will consult with the
that court ordered success so
this house was water study group
was never that decision maker
for expenditure of these funds.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman chairman claim so where
did the fifty six million
dollars come from.
turn on to a Representative
Hochman Vigil I was part of the
Arizona water cells so then act
so was federal funding for
construction it was on a
reimbursement basis and they
were given a deadline the
deadline was extended several
times.
They could never come up with a
project that made any economic
sense the kept trying kept
changing the project and
eventually the deadline passed
and there were no further
extensions.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman and and share McQueen
so now I'm starting to
understand it was it because of
this federal process there B. R.
because of the the allocation of
oversight by the federal process
that's where they meet that
requirement for the evaluation
team and.
Mr Chairman representative
hoping to help I think that's
right it was a federal project
there is no water solvents act
is a federal project and that's
why it's.
It required an oral impacts in
okay thank you very much Mr
chairman and so is it safe to
say that without a need a
valuation which they missed the
deadline to do this project
cannot go forward.
Is that the Mr Chairman
representative for a number of
reasons first all the
construction funding is gone
because they missed the deadline
and second you know they were
working on a draft EIS in in the
kept trying different projects
and even though they sort of
stacked the deck in their favor
they still in pencil out so all
the information that was ever
put on the table was that there
was no viable project.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair and and share McQueen so
all that kind of leads me to my
next line of questioning I'm so
if there are a number of reasons
why this project is not viable
and I've actually been part of
the of Environment environmental
impact statement yeah I just the
procedures and and I'm the
process is very long and arduous
takes years
beat because that can't be
completed you're now shifting to
another viable use of of the
funding that remains but my
question regards that is why we
need a bill to do that.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman resent how can we
help I would say this bill is it
is is a strong message to their
C. Stream Commission.
To move them in the right
direction the the cap entity but
even though I don't believe
they're the you know successor
and and the way we use that term
to the southwest water Senator
they have been at the table and
they have been an obstacle you
know there still trying to sit
on the money and they're hopeful
that at some point in the future
they're gonna be able to pursue
this you know the version which
is it's just not happening so
this bill makes clear that
that's not happening and it
frees the money up to be spent
in the community for the benefit
of the people leading the fork
in the area.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman and chairman McQueen so
this is my last question it's
it's been it's fast becoming my
constant question because I'm a
new member of House
Appropriations I've gotta ask it
you said that there was some
money left over that you would
like to re purpose why is there
no appropriation request or why
is there no appropriation in
this bill.
so chairman of the Anderson how
can we help.
The New Mexico unit fund.
Under existing laws perforated
to the Interstate Stream
Commission for either of these
two purposes.
This bill makes clear that we're
choosing the second purpose and
I can read that lame excuses
this is the federal law or other
water utilization alternatives
to meet water supply demands in
the southwest water planning
region of New Mexico.
We're just making clear that
that's where we're going and
that they should move forward
with that with that in mind and
they should use the expertise of
the water trust board as they do
so so it's not an appropriation
from the the state treasury
there's existing fund in the
state treasury with.
Roughly eighty million dollars
it waiting to be spent.
Very good thank you very much Mr
chair chairman queen that
concludes my questions I look
forward to supporting the bill.
Thank you representative this
gonna Representative Zamora
resumes and one of the
resources.
Thank you Mr chair in the.
We appreciate everybody's
remarks appreciate
Representative McQueen bringing
this bill forward.
My question to Representative
McQueen Mr chair is.
What.
Brought these bills forward at
the very beginning what what was
the reason for all these monies
in the federal government in the
state of New Mexico to get
together and put these monies
together.
Mr Chairman more I'll take a
stab at that it if you there my
experts want to chime and I
would welcome that it's there is
no water settlements Act so it's
the river is also a tribute to
major tributary to the Colorado
River we had interstate compacts
how we were gonna use that water
was essential to dispute between
New Mexico and Arizona to
resolve that dispute we passed
federal legislation.
In a lot of errors on and move
forward with their their part
and it allowed New Mexico if you
could figure out a way to
develop yes it's portion and and
how it develops is portion is
really complicated and that are
the reason why the amendment
bill to find a way to make it
work.
But because the load is a river
in New Mexico we're a party to
the Colorado River compact we
have a right to use a certain
amount of water under these
conditions and that was
memorialized in federal law and
your is in the water settlements
Act.
Thank you for the answer
Representative and Mr chairman
and Representative McQueen so do
you do you have a number of
front of you or do you know how
many acre feet of water we can
divert for the state of New
Mexico and not let it flow down
and there is on.
So it's I have a number but it's
complicated how it plays out so
the numbers fourteen thousand
eight fifty year which is a lot
of water.
Thank you want to keep in mind
first of all that much water is
not going to be available in the
queue a consistent basis.
The flow doesn't support that
level of the version the second
thing is every time we take an
acre foot out.
We have to pay for that use it's
called the exchange payment.
And so that's sort of in
addition to two building a
diverse commission to operating
the current structure isn't to
maintaining a diversion
structure we still have to pay
for the water we use.
And that exchange favorably
because there's not that they
use that money to replace the
water that we we take out and
you know and then the being an
astronomical cost per acre for
the water which is why we've
never done but the number yes
the number you start with this
fourteen thousand acre feet but
that doesn't really tell the
whole story.
So Mr chair Representative
McQueen.
Can we get your expert to chime
in on that a little bit and
may be are are we sure that we
have to pay for per acre foot
that we.
Bureau or.
Or is it that.
Arizona pays us breaker but that
they receive that we don't do
for.
So
Brown is commissioner Frank
Kelly hello if you want anything
in the store is a.
You never seen as a law
professor water expert former
water trust board member it's
either them one tax that
please it.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
representative Maria excellent
question we are sure of the fact
the exchange amount that we
would have to pay has been
calculated several times it
comes in at roughly one hundred
and sixty dollars per acre foot
we are paying for the cost of
delivering that much extra water
from the Colorado River project
to users in Arizona who are
presumably losing it to us we
do not claim water rights from
the Arizona water settlements
Act we gained Water exchange
rates and we don't lose those.
I just by passing this bill we
don't lose those by building
other projects besides diversion
projects we retain those
exchange rights in perpetuity so
if it ever becomes economically
feasible to build a diversion
project we can do this again.
and this idea that Arizona would
pay us for water that we didn't
use that floated around during
the time that the captivity and
its lower we're looking for ways
to fund the project because
that's what they desperately
needed and there was this idea
of maybe leasing our exchange
rates back to them if we refuse
if we if we promise not to use
them that never went anywhere.
Thank you very much for the
question okay and and Mr
chairman thank you for that
answer and and that.
That's what strikes me at the
court with this with this
project is that we're letting
water.
That belongs to New Mexico.
Rightfully so going to Arizona.
And we see the issues.
With the Texas New Mexico.
Lawsuit we say issues here in
the eastern part of the state
with the Ogallala aquifer going
down we see issues are talked
about this morning by witnesses
and in in this bill and in the
bill prior where the water is
getting to be more and more
important and and there's less
and less and and there's so many
factors that go into that.
And to me.
The cap entity has.
The incentive and and and.
And the.
The means to go into this
project.
Good to do some good for the
state of New Mexico.
And seems like I'm I'm in your
Representative it seems to me
like politics as has gotten in
the way of this project so many
times and not that part of it's
because of the money and and
part of it's because of.
environmental issues part of
it's there's there's just so
many things to get the way of
this project.
But we have technologies today
with Hans ways to measure water
flows
The way to dig ditches that are
so much better the the piping
that we use to transfer water
There's just so much technology
out there today that I can not
figure why New Mexico is let
their water leave the state and
and we're not supporting New
Mexico water stain in the state
of New Mexico that's that just
hits me real.
Real strong in the in and and I
feel that it's our job as
representatives to look at that.
One of these days we're gonna
look back and and we're gonna
wished would save every drop we
had.
And and I don't know how long
into the future that'll be and
and and how.
The healer what will change and
and maybe someday get more water
and then we will be looking at
that we are leading a lot of
water go if it if if they.
If if climate change takes place
in the inner in a better way
instead of worse and that's what
we all pray for.
It's just it's just hard for me
to look at this bill and and
accept it
for the state of New Mexico.
And in the water issues that we
have in the state and and I
thank you for your answers and
and look forward to seeing the
vote on this bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative somewhat I don't
have anybody else on the list to
speak.
I see a waving hand by
Representative is L.
Representative L. the floor is
yours then.
Thank you very much Mister
speaker I apologize I thought I
had posed it evidently I didn't.
Sorry about that Representative
McQueen have we heard this bill
before.
What to it all we've heard other
bills dealing with this issue we
have not heard this bill before
okay but we have heard bills
pertaining to this is what I'm
saying Mr Mr chair
Representative that's correct
okay and the Mr chairman and
representative miss McQueen I
did serve on the New Mexico
finance Authority oversight
committee for many many years
and I know that what we had
hearings done in those
particular areas of our state
that it did affect a.
That this bill was always
brought up because we did have a
oversight and and New Mexico
finance thirty still has the
will oversight of the water
trust board activities and
It's come to our attention very
right after this the first time
we've heard this particular
problem that they were have been
down the southwestern corner.
That the The New Mexico finance
authority is not very will very
knowledgeable on what actually
is going on in the counties.
Mr Chairman.
I guess my concern here is and
it always has been of.
Because these funds were
allocated to pay the cost of the
New Mexico unit or some any
other water utilization
alternatives to meet the
demands.
Of.
I'm reading it that the language
of this bill prohibits the use
of the money for New Mexico
unit.
And the New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission states that
there's a possibility of a legal
challenge can you would you like
to expand on that Mr chairman
and Representative McQueen.
Mr Chairman representative well
I I thank you for that question
because I saw that in the
analysis and if you look at the
federal law.
It is actually says you can use
this money for a or B..
We the legislature the Mexico
are going to say we choose be.
And the idea that we could be
challenge on that choice when
it's written in the federal law.
You know I just don't see it
yeah I really am surprised by
that suggestion the federal law
is clear we have the option to
choose to invest this money in
that community and that's what I
think we should do.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you very much for that answer
right there but then I go on to
the notices I've been reading
for the office of the state
engineer Mr Rolf Schmidt
Petersen and Mr chairman let me
turn to the spec page that I
have more of.
Does the water trust board do
any sort of environmental.
And Alice's.
As part of its normal efforts
especially on this particular
project thank you Mr president
so if I'm if I might I'd like to
defer to my experts the
professor fort okay.
This.
Mr Chairman nice to see you
again and members of the
committee of the Water trust it
I would.
Service I was on that water
trust board a number of years
ago for eight years and governor
regents and administration but I
have brought myself up to speed
on its activities now it does a
contract for environmental
assessments that it does on
behalf of revolving loan
programs under the safe drinking
water program.
It it's it's an else these are
primarily concerned with
financial matters okay so Mister
chairman of Representative
McQueen miss fort.
Water trust board does not do
its own analysis but it hires
and the firm to do it is that's
what I'm hearing is that correct
Mr Chairman representative with
respect to the environmental
analyses right right okay Mr
chairman and Representative
McQueen.
The some of the stuff I've been
reading though and this is quite
a bit of information I've had to
clean.
Which I don't mind.
General fund at all.
But it also states The New
Mexico cap entity has
documentation designating it as
the successor to the southwest
to the southwest New Mexico
water study group and this is a
poor county region of southwest
New Mexico that's comprised of
character and granted all go
live in the counties the cities
the dimming lower and Lordsburg
villages of Santa Clara Hidalgo
soil water conservation district
at all of those others that are
listed on there.
Have you.
Can taken that into
consecutively king about having
this bill draft.
Did you with any of those groups
are named before you had this
bill.
Taken up to Legislative Council
and finalized.
Mr chair representative so that
this bill has had input from
from many different stakeholders
network in the region.
But it did they include any of
well okay if you said that you
did I guess you did.
Mr chairman and Representative.
I also received.
Mr chairman and Representative
McQueen if moving the
consultations Authority.
From the New Mexico unit fund to
the water trust board with that
and violate the intent of the
Arizona of.
what am I trying to say you're
sorry I just lost my train of
thought that a Debbie is a.
Mr president as well so the the
USA actually talks about
the southwest Mexico water study
group the New Mexico captaincy
is not the southwest New Mexico
water Senator.
This the state.
Yes of the state continues to
consult with who they want to
consult and that's not to the
exclusion of any local voice
back I would think local voices
would present projects to the
water transport and water
transport is not and under this
bill would not be the decision
making body I just see it under
federal law and under this bill
I see is still of the decision
making by.
Well Mister chairman I I guess
I'm really confused here
Representative McQueen I am
reading this letter that I
received from the New Mexico cap
entity in is it is a all the
members that serve on that and.
The very last sentence really
does stand out in.
Gives me pause here the language
in the Arizona water settlement
act clearly defines how the
funds can be used and
elimination of the specific
provisions is a violation of the
US constitution's supremacy
clause would you like to make
any comment on that last
sentence I just read.
Mr chair was out the federal
government give us a choice
we're exercising that choice.
Mr Chairman are I'm.
It's kind of like a lot of the
different committee says that a
Mr chairman.
It's really hard to get
everybody on one page but I
think that the decisions that
are being made or the the views
being expressed for this
supporters of this bill are not
necessarily the voices of those
people that live in that area
because right here I'm looking
get a resolution that the New
Mexico captives do is put out in
opposition to New Mexico house
bill two hundred.
And then I'm also looking at a
resolution of.
From the count catching County I
do believe this is from the cat
Katrin County
Commissioners so I'm just very
very confused that.
We're not listening to the
people that are going to be
affected down there in those
areas I understand the need to
get these projects done I do get
that but you know what whenever
there is.
Differences of opinion that
can't be addressed and go she
added there is a problem but I
think with you kind of push in
the center this particular bill
I think that this.
Might go further to get them all
on the same page thank you very
much for your responses Mr
chairman I do yield the floor.
Thank you representative
Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr Chairman
and Mr chair yeah the testimony
showed the you testified that
the water trust board will only
advise on projects is that
accurate Mr chairman of some
great.
Mr Chairman representative all
that's correct.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman and chair of House
Energy.
secondly Mr chair is it your
sense that this arrangement
would still these the authority
for those projects with the
original and stay with the
Interstate Stream Commission
that this will actually help get
those funds expended in various
local projects.
Mr Chairman small I believe
that's correct as well thank you
Mr chair at and share my final
question it's safe to say that
many of those projects will be
connected to the average culture
industry is that accurate.
Mr chair of the small ugly
that's true as well okay thank
you very much Mr chairman and Mr
chairman thank you bye chairman
small it's going to
Representative brown
Representative brown was yours.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
Representative so I just want to
confirm is the amount
At issue here eighty million
dollars.
Mr Chairman Representative route
yeah in that ballpark it it's
not easy to you know to the
dollar but it's about eight
million dollars.
Okay.
Okay thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Brown
that include your comments
questions.
Okay thank you with the with the
hands the race was a pleasure of
the committee Mr chair I move it
to pass the small was a new
passes their second.
Second.
A place where by a
representative Allison thank you
very much ma'am secretary please
call the roll.
Representative Allison do pass.
Representative Brown.
I'm going to vote no and I would
like to explain my book please.
Representative he's out no.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Matthew.
Yes.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Zamora no.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Vice chair Herrera.
You're on the yes.
Chair Lenti yes.
Representative brown had an
explanation okay before you do
Representative run if you would
please what is the county it is
five two three.
I do have a due pass and house
bill two hundred Representative
route to explain your vote.
Yes thank you very much Mr
chairman so I don't have a horse
in this race
I know the water projects are
very important I I do not know
the whole history of the human
diversion project and all that
but I guess what I'm reacting to
is eighty million dollars
roughly is a lot of money.
I was just kind of strikes me as
a as a as a takeover
right I'm not sure it's the
right way to get to handle
situations like this I do read
in the bill that the the money
would be used for water projects
in catching granted although and
Luna and so it in in some ways
there's that local focus an
application but there's just
something about this districts
the is just not.
Just not the way to approach the
problem and and get to the right
solution and I hope it all works
out of this bill gets all the
way through up to the governor
and she signed it anyway thank
you Mr chair Representative
Brown thank you chairman of
cleaned and pressed four
commissioner Representative for
being with us this afternoon.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee have a
great day that's not move to
house bill one ninety four of
seeking help for education
settlements
presented by Representative
order this representative please
raise your hand will bring you
over.
Okay representatives do you have
any expert witnesses you like us
to bring over to help you thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I do I have to expert
witnesses are called are C. at
and and get a medal thank
goodness Garcia Meryl please
raise your we'll bring you over
without further ado
Representative or this piece
proceed with house bill one
ninety four.
Thank you chair Lente members of
the committee.
House bill one ninety four is a
simple bill that does a lot of
good for are a second
communities this bill amends the
a second community ditch Fund
Act the ACTF so that the
implementation of water rights
settlements is included in the
purpose of the Act this is so
important for us I guess is the
Asians to access these funds for
the technical and legal it
expertise that they that they
need as they go through the
implementation process.
Thirty three years ago we passed
the CDF Act so that I think yes
and community ditches who are
parties to the water right
education process could have
access to legal Representative
representation and experts many
of you here in the north where I
am right now where the snow was
coming down know that the
adjudication process is highly
technical as an asset economic
commissioner of a ditch myself I
have seen my fellow us to get
those out sometimes struggle
with the legal and technical
issues in the water right Madam
K. I think yes who present as
our need as defendants need that
legal representation at at all
during all aspects of the
settlement and the
implementation you know it can
take decades to rent to resolve
some water rights settlements
this bill helps are a second and
our ditches after the settlement
after that final decree
sometimes some of the
individuals that have been
involved with that settlement
move on sometimes they pass on
in New par Sanchez take their
place and they have to implement
this decree with little history
or knowledge or support yet they
are required to be in compliance
so this bill makes a much needed
help clarification in the A. C.
DS Act without this bill
centrioles centuries old Leszek
yes you know here in Towson all
over the north.
And their their members could be
negatively impacted if they are
unable to equitably participate
in settlement implementation the
lack of compliance with the
settlement could have major
consequences for their water
rights with that I stand for
questions along with my expert
witnesses Public or CNN from
thank you very much of Madam
work this with that being said I
appreciate the presentation
let's go to the audience for
public comment all those in
favor of house bill one ninety
four please raise your hand at.
All those in favor of one ninety
four please raise your hand.
Okay again with the number of
folks we have reason that
handles of beaver we will then
start the clock again.
In the interest of time.
Fifteen minutes and then we will
allow the same for those in
opposition that being said we
will begin with the Donna who's
does Mr boost us.
Thank you very much chairman
committees of the member members
of the committee my name is don
postos and I own a small farm
here in Santa Cruz I'm a
commissioner on the second this
on there yeah I'm not here and I
am the president of the Rio
camallo realty owners you and
maybe even the Santa Cruz stream
system community association we
stand in support of this bill
thank you thank you very much
resembles those Jen Watkins Gen
your next hi my name is Jen
Watkins and I'm the treasurer
for the pocket valley regional
SA kia Association I fully
support H. B. one ninety four
because the just say yes that we
at PED are AA Representative
need funding to help with the
admin Madam compliance
understand the terms of the
agreement implications for how
we continue our traditional
operation of the state test
requires people and other
technical assistance because of
the settlement our safety as
their domestic commissioners
have new responsibilities and we
don't have the means to retain
attorneys and experts to help
them understand the nuances and
complexities of the settlement
thank you for your we are for
the opportunity to comment.
What part of HB one ninety four.
Thank you Mr Watkins is good
enough to
hello to heal Mr chair you with
us.
Thank you Mr chairman our thank
you for this opportunity we
stand in support of this bill
esterman Mexico sic Association
we hear complaints from many
just sick as that are having
extreme difficulty in complying
you know there's the enforcement
there's monitoring there's
reporting you know and all the
other groups that we're working
with the settlement have a lot
of resources you know to help
with they have a you know a
geologist and attorneys and all
of that so we would like to have
as an equal footing as possible
during the implementation
process thank you.
Thank you.
You're on mute.
Chair Lenti you are on you.
Sorry about that that you talk
to the other people Mr Madrid do
with this.
Well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee my name
is Gerald Madrid I am the
president of the overview of the
trauma secular so ciation
representing on twenty to a
secular is among the components
of the all of the trauma low
Avid you down on as president
RCA will continue to be a fair
and reliable partner in the big
picture of water sharing
statewide because of the
creation of the city Fund this
is provided an opportunity for
RCA to have a permanent seat and
be an equal partner at the table
among our neighbors we are
grateful that our native
brothers and sisters and okay we
get on have access to the best
legal and professional expense
expertise in the nation however
in the name of fairness and on
behalf of our State of.
we we asked that the that that
ACTF being sufficiently funded
so that we can ourselves be
wrist Representative with the
with the great R. O.
professionals that we have that
the state has to offer thank you
chairman.
Thank you very much Mr Majid
let's go to then runner Martinez
Mr Martinez are you with us.
Our test can you hear me you
okay yes my name is Robert
working this and I am a
commissioner on the Sikkim other
the love that when she goes of a
hole in the town's valley and
not also a uh board member on
the house valley a second show
ciation and we're in the middle
of the implementation phase of
the debate the settlement you
know which is will complete
education of water in the house
valley and as we were going
through the through the work
associated with this up the
settlement basically you know
serves as a template for how
things are to be implementation
phases is really were up the
devil in the details comes out
in terms of resolving all of the
issues at the a secular level
and and also we we have somewhat
of a special case in that a lot
of our our negotiations in terms
of things like water sharing
are are done in cooperation and
in negotiation with with our you
know our brother in accounts
payable.
And and show our hospital being
a sovereign nation they have you
know basically the resources
they need both legal I drawl it
just so for and my fear is that
with the lack of this funding
all the implementation phase of
the debate the settlement will
be delayed years and the roll of
you know the
the legal support in hydrology
support will fall in the hands
of laypeople and and so I I
think that puts social and very
on equal footing so I really
encourage the committee to
two of support this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much that's going
to rent there is the with this.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
committee members
My name is Clarissa due to and I
am a generational resident of
the Espanola valley I am the
founder and principal of T. two
twenty thirty two youth actually
and we stand in support of this
bill and all actions taken by
the New Mexico I think yes it
ciation thank you.
Thank you very much it's going
to Sam Sam you with us.
Yes I'm here thank you Mr chair
and committee members of my name
is Sam just George's time the
vice president of the test alley
a secular Association.
We represent over fifty member
of secular as in the past
valley.
I'm of course Santa Fe on street
a sick as.
And up also have been privy to
the support that a CDF has
provided to the task value of
secular Association as we have
gone through our education
process and I will not repeat
what others have said other than
the future is much more complex
and will require a lot of
support and so I I ask that you
do pass this bill thank you.
Thank you senator Fritz Rutan
you with this.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members thank you for
your service on this weekend
we're very grateful just a ton
of tiles consular town
councillor.
I fully support this bill and
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you very much that's going
to make easily lock.
All right thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Madeline lock and the staff
attorney and registered lobbyist
with the New Mexico
environmental law center as been
said the financial burden of
water rights adjudication
litigation which takes a lot of
time even more money really
cannot be understated this bill
in amending the debt funds that
shoot remains consistent with
the original intent of the
legislature and simply providing
aid to a second communities when
implementing provisions of
complicated settlement
agreements at the law center
where civil legal service
providers providing low and no
cost legal services and working
on behalf of the state you
communities in New Mexico and we
understand how important legal
assistance is in assisting us
thank yous and Community ditches
when equitably implementing
water rights settlement
agreements so we are you on the
committee to support this bill
and thank you for your time
today you just log it's going to
need Torrez miss Harper.
Thank you chairman committee
members and Representative
Christina or test.
I will not repeat what are board
members of the council is second
cessation has already said that
in two thousand sixteen the
house policy association
received a partial final decree
that we are now in the process
of the implementation of the
test on the water right Madam
agreement being in the
implementation of the settlement
agreement for the last four
years we know the need to
continue in support of the ACT
UP Fund we have needed the
advice of our experts especially
our attorneys in our
hydrologists interests are very
under funded we have no other
resources of funding and it's
very important to have the City
of funding for our employment
Tatian also the ACF recipients
what.
But at some point at the end of
the adjudication process it will
be the continuing support of the
CDF funds.
Thank you very much that's gonna
surfing on the market.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee I am speaking
to you from Chennai all off the
Martinez city of us thank you
and a board member of the Santa
Cruz stream systems our regional
thank you Suzy Shinn which is
currently in the avid education
for any of you who have.
Right up against any our water
rights adjudication process you
understand that people and
various entities and parties
dedicate decades of their lives
and much financial investment
goes into this process.
This clarification to the law
will enable communities to honor
the hard work of so many by
putting into practice what we
said we would do and we need the
support in order to do so so
thank you for supporting H. B.
one ninety four thank you for
your service thank you very much
that's good at Juliet.
You with us you're on mute.
Okay let's then move on to the
all those in opposition and
opposition of house bill one
ninety four please raise your
hand.
Once.
No one okay well then we will
now go to our committee for
question and answers first on my
list we have Representative is
L. representatives out the floor
is yours ma'am.
Mr thank Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative Ortez
closer to see you.
I was reading your bill of I I
understand how important the
need to K. to process is it is.
If you're gonna have a water
right you better have been
adjudicated water right that Mr
Chairman in reading your bill ms
Representative Ortez the first
thing that caught my mind was
Madam implementation and I
caught it on page two not once
but twice it is on line nine and
line twelve through thirteen and
Mr chairman I guess maybe if I
missed it I hope you can pointed
out is there a definition for
that for the for Madam
implementation.
Representative Ortez can you
show me if there is a definition
in your bill for Madam
implementation.
Mr chair representative a sell
and it is great to see you as
well I would like to ask a Mr
indicator metal or public or see
it too.
To help us out with this
question here yes we are.
More reference
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative and
Representative Joe so the
definition in the bill of Madam
implementation however that
language is actually taken from
the state engineers rule seventy
one point three reports that he
provides to the courts every
year.
What he has to give the court an
update on the education that are
going on in the state and so if
you notice you don't have in
front of you but but even for
example the two thousand
nineteen fiscal year nineteen
part of reports.
The senior list settlement
implementation as ongoing and as
a priority for certain
adjudications including Taos and
the number of walking to secure
base and see
eighty definition in the bill it
is language that the state
engineers familiar with in
addition in addition to that
state engineer often find one
not often every year will
provide to the CDS Committee
that distributes the fund
humor provided a list of
priorities and in the priorities
That I don't need a list of this
committee is gone on long enough
and up my patience is going like
this okay so I'm going to
interrupt you right there but I
am reading the analysis from the
state engineer and yes I do
realize that it is used to
describe other projects and
being very specific with us
project but whenever it is
brought up in in Representative
Ortez is bill it is not defined
on what that would be used for
so Mister speaker Mr Chairman
representative or to is and Mr
Romero one of the
I think it here it is Richard L.
of from state engineers office
of roasted analysis on that news
states under substantiated
issues Madam implementation
whatever it precisely means is
in some ways and arbitrary
descriptor of what acequia is
required for posted need to K.
shin needs that's what it says
there.
Does this need to be.
Put in this bill to make it very
specific for that and the reason
I'm bringing that up.
Whenever I'm reading and that
the FIR the physical fiscal
impact report.
It is talking about.
the Sankey a.
This bill one ninety four.
It this potentially has.
It has the potential to reduce
the amount of money available in
the fund to provide assistance
to say cues for litigation
activities and ongoing water
rights adjudication suit.
So therefore I I'm.
I in my opinion I think it
really needs to be spelled out
and then I'm also reading.
The analysis from the New Mexico
department of agriculture in
particular doc and Secretary
witty.
And
He has the same concerns about
the definition and there's a
couple others add that same
concern also the notices of it
but I one thing that really did.
Stand out of me Representative
artisan Mr chairman.
In August of two thousand and
twenty the safety of the
community ditch Fund Act or did
did fund committee comprised of
the director of the NMDA the
chair of the Interstate Stream
Commission and representative
for the New Mexico Sanket
Commission requests and and New
Mexico attorney general's
opinion related to this topic Mr
chairman and Representative
Ortiz have you ever heard back
from the.
attorney general's office in
regards to this matter.
Mr chair representative Weisel I
do believe that Mr Merriman's
Garcia can respond to about that
issue and the funding is
necessary as well thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative itself thank you
for the question all all respond
first to the question about the
Attorney General opinion and
then I'll offer a perspective on
the funding of first the
The question about the AG
opinion is important to thank
you for asking about that it's
something that that we we have
worked on the the ACTF
Committee.
When it took under consideration
applications for the AC DF Fund
of approved funding for Peavey
R. eight A. which is a regional
second cessation that is
under the how much settlement of
that approval with conditions on
getting an AG opinion that was
favorable so NMDA did write a
letter requesting an IG opinion
in late July us whether they
felt that the AG's us they need
what their interpretation of
these a C. DS statue was in
relation to eligibility of
regional associations to get
money for Madam implementation
as of the start of the
legislative session that AG
opinion had not been made
available to us yet and so we
always discuss even with the AC
def Committee which includes an
NDA and the Interstate Stream
Commission and the New Mexico
second commission that if there
wasn't an AG opinion that that
we may need to seek a
legislative remedy and that's
why we're here today with this
bill so there to answer
questions briefly that we have
not seen any need opinion yet on
this particular question okay
and of Representative Ortez Mr
chairman and miss Garcia I
understand how important that
opinion is and I'm real
disappointed that you all
haven't received one yet.
And.
I'm just very very concerned for
the protection of the psyche
associations.
There does need to be an
attorney general's opinion and I
hope somebody from that office
is taking note of this Mr
Chairman representative artists
along the same lines of doctor
of Secretary whities comments
through the New Mexico
department of agriculture
He is stating that the office of
the state engineers interpret
the statute and indicated that
the A. C. D. F. should.
The expenses related to the Judy
education process and not post
settlement activities.
So if there is litigation after
the fact.
Is there a concern about the
lack of funding available to
follow through with that.
And.
Representative Ortez or Mr
Romero miss Garcia would you
like to address the.
Mr chair representative resell I
think that is and and issue but
I'd like for miss Garcia Mr
matches found on that.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and Representative cell it's
under I understand the question
you're you're asking about and
expanding the purpose of the
frontier and and whether that
that that will affect the
ability of of other grantees to
have access to funding for
litigation either before a final
decree after final decree and
the first thing that's important
to keep in mind is that that
there's a limited universe of of
applicants for this money they
are Association of us against
that are either in an act that
are in an active phase of
education those are the ones
that are considered eligible now
under the status quo
this is the state engineer in in
making their recommendations to
the AC def Committee did render
an opinion or their
interpretation that the statute
only apply to act educations of
we we have a different legal
opinion our own interpretation
that the statute does include
Madam implementation as that be
part of the education process so
we had a difference of opinion
on the interpretation of the
statute of ACTF Committee.
Agree with our interpretation
but that's for the eight page
opinion in as a contingency of
their approval so so where we
where we are now is is that
you know we're asking for the
clarification the statute as far
as funding because it's a
limited universe of of entities
that would have access to this
fund we don't see a big
expansion in and the need for
the for litigation dollars right
now there's only one association
that's a a post final decree
that the people walk at regional
association in the near future
we'll have some associations
like because I think it's so
ciation real charm Association
go from being in a pre final
decree to propose file decreased
status so the overall number of
grantees that are going to be a
having access to the fund is not
going to expand tremendously and
after settlement there's a lot
less risk of litigation compared
to the costs that are pre final
decree.
Good thank you very much for
that response there.
But I'm I'm just very very
concerned that the.
I don't know I've at all of
these analysis.
I just want somebody to lose
their water rights if they don't
have the ability to get to the
negotiate and have to litigate
and Mr chairman and
Representative forest or test
can you tell me why you chose
not to have of have an
appropriation done to help with
this.
Mr chair representative ease L.
I don't think that we need an
appropriation for for this this
would you just expands the
ability of of those a second so
stations that that need help
post post settlement in in the
implementation process to to get
that help that they need the
resources for that you for the
legal and technical advice but I
mean I I will say here that I
think it's always a wonderful
idea to support I say yes with
funding at the state level.
Okay Paul I'd like to if you'd
like to expand on that a bit
more before you do
Representative zelko good
continue questioning okay M. Mr
chairman that's that's basically
all the questions that I have
but I really do feel
Representative a Mr chairman
that in your bill you do need to
have a definition for Madam
input implementation to make it
very clear so there is no it
will be construed in any way
shape or form that's all I have
Mr chairman thank you very much
and thank you for your responses
and to the other two expert
witnesses thank you very much
the representatives L. that's
going to represent brown sort of
yours then.
Thank you Mr chair so just
thirty seconds
I think this is a very
reasonable request I I think it
makes sense I would support the
bill and I just wanted to close
at one of our analysts told us
there's a Maximilian Mexico
water law and it goes like this
when you get your water right
Madam then you can really start
right that that was pretty good
but anyway it's a good bill and
I do support it and thank you
Representative Ortez for
bringing it forward thank you
Representative that's going to
represent NMAA chairwoman.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Sanchez the
Representative Ortez like to
welcome you to our committee
it's good to have you I think
yes I I don't know how much
money is there in the the second
community ditch fund and maybe I
missed that along the way how
much do they have that but right
now I'm just curious.
Mr chair representative that
I think that is an answer that
Paula Garcia has.
You did.
yes second committed fund is
administered by the New Mexico
department of agriculture and
the fund is is and included in
their base budget so over the
years the fund has
and incrementally been increases
started with about a hundred
thousand dollars of over two
decades ago and today has about
six hundred thousand dollars
that is is is in the funding
that is allocated by NMDA to
various regional secure so
stations across the state
through a an annual grant cycle
for that requires each of the
associations to submit an
application and go through a
ranking process state engineer
advises on that process and a
three member committee comprised
of the Interstate Stream
Commission the secretary of
agriculture and the chair of the
New Mexico second commission on
those three for the committee
that makes the decisions about
who gets what money.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Ortez and now all
Garcia good to see you I to
think this is a good bill I kind
of agree with that
Representative the sale that I
think further on down the road
we're gonna have to look at some
appropriations just thinking and
that's all I have Mr chair thank
you thank you maestro let's go
then finally to hop
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and Representative Ortez I just
have one quick question I
apologize I was presenting
another committee so if this
question is already been asked
just tell me and I will shut it
Mr Chairman representative arts
has there was some alternative
language suggested in one of our
analysis that might kind of
clear out those definitional
problem you have with Madam
implementation I just wanted to
float this to you I mean it's
it's I I think it's a good bill
I think you need to progress
forward with that but it might
be a little cleaner I'm not sure
the alternative approach would
be to expand the use of the fund
be on active educations and
allow safety is to use money
from the fund to comply with
state engineer and ministration
which is a broader more flexible
more long lasting category of
activities that would greatly
assist with the sick SO just
wanted to plant that seed in
your mind Representative thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative what is
the committee.
I moved to pass motion made by
Representative the motor is
their second.
Second thank you.
Let's call the roll they've
and madam secretary.
Tell me who seconded it sorry
Representative headed.
Okay thank you so much
representative Allison yes.
Representative Brown point.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Matthews.
Vice chair Herrera yes.
Chair Lenti yes eight two zero
what is it are you have a do
pass on house bill one ninety
four thank you representative.
Appreciate you appreciate you
have to win this is of ladies
and gentlemen of the committee
we will roll house bill one
ninety seven I recognize it's
been a long afternoon of bills
so with that being said I truly
appreciate your your activism
and you staying with us this
afternoon we will have to look
at it again on Tuesday morning
so we will see everyone there on
Tuesday morning enjoy your
weekend stay safe and stay warm
take it but what.
