session. Good morning. We're
gonna take roll.
Good morning.
Good morning everybody.
Uh, Representative Herrera.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio.
Ranking members Zora, Madam Vice
Chair Keats.
Here, Madam Chair Orte here, but
not necessarily present. OK,
everyone, that's gonna be my
line for the next 3.5 weeks. Uh,
thank you. Do you want another
chair?
Are you sure? OK. All right. uh,
Representative Zhao is here to
present a House bill that is the
that is uh HB 431. We only have
one bill on the agenda today,
um, House Bill 427 has, has
rolled. Yeah, so just one. So go
ahead and begin. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I am just going to
turn this straight over to my
expert witness who has the
statutory language in front of
her that explains why this is
man.
mandated. This is Debbie Hughes,
the executive director of Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts. They represent the
soil and water districts across
the state, of which there are
47.
Go ahead, Ms. Hughes. I'm sure
members of the
soil and water districts were
formed over a watershed
districts
were floods.
We have hundreds of them
actually around many cases in
some cases, they're co-sponsors
with, um, DLS, a lot of
different things, but, um, so
they were formed and if you look
at 7324.
In that statute that says
watershed districts may be
formed as subdistricts of soil
and water conservation
districts. Um, when the local
election law was passed, we
should have paid more attention
to that part about the sub.
She's going on, um, we've got
watersheds in the healing the
watershed district live
outsideation District, but
outside of the Watershed
District. Therefore, they get
taxed.
But they can't a vote and they
cannot, um.
They, they have to pay the
taxes. They can't be on the
board.
We've got that issue. We have
another issue down by hatch
where they, the watershed
district itself, the boundary is
one family.
So it's not as we're required to
by the local election law. So
we've got several of those
things going on. So we started
working on this actually several
years ago and decided to come
back, um, we didn't do a bill
before, but we've been having
lots of meetings about it. So
really the best option is just
to take the watershed districts
out of the local election law
and have the soil and water
districts appoint them because
within the watershed district.
Uh, all their budgets have to
be, that's, that's basically
what this bill does.
Uh, thank you. Do we have any uh
Uh, supporters in the audience.
Would you like to stand up and
and make a comment?
You have one
2 minutes.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members. I'm
Jim Berle, registered lobbyist
with the Sowater Conservation
Districts state association.
And uh I'd just like to stand in
support of this so we could
We've got a lot of these
districts that have been acting
autonomously and not.
No oversight and even though the
law is not set up that way,
that's the way they've been
running, so we need to clarify.
To have oversight how their
budgets are run and spent and
that they submit budgets to DFA
and and as Debbie said there's
some of these districts don't
even have enough people living
there, just one or two families,
so it needs to be appointed
district-wide and just
appreciate your support on this.
Thank you, just for
clarification, that was a
support comment, correct? OK.
All right, any other supporters
in the audience?
Uh, do we have any, uh,
supporters online.
No? Any opposition in the
audience?
OK, opposition online.
A representative, would you like
to make any final comments?
I, I, I, I'll get there.
I won't forget about you, I
promise. Um, OK, Representative
Herrera.
Thank
These, I, I mean, I have some
really, I have, like you said,
some that are really, they work
very closely and very well, so,
so it would be the boards
themselves that would, yeah,
because I have really strong.
Yes ma'am. So yeah, so they did
great work that they're the ones
knowledge, you know, soil and
water, which I did not know till
this year are the only state
agencies that can mediate it.
So when we had these huge
floods, you know, when the river
changed its course. Marcos was
the one that got.
Millions of dollars from federal
funds, they still can't get
there. I mean, they brought in
millions of Domior engineers. I,
I mean, they just happen, so.
I, they, they're just very
valued. They go to people if you
have a huge flood and you, you
do, they're the ones that can
come in. It's just a mess, but
thank you, thank you for this
bill. Thank you for bringing
this forward. Uh, we, we, I
appreciate.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Madam Chair, um.
I was, I was reading this last
night and I kind of felt like
rabbit hole. I had fallen into
the strangest.
Process, uh, or.
Set up, but I am curious,
there's a lot of money
available.
Um, at least 115.7 million.
I think I read and I'm just is
um.
Sorry
Is, is um
It is this money actually being
used for the purposes that it
should be used for and what
would be the oversight.
Of the money
I'm, I'm not even sure who
decides who gets like could you
talk about that a little bit
can pass a mail levy, um, for up
to 5 male budgets approved with
DFA have to have audits, all
this kind of stuff, and actually
the wind up be there to actually
guide them. If I could just add
to that, Madam Chair, and
Representative Matthews. The,
the, um salt and Water District
board, they're called
supervisors, and they are on the
ballot for election. They're
elected by the people. So they
are elected officials. It's a
political subdivision and they
have to comply with with DFA
with, with
I'll, I'll, you know, they have
to go through procurement, they
have procurement officers,
they're the ones that are
responsible. They were handed
20 years into their existence,
they were handed the watershed
districts.
So this is trying to allow the
swan water districts, which are
much more healthy and and and
very rarely have vacancies and
are able to do their, get their
audits and do their procurement
process correctly to help the
soil, the, the water districts
that are struggling.
Funding that they any of these
dams were built with these dams,
uh, it's been 60 years.
To clean out some of the silt to
it's millions of dollars and
then the other thing just for
your information, um,
Planning and zoning committee,
that's what they're built for.
So the, so the land below these
dams in several trailer parks,
subdivisions, even Bernal Leo.
We have a great loss, so, um,
New Mexico, uh, that funding
that comes in for floods or
fires. Yeah, the money can just
be spent for the maintenance
operation.
OK, well thank you very much for
that explanation. This is.
Somebody should write a little
bit of a book or something on
this because it's such a
And a special thing, um.
Um, so I just wanna be sure I
understand. I, my massage
therapist is actually on, I
think a soil and.
What do you call it, soil and
yeah, just, just she bored and
She, she always likes to tell,
tell me how she gets more votes
than I do.
Um
Um, I don't remember which it's
in Albuquerque.
Yeah,
yeah, so, um.
So I'm somewhat familiar with
those. So what we're doing here,
we're still have these watershed
districts, but we're not going
to elect him.
They're gonna be appointed by
the soil and conservation group
and they will be the responsible
government entity.
For
Sort of being sure that money is
spent and everything, is that
what we're doing?
Yes, that's exactly what we're
doing. We already have that
responsibility by law.
To, to take care of all that for
them because they're
subdistricts, but I can imagine.
Uh, do you, does your bill also
change the
Election code to take them out
is here.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
It was pretty much taking it all
out of the local election. OK,
so everything
everything's getting cleaned up.
OK, super. All right, well, if
it's appropriate time, I would.
Thank you. We have other
speakers, uh, ranking members
and more.
of Char I was gonna move with
DuP pass.
I have just a few questions, but
We'll, we'll see. I, I like an
argument over Du Pas, so that's
a good sign. Um, I, I have a
couple of questions, um, so in
uh our analysis, uh, the
Attorney General's office
suggests that you don't what the
bill does not indicate which
members are a two-year member
and which members are a
three-year member and um and
they also.
So
It says purposes that when
available one director shall be
a current former elected
director of the Watershed
District, it is unclear how long
this appointment preference will
last, for example, is this only
the first round of appointments,
or does it, does the preference
last for several rounds of the
appointment. So I know we're
really getting down into the
weeds of this, but before you go
to the next committee, I do
strongly suggest that you clean.
this up an amendment. I don't
think that we need one to get
you out of this committee today,
but I want to make sure that um
you are uh understanding what
that issue is and you can get it
addressed. All right. So we have
a due pass, um, for this bill
from Representative Matthews and
a 2nd from ranking member
Zamora.
Take the role.
Representative Pereira.
Yes. Representative Lara Kadena.
Yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Rubio.
ranking members Zamora.
Yes.
Madam Char Kate.
Yes
We have a unanimous due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll go
talk to, uh, our council
service. OK. Thank you very much
