As an.
Interment green.
Here.
We have a quorum.
Okay a couple of a couple of
announcements before we start
first we are planning on
Saturday at nine o'clock I think
we currently have two bills
scheduled.
I don't have that in front of me
but it's it's House online which
is the.
Resiliency bill and then
Representative Ortez is the.
Sustainable building tax credit
something bill address okay
exactly it it's it's exciting.
So you know I don't I don't know
how long it's gonna take but I
think we're trying to do a
little bit different in
yeah I said earlier that I was
just gonna take comments in
order they popped up.
I think what we're gonna do is
for House Bill line at least
provide the Santo time probably
forty five minutes for each
side.
in the we'll have a will we're
gonna try to do the timer on the
screen so anyone that wants talk
will get two minutes
and we and we might actually
start with the full.
Just to see how that goes
so we'll do opposition first and
then we'll do comes in support
you know if we do forty five
minutes we don't have to get to
forty five minutes we can take
less.
That's always an option so
we'll do it that way.
Just to make sure we're not
they're all day on Saturday and
then after that we'll take up
the the building tax credit
bill.
send me questions on that I
have talked it over with to
sponsor H. B. line I had not
talked it over with
Representative Strickler.
As we didn't get a chance to
talk yet but that's what the
plan.
Representative my toe is coming
on.
Any any thoughts on that.
A chair I'm sorry I just got on
I'm on my phone I tease exported
from on my connection for my
computer.
So I'll be joining like this
until I get my computer up and
then all.
Be switching over to my computer
getting logging off and getting
on my computer logging on so I'm
I'm sorry I missed the question
so we were just going over the
planned for Saturday okay.
It's basically started nine the
we've got to bill so far house
bill nine in the sustainable
building tax credit
my plan is to have a set amount
of time for both opposition and
support use the timer two
minutes for each person wishes
to speak.
and if we use less than the
seven out time which I think
will be forty five minutes each
all the better.
Senator okay everyone.
Okay.
The hearing in the support or
opposition will work out the
details and we will of course on
Saturday announced those details
and.
Try to explain them is this
routine to the attendees.
so today we have three built up
Zaman have any questions or
announcements before we begin.
Okay so our first bill is house
bill ninety five water
ministration changes with
Representative Romero Shelly is
Representative Romero available.
Yes I did just promoted her I'm
gonna go start looking for her
witnesses as well.
Good morning everybody.
Representative Romero we're just
you have some experts that we're
adding I think I'd still average
Benson should be in the audience
Dr David got slower should also
be in the audience.
And on call but just in the case
that we do need him as a journal
will be but I think he's going
to give Committee unless we may
have a question specifically
about water management.
Okay.
And I do believe the SX
Association is out there as well
I'm not sure if they were going
to give come the public comment
but if there are questions about
that technical issue as well we
can respond to that
Okay
if you are using public comment
that's a little different than
being an expert so
well that will leave them and
for public comment.
That's fine for now.
It's will be able to have them
available Senator amero whenever
you're ready please present your
bill.
Thank you madam I'm sorry Mr
chair thank you members of the
committee I miss you all I I'm
here today to present to house
bill ninety five this bill
essentially looks at water
administration changes with the
office of the state engineer
I'm gonna read from you from our
state constitution to just kind
of frame where we're coming from
with this bill an article
sixteen.
In our constitution section two
on the appropriation of water
allow S. lobby the so when it
comes to New Mexico the people
of New Mexico and I'm
appropriated water and water is
placed in our area however in
the way that it's managed
currently through the office of
the state engineer we're not
really seeing that sort of
purposing of of water and the
way that it's manage so we have
been experiencing increasing
drought
and and on the on and because it
belongs to the people we want to
understand that the way that
it's managed is a from the
framework of climate change
Essentially what this bill does
is create transparency of for
the management of water for any
application we want to know why
it was approved or denied just
give us a reason and to through
the lens of climate change we
want our water evaluated and
managed so the for the framework
for this bill and it is long so
I'm prepared for questions with
my experts is essentially to
look at under the hood it how
that's that's being managed what
we have experienced and and many
in my community and why this
bill was brought forth to me is
that the management of water has
been unfortunately a quite a
black box and if you read part
of the
analysis in particular that came
from the O. S. C. there's a lot
of real climate denial language
in there that we want to address
and with this board with this
committee really speak to to
some of those things as you read
through the F. I. R. this does
impose requirements for the
state engineer to follow and
evaluate acting upon water rates
permit applications that already
exists they already have a
mandate to look at public
welfare has the lines in which
we have they will be evaluating
water and to they are we're
asking them to perform certain
tasks with respect to the water
supply from the climate change
lands we're we wonder why that
isn't already happening being
that many courts have of already
mandated that this be the way
that the water get managed and
then finally we want the most up
to date science to inform that
decision making process and they
call that difficulty where as we
would argue that that's actually
what we would hope for any
department to run any sort of
way of being able to defend of
the management of water would
absolutely ensure that the most
up to date science was informing
those decisions so yes indeed
the things that we are asking.
this office to do through this
bill is very clearly stated and
so what we want to completely
impressed everybody to is the
that there is ongoing drought
the rivers are drying and we
just we're asking for
transparency and the lens of
climate change through the
process of water management
being that the people on the
water and we want to know how
it's managed so with that Mr
chair and members of the
committee I would like to
introduce my
experts with us I'm with read
Benson he is on the UNM faculty
of affect law faculty he has
contributed to a broad
background of environmental work
including five years as
executive director Water
watching or again and she now
contributes to water law natural
resources administrative law and
chairs the natural resources
environmental law program also
with me is the preeminent
emeritus professor Dr David got
slower who's seen been seen
before this committee in
previous years on climate change
your you should be very familiar
with him and his projections
he basically research at reached
researchers climatology
meteorology interactions between
the earth's atmosphere in its
hydrosphere biosphere cryosphere
let this fear of predictability
and variability of weather and
climate and extreme weather
events and looks at long term
research in the southwest as far
as the monsoon season long term
climate change projections
wildfires and basically how it
all works together he writes the
international report for the U.
N. and contributes to that on
climate change he's here to
answer those questions for you
and so with that Mr chair will
go to whatever you want to do
next.
Thank you.
Representative Romero did did
you want to have your experts
give a statement or just be
available for questions they
will be giving a statement I
don't know where when you want
them to do that if that's
alright so we'll do that now
we're still on the presentation
of the bill before we go to the
audience great thank you and
okay Mrs notes that.
So resentment American you
related to a two number your
bill yes my apologies it's a two
one nine four three three point
two.
Okay so this this bill
We have a regional draft which
was on the the legislature's
website there are a couple of
minutes the amendments became a
committee substitute and then
the committee substitute became
eight point two version of the
bill some point to meeting at
the second draft of the
committee substitute so stark
third draft of the bill so the
the bill for those listening the
bill on the website is no longer
the draft for discussing in.
We haven't really figured out
how to deal with this in a
virtual world
the the
The draft doesn't really get
presented in so we have the
committee and speaking which
would someone like to move the
draft for discussion purposes.
I move the draft Mr chairman
thank you Representative sorry
on this their second.
Okay so I see a second so we're
we're on the two one nine four
three three point two.
Half of the bill and that that's
difficult to fall along at home
I apologize
Representative Romero your your
experts if they would like to
get a a brief statement or
explanation bill that the.
At this time.
Yes I believe I can't remember
which order we're going in but
either read or drive got slurred
repent Center drive that's like
should be I needed.
Or both.
Yeah I believe
Areas hi doctor.
Well.
I think that's my cue to start
speaking sorry
thank you Representative Romero
a chair with queen.
Representative is my name's
David Cussler
I received a very overly
generous introduction from
Representative Romero so I won't
take anymore time telling you
who I am
And and simply get to the the
matter at hand
as Representative Romero stated.
On going and projected climate
change poses severe risks to New
Mexico's water supplies
southwest is warming snow pack
is declining region is becoming
more arid leading to diminished
rates of groundwater recharge.
These are not hypothetical
concerns we see the initial
effects of these long term
trends in the data already.
and as Representative Romero
stated HB ninety five would
codify the need to include these
impacts as a consideration in
the establish criteria for the
assessment administration of
water rights in New Mexico.
Two recent developments
illustrate both the urgency of
making climate change an
essential consideration for the
state engineers activities and
support the implementation of
this change first I would repeat
something you probably already
know which is that the president
almost the entire state is in
severe drought or worse.
The snow pack in central and
southern New Mexico right now
was abysmal almost all of the
Human Pecos valleys are
considered by the national
drought mitigation center to be
an exceptional drought which is
the most severe category.
The tree ring records tells us
that severe droughts like this
have been a natural an episodic
feature of the climate here for
many centuries.
However.
I'm a change over the past half
century has made these severe
droughts worse for example high
elevation snowpack now yields
less reliable snowmelt runoff
for the same amount of snow
compared to.
A century ago a real loose
reducing the reliability of
water supplies and snow fed
rivers.
so.
I hope there is little question
about the urgency of of of of
adapting to this climate change
even as we think about
potentially mitigating future
climate change which will be
more along the lines of what
you'll discuss on Saturday and
H. B. line.
Secondly a new management tools
have been developed in recent
years that allow us to monitor
and project hydrolyzed hydro
climatic change with sufficient
confidence to make
implementation of this bill
practical so many of the same
data modeling tools that will
support the development of the
Interstate Stream commissions
new fifty year water planning
effort which is not the subject
of this bill
and which is now being spun up
can be adapted to support the
decisions faced by the state
engineer.
so.
In my opinion the need to
incorporate climate change into
water administration in our
state is a central and it's
doable and in my opinion current
and future citizens of our state
deserve no less
so I thank you for the
opportunity to speak before you
today and I certainly will
remain available to address any
questions that are appropriate
to send my way thanks again.
Thank you doctor
Representative Herrera do any of
your other experts wish to speak
yes of Mr chair if we could get
rid Benson into the.
panelists position.
Greed is already on the call as
a panelist okay great read I
hope is connected.
He was but I don't see okay.
Yes my my apologies for that
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
appreciate the invitation to us
speak with you this morning
about house bill ninety five my
name is read Benson as
Representative Romero said I'm
a professor at the university of
New Mexico school of law just to
be clear I'm here speaking on my
behalf today not to on behalf of
any part of you amendment I'm in
my thirteenth year at UNM having
spent a twenty year career that
was mostly practicing or
teaching water line various
parts of the west and to
currently I teach water law
administrative law on other
subjects so my administrative
law courses a recurring question
is what is good government that
is what is a set of rules that
people want to see agencies live
by and work by regardless of how
they feel about the current
administration so we're talking
about things like transparency
accountability public
participation and fear
inconsistent application of
legal rules based on facts and
science house bill ninety five
seeks to apply these principles
to certain kinds of decisions
made by the office of the state
engineer.
One way that House Bill modifies
seeks to do that is by promoting
transparency and consistency in
OSCE decisions on applications
for new water use permits water
leases in changes of water
rights the bill would require
the agency the current draft
would require the agency to lay
out the factual and legal basis
for its decisions and publish
that the intent is to ensure
that the OSCE decides similar
cases similarly unless it can
explain clearly the factual and
legal race reasons why they
should come out differently.
The idea is to promote
transparency consistency and
predictability so that
stakeholders know what to expect
and the public can be confident
that the OSC is applying the law
equally to everyone another good
government goal is public
participation and house bill
ninety five seeks to promote
this by expanding the rights of
people to be heard on whether a
new application will be
consistent with the public
welfare and conservation of
water within the state state and
local agencies can already do
that this would expand extend
that to humans up these
standards have been in the loss
since the nineteen eighties
public welfare and conservation
of water but the law is not well
developed out what they need
and this would give the public
the right to be heard on whether
a proposed uses in the public
welfare the bill also includes
important new factors for the
first time with the legislature
would lay out considerations
that the agency would have to
look at in deciding on public
welfare.
Good government also requires
agencies to use their expertise
and authorities to address the
most important and challenging
issues in their field and is Dr
guts Legisla- at that's climate
change as applied to water in
the southwest so the bill does
not dictate exactly how the
agency should do this rather it
directs the O. S. C. to develop
rules on this point which gives
them a chance to apply their
expertise in their judgment and
also ensures that the public has
an opportunity to be heard in
what those rules look like I
regard the climate change
provisions has the most
important parts of this bill New
Mexico is stepping up to do its
part on mitigating climate
change with your urgent
challenges in how we adapt to
climate change in those are
especially crucial in water
management house bill nine which
you'll hear on Saturday contain
some good policy direction on
this point ensuring the
agencies.
It up improve the resilience of
water supplies by among other
things ensuring that climate
change impacts and risks are
fully considered in state water
management decisions the house
bill ninety five would take that
general policy direction and
make it specific to certain
kinds of decisions made by the
OSC I want to close with a
couple of points on what I think
this bill does not do first I
don't regard it as an attack on
the state water agencies the
current person or leadership of
the OSCE and it's not about it's
not a reaction to any problem
that originates with the current
administration it's also as I do
it not a major overhaul of the
New Mexico water code it doesn't
mandate that agencies address
climate change across the board
for example compact compliance.
It also it flushes out the
public welfare stated but it
does not elevate that
determination into the most
important factor up but I do
think that this bill represents
an important step forward in
water management and good
government for New Mexico thank
you I'd be happy to take any
questions.
And Mr chair if I may just two
quick points that I may have
messed up from my testimony
my community has been struggling
as many of yours have with
community against community
duking it out over water and
part of that lack of
transparency is that we don't
have the government's answer for
why things are the way that they
are currently from my
perspective and being able to
respond well to my constituents
about that management is being
able to have that response as to
why decisions are being made the
way that they are and when I've
spoken to ranchers farmers folks
in different industries across
the board I think this helps
everybody understand how the
management works and so that
when decisions are made were all
informed regardless of where
that's coming from so with that
Mr chair looking forward to the
questions and with that we'll go
to Madam what's next thank you.
Thank you Representative Romero
so now we will to the public.
Public may include US and state
agencies I'm not sure yet
if you would like to speak on
this bill please raise your hand
if you're on the phone you can
raise your hand by pressing star
line.
I ask you to be brief.
And you know we sometimes we'll
get more on the way to the
executive branch agencies that
is built impacting so I think I
see the state engineer we would
like to hear from them up but
we'll go in order because that's
easiest so first up we have step
the wise for.
Chair McQueen and committee
members.
Thank you for your work
protecting our beautiful state
for generations to come my name
is Stephanie Weiss Verde
Representative rural advocacy
group of three fifty New Mexico
which is in support of this bill
I also live in to Harris where
my well water drops twenty feet
in three years three of my
immediate neighbors had to drill
new wells this year and many
people living south of me who
can not afford to drill new
wells have to have all of their
water trapped in I also pay over
five thousand dollars a year for
homeowners insurance due to fire
risk because we are in the
twentieth year of a mega drought
climate change has pushed what
would have been a short moderate
advantage into the second worst
drought in twelve thousand
twelve hundred years who
protects our water where I live
when a developer wanted to build
a housing complex with the golf
course it was a judge who had
the foresight to think that the
developer should have understood
the aquifer's better and taking
climate change into account in
his plans.
And should have consider the
consequences of his plans on our
community will we be so lucky
next time what we have to see
you every time a permit is
issued without taking science
into account this should be an
essential part of the state
engineers process H. B. ninety
five will protect all New
Mexicans so we should can have a
livable future thank you so
much.
Thank you for that next up we
have to steal and you are.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is additional are you are I am
here as a spokesperson for
jach'a use United for climate
crisis action to stand in
support of HB ninety five for
those of you that don't know us
yucca is a youth led climate
justice organization with
members throughout northern New
Mexico we want to think
Representative Romero for
bringing this important
legislation to protect our
precious water resources make
sure they're being used for the
public benefit and make sure the
water management is taking into
account the very real impacts of
climate change on our state
drought water scarcity are
realities our communities have
faced a long time thanks to our
thirst for oil and gas and
revenues we generate from their
extraction climate change
threatens to make our beautiful
New Mexico harm in hospitable
New Mexico is warming faster
than the global average
temperature rise we're
experiencing deepening drought
reducing snowpack in annual
precipitation in our rivers are
drying water is life and while
too many decision makers in New
Mexico have acted like oil and
gas is our lives sorry our
lifeblood in fact water is the
resource on which all of our
livelihood and our presence in
this precious high desert
ecosystem depend many of our
younger members are indigenous
to this land many of our members
have lived here for generations
we want to be able to live in
this place that we love to raise
our families here to steward the
land and to thrive thank you for
voting in support of HB ninety
five.
Thank you next I believe is the
stagiaire John the answer.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you and
Representative Romero thank you
for bringing this legislation I
want to address of actually
quite a few issues not just only
with the bill but with what some
of the experts have said and and
also Representative Romero
ourselves I think you know part
of
part of what we.
And I really do take offense
that there's climate denial
language in our bill analysis
we're trying to we're trying to
go in and and we take take
climate change extremely
seriously
the most up to date science and
and scientific information is
what we use on a daily basis and
the you know getting to your
experts and and date costs are
obviously can't argue with one
thing that he said.
Find issues are but most
important to us as a water
agency and agree with with all
these contentions on how severe
the drought is that's obviously
it's been that way for for
number years and and the state
engineers office has for number
years put tools in place to deal
with drought one of the things
that I I want to emphasize is of
we've got all this support for
all these issues but the state
engineers office is still not
funded to the extent that we
need to be funded so that we can
put in the and put together
districts specific regulations
that were put it that the whole
idea of active water resource
management in the state of New
Mexico is to deal with climate
variability and drought
scenarios Mr Benson again thank
you for your comments but I'll
go back right back to you on
good government good government
would be working with the
administrative agency up
beforehand we've got a which
only a thirty page bill double
that's been changed to a twenty
one or twenty two page bill but
we we as the agency and the
administrators did not see that
bill until you know just a few
days ago and it's been changed
twice and a good government is
is not necessarily having an
educator to professor and a
scientist not work with the
administrative agency that's
been been working on these
issues for a number of years and
so what is good government is
certainly S. transparency
consistency if we were funded to
put districts specific
regulations in place in in every
part of New Mexico we would be
able to address the climate
change issues.
Our top line message of for this
bill as we the state engineer
and the icy we take climate
change seriously we're already
working to incorporate climate
change in the future water
supply projections and plans the
goal of ensuring consideration
of climate change it's a lot of
all one but to the bill which
was drafted again without our
input would have significant
disruptive effects on the
administration of water and
would actually make it harder to
incorporate the best science
into to administrative decisions
we are very collaborative but we
need to be contacted we need to
be communicated to and we can't
we're not my and my reserve but
readers of what's coming down we
again we're embarking on a fifty
year state water planning
efforts at the direction of
governor Michelle lu Han Grisham
and that efforts to incorporate
sound science using water and
climate experts to leap ahead
fifty years and really look at
what's of what we're expecting
to happen within the state of
New Mexico.
making assessments of climate
change on individual
applications is really
cumbersome and from our from our
perspective it's going to be
problematic we have a prior
appropriation doctrine a water
code we love that provides the
state engineer with tools and
flexibility to it minister
variations in supply and what I
would like to to continue to
address is we went through a
process from two thousand and
three to two thousand twelve
where the New Mexico Supreme
Court of validated are active
water resource management
process to allow us to go in and
manage water in the absence of
adjudications by priority and
part of it is putting together
districts specific regulations
that we need to be funded for
and so again I when I when I
look at so what we have in place
and what's with the state water
plan essentially is going to
help us do is set that stage and
that basically with with experts
and and we've got just a little
bit about that that leap ahead
analysis we're gonna use experts
of selected New Mexico water
climates.
Experts to leap ahead fifty
years a twenty seventy described
how our water resources may have
changed the New Mexico
department of the of the bureau
of geology and mineral resources
and advisory team are going to
conduct that analysis Mr
bachelor I'm sure you're gonna
be be involved in commenting and
building up to help that process
to make it better.
We're going to assess impacts in
various sectors of the state and
the state as a whole we're gonna
describe how those changes are
being addressed today or or not
being addressed by state federal
and local efforts and we're
going to complete that analysis
with several iterations several
opportunities for public input
and we're gonna provide
presentations to the public to
the interim committees and
that's what we need to do this
process is too important not to
involve the legislature and not
to involve our experts and is
going to be done in a
transparent and consistent
manner so that we can put out
the best and utilize the best
science to make the best water
decisions that we can.
Let me talk a little bit more to
build in particular with the
rulemaking process
that's required by section
eleven of the committee
substitutes to identify and
assess the impacts of climate
change on the surface and and
groundwater New Mexico would
entail significant agency
resources and there's no
appropriation to enable our
agency to undertake this effort
and we will continue to get
hacked with unfunded mandates
and that's not good governments
and so on the of the harken back
to to those words of the
requirement to publish state
engineer decisions on
applications it's going to
require additional agency
resources and there's no no
appropriation to support that
efforts there is a significant
disruption of administrative
processes for water rights
applications just the standing
to protest.
Absolutely every application
that comes from and I I would
say in the high ninety
percentile gets protest it
anyway and we have to go through
the the hearing process in most
cases this committee substitute
would allow anyone in the world
the file protest of water right
applications are this likely
would significantly increase the
number of protesters protest
filed we currently have nearly
five hundred applications that
are backlog because we have
sixty vacancies within our
agency it's really difficult for
us to get to every single piece
and and if we're going to have
and continue to to what good
administration we need to fund
the agencies that are looking
over the water resources and and
managing those water resources
of this is just the of the
ability for anybody to protest
would increase the number of
protests filed a large numbers
of additional protest and so of
it would be it can burn burn to
the state engineers office would
allow out of state interests
more easily file protests and
efforts to disrupt Water Rights
permit processing procedures in
New Mexico if there's any
special interest groups are they
could direct hundreds of or you
know you just a few hundred
people to do their members
everybody else to protest
applications I just brings the
administrative hearing to a
complete halt.
Of the committee substitute also
would require written findings
by the state engineer and every
application as to whether the
impacts of the proposed budget
show use on a static health
safety recreation recreational
cultural and environmental
interests are detrimental to
public welfare this would impose
new burdens on applicants and
lead to unintended consequences
of for example impacts on
interstate compacts deliveries.
It's not even in there and that
that should be considered as
part of the public welfare of
the state the specificity of
this list would produce
confusion over the ability to
state engineer to address
in public welfare evaluations
other interests or
considerations that aren't
listed here and it's from my
perspective do you really want
to state engineer to make.
Rulings on aesthetic issues and
other things that are are in
here of it's it's really from my
perspective something that we
could work on in an interim
session with the working group
to see what's really valuable in
in defining what public welfare
is that's good governments it's
working it let's work on those
issues during the interim so
that we can put that in place of
required conservation of water
findings of the committee's
tested again would require
written findings of state
engineer on every application on
the impacts of climate change
over a fifty year period of time
well from again Water Rights for
the most part in New Mexico
service water rights are fully
appropriated there are no new
appropriations for the most part
but we're we see this being a
cumbersome process is when we do
changes of of applications
changes in place and purpose and
use applications are evaluated
for impairment at of both the
move to a location and the move
from locations but we manage
that water supply to the what if
we manage those applications on
a year to year basis to the
water supply in any given year
so whether or not we do an
analysis and again you look at
you look at Water Rights there
either for the most part either
educated or they have
established budget issues with
permits filed within the state
engineers office let me use an
example if we come in and
certain basin where twenty
percent short on water supply to
fulfill all the needs we should
be invoking priority
administration a priority
administration would manage to
that supply of what the act
water resource management and
districts specific regulations
would allow us to do would be
able to to manage ourselves
through those scenarios so we're
managing to the current supply
if we're changing a place and
purpose of abuse were only
transferring to consumptive use
portion to the new use.
Then as as any was it western
desert state should be doing we
need to administer to supply the
district specific regulations
would allow an orderly transfer
of a temporary transfers from
say an agricultural use to
municipal industrial use some
other type of use but it's on a
short term basis and it would
allow us to entertain trigger
points and other things
certainly the climate change
analysis which we're doing in
our state water plan is is going
to be happening and we can take
the benefit of those studies
when we do master planning and
looking at other things and and
where the real issue is it what
what what are the second floor
third order effects on
groundwater pumping in those
areas where we have short
surface water supplies and
that's where we have to put in
of the administrative of stops
such is critical management
areas but critical management
areas based on sound science of
available water in an awful for
the amount of of
you're not the aquifer has
available for for water
resources the amount of decline
in the impacts of those offers
and we have to put in critical
management areas to restrict
groundwater well that's going to
come through a study that's done
with the Interstate Stream
Commission on this fifty year
water plan is being of the
that's we're we're being asked
to do by by the governor so
we've got to do that robust
study which will entail other
avenues for us to put in good
policies and good management
within our water resources we
need to be funded and I think
one of one of the things that I
like like to end with is if we
have a state water plan that
helps inform where we
incorporate incorporate those
critical management area
domestic well management areas
to deal with one link
groundwater we have the prior
appropriation system and the
water code for us to be able to
manage to.
Through our shortages and we we
are currently of you know going
to I I know there's a lot of
conflict out there we were in
every single base in the in the
state last year because of the
slow water supplies the low
water supplies and enforcing
shortage sharing requirements
that's part of what we do in New
Mexico we've done it we do it
better than every other western
states and and and and so what
I'd like to do is be.
As collaborative a possible but
collaboration goes both ways of
you know I would love for for
your experts Representative
Romero up to come to us in the
interim would like another
opportunity to do that in the
next interim but again this this
bill as it structure is again
huge unfunded mandates for our
agency and and we need well we
really need to focus on the
state water planning efforts us
so that we can piggyback off of
that really put ins sounds a
sound of and good policies for
the state of New Mexico Mr chair
I'm sorry for the long long
explanation but it's really
important pourtant that we
address it and I'll stop there
and allow others to speak thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you and senator if you
could the sick with us.
Through this committee hearings
is quick questions for you that
that would be appreciated.
next we have in reaching a
Romero.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
My name is indeed a matter on
the director of legal services
at the New Mexico secular
Association.
And I'm speaking today on to to
express our support for the bill
water transfers are profoundly
important public policy
decisions New Mexico water law
is predicated on the fundamental
principle that senior in
existing water rights are
protected if there is a new
appropriation or if there's a
change to an existing rights in
terms of a changing point of
diversion purpose of use
replacing these there's good
reason for this as many of the
folks have already stated today
New Mexico has very limited
water supplies in any new use of
water can impact an existing use
those impacts have to be thirty
considered before then you use
can be approved by the state
engineer.
For the more policy makers in
New Mexico have recognize that
water is a public good and then
we all depend on good
stewardship of our water
resources and have included
consideration of public welfare
and conservation of water in the
criteria the state engineer must
consider in an application for
water procreation or wire
transfer.
To provide the protest
applications before the state
engineer a second for several
decades have been very involved
in making arguments about how
applications affect their
respective communities including
articulations of their concerns
in terms of public welfare and
water conservation.
The general pattern with state
engineer decisions however is
that decisions on water rights
are made without any language
that addresses.
This is arguments about public
welfare conservation of water
for this reason we support this
legislation because it requires
that there be findings in the
decision relating to public
welfare conservation of water
we're working with the sponsor
Representative Romero to include
our input and we appreciate that
the language around public
welfare and conservation has
been brought in the committee
substitute we're also supporting
it adding language requiring
consideration of climate change.
That's all thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you for that we have Gary
Payton.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members.
I speak today on behalf of the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico our
coalition is comprised of the
elected leaders of the cities of
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County.
When I go to communities across
the state each of our members as
serious issues of water
management and sustainability.
The bill offers major steps
toward greater transparency and
further ways to adapt to the
full impact the climate crisis
upon New Mexico's water
resource.
We are your careful
consideration of HB ninety five
or considering improvements to
the bill such as additional
resources for the office of the
state engineer thank you very
much for receiving our comments
this morning we thank you for
the support of the movement of
this bill from Representative
Romero.
Thank you next up we have Liz
Taylor.
Good morning everyone my name is
Liz Taylor and I am the water
all your New Mexico I've been
practicing years since nineteen
ninety two which university
Mexico and Representative
entities across the state the
public and private entities and
today I'm representing the San
Juan water commission in
northwest Mexico and select
energy services in southeast
Mexico in both of these
introduce my clients opposed the
bill as Mr Dantonio said.
Elaboration would been great
this up last substitute we just
saw yesterday but I oppose the
bill because as the state
engineer pointed out he's able
to manage troubling water
supplies now with the tools that
he has another important feature
that I don't think it's been
mentioned is that people who
have valid existing water rights
have private property rights and
they have a right to move those
rights to change them to use
them they're already accounted
for in the system and they
should have the right to move
them around in this bill makes
that much more difficult
particularly on the public
welfare criteria it is a list of
items as Mr Dantonio said that
you have to find the harm in
there needs to be a balance in
that list of items to consider
the economic development and the
benefits of moving the water
right sure changing them in some
way
it also completely ignores the
input of local governments in
the case of appropriating water
for the Intel plant in in Rio
Rancho Public participate in
that in in that case then state
engineer live Martinez made the
point his decision on public
welfare was that if the local
zoning approved it in the water
is going to be used for that
beneficial use then it means the
public welfare criteria now I
see that perhaps you could be a
larger list but that idea of
local government voice on what
the land you should be should be
considered in your public
welfare criteria and that's
complete completely missing at
this point
and also is as Mr in twenty oh
said just the process of having
to produce of findings and
conclusions basically make every
case like it was a protest the
case even though some of them
are not would be very burdensome
would add to the length of time
that it takes to get water
decisions for.
On the state engineer already
can be at least a couple of
years I have a couple that
lasted more than five years
before we got a decision in so
this bill really would would
crash the the agency and its
ability to produce results make
decisions on a timely basis
because as you know water is
desperately need for a lot of
economic development for changes
in our economy that will help
people and give them jobs in
this bill does not do that it
would stymie those efforts to
move water to where it's needed
and to support economic
development thank you I
appreciate being able to make
the comments and I do believe
this bill should be defeated and
not go any farther thank you
madam very much.
Thank you for your comments and
to the members of the public I
do ask you to be brief we have
quite a few requesting speak we
did have Mr Dantonio go on for
quite a while but it's important
for us to hear from our state
agencies and so that's why the
interruption but if you could be
prepared appreciate it next up
we have been Chilton.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Enrollment.
Okay.
Professor Benson drive guzzler
made my points better than I'm
going to make them so a very
quick no we do support the spell
out that shelter in the
political legislative director
with conservation voters New
Mexico we support this bill
because it does something that's
extremely important for every
single agency the states do you
which is that it codifies
considerations of adaptation to
climate change as part of its as
part of this process and that's
something that every single
state government agency must do
a couple a couple knows to just
a couple of things that I heard
I want to agree with Mr Dantonio
just a couple points one S. the
budget we must fund office state
engineer more fully must provide
all of our environmental
regulators more fully the entire
budget for all of our
environmental regulators the
state comes from a slice of the
pie chart that is less than nine
percent of the entire state
budget these are agencies whose
work Effects everyday New
Mexicans are very very direct
way we got to make sure that
we're funding them correctly I
also want to create and that
consideration of climate change
and climate change adaptation is
a cumbersome process for
agencies to undertake it is
extremely cumbersome and it must
be cumbersome because the
problem and that that we're
trying to address is vast and
will affect every person in
every corner of the state I
appreciate that it's difficult
but it must be done.
I'm a little discouraged I guess
by it by hearing that of public
participation and and community
engagement and and water
protection water decisions is
something that's considered an
alphabet of the agencies work I
don't think it should be I think
that this goes back to good
governments precedence was
talking about I think that
providing avenues for the
communities and at that are
impacted in the public to
participate in these kinds of
decisions is really important
but I'm confident that we'll get
into a robust debate about that
thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
please consider supporting the
bill.
Thank thank you we have given
rel colonel colonel.
Good morning chairman the queen
and members of the committee I'm
on the register my name is
Gabrielle Care hall and I'm a
registered lobbyist for COG
operating and I am here today to
propose and house bill ninety
five and we had an opportunity
yesterday to review the
substitute and was concerned to
see as as already been stated
that the limitation on
challenges the substantially and
specifically affected is still
been removed so anyone can
challenge not just someone who's
water rights have been impaired
you heard the state engineer say
say that ninety percent of
applications are protested and
that this could open it up to
special interest groups will
could also open it up to your
competitors therefore wasting
valuable state time and
resources in addition I would
brought joy your attention to
the fact that while the
presidential requirement has
been removed from the committee
substitute the factors and the
requirement that the state
engineer still publish those
specific findings
I I don't understand if it if
you've gone ahead and remove the
presidential requirement of that
why include that I mean it it
appears to me that it's still
recreating this presidential
requirement which in the F. I.
R. the state engineer pointed
out too that each application
decision is dependent on local
characteristics of an individual
water basin thank you for your
time this morning.
Thank you next up we have Bob.
Wesley Wesley.
Mr Wesley you're currently
muted.
I think that's on your end.
There you go that's simple
wasn't there before.
ready for you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I name's Bob Wesley
the immediate past president of
the Middle Rio Grande water
advocates we're an all volunteer
non profit addressing the water
management issues in New Mexico
for well over two decades I want
to thank you for the opportunity
to speak.
We strongly support HB ninety
five and especially with the
committee substitute revisions
along with climate change it
codifies scientific and legal
integrity.
As well as the intense we needed
consistency as opposed to wins
in the state engineers Water
Rights decision making all we
ask you to please vote do pass
thank you.
Thank you for that except with
Tiffany Rivera.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to
comment my name is Tiffany
Rivera I'm the director of
government affairs and
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I stand before you this morning
in opposition to house bill
ninety five.
Mexico Department lives up your
supports the sanctity of the
private water right as defined
by state law and individuals
legitimate privilege to utilize
these water rights without undue
interference from government the
proposed legislation before you
today is the twenty page bill
that continues to be modified
and has not been vetted properly
or work to the interim process.
Any legislation that looks to
address such a critical topic
like water must be heavily
analyze and work to ensure that
all these effective have had the
opportunity to voice their
concerns and issues.
This bill also increases the
workload at the state engineers
office without any new
appropriation to support that.
The bill is majorly unfunded
mandate that will continue to
hamper the ability of the state
engineers office to do the
important work for which we have
assigned to them.
Further this legislation looks
to try and micromanage the work
being done by the state
engineers office lastly and most
importantly the bill removes the
requirement of an individual to
prove that they would be
substantially and specifically
affected in order to protest an
application on the grounds of
conservation of public welfare
this bill will open up expanding
to anyone person or entity by
the time a protest has been
settled the need for approval
have been passed the probably
dead and the project will be
abandoned I respectfully request
that you vote in opposition of
house bill ninety five and thank
you for the opportunity to
comment this morning.
Thank you for that we have a
Rolf Schmidt Petersen of the
Interstate Stream Commission.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I want to say I'm I won't repeat
a lot of the things that the
state engineer said although I
agree with them Interstate
Stream Commission finds this
bill to be what we have to say
directly to the representative
in the testify or is that thank
you for highlighting the impacts
and the concern on climate
change I just think at this
point in time at the what this
bill of describes to me is
really of the differences in
communication and understanding
about what state law does now
and what the even the state
agencies are trying to do of the
state engineer brought up the
fifty year water plan and I just
wanted to highlight that there
there is no funding in this bill
for it on the I. S. C. side we
put forward a special request to
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars for the fifty year water
plant which would look at
temperature induced increases
and how those affect water
resources seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars the legislative
finance committee of has zero
dollars in their in support.
so even our ability at this
point in time to if that were to
play out to even address these
initial impacts our assessments
of of climate change will be
very difficult but I do believe
also that process which we will
carry forward no matter what.
Will will open up the kind of
pathways for communication that
we have not been able to do for
over eight years or eight years
previous to this administration
and they'll help to better
identify what state law already
does addressing these issues and
why they're some of the mis
communication that's going on.
finally I would just say that it
as director of the Interstate
Stream Commission with thirty
years experience on the ground
with water in New Mexico and in
that role we are of a number of
times applicants the state
engineers office for transfers
of water and particularly for a
a statute that the legislature
legislature put in place a about
fifteen years ago call The New
Mexico strategic water reserves
and that statute allows us to
you know to acquire water rights
and then put them into the
reserve for endangered species
purposes to reduce the the
likelihood of additional
listings of species and for
interstate compact for purposes
two things in that regard
you know if there is anybody can
protest anything we do and we've
been through this process before
it could just stop any of those
types of activities moving
forward no matter if there is an
actual impairment impact or not
so the way the bill is written
with regards to no limitations
on protest and gives us a lot of
pause and then in addition to
that when you're looking at
precedence you know white with
thirty years on the ground
experience I I still don't know
of the big pieces of what's
going on with water in different
parts of the state they are not
the same and the idea that there
would be a precedent said let's
say by a strategic water reserve
application in the Pecos river
that that would apply to the Rio
Grande or the San Juan really
doesn't make a lot of sense
technically or legally so for
those reasons we're we're
opposed to this bill but we also
think the fifty year water plant
process particularly if we can
get the funding for to get the
support from the legislature can
help with identifying you know
these impacts across the Mexico
and better understanding of the
laws that are already in place
and.
Impacts that could occur Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you next up with the
medical John.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Douglas make coach on I'm a
lawyer with the New Mexico
environmental law center and I'd
like to speak to this bill on
the basis of what is happening
in the case that our office is
been involved in for more than
ten years in two thousand seven
in two thousand eight a company
the proposed to extract fifty
four thousand acre feet of
ground water a year from the
Santa Gustin basin I believe
that that's about
three step three hundred
thousand gallons of beer a year
and about eighty people in that
area protest at that proposed
appropriation of water we
represent all of those people
the company his first
application was denied by the
state engineer because the
company did not specify either
the use of the water or where
rate use would occur that denial
was upheld by the seventh
judicial District Court in
Sapporo subsequently the company
filed another application which
also did not specify the
specific use to which the water
would be port or where that use
would occur that was denied by
the state engineer although the
state engineer accepted it for
filing which meant that we had
to litigate that issue all over
again the company appealed to
the seventh judicial District
Court again and we had to
litigate the matter once again
there the company has now
appealed to the state court of
appeals.
One of the things that house
bill ninety five would do is to
try to make sure that decisions
of the state engineer are
consistent and if the state
engineer head of.
Be more consistent decisions it
would have denied that second
application on its face and our
clients and we would not have
had to go through this matter
again and again the other point
that I'd like to make based on
that case is that there has
never been a an issue raised in
that case about the impact of
climate change on the supply of
water in the Santa Gustin base
and if it was clear as it would
be if this bill is enacted that
climate change will be taken
into account then the company
would have had to address that
in its application and our
clients and we could have had an
opportunity to respond that.
Finally I'd like to second what
Ben Shelton of conservation
voters said about the need for
adequate funding for the state
engineer office we agree with
that Madam we therefore urged
the legislature to provide
adequate funding on the bill we
urge that you vote don't pass to
move this bill to insects
Committee thank you Mr chairman
and committee members.
Thank you for that we have an
email Verity.
Good morning chairman McQueen
members of the committee first I
just like to say thank you to
the sponsor she's been
incredibly responsive and we've
had a good conversation about
this I am just going to echo
what many scare hold miss Taylor
and specifically the state
engineer they've done a
wonderful job of outlining all
of the outstanding remaining
concerns that memo has so at
this time Moga stands in strong
opposition to this legislation
moving part thank you.
Thank you next page and with
when Chester.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Winchester with the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
we stand in opposition along
with the three fifty members of
our association just briefly and
not to repeat what's already
been put out there this bill is
a major major overhaul on state
water policy and expanding pool
water right to object has been
the basic legal requirement in
showing that impairment of a
water right has been the
standard in New Mexico and other
western states since case law
has been developed in this bill
frankly as you've heard gives
**** nilly right to challenge
water right to anyone who has a
grudge against any water right a
right holder anywhere at any
time also just would echo the
concerns from the state
engineers office this would put
enormous burden on them and so
for that in many other reasons
we do stand opposed thank you.
Thank you next page on the small
at.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jonas
Y. and executive director of the
New Mexico cattle growers
association and the New Mexico
growers incorporated we're
statewide organization members
and thirty to the thirty three
counties in New Mexico
representing cattle and sheep
producers used for over a
hundred years our policies
membership member driven in our
position on House Bill life this
based on member feedback New
Mexico categories in the New
Mexico workers both oppose house
bill ninety five all the
although the bills intent is
good our membership feels that
house bill ninety five will
hamper agriculture business but
for the SLO in the process to
receive a water right permit our
membership is also very
concerned that house bill ninety
five allows any citizen to
protest water right in addition
we are concerned about the
additional unfunded work will
that be assigned to the office
the state engineer The New
Mexico catagories Association
the New Mexico will go overs
incorporate both appreciate the
bill sponsor for addressing the
extreme drought that we are
currently living in but we
believe this does not assist us
in our current future needs
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you we have the thighs
they're.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative comment I work
for the company called NGL
energy partners.
Amongst other activities we we
own and operate rents lands in
southeast New Mexico and for a
number of water right on Water
Rights and are are eager to
engage in a conversation about
the considerations of climate
change and climate impacts of
climate change on New Mexico's
public trust water and the the
the system that governs not
water.
At present however.
My review incentives in the bill
The does little to address our
military actual impacts
associated with climate on New
Mexico's water resources as is
most folks listening probably
where where New Mexico's prior
appropriation system is
organized around the concept of
scarcity and works of course you
water based on available
quantities with junior program
staffing to curtail in years of
low flow.
That.
Bill as presently written does
this little to to adjust that
system and that system the
president doesn't do do a good
job of managing.
So times medic Water.
Additionally and I think as it's
been well documented one noted
particularly by the state
engineer
the opening up of expanding to
protest any application without
before new water right or to
address existing water right
removing existing requirements
for standing I think will will
will cause problems the
administrative context for the
state engineers office as you
noted but as well I think it
over you over the complicate the
system the president we does a
really good job of.
Being sensitive to issues of
scarcity.
There is really no one more
eager to protect existing
volumes of water in current
water right holders in so when
an application for your new
right or just a ride is filed.
The reason as noted by the state
engineer the protests are are
the norm because existing right
for holders do not want to see
volumes diminished you not want
to see.
Water levels dropped in there
right impacted.
And so we well we're here to
have a conversation with the
impacts of climate change I
don't think this bill
does much to address actual
impacts of climate change.
And so for that reason we went
Urge the opposition to this bill
thank you.
Thank you except we have James
Walter says.
Hello there.
Mr chair and the members of the
committee a former down in
Carlsbad New Mexico member of
the cross variegation District
and what things I'd be concerned
about as effect on the picture
compact on with package River
how this would impact that in
and I echo what John D. Antonio
was saying about unfunded
mandates for them he was saying
there were sixty position short
right now.
The and I and I can see that we
tried for application of the
moose Water Rights into our
wells back in October they were
told them that the the state
engineer office was tied up with
the intrepid Water intrepid
potash Water education case and
it could even pay attention to
it because they're so.
shorter people so many from that
standpoint alone if this is not
funded adequately there's no
sense in going further so I
stand in opposition to the bill
thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Michael Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Michael Miller
with Permian basin petroleum
association I just want to
reiterate that you know this
bill removes that a person it
will be allowed to objection
application interfering the
permitting process for
illegitimate reasons such as
obstructing a committed
competitors business.
When the application would have
no direct impact on them.
The increase in objections will
increase the offices state
engineers administrative costs
as well as the applicant's cost
and for those and many other
reasons it's been stated we
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you.
Thank you we have a phone number
the last four digits are zero
three three two.
Chair the queen and members of
the committee my name is Ralph
runs I'm retired energy
management engineer and a thirty
year resident in house district
twenty four about the perky long
before rebates came along I
implemented water saving
measures in my outdoor uses
including low water landscaping
rainwater harvesting and drip
irrigation inside the house
House water saving appliances
and fixtures I'm saying this
because not even been aware of
the
most impactful.
Part of climate change I knew
that water stating was important
I strongly support all of the H.
B. ninety five amendments to the
Mexico water code and I think
Representative Andrea Romero for
sponsoring this bill I also
appreciate testimony advice Dr
David doctor David Cutler and
read Benson.
I urge this committee to pass
this bill and to work with your
colleagues and house finance and
Appropriations and Senate
finance to secure the full
funding for the fifty year water
plant and as I've heard if we're
short on the person to help
implement
so many water rights request
then we need to address that as
well thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you next we have Jason
Weaks.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee manages
weeks of a registered lobbyist
for XTO Exxon Mobil we stand in
opposition of the bill this
morning I'm not going to believe
for the point we agree with many
of the good points made by other
opponents taking environmental
considerations into account as
it relates to
this applicator environmental
considerations as it relates use
applications is absolutely
necessary we're not opposed to
that however this bills drafted
does too far when we displayed
investment in New Mexico and Dr
Channell industries out of the
state those like this need to
strike a balance between
considering environmental
considerations and also allowing
for development the still falls
on side that will sensually
because in she's not to be able
to develop and future
development will be chilled we
appreciate what the Sanchez
trying to do we absolutely have
worked with her I talked to
yesterday about the bill and
look forward to continuing the
conversation however is
currently drafted we stand
opposition thank you.
Thank you next up with carbon to
steel.
Good morning Mr chairman members
money was Corman Casteel and I
represent centennial resource
development and all the gas
production company with
operations in Lee County.
Reach reason already stated in
previous testimonies we oppose
this legislation if passed into
law it would put our ability to
operate in New Mexico in serious
doubt potentially forced my
client to consider moving its
operations out of New Mexico
likely in a Texas it is well
documented on the oil and gas
industry contributes to the
economy of the great state of
New Mexico we ask this committee
to vote no on this bill to
protect Mexico jobs and its
economy thank you.
Thank you Debbie is.
Thank you your you did that
leave on your end.
Can you meet yourself on your
end.
You're on mute on our and.
You can come back to Debbie but
she is the last member of the
public who wants to speak so
let's see if you can figure this
out.
Debbie it's you're still me the.
Okay well.
let's move on that's fortunate
sorry about that that the so
Debbie is with the serial water
conservation district.
Back to the sponsor
Representative Romero
would you like to say anything
before we get to the committee
yes Mr chair if you don't mind
above to just respond to a
couple of the points that were
made
I you know some of the
opposition and of course the
state engineer who as you've
heard we've been really open to
the opportunity to discuss this
bill we've all been challenged
by the interim as far as how
we've been able to operate
because of the pandemic that
said you're here we've been open
to feedback any sort of
substance and substantive policy
changes that were are in this
bill from the department we have
not heard and any feedback on
the actual the bill I know that
that we've been dealing with the
substitutes etcetera but I do
want to just respond to a few of
the specific points that are
made on funding and then sort of
the conundrum that you're
continuing to hear about ninety
percent of the already existing
applications being pro tested
five hundred applications
pending which is what they're
agencies always dealing with and
trying to keep the volume down
meanwhile there are many many
vacancies in the agency itself
currently if seventeen positions
are funded there's one point six
million dollars available to
actually provide for the that
now houses that we talked about
that is currently folks are
currently equipped to do that
are coming out of New Mexico
State University you amendment
on that could do this kind of
analysis the question is why are
there so many vacancies when
there is so much work to be done
and we talk about unfunded
mandates but there is one point
six million dollars available
just for labor alone within the
agency we identified that with
the legislative finance
committee when we basically said
they should be not just a plan
but in doing in the department
we heard a lot about the water
plant we absolutely support it
the question is when do we
actually put things in place and
when you heard about where.
Our codifying in law both
climate change and is what's
public welfare means that
essentially has come from many
many court cases where decisions
have been made about what the
agency should be doing and how
they should be vetting
applications that they currently
are not and if and in fact we
talk about transparency and good
governance if you go to any of
the LFC website some things are
publicly available and some
things are not regarding
applications why they've been
denied or accepted
and when we've talked to I do it
and and other agencies about
transparency and sunlight on
that process you can it brought
for certain applications and and
results but you don't get a
clear picture as to why certain
decisions are being made
consistently and just for public
knowledge as far as how the
process works we would like to
see that and do it is ready to
go as far as agency codes and
what not would be available for
it for being able to present
that that information to all of
our government agencies for that
public availability
that said of Mr chair for and
and members of the committee I
just wanted to respond to some
of those things and finally
you know the if the entire
purpose of the bill as you heard
of the advocates is that about
it this is about action and
businesses usual as we know
throughout the state in the way
that we've seen in our climate
change it's not an option and
this will drastically change
water supplies if we continue to
go the route that we've gone and
I've also never industry
defendant agencies so robustly
as far as the budgets go in the
budget so we're requesting so I
hope that they go to
appropriations to fight for
those budgets as well when it
comes to being able to fund all
of our environmental agencies
properly so thank you Mr
chairman thanks to everybody who
provided testimony for and
against we look forward to work.
Working with everyone as well
and with that.
Mr chair will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative Romero
for separate Representative that
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative David presenters.
more with this piece of
legislation.
Have been well documented by.
We're standing in opposition
In those we.
But.
This bill requires.
The old water Judy cations in
the state.
Through the lens of climate
change.
And primarily.
That is expansion of standing
to people that would not be.
Correct.
To buy these.
Of these considerations before
forget all fit into that.
I believe her district is stand
up.
In support of the bill.
I believe it or not sure to the
provisions of the bill.
Two to one that is.
Mr chair representative all of
the to do my best at responding
to that and then I believe.
Read as a response to that so
seventy two dash twelve dash
three D. basically of that
prohibit prohibits domestic and
livestock wells from being part
of this as well as the ascetic
as that's why in the original
draft we had exempted them and
that was unnecessary we there's
already protections for
basically that domestic
situation which essentially
covers that the large you know
at commercial projects is really
what we're targeting here is is
the big impacts to our state and
all that read responds as well
that's my.
Two cents but if we can Mr chair
let read respond to that
question.
I don't know that I have Mr
chair representative got I don't
know that I have much more to
add to what we're Representative
Representative Romero shad I I
think it's worth noting that
this bill is still very much
involving and Representative
Romero
made to significant changes so
it's just a with that this week
so I I think she is
still working to figure out
exactly which what which
objections so she wants to
address and how hard she wants
to handle that thank you.
With respect to these appears or
Mr chair representative.
Most of the sites entities with
the.
Culturally Korean is that
correct.
Mr chair representative are you
saying that the who would be
impacted by the changes that
were speaking to me excuse me
speaking to make.
Mr chair representative no the
circular organization would
normally be involved.
In the business of agriculture
would be inaccurate State.
Mr chair representative I get
there are many uses for the a
second systems agricultural
traditional.
Environmental acknowledge what
have you so that is correct
that's one of the many uses of
the a second system.
Representative is with you of
the water.
Issues through the lens of
climate change one of my.
Concerns that.
There is no lands.
Associated with the relatively
near term impacts.
New Mexico that emphasis is not
in this bill with that.
State.
Mr chair if I may have my
experts believe date a doctor
got Sir can you respond to some
of the impacts.
and I'm not certain that I
understood.
Excuse me Mr chair and
representative Representative
Scott I'm
I I'm not quite sure I
understand the thrust of the
question
what are the view this bill is
doing is adding a consideration
to the assessment of water
administration that has not been
clearly codified in the past and
and and so that's the way I see
the impact of of this
legislation I'm.
Sentenced to your question.
Mr groups were coming from where
I do southeast corner of the
state is not coal and gas
producing country my concern a
particularly is that had not
directly impacted stakeholders
to this process.
With the.
Change is the overarching
objective.
My subject my industry or the
industry that.
Primarily responsible for
protrude on the table in
shellfish New Mexico and much of
the state would be negatively
impacted because water usage
would.
Would.
Would not be favored.
With respect to consumption in
the oil and gas industry to.
Hello was any clarification.
Mr chair representative if I may
I think when we're talking about
the process of applications this
is about transparency first and
foremost so I think every
industry would be subject to the
same guidelines as far as how
they're evaluated that's what
we're asking of the LFC when
they're actually evaluating
these applications to tell us
upon what circum upon what
criteria is of these prop these
applications are being approved
or denied so whether you're just
applying for you know a perhaps
in New cannabis you know farm a
legislation that we're hoping to
support you know new industries
that would be using water
whatever it may be we're asking
for a criteria for that use and
and for just publishing the
decisions that are made so I
think regardless of industry
we're just asking for for
consistency and and how
applications are processed Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative give on
the hop animosity toward fossil
fuels in the state of time.
Would you believe likely
applications for use utilization
approach water to develop these
fossil fuels would be more
likely protest.
Mr chair representative as
you've heard over ninety percent
of the applications are already
protested the problem that we've
heard back from many many folks
in the audience is that the
process is taking very very long
time they're worried that it
would take longer the question
is why is it already taking so
long and and for the for our
understanding and for our
legislative process it would be
important for us to understand
what's going on as far as how
these decisions are being made
so that we can improve upon that
maybe it's a funding issue that
would be interesting right now
it's perhaps a vacancy issue
because there are there is
funding available to fill many
vacancies and if you look at the
person website there only to act
hirings they're going on in that
department
and so Mr chair representative I
think that there is a capacity
issue the question is how do we
respond to that when it's
already been a problem and we're
hoping that we can improve upon
that bye bye also ensuring that
we're protecting New Mexico's
water and having that consistent
response
For noted in provided by the
office itself.
Mr chair representative would
you not.
Great adding standing to anyone
who wishes to to protest would
exacerbate rather than help to
solve the problem.
Mr chair representative I may
have a read respond to that
Basically the question is just
on how the decisions are being
made currently we don't have a
transparent process and we're
just wondering what that is so
as far as what you're what we're
considering expanding I would
love for Representative read to
be able to respond to that from
an administrative perspective.
Mr chair representative Scott I
I this bill would
eliminate the
requirement if an existing law
that a person so right now any
subdivision of the state any
state or local government can
object to any application anyone
who claims time to their water I
can object to an application
what the bill would do is allow
members of the public.
The same ability as state or
local agencies to object based
on public welfare or
conservation of water within the
state might that.
The meeting that the more than
the existing ninety or so
percent of applications get
protest that it might
but at this one thing I would
point out is that in the
constitution in the statutes we
say that water in New Mexico is
a public resource so I think a
lot of people would say if it's
really a public resource and
members of the public ought to
be able to participate in the
process of how they decide it
might that cost more money and
take time
yet yes it might and and I will
I want to say I really agree
with the points made about the
importance of funding the office
of the state engineer I I hope
that support for funding of the
office of the state engineer
doesn't just come up when
applications are when when when
legislation is proposed to
change the way they do business.
Representative the next court.
All.
Is.
Water.
Mexico.
What.
An established property.
Mr chair representative that
you're correct the water is is
only public that has not been
appropriated so uneducated water
is the public's of that which is
already privately owned and
operated is privately owned and
operated Mr chair representative
F. F. Mr Bentsen wants to add
anything to that.
Know that that that captures it.
Mr chair represents got that
catches it.
Mr chair representative Mr
pension.
You will transfer over water
right to.
From culture to industrial
development contemplates.
What would this legislation
hello.
Ross.
Mr chair representative Mr
Bentsen can respond to the
process.
Mr chair representative Scott I
would say three things one is
that
It would.
Expand it would ensure that the
impact of the proposed change.
the impacts of climate change on
the up the depletion or
sustainability of the water
source are considered and
whether that transfer would be
approved.
To the existing to you would no
longer have to person objecting
on public welfare conservation
water within the state grounds
would no longer have to show
that she or he has been directly
affected three you the public
welfare criterion it's an
existing law would be X. that
would be better defined by the
legislature to include some
factors that the state engineers
office that look at now.
Mr chair representative.
And could you further to fund
what factors would be considered
with that transferred what I
just described.
Mr chair representative Scott
already there would be the.
Determinations of whether other
water rates would be impaired.
is this bill as I read it would
introduce climate change into
that.
assessment of impairment that is
whether the change as proposed
would impair existing water
rights this would ensure that
the state engineers office is
looking at how climate change
might affect that.
and in terms of public welfare
of the that that's a of standard
it's in the law now.
It's not well defined the
legislature has not added
definition and this bill would
do that in introduced six
criteria not as an exclusive
list as I would read it but to
ensure that those factors are
considered as the agency makes
public offer determinations.
Chair representative.
When you have chest.
Stroke and heart
are much.
Hundred sixty acres of water
rights currently in cultural
use.
I want to transfer water rights
to a.
One nature specifically for the
development of.
Fossil fuels.
Very likely be.
Should.
Ridley impact.
For.
More concerned with the effects
of climate change.
Mr chair representative Scott
the there could be an objection
by
it any person to the
To the application.
but the but but what you don't
say about climate change is not.
Included as a public welfare
factor it's a D. tickets see is
I read the bill it is a factor
to be considered in the
termination of impairment and
the sustainability of the use so
if your saying.
People would object to the.
Our proposed use because oil and
gas development might up the
lead to a further climate change
I don't see the bill doing that
I don't see the bill having that
effect could be argued that way
it could but that but the bill
does not.
up defined public welfare that
way.
I'm not it does do it yeah my
answering your question Mr chair
representative got.
Mr chair representative miss
madam but through the lens of
climate change.
This.
Problematic Mr chair
representative I think what
we're so you can protest
currently on any negative
effects that's why ninety
percent of these.
Are you these situations are
happening when you're talking
about five hundred applications
in the backlog Mr chair
representative so what we're
asking the the department to do
is evaluate any change in
particular when they're looking
at that application and I
transfer of water right is that
make sure that climate change is
part of the analysis as to why
if there are any impacts on that
we want the department to keep
that into account as to why this
would be a meaningful transfer
or not in particular if it's
really negatively going to
impact our state and our
resource for future generations
that's what we're trying to get
a handle on and so research
chair representative we're not
asking you can already protest
for the reasons that have
already provided for ninety
percent of the folks protesting
this just ensures that the
department is doing their due
diligence through the lens of
climate change.
Mr chair representative the
protest has to come from some
one currently who is directly
negatively impact on the
proposed.
Correct.
Mr chair representative
absolutely that's why ninety
percent of the protests of the
applications are protest at.
So Mr chair representative with
this legislation there need not.
In a direct impact to from or to
the protest rather.
The proposal.
to
questions judge.
That's correct Mr chair
representative we're not trying
to impact the protester at all.
Representative.
Your.
You're still there.
The impact with respect to
future generations same.
Asis over the impact on the
current generation that's a.
A
change narrative is not.
Mr chair representative yes we
do believe strongly that is the
current generations job to
ensure that future generations
have water
that is precisely why we are
asking for that analysis through
climate change.
Mr chair representative.
What do you know how much water
it takes to grow our circle.
Irrigated corn.
Mr chair representative I would
guess that you probably have a
better response than I would to
that and that question.
Mr chair representative would
rise you know that the smoke
about one and a half million
dollars for one growing season.
I believe you Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair and representative.
What would be the economic
impact of that one surgical of
corn the to the current
generation of New Mexico.
Should we focus more closely on
the bill the scene this question
seems somewhat hypothetical and
far field.
Mr chair thank you speaks
directly to the heart of this
bill and that thank you for
Social homage.
Is what.
An emphasis on current impacts
the usage of this water and what
I'm trying to get to hear yes a
little bit of science with
regard to have the SLO crew to
use my.
J. generation current users of
water in the state not
necessarily with the emphasis on
future generations employment
change I think this line of
questioning is particularly
relevant to this bill.
Representative Scott I I think
you just made that statement and
it was well said and it was
clear and direct so we don't
necessarily have to go through
the hypotheticals about how much
water tasted grown individual
crop do you could you can make
your point more directly I I
would ask.
Mr chair rather than has to
questions I will just provide
the insurers.
The impact of the.
One surgical war to the state is
about seven thousand two hundred
dollars.
The impact one.
Water usage in one gas
production drilling project one
of the usage is one million four
hundred thousand dollars next
just direct impact in taxes to
the state so.
This bill impairs the ability
to.
Well.
If you will current economic
impacts over.
The consideration of climate
change yes not good legislation
one last question for the.
This is a bit of a technical
question and then all level some
of the folks.
With respect for example to the
Ogallala aquifer you must have
the street corner of the state.
One of the requirements would be
the calculation of the fifty
year impact of climate change on
that for.
The experts say to the
calculations that might the
windows.
Yes Mr chair if any either one
of my experts wants to speak to
the impact.
L.
Representative Romero
Representative Scott
I'll take a shot of this
although a groundwater hydrology
is not my specialty but I a
would
Say that.
At present
across much of the Ogallala
aquifer.
extraction of water far exceeds
any recharge that's not a new
result it's been known for quite
a while
climate change is
Would speculate I haven't done
the calculation is likely to of
potentially diminished recharge
rates modestly because those
recharge rates are small already
so the biggest effect on
groundwater in the Ogallala
aquifer is almost certainly the
right pumping and and so that
and and I might mice.
What was exactly the point that
I was trying to make is that in
many of these groundwater basins
recharge rate is social
fifty to a hundred or a thousand
or ten thousand your calculation
will have little meaning in this
what appeared to be just a small
portion of the wasted effort
going into this bill Mr chair
representative and experts thank
you for your answers that's all
I am.
Thank you Representative Scott
next up we have Representative
Townsend.
President Townsend are you
ready.
I am chair.
Thank you Mr chair
representative
Over the last.
Twenty five years and then I'm
not.
And interested in.
Water New Mexico the New Mexico
School of money to spend the.
The repository for much
information
had.
Have they been included in this
bill and the.
What was their input.
Mr chair representative now.
Mr chair and representative I
just I saw you shake your head
that you agreed with me that
they were the repository for
much information.
Why not.
Mr chair representative we feel
strongly that the bill S. as far
as the intent in what we're
doing with that is is precisely
already in in the bill Mr chair
representative.
Thank.
I appreciate that
Mr chair and representative and
and experts
I was particularly interested in
Representative Scott's line of
questioning on on the.
Calculations going out fifty
years.
Certainly
One of your experts has done the
calculations on this impact of
this legislation to that.
Can they expand the land.
Yes Mr chair if you can get
drive slower to respond.
Representative Townsend Mr chair
We have not done
explicit climate change
calculations that would apply
directly to every decision the
state engineer is maybe he you
know as as Mr Dantonio stated
quite clearly and I agree with
him that of the decisions that
his office faces need to be
tailored to individual water
rights applications so there's
no blanket
the
Climate change projections that
would apply across the board to
all the activities of the state
engineers office.
Let me check that Sir and Mr
chair representative.
Early on the line.
Madam so.
Transparency wells.
Significant issues which is you
will know I've stood on that on
the house floor on a number of
instances on a number of
different topics.
But with that answer what you're
asking me to do yes the vote on
and condone a process that we
don't know what the effects are.
And I find that to be
Troubling.
Mr chair and
Representative.
The aquifer's.
In New Mexico certainly in.
In many areas.
Our.
Unique and isolated would you
agree with that.
Mr chair representative all at
my expert respond to that.
I'd.
I was you Mr Representative
Townsend Mr chair
I I would disagree with that
statement the way it is weird
because I think we can apply
in a broad brush way without
quantifying results for
individual Water Rights which
cations there are trends in
climate that are occurring
across broad scales that can be
applied to of the administration
of water in New Mexico it will
take some work to do to turn
this information into
actionable consider
calculations that the state
engineer can use but I think
that is a dual process so I I do
not think that we will need to
start from scratch for this
process for every single aquifer
or every single water rates
application.
Mr chair and representative.
Mr bachelor my point is and I
know you did a wonderful job of
skirting the issue but there is
no communication between many of
the reservoirs underground today
is that correct.
Mr chair my expert.
But that there are.
Isolated aquifer's I'm not quite
certain how what the direct
connection between that question
is and the application of
climate change is a
consideration and water rights
applications.
Chair and representative got
from my point is that those
October first for the most part.
Our unique and isolated and
support.
areas of our state
and that the ability of the
person.
Entity.
to protest a
A transfer.
In.
One part of the state.
When they have no.
Expanding within that aquifer
when.
When they are only looking at it
from a philosophical
undetermined in calculable
position seems to be
a real stretch and probably
detrimental to the state of New
Mexico.
The only thing that to.
I would add that this I think it
is important that.
When the Interstate Stream
Commission.
Stands in opposition state
engineer.
The agricultural community to so
now much of the water.
This is been adjudicated
and has.
Courted beneficial use for.
And state
and many of the oil and gas
operations
I have to say great.
Has the.
With this piece of legislation
and I think we all should.
Should we
Should we work in New Mexico to
the better use of our water
absolutely.
Should we look at our current
water laws that require
disposal of water that could be
used for agriculture.
Absolutely and today we put much
water that down in in.
One geographically and
geological formations that never
come back in two.
Our cycle with with the.
Which human use and and we need
to look at that.
So I I will not.
Support this bill.
I support the effort at
protecting water in New Mexico.
For the effort.
Funding.
Our state agencies where they
can do a better job.
I would be remiss as the.
Minority floor leader if I
didn't say that maybe the Hey
races at the governor passed out
last year might have been better
appropriated state engineers
office so with that I
and Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Townsend next step we have
Representative Strickler.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Romero
and
Again
First met John de Antonio my
first year the legislature in
two thousand seven it was a
state engineer back then under
governor bill Richardson and if
there was any if there ever was
a bill that I've seen in fifteen
years this this certainly needs
some interim committee work and
and I'm not just trying to pass
this off.
Because when
Our state engineer.
You served at years and he's
been with us a two years in this
administration so glad to have
him come back.
because his job is is a
difficult one and
Representative we've been in
drought conditions gosh for
fifteen years as long as I've
been a legislature ability and
and these big issues were come
up you know during the interim
and with the too big
Impacts that having interstate
income the interstate compacts
with Texas on the on the lower
Rio Grande in the pagus we've
we've really had to we've been a
drought management situation for
quite some time which is a
climate.
I'm a change mechanism and so I
think
State engineer Dantonio was very
very focused on this I know in
our country.
There's a gentleman by the name
Jim Dunlap who served he's
eighty six years old he served
on the San Juan county water
board for cash thirty years and
interstate trips with Stream
Commission for number years and
and he calls me up and he rarely
calls me make calls me up on his
concern of this bill and
I just think it in a some more
you know more scrutiny and and
certainly more input from
from the state engineer and I
know you've reached out to the
state engineer Representative
Romero and and I appreciate that
but this is been kind of a weird
year last year was County.
Very unusual with the shut down
and I and the inability to to
meet one on one and this sort of
thing and I believe this this
issues can it's kind of in a
rush through and thank.
All the all the opposition is
very concerned.
About this and I don't need to
belabor that but I would like
for you to consider
really sit down the state
engineer the Interstate Stream
Commission and and work out the
bugs on this and
and I don't know.
Course you have a unique
situation your district with you
know with with white water
rights issues between the
pueblos and and the private
sector and so you you know
you're County in the firing line
too and I am in my area in San
Juan County we have we have
curtailments because of drought
conditions and I have a I have
some of your Dacian Rights
in town and I I use we have a
committee community garden.
We have a a chilli farm and we
have to sometimes time to time
we have to the.
Taking a to turn off the water
for like three four days a week
so I mean we we have to do that
are you know we're not gonna
have anything so what are your
thoughts
on on the concerns that
our state engineer has and in
our Interstate Stream
Commission.
Actor has with your bill.
Mr chair representative I don't
want to I.
Go over at some points that I
made earlier as far as just you
know we understand the budget
concerns we do know that there
is one point six million dollars
for hiring for labor right now
that's not been used there there
were eighty four vacancies they
struck struck that down recently
after twenty twenty the question
is why aren't folks being hired
to do this work we've been
talking about the protests we've
been talking about these issues
Mr chair representative we want
to improve that process but we
also don't have time to waste on
a completely real issue which is
climb climate change it's not
philosophical it's here it's now
like you said these are
important issues Representative
I'm sorry Mr chair
representative we've been
following nineteen century water
policy in our state for far too
long and that's what we're
trying to to really make
happened here is that we're
vetting it for the purpose of of
ensuring that the use of of this
scarce resource is is being
managed in that way by our state
government so as far as you know
what we would all want to rehash
about the problems of the budget
you know that's across the board
but this is we really see that
this capacity should be built
and to the process and it can be
a currently with the budget that
already exists.
Thank you Representative Romero
yeah I understand there's a
budget you know concern and but
that's that's just part of it I
think the impracticality of this
is what
our state engineer and the you
know the Interstate creek string
Commission director is is
concerned about as well and
we're always going to have
budget constraints
at least the fifteen years I've
been here we've never been fully
funded in any department
and.
But I want to get back to the
drought Management.
Issue that is a it is a climate
change
program if you will made with
without drought management.
You know climate change is not
going to be addressed and they
and they've had to deal with
that again for fifteen years and
probably longer.
that that's kind of what I'm
talking about I you put the
budget aside and I know there
shortfall forty positions and
all that.
But
Our state engineer expressed.
You know we're great workability
and this and this in this bill
is a kind of a major change.
and that that's kind of what I
want you to address a little bit
of those concerns that I think
need to be worked out.
Mr chair
and I'll have a read respond to
that if I what can you district
to find your specific question
about that what you're looking
for just so I'm going to route
management program and in our on
going efforts to
take care of our interstate
compacts with Texas Rio Grande
work in a lawsuit right now and
in in that place thank you for
well I think we're in compliance
year you know that we're pretty
good shape there but the real
grant lower Rio Grande our con
lower she's a great deal water
you know for their agricultural
purposes and I think thank you
our water usage is the the
biggest consumer.
Of
Water interstate I think you
know it's four times what the
City of Albuquerque uses on
annual basis nine thousand acre
fate I'm just going by memory
from our inner committing maybe
he's so
Please address or climate change
or climate change goals they
were doing currently with our
travel management program you
know we have to work we have
or watershed management or
watershed during bad shape
because of over growth in our
force and whatnot it's all part
of it so poor climate change so
are we doing this now let's I
guess that's what I'm trying to
get at Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative thank you for
that question I think you're
exactly right we're trying to
get that that sort of big
picture understood the question
is how who is it held
accountable for the ensuring
that that management is done in
the way that we want to know
what's happening with the water
and that's what this bill
proposes Mr chair president we
have a lot of plans we have a
lot of things that we're looking
forward to as far as managing it
the question is when the rubber
meets the road on managing it
that's what we're hoping this
bill does is it it it gives that
that that that element of
management value to the state of
New Mexico to our legislature to
understand what that we have
resources is is is being managed
you and and what's being done
with that and and that's what
we're looking at right now as
far as your management I'll let
my
expert response to anything in
addition to that.
Mr chair representative
Strickler I just a couple of
things one is in the the yes
this is a challenging
undertaking.
And you heard of the state
engineer the eight the I. C.
director say that they their
agencies take climate change
seriously that is a that is good
that has they have not been able
really to do that for much of
the last decade it's good that
the agencies are doing that now
up but you know the but as they
make decisions of the kind that
this bill addresses decisions
about new appropriations about
permits about leases of the
agencies are looking to their
statutes to see what they can
consider what they must consider
climate change is not in those
statutes now.
This bill would make would put
climate change in those statutes
for the first time it would
ensure that when these agencies
make those decisions the climate
change is considered now are
there some questions about how
they should do that other
challenges and how they should
do that absolutely but the
agencies already have to make
decisions where they don't have
perfect information where they
have to make judgment calls
about how they're gonna handle
questions about things like
water availability about
questions like impairment those
are not black and white
decisions judgment and expertise
are involved this bill would
ensure that the agency's do that
same thing on climate change
impacts that will be challenging
but they figured out these other
technical questions and they
will figure this out to they're
good people if they have to do
but they will figure out how to
do it given the resources and I
want to come back to that point
the the agency's do need
resources that I court I totally
agree with that.
So.
Representative Strickler said to
the members of the committee at
and our experts we've been on
this bill for over two hours we
have two more bills yet to do
today I would ask you to be as
direct and concise as possible
in both your questions in your
answers thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman is a
complicated bill on shore were
taken so long but I think it I
think it really is is necessary
You know we need a lot of study
on this and I was one last thing
at is right is is a state
engineer the IOC.
Are they still available to it
to maybe expand on this or I
don't know if they're still
around.
When you say yes certain offices
stagiaire they're still in the
attendees list I would like to
get through the committee first
and then maybe we can go back to
them okay question I would sure.
At that appreciate that Mr chair
at
this is such an important piece
of legislation I'd love to hear
further from the people have to
do this the the people have to
administer this if this goes
through.
in all of you my time thank you
Representative Romero in a thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next up we have
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair appreciate
the Sanchez intent and very very
hard work on an important bill
no question about it and and
thank you experts for your
insights into what we're trying
to address so first I guess I'd
like to just touch on a few
things that I like about the
bill or at least generally like
about the bill and then go to
what I have some serious
heartburn with
What I like about the bill is it
acknowledges the need to
consider climate change
absolutely an extremely
important issue in our day and
time and for future generations
no question there.
What concerns me is it doesn't
go far enough and talking about
public welfare in terms of
defining better what that means
I agree wholeheartedly with the
sponsor and others that we need
boundaries for our office of
state engineer and it's not
specific to any particular state
engineer it's this is a process
issue that I'm raising we do not
have sufficient guidance for our
state engineer when he is
considering applications that
are brought to him for water
transfers and may I know water
leases and I refer you to house
bill thirty should you choose to
be interested in another bill
that is very important for us in
terms of managing water
so totally completely agree with
that we need better definitions
to guide policymaking that at
this point in time I believe the
office of the state engineer has
too much latitude and being able
to exercise.
Clearly agree with that.
Where I am having extreme
difficulty is.
The private right of action
essentially this is really a
private right of action that you
all have created in on the bill
and I think it will have impacts
that on the actual individuals
whose water rights can be
impacted by decisions of the
state engineer and let me
explain why I think that.
People who want to join our
protests and their own ideas to
those protests and they have the
ability to kind of model up what
the actual individual who's
Water Rights may be impacted
can bring forward.
They add complexity to the
potential protest and that
increases the cost for the
individual who actually may be
personally impacted or who's
Water Rights maybe personally
and you know baby impacted and I
don't think that's fair to the
individuals who actual have a
direct contact with the decision
that is going to be made by the
state engineer so for that
reason I cannot support this
bill I think it unduly intrudes
on individual property rights in
a way that we cannot manage and
it's unfair to those individuals
who will be impacted and that
way thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative if I may
respond to that just to ensure
that we to clarify that point
you know wasn't in form of the
question but I want to based be
sure that our expert responds if
we could just respond briefly.
Read if you could.
I hope we don't get into a back
and forth Mr chair.
Yet not yet no Mr of Mr chair
representative Chandler the bill
does expand who can participate
on and it does not expand the
issues they can raise up but it
does expand who can participate
I agree with that.
Let's when we move on
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chandler
it exactly what is my the
biggest problem with this
obviously
Mr the Antonio.
I have several items that were
problematic to the Department
and.
But this is the second bill Mr
chairman that we've we've heard
we're we're we're we're
expanding the private right of
action and and I think that's a
real problem I don't know if
people on on who are watching or
who were who are attending right
now understand exactly the
implications of that I mean if
if
If I were a business partner
with someone and and my business
partner got kids.
even though it does it impacted
me probably greatly who knows
what's going to happen to my
business if my partner is not
there and holding up his end
that is a direct impact on me
but that doesn't give me the
private right of action to go
and sue because someone.
Kids my business partner for a
forclose friend.
May direct you directly impacted
me profoundly.
We're hearing here is because of
climate change it because it
profoundly affects others.
That they should have the right
to intervene this is the second
time we're hearing this I think
this this goes
up way too far and the idea that
we can allow anyone in this just
and as I'm reading this in the
title just in the title allowing
citizens standing.
That that doesn't even that's
not even
Limited to New Mexico citizens
this could be someone in
Colorado who.
At work Texas where we already
have water disputes.
This goes way way too far and
and I don't think that
I don't think that
This administration in
particular.
is should be considered to be.
Not paying attention to the
climate issue and that's that's
not been my experience
whatsoever so
it appears to me that the only
thing this would do is allow.
Just a multiplication of
intervenors I just drawing
driving every project to a
standstill because even if even
if
There is a.
Even if they're focusing just on
one project at and when we
understand that the.
The engineer's office state
engineers office is already
having ninety percent of the
projects being protested.
This would just mean that those.
Jex which are not intended as I
understand from the sponsor to
necessarily be affected by this
will be affected because of the
workload.
That that they're going to.
I just.
To me this road that we're going
down of expanding.
Has standing.
Is dangerous said that I think
it it and and I think
I think Representative Chandler
hit the right the very very
right tone which is.
People who actually have
standing.
Would be potentially harmed.
That may not be the case in
every instance but that has that
potential and so people who who.
Are directly affected.
Would potentially be.
Harmed by those who we've
created this new.
Private right of action and I
think that's rude I think that's
very very wrong.
I don't believe that's the
intent I've I've heard from the
sponsor that's that's not the
intent but.
If that happens.
Isn't that unfair
Representative Romero is that
unfair to the people who have
the actual direct consequences.
Mr chair representative
absolutely hear it loud and
clear about the question on
expanding on who it is I mean
the way we've informed this bill
is through our constitution it
does it identifies very
explicitly in article sixteen
that the people of New Mexico
own the uneducated on
appropriated water if this
committee or if there is a
situation in which we feel that
we can better clarify standing
if there's a means for us to
help folks understand what we're
trying to get a as far as why
you know we would allow the
protest and to whom you know for
the frame of what we're looking
at this is this is about the
people about the people of New
Mexico and giving them the power
to be able to protect their
resource so Mr chair
representative if there is if
that's the hang up on on where
we are with this you know we
feel this bill is too important
to have to for that to be the
reason why would be held up I
think Mr chair representative if
we wanted to if we there was
suggested language about what we
what would be more clear
you know clearer than what we
are reading from the
constitutional perspective we'd
be willing to work with making
those edits
Mr chair representative but at
this point I guess I'm I'm
trying to to to understand you
know where folks are coming from
as far as you know what we're
trying to protect
constitutionally and and what
objected we would otherwise want
to have if my expert wants to
contribute anything to that Mr
chair representative you know.
He's still.
Mr chair representative my toy
just very quickly at the.
We're using the term standing
and and you know not to be too
technical about it but it's it
turned that apply it applies to
court proceedings and what we're
talking about here is allowing
people to participate in front
of an agency in in the HSD
process now as I think there are
some I hear the concerns of you
and Representative Chandler and
others about what that would do
in terms of constant delays and
things like that but I this bill
is not giving people the power
to sue The New Mexico courts
could still
deny expanding to people based
on the test that they apply to
who can bring a lawsuit in this
state course of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Mr chairman.
but I understand that we but the
but this is specifically
standing with the state
engineers office for proceedings
and it has essentially with the
state engineer as it has with
the previous bill what we heard
you have that one was it within
the courts
but this one would have the same
effect that will that I see the
other one would and that is.
People who who have who are more
directly affected.
They could lose to some degree.
The.
Some authority in in.
Trying to do an educator case
before the state engineers
office to folks who don't have
that direct standing and once
again it just means people who
are not directly affected at the
time of the proceeding would be
able to intervene and and I and
I don't understand really of the
the necessity for this because
this is for the for advocates to
bring concerns forward advocates
already have that ability to
bring concerns forward to the
state engineers office so this
just seems to be it opens up way
beyond.
Applicants this close to
potentially anyone this could be
as was stated earlier a
competitor if this is a for a
businesses trying to vote for
someone who does not like a
rancher for this just opens up
way too too big best once again
that's just my main concern that
that's the most egregious
concern
what what the state engineer.
Senator earlier.
All of those need to be
addressed and and once again I I
think you guys have an uphill
battle here if you're looking
for for this to be signed by the
governor I'm sure that the that
that the governor's and listen
listen very closely to the state
engineer to that almost ten
minutes of grievances.
This on this bill so
I think there there is a lot to
be done here and I would hate to
see us do what I've seen happen
too many times in the short time
that we've been session which is
a bill that obviously has lots
of problems being voted out of
the committee with the intent of
trying to get him fixed before
another committee which may not
have the same technical
ability to address an issue so I
I would hope that the sponsor
would would would roll this bill
and try and sit down with the
state engineers office Mr
Dantonio and our address what
seem to be a whole laundry list
of of major issues not not not
withstanding.
My major concern
you know what the allowing
private right of action within
the within the engineer's office
so those are my comments and and
representative I I I would hope
that you would
Sit down you this point time in
the session for you to sit down
with state engineers office but
I think I think there are a lot
of major concern to the need to
be addressed so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much vice chair
stands for.
Thank you Mr chairman am I a
think actually Representative
Montoya is that a lot of things
that are on folks mind here this
morning
I just want to take a moment to
kind of go back to the big
picture as to why this bill is
being brought forward because I
think in some ways that kind of
got lost in the discussion it
sounds like there is a strong
desire to continue to work on
that technical issues around the
bill but I I just wanna Act I
want to ask a question and kind
of re focus on the impacts of
climate change on hydrology here
in New Mexico so Mr chairman I
know that at the beginning of
this conversation we had doctor
Kessler and that professor read
talk professor the professor
Benson talk about the impacts of
climate change and how that will
affect our ability to administer
water but I think one of the
things that got lost in the
discussion is the ways in which
we are understanding how the
entire hydrologic regime of our
state is changing right now the
federal government is conducting
a basin study for the Rio Grande
and their models are showing
that over the next fifty years
it's expected that New Mexico's
snow pack is going to be reduced
by seventy to ninety percent.
I want that to like sink in for
a second we're going to lose
seventy to ninety percent of our
snow pack over the next half
century our entire hydrologic
regime in the state depends on
that snow pack and summer
monsoon seasons that will be
disrupted by climate change if
we do not take seriously the
science of climate change to
inform our water management
decisions every estate kia every
watershed every permit T. in the
state every industry and every
community and the state is going
to be impacted.
So we cannot.
We cannot continue to do
business as usual.
Now I understand that change and
fundamental change and how are
agencies do what they do is
extremely difficult and I
understand that we are
completely understaffed we are
completely under funded and that
the way in which our current
system is organized is not ready
for this huge hydrologic change
that is coming our way.
But I think that it's critical
that we not lose the forest for
the trees because the hydrologic
change that is coming our way
right now is so massive and so
disruptive that every single
person who spoke today your
grandchildren are going to be
facing a completely hydrologic
reality that is different than
today so if we don't start
making steps is a state to
address that change we're not
just talking about a
catastrophic drought that we
already know is on its way this
year we're talking about regime
change and are hydrology so we
have to take steps to actually
start to address this in the DNA
of how our our state addresses
water going forward.
So.
That wasn't a question that was
a statement I work on water
every day it's what I spend my
bread and butter my life working
on and I want to thank the
sponsor and our experts for
bringing this issue forward and
I just want to say that I fully
in support of the intent of
trying to bring systemic change
to how we address water going
forward because every farmer
every rancher every community
every stake in the state needs
support as we're facing this
huge change and so I fully
support the intent of what we're
trying to do but I think it's
critical obviously that we work
to address the technical
challenges of how we do it so
with that Mr chairman I think
I'll just leave it at that and
and say thank you for the good
discussion this morning.
Thank you Mr sense very
Sir any further discussion from
the committee before I ask my
questions thank you have several
questions.
Okay
first off the Representative
Romero we talk a lot about
staffing I'm.
You know we I think the C. chair
is in the.
Waiting area
I think he is I don't
really want to wrap this up but
isn't there some sort of hiring
freeze I think the fact that
they have open positions doesn't
mean they can automatically fill
them and it is a big agency so
there's gonna be a fair amount
for our.
That's correct Mr chair
representative when we talked to
LFC of the three hundred forty
two positions that are currently
active in the agency there eight
or eighty four vacancies as of
twenty twenty and they
eliminated I believe twenty four
of those positions that had been
on hired for for two to five
years so Mr chair representative
that that's correct there was a
freeze but that said there still
seventeen positions that are
fully funded right now Mr chair
representative that's the one
point six million dollars that
we keep talking about the LFC
identified.
Thank you Representative Romero
On that understanding issue yeah
we're essentially removing
standing requirement.
So there's there's no
materiality cut off in terms of
impact on the individual impact
on climate change size of the
water right there there's none
of that is that correct.
Mr chair chair representative
I'm sorry Mr chair.
as far as the standing goes I
guess you know if it's feels
like that's the thing that we
have to technically work upon it
with this bill which would be
absolutely willing to do
to to ensure that folks feel
good about that portion and all
that at Mr rents and respond to
any to the to the crux of your
question.
It Mr chairman that's right in
the bill as it stands now it is
it any person of ability to
object yeah administratively one
thing I want to say that
was it came up in the state
engineer so written comments.
The bill is as I understand it
not intended to address the the
domestic wells livestock wells
temporary use wells those are
are not intended to be covered
here and I think there were some
maybe confusion or lack of of of
clarity on that point.
So I I I guess the reason I ask
is if you ever watched city
council proceedings or maybe
County commission proceedings
everyone that I've ever in in
also with over an extended
period has that one person who
comments on every single matter.
And you will get that you'll get
someone who will object to every
single transfer I think that
will be there.
Their hobby there there are
outside their whether so.
I have a couple more questions
the way the the findings.
The region I'm looking on the.
This is the point two version
page for like twenty four
actually I'm twenty two and
twenty three in determining if
the approval would be contrary.
or detrimental.
The.
They make findings and will you
know I I think what we're
talking about here is the dock
for science case I think the
state engineer should consider
climate change I think if there
are no.
The terminal our country
findings they should so say so
those those findings should just
be
the that there are impacts but
that there aren't impacts and
art intoxicate determine the
agency.
You could be you know doesn't
reach some threshold I'd be fine
with that but I think they're
working on that is.
Confusing to me
On the on the criteria Romero
excuse plainly static.
Valuation to me.
Mr chair representative that was
in a nineteen eighty five court
case of a el Paso something of
the judge deems that that was
one of the important pieces for
the US for the state engineer to
take into account so we just
wanted to be consistent in the
way that we worded it with the
decisions that have been made.
So Representative Romero I
appreciate there's an origin to
that but I don't understand how
they could have just implemented
and you know I I mean I think
New Mexico's beautiful place I
think at your gate Act is
beautiful thing I think our
rivers are beautiful you know
the I was at a conference once
and someone suggested cutting
down all the cutlets to conserve
water and I yell I'm we regret
that
the but I don't understand how
the state engineers office
factors that into an approval
decision.
Mr chair representative if you
wanted to take it out we would
be open to that suggestion.
So.
Representative
Romero.
We've talked about this bill
finally a couple times I believe
this is the House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee and that it's our
subject matter jurisdiction that
we get these issues right before
we send them on to another
committee or if you're saying
your instrument in discussing
these would you like to roll the
bill at this time and continue
to work on these issues Mr chair
Representative I'm sure yes I
think that would be great we did
definitely want to take into
account the conversation that
we've had today in particular
but gives folks heartburn more
specifically and that I think
that would be an excellent way
for us to strategize move
forward.
Okay Representative Romero
appreciate that have the role
the bill I will say that if you
come back to this committee I
don't have another two or three
hours to spend on this bill so
we've already had public input
without a lot of the committee
discussion
you know hopefully ever vice
draft is
Haider in the committee has it
be great to have more than
twenty four hours to review it
and have people way and so we we
don't.
Our time is precious as you well
know.
Okay when it with that we're
gonna roll this bill so thank
you all very much for a very
thorough discussion thank you to
the experts in the members of
the public
As we did last week we're not
there was are doing that we have
two more bills that would like
to hear our next bill is house
bill one seventy six renewable
energy standards and rate
increases with Representative
Montoya and Strickler.
Who would hello of our members
of this committee was elected
president Bill Representative
Ouattara.
Yes Mister chairman I I I can
present the bill and it's pretty
straightforward I don't have an
expert it's
Reasonable bill and I think I
think Representative Strickler
gonna want to ask some very
leading the kind questions of me
so.
Okay so go ahead with your
presentation of someone to.
Yes thank you Mr chairman of.
This bill I essentially tries to
put in place.
Some some.
Rate increase caps in the place
on what the public utilities
could do to raise on there are
rate payers we passed.
The PTA.
The energy transition act and.
The.
Controls.
That the PRC has were were
removed from from that entity I
believe we are going to be going
to some other form of the.
Oversight over utilities and I
don't know if it's going to call
the public utility commission or
or what but the the the the
voters did pass
A
constitutional amendment which
allows that to go under the the
governor's administration and so
I I believe there's going to be
a public utility commission or
something like that going into
place but regardless we removed
restrictions.
From.
The public utility that is
regulated we took away a lot of
the regulatory authority with
ETA on this matter fact this is
not the only a bill that
addresses this issue on the
Senate side.
Representative Senator Stefanics
and senator Tolman and
To the server is but there's a
there's a third senator who has
introduced a bill that
Reintroduces the oversight over
the public utility
what was taken away was
The ability to to deny.
A cost recovery of the of the.
Any of the facilities they have
the shut down in in an effort to
get to eventually a a zero
carbon emissions state
what's going to have to happen
there we have a long debate on
the to hash that out here but we
have a long debate.
Over what the PRC what oversight
they would continue to have in
the argument that that I made at
that time and others made was
that we were taking away the
ability of the PRC to be able to
nine eight four limit.
recovery costs so that was built
in so so as it is the regulated
utility has in essence a blank
check that that's why this is
being introduced today that is
why the Senate bill
I cannot remember the number
right off hand but the Senate
bill that was introduced both to
put in place something to
protect rate payers and that's
what this does trying to match.
What in New Mexico has been
the rate of inflation.
you know obviously there are
rate increases and the and the
idea is to take in to
consideration not those
necessarily who could afford.
Five or ten percent increase at
one time to rates on to you to
utility pairs but.
Also calls about.
People who are on fixed incomes
like at the elderly elderly
retired folks for people who who
are.
On either some sort of
government assistance or maybe
working for minimum wage there
are folks who can not afford a
ten percent increase at one time
a nine percent increase in in
reality a nine percent increase
over three years would be fairly
dramatic and that is why we want
to put in something in place and
and the numbers may not be right
I'm willing to work with those
who are advocates for
people on fixed incomes of the
poor.
As to something that would to
put in place protections for the
ratepayers so what this bill
essentially does is it states
that.
That rates could not go up more
than two percent in a single
year and no more than five
percent over a three year period
once again those numbers might
not be the right numbers but try
to look at what has been.
Close to inflation in New Mexico
we and and just looking at from
the perspective of those who are
in the hardest hit if rate
increases are completely
without any.
Any input from from a provided
for oversight body so but with
that Mr chairman I stand for
questions.
Mr chair your I think you are
muted I am he that I apologize
about that so we will go to the
audience if anyone would like to
speak on this bill please raise
your hand now and we'll call on
you I did hear a president with
tell you as you were speaking
last week on the back the for
special calls an open I have
asked Hubbard Committee excuse
that.
so our first thank you for that
Mr chair I figure that we can if
I kept it short and sweet we can
pass this on to the next
committee quickly and move right
on to our final bill in the
agenda so we're not done yet
first up we have been Chilton.
Thank you Mr chairman membership
to to speak bench also
conservation voters New Mexico
we oppose this bill on the PRC
has mechanisms in place right
now today to keep rate increases
and Jack this call Prudencio
resembles for reasonableness
review there is no need for this
bill other than to set costs
associated with transitioning to
renewable energy aside and and
control them and try to
basically provide a market
disincentive to add new ones to
the great that does not exist
for any other kind kind of
resource we can dispose of very
very shaky ground recommended
thank you.
But.
Thank you our next the speaker
is blue skirt Carreiro.
Yes hello good morning chair
members of the committee my name
is please get it on the provided
a political organizer with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande a chapter
as a Sierra Club chapter that
represents more than thirty five
thousand members throughout
southern New Mexico are sorry
throughout all of New Mexico I
miss of the New Mexico but we're
all the state we oppose this
bill the renewable energy act
already has a recap renewable
energy is cheap some of the
cheapest power available to
utilities solar prices are more
than seventy percent lower than
they were just ten years ago
when is the cheapest form of
electricity as well one of the
reasons that affordability is
renewable portfolio standards
like New Mexico that were passed
all across the nation in the
past twenty years no storage we
can bring in the reliability gap
and take us to a hundred percent
renewable energy is also see
huge reductions in price and
scale the renewable energy act
and renewable standards like
this all across the country is
that we must transition to
renewable energy in order to
survive and thrive isn't as
civilization.
These laws were enacted because
the risk to our children's
future is so much greater than
the percentage of our electric
bills all after poll has
demonstrated the consumers agree
this bill is not a solution but
it is limiting that we what we
can achieve on renewables and
our state and the temp by fossil
fuel industries this lore safe
and clean transition to
renewable energy which is
creating more economic
development to New Mexico than
any other industry additionally
I would like to politely correct
representative will again the
previous statement you made
control of the PRC has over rate
increases for RRPS compliance
were added and not rules I am
urging you all to vote no on
this bill thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you for that and.
Seeing the further public
comment.
Before we get to the committee
Representative Montoya we you
have anything that.
Yes Mr chairman I know a if
this is been from the standpoint
of of of representatives or
legislators talking to each
other but we have make me make
it very clear to each other that
will that.
A representative would not sit
there and say well does your
stated concerns are not really
your concerns you're really
doing it for and I'll tear your
motive that is something that we
hold and courtesy for each other
but I have noticed that the
applicants a lot of times will
not hold that same courtesy they
will take what is the this
stated goal of a person and and
turn it into a different goal so
I I just.
That's just a comment in general
but I I've seen and and and I
don't know if it's maybe going
forward we might.
At Monash noted Monash.
Director.
Thanks to not necessarily take.
Those type of shots at
legislators but to that point to
the point of some of the actual
the discussion points from.
Attendees
that is not the case what was
taken out of the of the ETA or
was put in the ETA that it took
away the ability to keep.
For.
Net recovery.
Of stranded assets or or assets
that are that are abandoned and
those costs we that that was
specifically in the language and
that is exactly why three
Democrat senators have
introduced similar language
because at it they've come to
the realization that the
arguments that some of us may
are true there are no
limitations currently in the TA
on on their ability it's stated
in other sections of of
rulemaking for it for
the public regulation commission
but specifically in the law that
was passed
they could not be.
Denied.
Those costs that's in the
current ETA so
and that is my concern it and
and and if if what you continue
to be stated that it costs less
for renewable.
And and that that the costs are
going to go down.
Price control wouldn't actually
be a problem for advocates and
so
I if it it was stated that it
was that these price controls
are put in being put in place to
make it more difficult to
transition that isn't that isn't
a mission that costs are going
to go up PNM after arguing that
the cost would go down initially
this year in the in the
Albuquerque journal came to an
admission that prices will
increase somewhat dramatically.
That is something they say so it
just it appears that that and
and from what I understand for
it from Representative home and
are senator Solomon centers the
phonics was that they felt
misled that is their statement
in in their.
In the papers as well and all
okay I'm I'm.
If the two percent and five
percent limits over two and
three years.
Are one in three years are are
are the wrong numbers I'm
wanting to find out for the
right numbers to put in place
that would potentially protect.
The the people on fixed and
incomes and poor with that.
Mr chairman I stand for
questions.
President of Terry I do
appreciate your comments about
members of the public taking
shots at legislators I I do
think that happens it's harder
to control I was intending to
admonish people caution people
ahead of time on Saturday it
didn't occur to me it would come
up today but then as to the
Senators running a bill I would
know that they are democratic
senators not Democrats Centers.
And with that our first member
of the committee is
Representative Townsend.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman
Very quickly just.
Well thoughts.
I'm gonna support this bill
because I believe it's needed in
order to control and protect
rate payers in New Mexico.
I recently saw.
A proposed in Greece of almost
ten percent.
By a provider.
Because they had spent.
Millions of dollars.
Hurting
A large renewable projects in.
So the mandate that are within
the EPA.
Do not consider the impact.
To the rate payers and that we
have all said that on both sides
of the aisle
that bill went through
Very quickly
last session and many people
have said.
You know time out this is what
we thought it was we didn't
understand yes
we didn't understand we were
going to send you know this huge
debt you are right prior banks.
And so I think it's I think it's
prudent on a legislator.
to make sure not only that the
mandates that we.
Propose and implement.
Are in the best interest of our
constituents.
not
No ad groups that are beating
the drums for one thing or the
other.
I will also tell committee that.
One of the traveling.
Questions that I have seen
recently coming before us
Many of these are large scale.
Providers are out trying to get
IRB's.
In those I are bees although in
some cases supported by the
county.
The state of hundreds of
millions of dollars G. R. T.
taxes.
That we are all looking for in
order to try to balance our
budget.
they don't pay.
severance tax they don't pay a
production tax so those things
are gonna kick hit
the moms and pops of New Mexico
and people that are on limited
incomes will be.
Most severely impacted and I
think it's legislators if we
don't protect these big
providers that are coming in
building these facilities in New
Mexico and sending their
products to California and other
points they certainly aren't so
that is an issue that the.
I will stand and support up so
thank you bring this forward
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Townsend Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya in.
Several of us on this committee
serve on tennis Committee and
and we we always are trying to
to find ways to help our low
income folks and then we we
heard bill recently tax.
We recently heard a bill to to
help solidify our help improve
the low income tax credit.
Mainly to help low income folks
offset higher gross receipts tax
on goods services.
Food being one
Generally our lowincome
community they don't pay tax on
on on which is good so this is
kind of a similar concept it is
that is that what you understand
Representative Montoya this
helps
helps on the energy side for low
income folks.
Yes
Mr chair representative
Strickler that.
Is that that issue is is costs
are going to go up.
Everywhere we're seeing uh hello
I understand there's
Going to be some sort of a.
Omnibus tax bill I believe is
what I've heard to increase
certain other taxes.
and and concern is.
For quite frankly can least
afford it.
The elderly where we've got
another bill to trying to.
Stop the double taxation on
social security income for the
folks that are on on on fixed
incomes.
That
Mr chair what I just a second
I'll turn my volume down.
Mr sorry.
I would like to ask the
committee person interested time
to keep our attention on this
bill are higher be built not the
T. bills to the social security
tax.
Thank you for that Mr chairman I
just the discussion is not meant
to be that it's meant to be the
upward pressures on.
Of people on fixed incomes and
the poor and that's and to this
point this bill is
or.
I just wanna make sure that that
the people who are poor on fixed
incomes at least have enough of
are equal attention.
As advocates that's that's
always trying to do to try to
make sure that that to some
degree there's at least a
discussion of how.
Increasing costs on.
People on fixed income and and
and for that do we somehow
address their concerns and and
that's
enter utility that whenever you
look at utility rates.
the cost of electricity is is is
on any bill is the highest line
item and that's not even
including
Mr chairman and.
Representative Strickler the the
other.
Fees and attendance to a to a to
a utility bill that I'm just
talking about the rate of the
overall bill can go up with the
other and yet you say look at
the the utility bill there
several other fees that are on
there as well which this bill
doesn't even address this just
addresses the rates so
that's what I'm trying to focus
on that is the direct purpose of
this
And it once again I stated
before if the two percent and
five percent or the wrong
numbers let's find the right
numbers with six put something
in place that makes it to where
there is that it doesn't it's
not onerous on the on the those
who are least able.
In our state to be able to to
pay these type of increases.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Montoya
so what this does is just allow
a little a little backs on.
For low income folks and the
rates are going to go up because
you have to pay for new
facilities no one installer for
example new storage
Helicase and it has a right to
go up to percent whatever PNM is
not I'm not I'm not in the PNM
service area in the city of
Farmington service area
Naturally going to pay for those
facilities and this can be
passed on to ratepayers and so
this gives a little relief.
For for lowincome function is
for we have quite a few in our
state and.
I have to folks out there on on
Medicaid which is low income
health insurance so it's a real
need and appreciate you bring
this forward I was happy to to
cosponsored with thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Montoya.
Mr thank you Mr.
Sen Strickler.
Anyone else from the committee
before us couple questions.
Yes.
Our increased
The renewable energy versus
other increased costs one.
For increased
they say we want increased
because of X..
That is not my understanding I
think if they there there's one
part of it that is if they that
if any of their.
anything that gets
Abandoned or.
and and.
In this discussion over.
The over the life of trying to
treaties to comply with the ETA.
The problem that that.
I see coming is not just the
abandonment of the current
facility.
But if they.
Bring another source online
while to ensure reliability or
for something else that
eventually has to be abandoned
as well long before the end of
its life cycle.
and so each time that happens by
the way the team is written they
get full recovery costs.
That that can come very very
very expensive.
so that that is I just don't
want to see that passed on they
they're that is a publicly
traded company I think that the
shareholders need to bear some
of that expense rather than just
passing that for recovery cost
on to the.
This this is all this is
essentially a cost plus
ability from our the utility on
to the rate payers and and
that's that's the problem I have
with that is trying to find a
way that that that at least the
utility has to somehow.
Keep from just.
Be having at ten percent
increases year over year that's
just unsustainable for poor and
and and people on fixed incomes
so my question is when it the
utility because it for rate
increase will they say we need
the rate increase because in
order to comply with our guests
standard we did at some such as
opposed to price copper on a or
we had to replace you know this
was all the other things a
utility doesn't appropriations
bills segregate out this.
Yes they would have to segregate
out.
The the reason would be a new
facility in a more direct answer
to your question a new order pre
or or eliminating an existing
facility.
That they were able to
depreciate out.
So yes that is my understanding
and now I don't know what's
gonna happen in the future when
it goes under the governor's
administration the currently
under the PRC that is the way it
works.
Okay
If.
The company needed a.
A five percent increase in given
here with the results of your
bill be to deny them the right
increased B. to excuse them from
compliance with the ETA.
To be honest neither the rate
increase but the other is is
law.
This is to deny them the right
increase if it's going to be
onerous.
Okay.
Purpose.
Representative my tell you my my
final question if.
But the utility can be building
new gas fired power plant or
invested in nuclear and it was
more expensive and they need a
rate increase with a similar cap
play then yes.
that Cappy present.
Well currently I'm saying to
percent in a single year no more
than five percent in in three
years.
Tell you your your bills limited
to compliance with the the RPF
so if someone was building a new
gas plant that was.
Not done in order to comply with
our PS but just because they
want a new gas plant.
We
know at this point the way it's
the the law currently is they
have to comply with the R. P. S.
everything would be under the R.
P. S. they can't they they
cannot go outside of the R. P.
S..
So so I had that that may be
redundant language they have to
comply with the R. P. S. so.
They could build a gas plant
that complies in the R. P. S. if
it if it reduces carbon
emissions they can do that now.
The problem is if they do build
it.
Literally because of the
increased to how quickly they
have to comply the the the life
cycle of that new gas plant
will it will be shut down long
before what would be its natural
life cycle that's what makes it
so that's why I'm concerned with
the ten percent increase year
over year it is I mean not every
year but very often is because
of the
of the early retirement of the
facility and but in the meantime
I they they're gonna have to.
come up with some other sources.
So that they can increase their
emissions with the with the
natural gas plant as it is now
which would be in compliance
with the RTS.
Thank you very much.
Representative stands all.
Thank you Mr chairman I move to
table the bill.
Second problem Representative
Ferrary if.
Hi I'm gonna need you because I
can hear the speaker.
Should be will you take the vote
please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes to table.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes the table.
Representative Montoya.
And noted table and I want to
explain we have a.
Representative Ortez.
Yes the table.
Representative Saniona yes the
cable.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
The.
Representative Townsend.
No no.
Representative vice chair stands
for excuse me.
Yes the table.
Chair the queen.
Yes.
and that is a passed to table
with a vote of seven to four.
Representative explains the.
I hope it's briefly.
Mr chairman and and members are.
I understand the desire two for
two to.
Try and be
Stewards of the environment.
It does appear though what is
getting lost in all of this is
that people who are gonna have
to comply with and have to pay
for it and I just think it's
disappointing that that the poor
and and people on fixed incomes.
Can't get any consideration
along the way and I I it is
disappointing I I've I've
offered multiple times if those
numbers are wrong was put in
place something else but some
sort of protection for those
people almost half of our
population in New Mexico there
should be some consideration for
them and I I would.
Ask that if there is something
other that we can do to put in
place to help.
Those people the most vulnerable
among us in the state that we
find a way to get to an
agreement on that they can't
just I was not elected by
advocates I was elected by
residents and I and I believe
everyone here who serves is in
the same position thank you Mr
chairman.
I do believe we have a bill
coming up on the utility
affordability.
So I look forward to that.
Our final bill of the day is
house bill one eighty one oil
and gas tax changes represents
Scott and Townsend again members
of our committee who would like
to present built.
Terminal.
It's got to have a experts are
just the representatives today.
We're waiting in the wings of
personal questions to.
So we can answer here but I am
fairly familiar with this topic
and should be able to present
hope you know.
Okay
I see that.
Hello Mr chairman.
Members of the body of ring
house bill one eighty one very
very simple bill which
eliminates the surcharge tax on
carbon dioxide used rejected
into formation.
Hi to questions.
For enhanced will recovery
projects.
Mr chair if you would allow me.
Your tertiary recovery one oh
one lesson for those members of
the committee.
Representative Scott as long as
it's brief.
This is New Mexico church so
all the mid twenties.
The.
formation court sure over racial
for.
For example at five thousand
feet below the surface is
approximately three thousand
five hundred yes.
Here's rules of course are
developed moods for stricter oil
gas and water is replaced by
board and reduction and natural
bottom hole pressure.
Consequence.
A few percent of the original
hydrocarbons in place yes the
ability to the recover.
Secondary recovery in Jack's
Water.
Normally produced water
oftentimes made up with.
Cool.
Water into.
I am which is tomorrow
practically every other while
water injection draws oil what
the injection wells and improve
the producing wells to recover.
Additional resource.
One.
Economic viability is exhaust.
The next step in the process
treasurer program which involves
the injection of something else.
Warner to.
The rules of war and we're
however additional hydrocarbon
resources that would otherwise
be wasted.
many of the southeast rose of
course this issue rural
locations that is injected is
carbon dioxide used grocers.
Will war is finally depleted it
is produced to economic limit.
All carbon dioxide is been used.
In the recovery process is in
place.
Worster in perpetuity.
The problem.
is.
Our report.
It is true severance tax.
One project were of course the
authority.
Million dollars per year you
know that carbon dioxide is
extracted from the settlement
line and rejected in the form
much.
I was sure.
Question.
Thank you presents got let's go
to the audience.
if you would like to speak on
this bill please raise your
hand.
Our first speaker is Gloria.
Number number number.
Gloria you're muted there you
go.
When you're ready Gloria.
Hello chair clean and committee
thank you for the opportunity to
participate in this discussion.
I'm a lifelong resident no.
In a long time resident of
Farmington I hold health
professional degrees from ENMU
and UNM I am currently an active
volunteer on several local
boards and groups to advocate
for the health of our people
air land water watershed rivers
river trails and outdoor
recreation.
To help make our area in state
more attractive and healthy
destination in place to live.
I do not support house bill one
eighty one.
Oil and gas extraction X.
produces the equivalent of
twenty two coal plants worth of
time pollution every year
capturing carbon from coal plant
which hasn't happened
successfully on any real scale
and building the infrastructure
and transporting it across the
state to increase extraction of
new fossil fuels to burn is not
in any way helpful to resolving
or escalating climate crisis I
urge you Mr chair and committee
members to vote against house
bill one eighty one oil and gas
tax changes thank you.
Where can you say your name just
so we get the pronunciation
correct.
Gloria lemur gamer.
That.
Our next speaker is Michael.
I sent out.
German McQueen and committee
members my name is Mike Eisen
failed IAD and the energy and
climate program manager for San
Juan citizens alliance
in Farmington are we have about
a thousand members
And now the four corners region.
San Juan citizens alliance in
Farmington opposes H. B. one
eighty one we believe that this
is a deceptive attempt to
provide tax breaks for coal
derived carbon dioxide.
This is not a progressive bill
for those who live in the shadow
of coal fired power plants.
We object to the terminology of
captured carbon dioxide be
defined as captured from
industrial source my carbon
capture equipment is allowing
coal fired power plants to be
after antero Progenics source to
create carbon dioxide emissions
to then be used in oil and gas
projects for enhanced oil
recovery leading to more
missions we do not believe that
coal fired power plants should
be allowed to qualify.
As a source of captured carbon
dioxide for tax exemptions for
what is described as an oil and
gas severance tax issue in
addition carbon capture is an
unproven technology New Mexico
where the most prominent
proposal planned Jan Energy at
San Juan generating station the
speculative in years away from
permitting.
Please vote now on this
deceptive Bill thank you for.
Thank you next up we have to
leave more.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
I and Julie Moore I'm a senior
director for Occidental
petroleum.
We do support house bill one
eighty one.
This bill incentivizes the
capture of anthropogenic CO two
the man made CO two out of the
atmosphere
As you might have read are still
patrolling the sort of leading
the way R. as one of the leaders
and and trying to capture
anthropogenic CO two we're in
the process of trying to build
these direct air capture
facilities and.
It's really something that we
invested a lot of time and money
into we think it's good for the
environment to capture
anthropogenic CO two from the
atmosphere we think it's good
for New Mexico.
We think that New Mexico could
come but become a leader and
carbon capture and this is an
issue that companies all over
the world have made a priority
and we would like for New Mexico
to take a leading position on it
so we support house bill one
eighty one and thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you next up we have Louise
Guerrero.
Good morning almost afternoon
again chair members of the
committee my name is miss
Caroline the provided a
political organizer with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande in
chapter.
As a Sierra Club chapter of the
represents more than thirty five
thousand members and supporters
through southern New Mexico.
Sorry to through the state of
New Mexico we have those H. B.
one eight one taxpayer dollars
should not be spent to keep
deadly industries I think carbon
dioxide from the cold front
crosses the trick cresol
extraction will not help us we
are increasingly urgent climate
goals the infeasible effort by
content energy to cover its
outline generating station for
carbon capture call plan is
likely a data proposal and not a
promising use of taxpayer
dollars.
There are no commercially
operating current government cop
sure coal plants in the US the
only one that is operating at or
no less captured only a fraction
of the car being at it promised
and was mothballed this year the
four corners region is now
seeing a one point one billion
investment in solar energy and
battery storage it is time to
invest in the energy of the
future not provide tax breaks to
the Energy this the harms our
client I am urging you once
again to vote no on this bill
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you next up we have
Michael Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee Mike Miller Permian
basin petroleum association we
stand in support of this bill
we've built this bill encourages
the development of of the.
Fossil fuels in a clean way we
we feel that it encourages
direct air capture from the
atmosphere of CO two that then
can be sequestered for the
purpose of developing energy to
this country continues to need
thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have been Chilton.
Thank you Mr chairman all let
others speak more eloquently to
the.
The card capture concept the one
thing I would say I think we
have all seen cabinet
secretaries all over the virtual
roundhouse in the last two weeks
talk about the difficult cuts
they're having to make in the
damage to their key programmatic
work from the from the dire
budget situation and that a tax
break for the most profitable
industry in history of the
planet is not appropriate at
this time given the challenges
that agencies are facing so
we're still thank you.
Thank you we have Jim
Winchester.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jim Winchester with
independent patrol agency so she
ation we stand in strong support
of this bill and we think
Sanchez for bring it forward we
simply see this as a win for the
environment we see it as a win
for innovation we see it as a
win for new technology
development and we see that this
is something that will help all
members of the community and
with industry and for those
reasons we strongly support this
bill thank you.
Thank you except we have Matt
Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members my
name's Matt Thompson lines
director I'm sure manager
Camilla fares for Apache
corporation we stand in support
of house bill one eighty one we
feel the bill incentivizes
companies in New Mexico and
around the country to innovate I
know carbon management plan and
to help drive the technology
that will allow us to capture.
CO two from the atmosphere
sequestered in the in the plant
In perpetuity which is
beneficial for both our citizens
and our companies and so a win
win for the state of New Mexico.
Thank you and that is our our
public discussion so back to the
committee represents that would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee.
No search.
Thank you Representative.
I don't know how I could hear
you because you are muted but.
Thank you chair and
I apologize is representative
Scott introducing this bill or
was it Representative Strickler
Representative Scott okay thank
you I'm Mr chair and
representative Scott I am very
interested in house bill one
eighty one as a method to
diversifying new Mexico's
economy and potentially mitigate
against climate change but I did
have a couple of questions that
I'm hoping you can elaborate on.
The first question is regarding
the FIR
and the disconnect between what
the FIR says with regard to
carbon not being subject to
severance tax but then there the
example of
a an operator a company here in
New Mexico paying the severance
tax and so if you could
elaborate for me on how the
difference there thank you very
much.
Representative Dixon hallmark
and turning it is more or less
in order there are in fact
service taxes being paid on this
material.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott do we then
have an estimate by chance on
the fiscal impact for that on
how much it would affect our
budget.
One authority I'm aware of that
is.
Questions this material was
estimating one point five
million dollars.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
representative Scott another
question could you
Some folks have mentions that
this our bill may be related to
it the intent energy project in
northwestern New Mexico but I
also understand that there are
other companies in industries
that are interested so could
you.
Let us know if this is in fact a
bill for in chant Energy thank
you.
Representative Dixon it is not.
But in general the ability to
capture CO two from the
atmosphere and sequestered
underground forever would seem
to me to be a.
So.
You.
Possible to capture CO two from
the San Juan plant.
Request right yes
depleted oil fields I think
that's.
Percent worn and good for the
plan.
I'm thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott
it we've talked about other
companies but could you explain
are there are other companies
that you know of that I'm sort
of outside of intent that are
looking at doing this then maybe
capture that invest in New
Mexico and how that could
potentially help our economy
thank you.
Representative Dixon I'm only
aware of one other company that
would be interested in
undertaking this process at this
time in appropriation.
Okay at thank you very much
thank you Mr chair
representative Scott those were
all of my questions thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman so
Representative Scott
The.
The question of of of carbon has
been at the very center of the
climate control or Clemente.
problems that we have
that in.
Probably two thirds of of the
the bills we've heard so far and
energy
have been at the heart of the
problems one of the problems we
have in New Mexico is that we
are very reliant on fossil fuels
so.
If the problem is carbon.
How does this bill help us with.
The idea of of a fewer carbon
emissions.
Missions worry not much.
with respect to the
sequestration capturing in
sequestration of these carbon
emissions eliminating them
program which
is.
Here we want this material.
Photos under current.
Leave there for ever work will.
Thank you for that answer a
Representative Scott Mr chairman
Representative Scott this seems
to be something that.
could potentially help
With coal mines reducing.
Emissions in the atmosphere and
actually from what I understand
is if this is in place
a a coal mine would actually
capture those the majority of
those emissions and it would
actually be less detrimental to
the environment than even a
natural gas power plant but I
understand this doesn't just
affect.
coal mines but.
Coalmines New Mexico a very
small percentage of the overall.
Energy picture in New Mexico
minus what they do currently for
electricity for mostly the
Albuquerque at area but.
Oil and gas that is another
problem we're trying to deal
with and if we are able to to to
put this in place with this also
help.
Encourage.
Oil producers.
To also potentially
use its technology.
To allow us to continue with all
the taxes that we have on on
that industry
instead of just shutting them
down but help them to then
reduce their carbon emissions
their carbon footprint
Could you speak a little bit to
help with the oil and gas the.
production how this could
potentially help.
There as well.
Mr chairman Representative
Montoya.
Multiple reservoirs
particularly.
Southeast New Mexico this
technology might apply to.
You can enhance the recovery of
your hardcore worst recession
for and.
Previously so question for that
Mr component we it was harmful
when when and as it is
Yes.
Legislation were to move
forward.
Some.
Conversation about sequestering
CO two
produced in some cases
alongside natural gas which
so the CO two could be stripped
out.
Question underground as methane
so.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott.
I do I I like this answer I
believe it's environmentally
friendly.
if in and it allows New Mexico
to maybe not decimate going
forward are our main source of
income in New Mexico.
and I understand that
That the federal government is
trying to encourage this
behavior as well the idea of
capturing CO two.
But I'm not sure if you're
aware.
Representative Scott but the
there was a report out a day or
two ago about China's continued.
building.
The coal fired power plants I
think the the number that I saw
was that they tripled all of the
other coal power plants
worldwide in China I did this if
we could perfect this.
Technology and it could be used
and coal plants going forward I
mean it's obvious that's a cheap
coal sort of cheap energy source
for for developing nations.
that how could this if we were
able to to do this how how could
this potentially affect
the world rather than just
focusing on what we do in New
Mexico what what could be affect
B. by multiplying that effort
outside in New Mexico.
Representative Montorio I don't
know the exact number.
The the Chinese.
Cool additions are ongoing but
it is my understanding that
there will be significant.
For the next thirty to forty
years to the extent technology
request right to to is developed
and perfected here the
implications one one.
Thank you for that
Mr chair representative Scott
that's really all of my
questions this is something
that.
For some reason
environmentalists outside of New
Mexico have supported.
I'm I'm not exactly sure why it
within New Mexico.
But folks who are concerned with
the environment are just do not
like this.
Answer to the problem but that
minus answer like this to.
said that we face here I and I'm
concerned that our economy it is
going to be dramatically
impacted if if our only answers
to.
Reduce not only emissions but
reduce the number of businesses
in New Mexico who are fossil
fuel producers that will be
leaving the state and how
dramatic that that the fact that
cascade or domino effect would
be on taxes for for everyone
else in New Mexico I'm perfectly
happy with
The fossil fuel industry paying
a large portion of my burden of
taxes thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Scott.
I just want to give you an
update on the and chain Energy
Essity Akon Committee.
project.
And they're working as hard with
New Mexico tech university.
To come up with some geologic
information to sequester the CO
two.
And the formations that look
promising.
Are the to go to formation in
the entrada formation here about
six thousand feet a.
And their plan
is to.
Locate a injection field in that
probably the entrada formation.
Be able to inject permanently
the CO two capture from
the the facility
the expected volume.
It's three hundred million cubic
feet of gas today that's a lot
of gas there's a lot of CO two.
And
They have a plan to save it to
to tier plan
to simply sequester the CO two
and the second plan is to take
advantage of the nearby CO two
pipeline that said near the the
NM power plant.
Into pipeline.
The CEO to some of the CO two.
Down down to the
Torrez pipeline can a Morgan
operates at.
The currently
produce about one million one.
Million cubic feet of gas today.
One billion cubic feet of gas
stations right.
And they shipped to the CO two
from the field and Colorado to
the West Texas in the New
Southeast Mexico or feels.
For an enhanced recovery.
And so they got a pretty good
plan
the engineering is.
calls for for many units.
And so this could be a this
could be a game breaker game
changer excuse me.
for world wide Cole productions
in China is the largest leading
coal producer New Mexico
electrical generating country
and in the world and they they
have a lot of energy needs over
there so I just want to and that
We're excited about this
From a local standpoint.
State Farm is stepped up to take
over that that role and
It's important to the local
economy because it saves about
fifteen hundred jobs or
continues fifteen hundred jobs
the the cost of building
constructors one point two
billion dollars a lot of
construction jobs will be
implies along with the two sewer
facilities are in in in the
planning stage in the same
vicinity so that would be great
construction plan for San Juan
County we're talking about two
point four billion dollars worth
of that construction activity
that would last two years
and then also say for fifteen
hundred permanent jobs so anyway
this is it's worth a try we were
glad that to.
The city and the chant are
pursuing this and and we we help
successful so thank you for your
bill and and recovery is a good
thing as well
to extract more of the of the
resource which is also due to
tax so.
That's all I have thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Scott.
Thank you Representative
Strickler it looks like we have
leader Townsend on the board go
ahead please.
Thank you.
Comments.
Districts are one make motion
of.
Not just important at the
committee member.
In the in our effort to clean
up.
Electrical production.
And in.
You know how to write.
That.
Six question the.
The.
Sam.
In.
Can.
Seventy percent of all those two
missions in New Mexico.
So what's wrong with saving.
Thousands of jobs for New
Mexicans.
Reducing.
Their cost is city.
Sequestering.
A.
That we are wanting to do then
just seems to be a win win I
mean we're we're taking the high
road we're protecting New
Mexicans jobs.
We're sequestering drugs.
And we're doing the right thing.
So I know this.
Bill was not intended to be and
and chant Energy and it is.
It's just the right thing to do.
But what the comments were made
about whether this.
Was interviewed bill or not it
just dawned on me that even yes
in chance for someone else was
able to capture CO two.
Save Mexicans jobs.
And we believe the technology of
the world.
In carbon capture with that with
that technology what's that I
mean why would we do that why
would we protect New Mexicans
lower their their electrical
rates in the right thank I mean
we so I would say
That was India's.
The purpose of the bill but it
might be one of the benefits
that could really help and
And I think that would be a
great thing because I know of
eight people in Farmington.
Their jobs will be secure.
And.
Environment proponents that
would have to say.
Capturing and reducing the
overall sales missions of New
Mexico in months.
In one quick sweep you could do
that I think we would be remiss
in not doing it up but with
that.
Madam chair
that.
Okay yes I Representative
Ferrary I moved to table.
Okay we are on a motion to table
the bill and can we please take
the role.
Sorry one second I have to vote
in committee.
Madam chair did you get a
second.
yes I'm sorry do we have a
second to the motion.
Understand.
Okay we have a second from
representative said Indiana I'm
at Shelby can we go to the role
to take the boat please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Yes just a moment Representative
channeling can we go back to my
yep okay thank you.
Representative Dixon.
No to table and I'd like to
explain my Vodafone allowed to
do that on a table in motion.
Representative Ferrary yes the
table.
Representative Montoya the
table.
Representative Ortez.
Yes table.
Representative Saniona.
Yes to table.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend noted.
Vice chair Stansbury yes the
table and I'd like to explain my
doctor.
And chair the queen yes.
And that is a do table with a
vote of six to five.
Okay am I believe we have a vote
explanation for Representative
Dixon.
Thank you vice chair Stansbury I
appreciate that I am.
Particularly interested in
finding ways that we can use
technology and work together to
both diversify our economy and
to try to mitigate some of the
effects of climate change and so
I'm very interested in seeing
those pursued I do understand
the concerns with regard to
enchant energy but I'd like to
have this discussion and this
issue our.
Discussed more frequently thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative Dixon
and I would like to also explain
my vote I am a huge fan of
carbon capture and I recall this
bill coming up the last session
and it was I really enjoyed
working with Representative
Strickler to talk through some
of these issues I remain
Committee concerned about some
of the scientific and technical
considerations about the
capacity of enhanced oil
recovery using carbon as an
industrial by product product
actually permanently sequester
carbon which my understanding is
the sciences so I'm unclear
about that especially different
geologic formation this and so
I'd like to continue and
continue to have the discussion
and I very much appreciate at
the Sanchez bringing this
forward and the great and
consideration for capturing
carbon and addressing climate
change so thank you.
And with that and the gavel back
to the chair thank you everyone
thank you bye Sir Sandford that
does it for today I'll see
everyone Saturday at nine
o'clock thank you very much
thank you your turn.
