In the labor Veteran Military
Affairs Committee.
Ah, Mr Secretary. Uh, wrong,
Travis.
Representing
I pretended Johnson representing
Martinez.
Representative home
chair.
And I'm here. Thank you. We have
a quorum.
At this time we'll go ahead and
start with Bill. Uh, Hospital to
98 representatives. Garcia, the
hot seat is yours.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. Uh, House. Bill
298 is a knack relating to
veterans.
Enhancing a veteran service and
veterans to aside Prevention act
within the Veterans Services
Department.
Active hiding department
responsibilities to raise
awareness regarding suicide
within the population of
veterans Service members,
members, military and veteran
families. Richard chairman was
happening and standing Mexico
Has about the highest rate of
suicides in the state and the
country, and what we need to do
is get more awareness out for
veterans. They need more help to
address the issue that we're
facing with that Mr Chairman as
Stanford questions
Yeah, I don't have anybody in
the audience wishing to justify
and is Bill
Uh huh.
Everybody went home. My
goodness, we don't have anybody
on the Webcast.
All right.
If somebody on Webcast
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is John
Dickerson, a member of the
Veterans and Military Families
Caucus. We lose thousands of
veterans and military members
every year to suicide.
This money would be well spent.
If it saves only one life.
Thank you for your time.
Right?
Who's that day?
But then I'll go to the
committee.
Uh,
Thank you. What progress do, um
I don't really know existing for
to support questions Share
Representative with which
veterans in this, Um Mr Chairman
and representative of the State,
The veteran Service department
has things in place, but they're
not quite what we need. You
know, we need more outreach for
veterans.
Because that's especially in my
country ruled Mexico
representing Johnson's area.
There's very little outreach and
there's a lot of suicides
happening out there and what
we're trying to do.
Is getting more awareness out
there that there is help for
these veterans.
And not not only in our area but
throughout the student in
Mexico, because, you know, I
think further about the second
or third highest in the nation
and suicides.
You know, and that's just
reported. You know, a lot of
veterans committed suicide by
driving.
And then they call it an
accident. After it happens, you
know, And you know, I was in the
Marine Corps in 1968 and you
know, it's It's a rough world
out there it really is because
when you come back from war zone
Were any military thing, you
know, at least that you would
season your head all the time,
so we're trying to do is get
more.
I'll reach more benefits for
Just real quick. I just want to
add that, uh, after studies were
showing that New Mexico suffers
from the second
Highest veteran.
So you know, I started looking
around. They passed the bill,
just like this.
What I also found today was
really nice. Just what you do is
you put it in your wallet or
purse.
And if you know somebody that's
in
Pain or hurting and needs help.
Uh, the number is right there to
call for. Make sure
representative Garcia gets one
too.
Yeah.
So with that I have a proper
motion and proper second. Yes.
Malecon.
Yes.
Yes.
6 to 0. You have a do pass
looking appropriations. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and members of
the committee. You know, it is
very important vision are going
through.
You know?
You don't see it. I'm too wild
you if you live it, you know
exactly what's happening. Thank
community to you guys have a
good Sunday.
Be Asian
representatives 39 now
The hot seat is yours.
Goodnight. Have a good morning.
It's great. Okay, um, I'm here
to present house. Bill 302.
Don't have my expert. This is
this is an act relating to
military in the military. There
are certain things the federal
government wants on our military
installations and update updated
annually this year. We're going
to try to do childcare, um anti
discrimination and finally
define armed forces, adding
space force.
But, um, as far as childcare, we
are asking that military spouse
providers that are certified by
the Department of Defense or the
U. S. Coast Guard.
Who are in good standing and are
living off base. We provided the
same exemption that is provided
on base.
The D O D standards for
certification of much higher
than in most states and 70% of
our military. Family. Families
live off base, so this is just
allowing them to have daycare
with with a military kids and
not have to do the
certification. They can just
start when they get here.
Okay, That's the first one
Um, there is an exemption. Um,
they cannot have anybody who's
not military.
In their little group anti
discrimination we're talking
about adding military family
status as a protected class
under the list of other
protected classes that are under
what's called the New Mexico
Human Rights Act.
Discrimination of military
families has been often
reported, especially in the
areas of housing and jobs.
Um and I did speak with a C l U
and they they would They support
this bill. It's just really
adding them. Our military Terry
to the class of of, um, class of
group of people who, um, can I
be discriminated against
Okay?
Um, the third one is just a
finding armed forces. We are
adding space force to the
existing definitely stand for
questions.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is John
Dickerson. I'm a member of the
veterans and Military Families
Caucus. We support house Bill
302 because it provides
protections and benefits
primarily directed to the
families of military service
members, as recommended by the
Department of Defense. Um, the
state regulation of childcare
programs or facilities.
Certified by the Department of
Defense are duplicative and we
do not need duplicate
regulation, um, protecting
military families as a protected
class under the Human Rights Act
would protect them from
discrimination in housing
employment and other areas and
lastly, adding space force to
the definition of armed forces.
Would entitled Space Force
members to the same rights and
benefits as other military
members are caucus recommends
that do pass determination from
this committee. Thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you, ma'am for hanging in
there with us.
The committee.
I represent you better home to,
um
Why exactly is it being added
Because they're being
discriminated, aided against
when they're trying to get
housing and jobs and they were
telling me that you know, as far
as jobs they're kind of we made
it into were discriminated
because your military we don't
want you, but there's a lot of
black people and different
people. They don't want transit,
so they're trying. They're
weaving a lot of things into
being military. So
We just need them to be able to
get into that because I think
especially um or all work system
and who joins
Representative Travis So my
question is around the native.
My question is around the issue.
Licensing.
And so I'm looking at the F I,
R. Um and it looks like early
Really childhood education, and
they already have reciprocal or
so
Do you have an idea of
Um, does your bill um
Duplicate what they're already
doing.
They? One thing is, you can't
have anybody but a military
child in your group. Otherwise
you don't get anything special.
You know you have to have you
can have anyone, but they do
have a lot of the same stuff and
we were talking earlier about if
they if these if these families
could actually get support from
other Yeah, food and different
things do you know
So if
Um, early childhood Education
Department. Mount your Mr
Chairman, representative.
Um I don't know, but I can find
out for you. I don't know. My
expert left about
One o'clock. Sorry. Thank you,
Mr Chair, Representative. Good
luck.
Thank you, Mr Share. I just have
one question. I know that
definition for military status
is here.
But I don't understand. Uh why
is to see their military status?
You know, it's headed through
the second part of the bill or
military status. What that adds
not clear on that. So military
status. Mr Chairman is Air Force
Army Navy Coast Guard, and now
we're adding speed We're doing
space force is not an additive
became in 2019, but we haven't
added to our statute.
So mr Chair, so to add, or
military status.
Means that you are in all these
components. Mr Chairman, just
the space force. Everything else
is already there.
So, for instance, in Mr Sharon
page, 12 and older pages just
that definition of that.
I must still
It. Just Mr share. It just seems
like the whole deal is for
representing Mr Chairman.
Representative, um, for medical
and housing be considered
military. And right now the
space force is my son wasn't but
I mean they recognize him. We
didn't thank you, Mr Chair.
By that for you.
Mr Chair. Oh, yes. Thank you, Mr
Chairman Committee by a vote of
6 to 0 representing started.
None of you have a do pass.
Representing Toronto had seen
this yours. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Committee.
I'm bringing forward house Bill
303. What This bill does is it
creates a pilot program for
monetary stipends to be given to
New Mexico residents who are
enrolled in training programs or
up Skilling programs in key
industries so that we can grow
those industries and grow that
workforce here and ensure that
they're getting higher paid jobs
in the future.
Um this is a key thing to
developing our workforce as we
know a lot of folks that need to
up skill. Um, either need to
make an income while they're
doing that and also need to take
care of their families. This
would allow that that that that
statement to be able to do so we
had in Santa Fe, a similar
program. Um, and it was been
very successful where they were
able to have a believable $600
stipends so that people while
they were attending these
courses, um with that, I stand
for questions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman of all
the audience.
Ain't nobody in the audience.
Anybody on the zoom nobody in
the audience or anywhere come to
the committee.
17 good Or
maybe I'll Thank you, Mr Chair.
I have one question and it's a
Are any partnerships.
Already.
Kind of plan to to carry on
this. This, um, program
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Representative. You know,
at this time we're looking at
the pilot program to give us a
decent set of data on how this
would impact. Um you know the
different families and how
earlier On a couple of years
ago, they had a, uh, version of
this with privately funded, um,
where they were able to ensure
an income for folks. However, it
wasn't time necessarily to an
educational degree that people
are seeking.
Still, we saw a significant
increase in, uh, roll
participants gaining employment
of 14% increase in that urban
participants. Um, uh, reported
having unstable work schedules
that 36 decrease present
decreasing that a number of
these studies. I'm happy to
share it with you. But the hope
is to see you once you quarrel
once you tie those funds to, um,
Workforce program. How does that
impact that We're
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
represented so
When somebody wants to enroll in
this World Force program will
they have to join a specific
Organization. It will be under
the government. How How do
anybody can
Be part of this. Yes. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. So this would be
through the higher Ed department
And so they would apply through
that through that, and it would
be up to the higher end to bring
on all the details around it. We
wanted to leave the program
fairly open again. Just because
the nuances of what a statement
would look like in Santa Fe
versus rural farming to nor or
urban farming for that matter,
You know it's going to be a
little bit different, so we
wanted that flexibility.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So
Did. The people who has to
participate in this program has
to be enrolled in a higher ed
program. That's right. Uh, so
let's say that, um
I want to roll in the higher ed
and one of these programs, but
the programs do I do I have to
be part of a
Come poor year, bachelors,
degree or associate degree or
just can I just enrolled for
this program? Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you.
Representative. Apologize. I
understand your question. How
little better so the program
would have to, um, designates
certain sorry. Higher Ed would
have to designate certain
programs that would apply for
the pilot program.
If you look on pages three and
four, it identifies the
industries in particular that
we're targeting, um, that were
outlined in the governor's
strategic economic strategic
plan for growing industries. And
so, um in particular in these,
this is not necessarily a B, a
program with its A four year
long, etcetera. We're really
looking at those programs that
are more like certain
certificates.
Um, that would be that in
between level as well. Programs.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Representative. Yes. Um And so,
you know, we we have a lot of G
E. D. S in high school degrees
in New Mexico. We have a lot of
PhDs because of the national
labs we have, but we have a huge
gap of you know those
certificates or B a s existence
and for individuals that want to
see their salaries increased
very rapidly. Exact programs
you're talking about.
Let's say that I do not have
every like.
I wanted to roll in one. This
program's Mr Chair
representative, but I don't have
The right status. So I my, um,
tuition, It's really high.
For to be enrolling one or
university in one college to be
part of this, Um will this help
with that tuition?
Thanks. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative. This
will not directly help with that
tuition. Um, and that was some
of the things that were being
discussed earlier with the CTE
programs that were being
discussed, however, only
surrounding costs and they exist
childcare or you know other jobs
in the necessary but it would
not directly
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Questions were answered terrace.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Representative, Um
So
How long is there a time limit
room. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Representative. No, not at
this time, and not unless the
program has are developing it,
but not in this bill.
So, for example, if somebody
wanted to go to for just that
electricians or years long,
maybe five. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'm sorry, guys. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um again, you
know, we lay out the industries
and it would be up to the higher
Ed department to identify the
programs that they would want to
really focus on right?
Um the other question that I
have is do you have? Thank you,
Mr Chair? Thank you,
Representative. So in this, um
the example I gave you earlier
That was done with private
funds. They did they the the
monetary stipend was about $600
a month and so my presumption is
based on you know, again,
talking with community colleges
and different ones. This is
about my guess is about 33 month
program would probably be
somewhere in the likes usually
here about six weeks to three
months.
So, um, In those terms you would
see about 50 per year for five
years over time, so that would
hopefully give us enough to get
a good idea of how it impacted
those individuals. Okay? And
then the other question if
someone is already on Tanna
Would their benefits.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative.
They should not. But I would
want to get back to you on that,
And I can make a note of that
again. Um
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative.
It may because of the income
caps that exist and so again
because this is intended to be a
stipend to support to what
having a second job or something
like that. It could in that
sense, and then the last is that
so basically earlier.
Is there a sense of? Is there
going to be any particular
location is interested.
Statewide. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
leave it in the hands of higher
ed to really give that insight
into where that might be, might
be most needed or most
effective. To be honest, I have
a proper motion from
representative Corolla. Uh, yes,
Yes represented represented?
Yes. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Oh, do you have to motion to
end?
