Here.
Representative.
Here.
Representative group.
Here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Madam chair Rubio.
Right now we have a quorum thank
you.
Good morning everyone
we will go ahead and get started
first up we have Representative
Thomson on house bill two to
three Representative if you're
ready to go.
I'm ready to go thank you good
morning madam chair morning do
you have any witnesses or
experts that you want to.
This is all me okay sounds good
thank you Representative get go
ahead and and go for it okay so
first I'm gonna tell you a story
madam chair about why it decided
to to do this bill so as you all
know I have a son with autism he
is six foot seven
and at that point at that point
he was around two hundred pounds
and now he could be somewhat
scary and he didn't respond well
necessarily to verbal commands I
also had a friend who has three
sons one of them has autism and
one of the brothers what's his
caretaker and they were going
home from work one day and the
brother with autism to what go
to the bathroom and so they were
speeding and the police stopped
them and the brother with autism
they were speaking because the
brother had to go to autism when
they stopped the vehicle.
The brother with autism saw a
bathroom and jumped out of the
car and the police drew their
guns on in and the other brother
was screaming no no no he's got
autism he doesn't understand
luckily nothing went wrong but
that's why I did this bill madam
chair and essentially all that.
Is allow you to check a box when
you register your car that says
that either the driver or
someone in the car may have a
disability it may be autism it
may be deafness I work that that
that
thank magnet school in APS for
kids who are deaf I have
deference and deaf relatives and
I asked them when the police
stop you when you're driving in
the field I reach in my pocket
for my card that says I'm down
and all I could see was madam
chair was the police officer
screaming hands up our hands on
the wheel are get out of the car
and this person is reaching in
their pocket and not and
something bad could happen I it
happened in New Mexico we've
come close but I haven't heard
of any so when you register your
car you can you can check the
box that says driver maybe gaps
there may be a person with a
brain injury may not respond
well to commands there may be
some of the seizure disorder
that is made worse by flashing
lights and I have spoken madam
chair with with officers from a
bunch of different departments
in what essentially what they've
all told me is the more
information we have on a traffic
stop the better off we are the
safer we are and the state for
that the people in the car are
and so madam chair that's
essentially what this bill does
and with that I will stand for
questions.
Great thank you so much
Representative so we have
folks in the attendees list if
you are in support of this
legislation please raise your
hand.
We have a couple people so first
we have
Ellen Hines go ahead.
Thank you madam chair Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition and we
stand in strong support of this
bill as Representative Thompson
has described there have been a
tragic encounters up to
including deaths when law
enforcement officers have
encountered people with
disabilities that either make
them unable to hear or unable to
conform their behavior when they
are having encounters with the
police and we think that this
would be an important step to
avoid those occasions which are
tragic not only for the
individuals involved who are
traumatized and possibly even
kids but also for the law
enforcement officers we
certainly don't want to find out
that they have killed somebody
who simply couldn't hear what
they were saying for could not
be paid in the way they were
expected to so we are committed
support of the bill thank you.
Thank you thank you Elon on next
we have Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair Jim
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico and for the reasons
that done is fine said described
as well as a sponsor
representative Thompson we also
support this bill we think it
will contribute to the safety of
the people with disabilities and
also the officers themselves so
we encourage your support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Jackson we don't
have anyone else in attendees
and support is there anyone in
opposition.
Okay there doesn't appear and to
be anybody in the attendees in
opposition so we'll go ahead and
go to the committee first on the
list to speak is Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
the bill forward.
I'm on the FIR it's is that
Participation in the registry is
voluntary.
And so I'm wondering.
How does the policemen know if
they choose not to register.
That
there no dental fire on the car
is there is there a discount on
the car is there some way of of
a police officer knowing.
Madam works.
Router that was when I first
started this bill some years ago
that was my original plan was to
have like a sticker on the
driver's license but talking
with the deaf community they
told me that they are reading
feel like they're targeted and
they did not if that was that
how would be they would not
participate because they felt
like it would make them a target
so in talking with law
enforcement that the suggestion
was to have it when they when
they run your license plate
through I don't even know what
all that's called it will come
back it will say you know all
the things that whether the car
stolen and all of those kinds of
things and that will just be one
more piece of information that
pops up on the computer screen
when they run your license
plate.
Okay so thank you for that but
if.
There are individuals or
families that are not to
register.
What position does that leave
the law enforcement and it I
mean if you if you got someone
it that has a seizure that
panics from flashing lights but
that vehicle is not registered.
What what position does that
leave law enforcement madam
chair Representative Crowder
exactly where they are now it
doesn't change anything in terms
of liability it and the reason
we left it voluntary was well
because we didn't want to force
people to because some people
just don't want to disclose
their disabilities so it's just
one piece of information that a
law enforcement officer can have
if the person chooses not to do
what it doesn't it's and that's
just how things are now okay.
Last question madam chair and
representative.
Do we know you have a database
that says how many people.
May suffer from one of these
three disorders it that how many
people are we right I think this
law to cover.
We actually have those kinds of
numbers that there probably are
some numbers around the number
of people who are deaf autism I
have been trying to get in
autism registry for twenty five
years and have gotten nowhere
with it so it but kind of the
common wisdom is that about ten
percent of the population has a
disability now whether that
would be a disability that you
would want to put on the drivers
on your car registration so we
don't really know but madam
chair and representative as far
as I'm concerned if it was for
one person that we could keep
from having a bad interaction I
think it would be worth it but
we don't have those kind of
numbers.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
By a law enforcement agency back
home.
Reviewed your bill and and they
have some concerns about how the
the the police actually respond
to vehicles that there are a
weaving or or for some reason or
some justification they brought
over.
They're they're a little bit
concerned about how this may.
Increase their liability if.
If something goes awry so anyway
thank you I appreciate it thank
you madam chair thank you gentle
lady for bringing this for.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you Representative for bringing
this forth I I actually have the
English teacher suggestion on
page two of one twenty.
I'm you say a law enforcement
officer or to respond
appropriately to a law
enforcement's commands com.
And then you say including
autism spectrum disorder
deafness brain injury that would
actually refer to commands
grammatically speaking I would
just suggest that you make it a
separate sentence.
and put these medical.
These conditions may include but
are not limited to and autism
spectrum disorder some people
said that they suggested
diabetes included I don't know
if that's necessary if you put
include but not limited just a
practical suggestion.
You madam chair representative.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair well
And and chair Thompson thanks
for bringing this forward again
I.
If this sounds very familiar
and I think we we passed this
committee last time I supported
it.
and do you recall what was the
hang up and judiciary last time
and we address that in this
version.
Representative I'm it I it was a
matter of time I don't believe
that that it that it was it had
any issues.
I think it was just we all know
how that how the clock works
just ran out of time.
And especially in Judiciary
madam chair and chair in one
madam speaker.
Representative.
Right well I I appreciate that
this is voluntary I appreciate
that there's not a marking on
the outside the car I was
concerned about you know folks
being targeted.
so I thank you for.
I think you've done a good job
I'm happy to support this again
thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you Representative Harper
and I'm happy to entertain a
motion on the before that
Representative Thomson I think
we did hear this piece and see
or is it C. pack I think also or
but it's been but I know that
you've been working on this
issue for really long time and
as as someone who's who's been
an advocate for people with
disabilities in in a variety of
different ways I certainly am
very supportive of this
legislation and I know that you
put in a lot of work to make it
As a as reasonable and as
I mean at just as reasonable as
possible for really people to to
be able to support this so I I'm
I'm really
I'm I'm very much in support of
it and will continue to to.
Do what we can to make it easier
for
our communities to to be able to
feel like they can drive and and
do all the other things as
freely as possible so thank you
Representative so all
entertaining motion at this
point.
Madam chair I make a motion to
do bass.
Okay I have a of the a motion
from vice chair Garcia and a
second from was it
Representative Lundstrom.
And so we can is there any
opposition to this to this bill.
I don't oppose I would like to
make a comment okay do you want
to make it right now
Representative yes ma'am it just
normally actor a motion a second
there's further discussion
I think I'm gonna go ahead and
vote for this someone to contact
EPS and local folks are home in
in C. R. somewhat persuaded by a
couple of points that that came
out this morning that I don't
recall coming out last time.
I want to do a little bit more
research on on the liability to
the police officers in if they
believe this is going to
increase the reliability of
anyway.
but I I think I'm gonna support
coming out here and and reserve
the right to review it again
when it gets to the floor so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
that doesn't appear to be any
opposition to this bill
so we'll we'll go ahead and and
move forward with a a do pass
Congratulations Representative
Thomson thank you madam chair
and members of the committee you
started off my morning well
good.
In the morning bye bye.
Okay great next we have house
bill two twenty eight with
Representative gusty and all I
know that he's presenting a bill
an act so Representative Madrid
Madrid did you wanna go ahead
and and handle that.
Yes
I'd like to have
David can Donna let in.
David and David Mallory when
some.
In New Mexico level as well.
Secretary I'm sorry Senator.
They're all in whenever you're
ready Representative.
Thank you madam madam chair
I wanted to be able to help
about the Representative Ambrose
person in this bill and in turn
inform always in another
committee so I'll just give a
brief description and then turn
it over to the experts that I
have
this is house bill two to twenty
eight to change the distribution
of eighteen point seven five
percent of the motor vehicle
excise tax revenue collection
from the local government
refund to the transportation
project fund and from there I'll
be glad to turn it over to the
next ones allow them to speak
whichever would like to see
speak from the experts please.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Madrid for a
helping out today we really
appreciate that secretary Mike
Santa.
The transportation here really
it's a pretty straightforward
bill madam chair if I can
summarize it in one hand out
slide if I'm able to share my
screen it's just making.
Currently and starting July
first will be forty million
dollars or so it'll be more
reoccurring cost into the
local government road funding
this bill just changes that
forty million to the new
transportation project fund.
And
that's really all it does just
to give you an idea the local
government road fund is pretty
restrictive and how locals can
use that it's seventy five
twenty five match a lot of times
the poor municipalities and
counties aren't able to meet
that twenty five percent match
so they don't get access to this
money the transportation project
fund was actually created a
couple sessions ago but it
doesn't have a reoccurring
funding source and so all we're
doing this and that's put that
forty million in the new fund
which is a ninety five five
match there's even a hardship
waivers or if there is a
community can that can't afford
that five percent they can get
the project a hundred percent
funded it is a competitive
process we're looking for shovel
ready projects and so we just
think that that's a better place
to put the money it's more
accessible more counties and
cities municipalities can access
it and the local government road
fund already has a funding
source which is part of the gas
tax and let's leave that one
alone and put it in the new fund
and so I doesn't look like I can
share my screen but if you have
any questions we'd be happy to
answer those thank you.
Thank you Mr secretary
Let me I will go ahead and go to
the audience did the other
mystery done I'm miss Montana's
did you all have anything else
that you wanted to say okay so
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in support of this
legislation.
We have one person on a Johnny
Johnston can you go ahead.
Yes madam chair in you hear me
yes we can hear you we're in
support of this this is been
brought up several times in the
past madam chair members of the
committee I'm the managing
director for the New Mexico
trucking association and we are
in support of this because it
will certainly help those small
towns where we deliver and they
need some infrastructure help
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Sir there's no one
else and for support is there
any opposition.
It doesn't look like there's any
opposition to this we have folks
in the committee who want to
speak first we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative Madrid
for helping move this forward
couple of quick questions I
understand from this morning's
conversation that the local road
fund will still be in existence
it's funded through a gas tax
and so we're gonna have to funds
we're just moving the excise tax
into the transportation fund is
that correct.
Madam chair are the two minutes
for witness would like to answer
Madam chair representative of
Crowder yes that is correct the
local road fund will still get
its money that it's been getting
for the past many years that's
anywhere from twenty to twenty
five million
we're just giving the new fund
are reoccurring funding source
so it doesn't change the bottom
line the same amount of money is
moving through that's not taking
anything away from general fund
or anything like that all it is
is instead of going into a local
fund is going into the new fund
which is more flexible and has a
better match for our locals okay
so you're you're retaining the
local government fund for
communities it may grow at
frontier may grow because the
smaller
He's would use the
transportation fund.
What the larger communities are
the communities that have the
ability will will be able to pay
the twenty five percent match
over there in in so you'll just
manage the two funds differently
as is that a fair statement.
Yeah the Madam chair
representative the local
government road fund has certain
criteria there's four different
pots of money that goes into
somewhere for bus route some is
competitive some every county
gets a certain amount the
transportation fund the new fund
or this forty million dollars
would go if this bill were were
to pass is
governed by a regulation that
was passed by the department
it's a competitive process a
couple years ago the legislature
put fifty million dollars in
this who are pretty equitable
across the boards that east each
district got about the same
amount each or the counties and
it's competitive and and what
we're looking for is more shovel
ready projects things that have
made their way through the local
process so that they have a say
in how that goes with the
rankings
and then this Madam goes to the
commission transportation
commission they approve the
recommendations or have comments
on them and then usually by
October of every year the money
is distributed so of community
can still would still have
access to the local part but
they can also submit application
for this new fund through the
competitive part as well so they
would they can still do both I
think it's more advantageous for
some of the smaller ones because
the the smaller match to focus
on the new fund.
Okay in my final question madam
chair and representative and and
that Mr Secretary even though
the work local has been removed
from the fund the rules that
govern the fund of.
Clarify and specify that the
money can only be used by
municipalities counties or
tribal entities I believe is
that correct Mr secretary.
Madam chair and representative
of color that is correct last
year tribal entities were added
through legislation and at that
point local was taken out to cut
accommodate that and the
basically the the name of the
fund change but it's still the
same function through
Leicester's legislation yes
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have chairwoman Lundstrom.
Are you thank you madam chair
and thank you Mr secretary I do
have a few questions here I just
want to make sure that.
Currently the local government
road fund is receiving is that
one percent of the excise tax.
Is that what we set up I know
this was a compromise in terms
of getting money into the Brian
well in part of that was that we
were going to move money into
the broad well using excise tax
as long as the road.
What purpose that money is that
the same thing.
Madam chair and madam chair yes
so the department would be
receiving motor vehicle excise
tax a few ways first is a small
percentage that is making up the
difference that we gave for the
brand well you are correct.
Then from house bill six in
twenty nineteen the last couple
years we received one percent of
the motor vehicle excise tax and
that waste your mark to the
district to to the Oil Field so
July first kind of the the
distribution changes so now the
department will be receiving one
and a half percent a little over
one and a half percent of the
motor vehicle excise tax a small
percent goes for the brand will
pay back point seven five
percent goes to the Department
to use just general fund and
then the other point seven five
percent would go if nothing
happens to the local government
road fund this bill would change
that point seven five percent to
go to the new transportation
projects on so the amount of
money doesn't change but where
that local money goes what
change from one fund to the
other so was it is that of the
excise taxes coming into the
department it was instruction
juncture we're fifty percent
went into the state and fifty
percent to local.
Madam chair and madam chair that
is correct yes starting starting
July first right now the the
entire one percent goes to
district to but starting July
first twenty twenty one it'll be
split in half your career is
that what this bill calls for is
it where is that how it is now.
Madam chair and madam chair
that's how it is now okay this
bill just moves instead of that
point seven five going to the
local government road fund it
goes the transportation project
fund but the percent so no I got
that so madam chair Mr Secretary
so is it the transportation
projects fund that receives the
general fund appropriation that
we put in this year it's a
hundred twenty five million is
that where that money goes.
Madam chair and madam chair that
would be our recommendation I
think when
chair woman Rubio has an
amendment that's where she
recommended and that's where we
recommend as well yes we want
that to go to the transportation
project funded think there's
hundred twenty five million
propose right now okay so the
staffing agency understands that
do we have to clarify that in
our bill or is it because what
we don't want happening is it
goes to the local government
road fun just to be transferred
out.
Because it can't be accessed.
Madam chair madam chair yes I
there there should be language
in the specials when that is
appropriated that it go into the
transportation project fund and
not to the local government road
fund so if there was the
language I'm happy to work with
anybody on that okay so the
forty million is money that's
projected or is that a cash
balance.
So madam chair that's a
projection of what the point
seven five motor vehicle excise
tax would generate but that
starts on July first so we won't
have that number until the next
fiscal year and so what would be
helpful as as you mentioned the
one twenty five million going in
now to give us something this
year and then whatever revenue
is generated would be the
starting point for next year
yeah what I'm not interested in
though is that there's not
equity among the highway
districts you know I I I have a
I have a lot of heartburn if
that is skewed in one direction
or the other we want to make
sure you know and I know you
guys do a good job of getting
that word out to the counties
cities and tribes we want to
make sure that it doesn't go
into one project in one city.
Madam chair madam chair yes I
I you made that very clear in in
the when we when fifty million
dollars was put in here in
twenty nineteen that was the
first allotment right it was we
did put that pretty equally
among districts I don't say it's
exactly equal because obviously
some projects go a little bit
over but every district got a
certain amount I think it was
between Sir all districts got
between six and eight million
and so we do try and maintain
the equitably among districts is
not required in the project fund
but we do do that because we
know that's important to
legislators.
Ask you to do that Mr
secretaries make sure that we
Rev up those are PO's and that
they're putting those projects
in on behalf of those local
governments I mean sometimes
it's an art but together those
applications and in these rural
areas these are PO's nature be
revved up.
So they're ready to go and how
those projects ready to go
because you're saying that it
say ninety five I match I mean
that's that's practically a
hundred percent grant as far as
I'm concerned and then if you've
got a hardship waiver the hands
of the whole hundred percent
there's not a reason in the
world these local governments
can't get those applications in
for that hundred twenty five
million thank you madam chair
thank you Mr secretary.
Thank you chairman I'm next we
have Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
the representative.
The chair Lundstrom and
Representative Crowder asked the
majority of my questions are
great great information thank
you for asking those questions.
I'm sure and.
Representative and secretary
Santa
My of my recollection is about
one percent of motor vehicle
excise tax generally brings in
about forty forty five million
but sure looks like.
quite some five percent is being
projected to be about that same
amount of.
are are we are we seeing
substantial increases and
motor vehicle excise tax.
Madam chair and Representative
Fajardo Parker one percent back
in twenty nineteen the
projection was between fifty and
fifty five million
I think our projection this year
it dropped a little bit because
of the pandemic it looks like
it's recovered and our
projection this year was about
fifty million for every one
percent of motor vehicle excise
tax now expect that to go up as
we continue to recover from the
pandemic so when we look at the
point seventy five at somewhere
around forty million it's pry
maybe a little bit more than
that but that's kind of where we
are okay so excellent thank you
insurance secretary the other
question I have the gas tax
that will continue to go to the
local government fund
The my recollection was that it
was about two cents of the state
Rotax went went to the local
government is it is that correct
and and I believe you said that
that account for about twenty to
twenty five million.
Madam chair and representative
Mallory may know the exact
amount but it's your profits
it's right around two cents and
yeah you it's between generates
between two pretty consistently
between twenty and twenty five
million so that's been a
reoccurring funding source for
that fund for many years and
that's strictly from the guest
your.
Okay.
Excellent and.
I think I think.
you know it's not popular for
folks on my side of the state.
Of
where I stand on tax policy is
our New Mexico.
I'm should not really be an out
wire on the high end or the low
end of any tax relief should be
in the middle of the pack right
by being a high high tax outline
your back and I can do bad
things to the economy and and
folks come want to come here
being too low.
How is it going to bring a bunch
of folks here in New Mexico.
you know we have a really all
property tax on your people
moving here because we have a
property tax.
Our gas taxes whoa we really
need about a six percent
increase our.
To be more middle of the pack
so.
Senator couple extra cents local
government will fund doubling
that I think would be huge.
Are you know when I go around
the state look at our roads are
state roads are generally really
good shape.
There are some areas that need
help but it's our local our
county inner city roads that
really need help.
So
Someday when the time is right I
think a we'll need to bite the
bullet and a.
Increase that user fees are so
hard to we can we can this more
money to our our local roads.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative secretary
appreciate the time.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question in this back
to us something up
Representative
Lundstrom mention and that is
access to these funds you know
many of these communities and
and some of the smaller
communities right around
Albuquerque.
Don't have the folks to fill out
the applications.
To apply or compete.
For for the funds so do you all
Mr Secretary help folks in there
that can help some of these
smaller communities.
With the applications.
Madam chair representative is
yes we do and and what is been
happening in the past and
chairwoman Lundstrom brought up
a good point is a lot of there
wasn't a lot of engagement in
the local are TPO or MPO process
because there wasn't a lot of
money what happened when this
new phone fund came about there
now is a lot of engagement and
folks in those local areas are
gathering projects are getting
themselves already because they
know that there's an opportunity
for funding so it is important
to engage locals the in and
around Albuquerque we did issue
some of the first money to those
smaller areas which is good
because now they can afford it
they can afford the ninety five
five were even if they have
arches we pay the full amount
but if they need assistance
we're happy to help them through
their local process get their
application everything put
together.
madam chair and secretary about
how long does it take.
for the application process to
go through.
So madam chair and
representative when we got the
money in twenty nineteen the
bill was passed we had
applicants we had applications
due in June we did all the
valuations in July it went to
our commission for approval in
September and we got contracts
out in October so if we were to
get money this year it would
probably follow that same
process and I want to point out
that you know we were we
received fifty million we
already have the majority of
that spent or income byrd  by
the locals so it's not sitting
around somewhere I'm waiting to
be spent it got put in play for
shovel ready projects most of
it's already spent or or income
board which means a project to
started and that's one of the
advantages of the new fund it is
just more much more accessible
and easier to spend for these
local communities.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative is
there are any further
discussion.
I don't see anyone else would
anybody like to entertain a
motion.
Sure I'm overdue press.
There's a second for others of
first from Representative
Powdrell Culbert and a second
from chairwoman Lundstrom
Is there any opposition to this
bill.
There doesn't appear to be any
opposition Mario
so Representative you all have a
due pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
you're up next.
I appreciate appreciate that
madam chair and there some folks
from the department of
transportation that are.
Just help service expert
witnesses and we may even have
our bill drafter chase bank
order.
In the waiting room to help
also.
This is an interesting concept
with house bill two seven days
but I like to do is just talk
about it in general and
I can get into the the details
of the bill itself.
But basically what this bill
does madam chair and committee.
It puts New Mexico at least into
the twenty first century when it
comes to dealing with new
technology and dealing with
The way
just X. works today with the
economists vehicles.
What it does is this bill does
it demands the motor vehicle
code to allow it Thomas
vehicles.
Including commercial motor
carriers to operate on the roads
of New Mexico the bill would
allow platooning of such
vehicles as well as authorizing
vehicles within a driver
assisted platoon to follow other
connected vehicles closer than
currentlypermitted which is
three hundred feet.
But it does is it directs the to
Mexico department of
transportation to promulgate
rules for issuing a Tana most
vehicle permits.
It requires a Thomas vehicles
including commercial vehicles to
meet federal standards and
regulations for motor vehicles
and specifies that economists
vehicles must be capable of
being operated in K. in
compliance with apple Google
traffic and motor vehicle laws.
Also should there be any type of
accident would provide to the
investigating officer any and
all information needed to
determine the cause of the
accident further vehicle
manufacturers are required to
cooperate with the investigation
to the extent necessary in
determining the cause of the
accident.
And
In H. B. two seventy eight
states that no political
subdivisions may prohibit the
use of an economist motor
vehicle within its boundaries
solely based on vehicle being
equipped with an automated
driving system right I wanted to
mention that
this is a result of the work
that's been going on for the
last couple of years primarily
through a Senate Joint Memorial
that passed last year in looking
at this whole new industries of
economists and driverless
vehicles.
Last year I believe it was
senator Jim white that actually
had initiated a bill on the
Senate side to try to address
some of these concerns and I
don't know if it was a timing
issue or or what happened maybe
it was in twenty nineteen eighty
actually get this bill so I
picked up on it now because in
the Gallup area we're looking at
the opportunity to actually
initiate a new industry and that
would be an industry around
testing research and development
and
I'm just looking at the whole.
Concept of hosting these kind of
vehicles in in our area Gallup
through the Gallup I forty area
there's about seven thousand
trucks a year they go through
their.
So we have a major major truck
trucking economy out there as
well as long I can and I twenty
five.
We've looked at this and
actually I was interested in it
from a couple years ago when I
went out to an NCSL meeting I
attended the transportation
component where they were
looking at this whole
ballooning
Thomas vehicle that that
industry.
Actually had some demos there
this meeting was held in the
city of Las Vegas Nevada and
actually show some
demonstrations of how a Thomas
vehicles are being used in these
major cities.
The issue is is being able to
move people quickly and driver
without a driver actually got to
sit in one of the day modding
what I thought was even more
interesting for.
Large city like that what is
going to take time.
We saw what happens in the in
downtown well I guess central in
Albuquerque what happens is when
you try to do.
Retrofitting in a system that
wasn't designed for particularly
a bus system as an example down
there you go any try to retrofit
it makes a lot it makes a lot
more sense that it's designed
appropriately from the front
end.
And I can tell you just overall
committee that.
Where there I mean the whole
economists I mean when you think
about the drone industry you
think about testing of
driverless vehicle you know what
the driverless vehicles and put
tuning I know that Johnny
Johnson is in this meeting and
he can talk about it all day
long about what's happening in
the trucking industry I can talk
to you about what's happening in
the rail industry when you think
everything is robotic when
they're moving containers say
from from rail to truck.
You know it's it's basically all
about robotics now.
Our state
I don't think has engage this as
much as they should I know we've
got some people in deal to that
I mean they live and breathe
this every day but I think from
a policy perspective.
The legislative policy
perspective we really haven't
got our arms around it and this
bill is a first step in that
direction.
And I would anticipate
throughout the process from
today's meeting to the next
committee to the floor session
and the things that happen on
the Senate side you're going to
see lots of revisions just
because it's it's a new thing
for us to get our arms around.
But I think it's something that
we need to do it's very very
important in terms of developing
in the new industrial cluster in
the state of New Mexico.
So with that I mean there's
probably a whole ton of people
that want to talk and I'll be
quiet let him do it might
sponsor eight Sanchez
representative Garcia I yield to
him madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I know
that there's folks that were
brought in as your experts
Representative Mr when this and
Mr run gets and of course Mr van
Gorder I don't know if you
wanted to have them say anything
before we moved on to the
audience.
That would be helpful madam
chair particularly uh Jerry or
Charles if you're on the because
okay without these guys I
wouldn't have any idea were out
the state of New Mexico and
they've been living and
breathing this for a couple
years now if we could just allow
them a little time and then
chase is here to help me with
technical questions about the
bill so he's he's Legislative
Council staff but we could just
Jared and Charles to maybe make
a few comments.
Sounds great go ahead go ahead
Jerry if you want to start madam
chair US chairwoman Lundstrom
members of the committee new
technology had has been
developed and continues to
involved allow vehicles operated
with less that you mean or
action that is required today
Senator jurisdictions states
around the nation have
encouraged the development
testing a vehicle equipped with
the automated driving systems
what this bill does is it really
brings us to par as chairwoman
those from mentioned with other
states
it also encourages economic
development and it brings up
testing manufacturers into our
state that helps out our economy
in which is a huge part of what
we want to accomplish with this
bill
what it does is it notifies the
state of New Mexico of their
intends to come to our state to
testing but it also sets
standards around expectation
that around liability insurance
coverages and making sure that
they're sharing the road safely
with New Mexico drivers and with
that I you if.
Madam chair representative of Mr
Charles Recchi add to the
technological aspects of this it
would be greatly appreciated.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair this is Charles Frankie.
The one thing that I think bears
mentioning as the improvements
associated not only with the the
economics but also with the
safety over eighty five percent
of our all crashes are tied back
to you then they're having
automated driving systems will
vastly improve.
She's my best we improve the
reduction and and traffic at
crashes and fatalities as well
as allowing for the the state to
come up to par currently New
Mexico is only one of fourteen
other states that doesn't have a
Thomas vehicle legislation and
the legislation being introduced
is really a baseline or stepping
stone off of which we can
build on as the industry grows
and develops because it is an
ever changing technology
technology pursuit that we'll
see vast improvements in our
life here in New Mexico.
You Mr recce if there's no other
comments we'll go ahead and go
to the audience is there any
support for this legislation if
you could please raise your
hand.
we can start with
Mr Johnston if you wanna go
ahead.
Madam chair chair woman
Lundstrom I definitely want to
thank you for bringing this
legislation forward.
I did work with
Senator white when he brought
his up and I can tell you from
from our industry this is
extremely important.
And Gallup sits in the primary
place that is going to be so
important to the west coast that
economic development we'll go
home if everybody pays attention
to what the chair woman
Lundstrom wants to do out there.
It is going to be key and I'm
gonna give you one example
on our board sets UPS and UPS
has electric vehicles working.
and they're working on
autonomous in the California
area in the LA basin.
And they can't move those trucks
out because they don't have a
way to refuel them electrically
but Gallup is sitting right in
that window so they would
automatically as soon as that's
developed open their doors and
let those trucks come out so it
is a very important legislation
and we strongly supported and we
thank you very much for bringing
it thank you madam chair thank
you Mr Johnston.
Next we have Robert Brown.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Lundstrom
first off I'd like to think
Charles especially right because
we've got an opportunity to work
with him in the department
I represent two simple we are
working on what we call level
four autonomous trucks we
started this relationship back
in two thousand nineteen with
the pilot with the US postal
service we continue daily
operations in New Mexico along I
ten with friends like UPS and
and U. S. xpress so then farming
that you have created has been
welcoming and it and it's been a
great environment and also a
shut out here law enforcement
community so we're we're are
we're encouraged that New Mexico
is a is is trying to align with
you know other states like Texas
and and Arizona but doing it in
your own way and we look forward
to working with you on this
legislation in the near future
so thank you very much and and
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you Mr brown next if we
can have is there any
opposition.
And there is no opposition in
the audience will move on to the
committee first on the board is
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair those of
you who know me know my
imagination just went bonkers
but
I'm I'm really excited about
this and that had the
opportunity to speak with jail
just a little bit in reference
to all of this happening and so
I'm just wondering what our
current infrastructure.
You know as much as you all know
how is this going to affect this
how's it going to affect New
Mexico's existing
infrastructure you know what
they were doing the the bus line
down the middle of central that
area was in chaos.
So how was it going to affect
our infrastructure what we're
going to have to.
Build or rebuild or put in place
to make all of this happened for
our state.
You
chair representative that's an
excellent question and it and it
is what is going to force is
going to force the hand of real
infrastructure planning.
Planning and design both at the
state level and at the local
level.
I can't even imagine what it's
going to cost a small town like
minded did go up its central
infrastructure to accommodate
this kind of thing as an
example.
If we had I mean we've got a
state road that runs right
through the middle of town yes
sixty six as an example.
And say we want to have an
economist service there that
infrastructure is it to the
historic district yes band kind
of patch work it's never been
completely you know tore up and
re done.
What's going to create for my
local community is real
infrastructure planning and real
prioritization.
It's going to be the same way
for the state of New Mexico I'm
in New as as your mind goes into
lots of different directions so
this money I mean it may be
something like even the
development of a new lane on I.
forty for just the economists
group and I can and I twenty
five it may be that kind of
development but I think it's
going to force this whole issue
of real public works planning
now Charles and Jerry have a
better handle on it but that's
just coming from me as an
office.
Madam chair madam chair
representative federal
There's a distinguishing element
between what's called a Thomas
vehicles which are the vehicles
that can operate based on the
processing of information it's
all encompassed on the vehicle
and was called connected
vehicles connected vehicles are
very heavily dependent on
infrastructure improvements and
the transfer of information
between the vehicle and its
surroundings and that's when you
get into such a high overhead
burden associated with.
Improve your communications
infrastructure as it relates
specifically to autonomous
vehicles the manufacturers of
the OEMs what they're looking
for as a.
at basically is the M. I'm it's
more of a maintenance and
operations of our current
infrastructure mainly anything
that would assist a human driver
would also add value to the
autonomous driving system for
example ensuring that your
roadway striping is legible by
the system ensuring that your
signs can be seen and have great
retro collectivity on the river
please and and that's where
they're really putting emphasis
on work they're looking for from
the transportation agencies with
that if if perhaps one of the
OEMs maybe Robert wood to add in
the thing being from that
community R. or possibly Jimmy
Johnson on what they see their
needs are tied back from the
DOT's perspective.
Did you which one did you want
me to Mr right Robert Baker
would probably add some real
value to this chair that and.
From.
yes I'm happy to answer yeah
insurance is right you know what
is the if you guys invest in
infrastructure what is good for
human drivers today is good for
I Tonya destructs tomorrow you
know we don't like pot holes and
we like critically acclaimed the
stripe beans and and and and
clear sighted so I don't want
people to think that we have to
wait you know for five G.
deployments or anything like
that so if you if you're putting
investment dollars that are now
are very scarce into road
infrastructure that is also
supportive of the times vehicles
as well as our technology is
designed to operate safely on
today's infrastructure doesn't
rely on any kind of like future
oriented sensor future oriented
connectivity so Charles is a
hundred percent correct so if
you're looking to spend your
dollars you know helping human
drivers is going to help our our
tongues trucks today it is into
the future.
You know here in New Mexico
we're already having a hard time
with trying to maintain the
roadways that we have and so I'm
I'm real curious.
As we try to roll this out how
will it.
Impact one way or the other
electric cars.
Did you know we talked about
this committee over the years so
what what is the relationship
between the two.
You know what I'd like to
suggest Representative and madam
chair on this.
Since we still have this in HSC.
That we take five percent of
that hundred and twenty five
million.
For local and put that into the
planning for Thomas so
communities can answer that
question that is a incredibly
important question for eight the
answer.
When we say you know what what
what what it what would it look
like for Gallup what would look
like for Albuquerque or any of
these other towns it it's almost
it would be impossible for
anybody to really get their arms
around so I'm going to suggest
that we take a portion of that
local general fund money and
Senate at specifically for
Thomas planning for these local
governments and Rotarian Charles
let me see what you guys think
about that but there's just too
many individualized questions
that are going to come up
depending on what community
you're from.
Well madam chair and and
Representative Lundstrom before
you go there.
The legislation of the final
piece of legislation there are
the legislators that have worked
extremely hard to get Senator
Lisa completed long before I
showed up.
And I'm wondering you know when
you think about Santa Theresa.
I know they have somewhat of an
automated system.
You know we talk about how they
move the oil cars from from one
entity to the other from the
trying to the chart trucks are
vice versa so are we looking for
so are we looking at something
similar to that.
Or or or what I mean I know you
know your area in Gallup that
you're talking about so I'm just
wondering if Santa Theresa would
be somewhat.
Of a model or an idea.
As to what this would look like.
We are.
Madam chair part of it would be
I mean because it does the
thana miss work.
But what I'm thinking about is
more about the.
The major logistics piece of say
Lester issues tracking as an
example.
Is to get there please
With the Thomas vehicles what
would not work anymore is a
long.
State roadways we have safety
zones
he has to go down to fifty five
miles an hour.
Does that make sense anymore
with the Thomas vehicles as an
example okay I don't know.
So what it's going to take is
we've got to look at all these
major corridors.
And ask ourselves.
Especially if they affect local
government planning.
How is that how we gonna respond
to this and maybe some
governments they say we don't
want to do this you guys just
take the lead at the state that
there's going to be some they're
going to want to be right at the
front end of this incentive
traces gonna be one of them
because they rely so heavily on
what comes in from Mexico what
goes out we created that that
that twenty mile heavy weight
zone for trucks around that area
does that make sense anymore for
Thomas vehicles I don't know if
they weigh the same as a you
know big eighteen Wheeler I
don't know that I don't know if
they're designed differently and
these experts on this call on
this zoom call with no that but
I just think that there's a
number of questions out there
that if we could do some
stronger planning.
Some sense.
Jerry stand was a go ahead Mr
run this.
Madam chair chairwoman lesson
thank you for that and I can't
agree more with chairwoman
Lundstrom in regards to setting
aside a certain percentage five
percent we may have to explore
what that percentage is but as
we're looking at the technology
the shift in technology from
vehicle to vehicle vehicle to
infrastructure not urban
planning and our local
jurisdictions are local
municipalities will be required
to ship their priorities towards
setting up an apartment for
these Thomas vehicles to be able
to be driven through their
community safely and so DO TT at
the perspective of supporting
that type of initiative and that
five percent it may not be five
percent or whatever percentage
it is it we are definitely need
support for that and we would be
able to help guide these
communities through the industry
to make sure that we're doing
things safely and setting it up
for success as well.
Okay and and it's.
I guess to our Representative
Lundstrom the suggestion of for
the five percent now makes a lot
of sense
and so I think we'll just move
forward on on trying to make
make that happen because I think
this is very interesting I know
we've had a manner I here before
lance we talked a lot.
about the electric cars and and
No touched on the Adonis
vehicle the other question that
I have this strictly a curious
little girls question.
Is the lead vehicle.
Does it have a driver or is
everything driverless.
I mean if you have five or six
connected vehicles.
Is the very first one have a
driver.
Or not.
Just curious about that I don't
know if each year.
Representative could we have
Johnny Johnson or or OR Gerry
talk about that on platooning
I'm not I'm not sure if it's at
the front or the back.
Madam chair thank god don't Mr
Johnston on and then
Representative David Jerry if
you want also to some of the
journey Madam.
Chair.
Your woman Lundstrom on the
platooning trucks such as
peloton it is a geo fence
there's a driver in both trucks
and they are just within the
proximity of each other
normally fifty feet but those
are with the drivers at this
point.
Okay let's the economist command
is it because of their
connected.
You lost me there Johnny.
Madam chair.
Representative Andrea.
You've got two different kinds
of Thomas trucks are in a in a
level that is entirely different
than the geo fence and the
platooning.
Platooning trucks are saving of
Connie's from the lead truck to
the second truck but there is a
driver in both one so what that
is is that different companies
can come up in geo fence to a
different company and to help
their economy in their fuel
consumption.
And and wear and tear on the
vehicles because the lead truck
is actually the truck that is.
Drive in the truck and the
steering and the brakes.
And but you can break the geo
fencing time you've got two
different things there as
Charles can probably expand on
platooning and autonomous are
not necessarily the same thing
in this context amount.
Is my question thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Mr Johnson Johnson
next we have Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair and the
chair Lundstrom
appreciate you bringing this
forward
maybe just the.
A couple technical questions and
then the a COVID so so Madam
chair Ostrom we did get an
updated FY are this morning.
On your bill and they were.
Senator I think helpful
technical.
Suggested changes of Europe to
to look at those yet.
You know I'm sorry and madam
chair representative Harper I
have that FIR now in front of me
discussed at three seconds ago
and started reviewing and
this all the fiscal implications
in the signet significant issues
is that what you're referring to
Madam chair representative.
So.
Madam chair chair Lundstrom
yeah I'm looking at I guess
starting on page four.
TRD or as of a couple suggested
changes that I are minor but I
think helpful
for example.
I think they say here in section
five work permit is used but
they say this is really most
often associated with that the
driver permit.
And that they recommend we
instead called it a Torrez
driver certification or
certificate.
And later.
Yeah later on in the state.
Just the.
But to address the following too
closely issue that might happen
with the tuning.
To just add.
a new sentence in that statute
that section sixty six dash
seven dash.
Three eighteen the state
operator vehicle are part of the
connected to the system.
What the lead vehicle.
our.
No.
Especially not subject to this
three hundred foot provisions of
I mean there's there's basically
up a page and a half year of
what I thought were.
Minor but good.
suggestions to improve.
Your legislation.
I guess I just ask you to
consider what it does and and I
think this come where does this
go next.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank I think it
goes to the business committee
next and we know that we're
gonna have to make changes
between now and then and you
know I have no problem with
suggestions from tax.
Of the tax department because we
know that this affects DOTA Tax
public safety a number of
different state agencies and tax
is a big deal because you know
we haven't even got into the
whole issue around how does
revenue get collected from this
you know we do a weight distance
tax now based on traditional
trucking.
You know I don't know what that
that best practices in other
states but I want to work
through this process so I get a
better grip on it and could
recommend something to the tax
committee.
and if it needs to go to tax
committee I don't have a problem
with that either because a lot
of good I want to good thinking
around this bill is this is a
new industry for us so I mean
that's okay with me to.
R. Madam chair Lundstrom that's
very gracious of you I I would
not suggest this has to go to a
search committee
Act I'm pleased to hear you say
that you consider making these
changes along the way I think
they're good suggested changes
and I guess that this that the
the comment I would make is I I
really think this is going to be
so what we're asking all the
right questions and you to we
need to surly think this
through.
Because.
We know that they'll be some
things that come up that none of
us anticipated.
But I really think this will end
up being a lot easier
than we than we think.
I've.
The.
Estimate was a lot of the work
so that
In out Tesla and SpaceX are
doing.
And yes so is one of the leaders
in developing you know kind of a
Thomas or automated driving.
so we we kind of associate that
with electric cars but but
they're really they're really
two different things right yes
it does make elector cars but
they're also working on
automated driving systems.
that could be applied to any
vehicle as long as you had a
bunch of cameras on the computer
and GPS.
so
I think we heard earlier
That you know what we really
need is good roads
winds you know good good
painting marking lines good
signage.
I think that kind of saying is
really.
All that's going to be needed to
make sure
take advantage of these new
systems are coming online.
And and it's kind of it's kind
of exciting I've I've got a
friend who has a a Tesla and he
says yeah he turns on the
autopilot and bill passed cars
on the highway and all you know
he can check his email wall wall
wall wall driving
it's a it's impressive what they
can do now so I appreciate Madam
chair wants from you you're
bringing this forward I think
you're that close would be a
perfect place for for a lot of
the the already work a lot of
the the development work.
On this and and kind of pave the
way for us to New Mexico to the
to be able to implement these
kind of things.
Madam chair I I would like to
respond Representative Harper I
have absolute respect for his
background and knowledge in in
understanding new technology and
I just wanted to say we're I
think we're gonna see the
biggest change is in the
communications piece and
broadband or satellite
technology this only works if we
can communicate.
I'm glad to hear from our our
experts and actually have these
vehicles that we've got decent
road conditions and and that
kind of thing that at the end of
the day I think what this is
going to do is drive better
communications because they can
operate if they can't talk to
each other and
what I'd like to suggest and
will in my club closing comments
says is that I'd like to see
this transportation committee
sign on to this bill the
transportation bill there's
nothing that says you guys can't
sign on to this I'd like sit
bipartisan and I think we Mexico
needs to be the lead dog and
just as I've said many times you
need if you're not the lead dog
the scenery never changes and in
New Mexico this is about
transportation and this
committee should be late that
that right so I would welcome
anybody who's interested is I
need you I need your help on
this
what I know is this much but
bring in all of you guys stand
we know this much so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chairman stripper.
Thank you Representative Herbert
next we have Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairwoman Lundstrom
representative Garcia for this
bill and I also want to give a
shout out to our transportation
department because they really
had the vision to lay the
groundwork for statewide
broadband which is essential to
this bill my question might be
to Jerry about this I'm not sure
in study more about automation
Thomas vehicles I've learned now
that there's six levels and they
they really really very with
that level I being full driving
automation with no steering
wheels or pedals and tracks no
geo fencing have you
anticipated a multilevel permit
system where according to the
level of automation the permit
cost would be very have you
gotten that far yet or are
considered the implications of
the different levels of
automation.
Madam chair chairman Lundstrom
Representative Garrett you know
my involvement in this I began
under Senate Joint Memorial
three and what we did at that
time as we brought together
stakeholders from around the
state that included law
enforcement the office of the
superintendent of insurance
Other state agencies that are
deeply involved in this and as
it is transitioning into the
future there all of those
questions are relevant as you
know many of us already have
certain levels of economy in our
vehicles you know from steering
control to automatic braking
those are zero one two and then
when you start getting into the
hi we promise areas which are
three four and five those are
all important questions that we
discussed but have not been
codified those these can be
definitely worked out through
the rules process of this
statute and making sure that as
we're looking at it from the
perspective of fees and revenue
for the state in regards to
compensate the state for for
providing the testing grounds
that one we're not discouraging
companies from coming here but
they were also taking care of
the interests of the state so
all of those under Senate Joint
Memorial three which was a few
years ago but that those
concepts are still relevant
today are things that we can
definitely discuss and proceed
with removing all works with an
ever changing and evolving
technology like it funds the.
Okay thank you very much thanks
are that's all madam chair will.
If you Representative next we
have Mr Burciaga.
Thank you thank you madam
chairwoman all.
Thank you representative
Armstrong Representative is bill
she pretty well covered much of
what I was going to talk about
all school one thing that we
really need to make sure is
because you know they're going
to be a lot of cost in the grid
on this stuff project we need to
make sure the department of
transportation has the proper
funding to implement all these
changes will go to another
should wretch chairman long from
said you know if you're not the
lead dog nothing changes and
all.
Appreciate what we're trying to
do here is legend John this
committee
the real reality of all this
madam chair this is gonna happen
you know we're not going to stop
it from happening and we need to
be in front of this situation
before we fall behind you know
what do you do always sure about
New Mexico madam chair being
behind on everything and we
don't need not we do not need to
pull behind of this part of the
what's going to happen it is a
big if we economic driver for
the state of New Mexico it will
happen and it's happening now
the new norm this issue before
we you too far behind thank you
Madam for that and all one more
thing madam chair if I may I
would just like to recognize all
the secretary of all
transportation been on Google
technology want to recognize
them for the public of New
Mexico state dog Department
secretary Michael Sandel thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Mr next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and
madam chair thank you for
bringing forth one house bill
two seventy of madam chair is as
we begin the process I heard a
comment
for Mr rent basis said we're now
one of fourteen others that I
would our our docking our
version of the lost and I became
curious this probably madam
chairman chairs a question for
Mr red border.
Our is our new house bill two
seventy in concert with the
statutes and taxes in Arizona
where the truckers are are gonna
transition in and out from our
how much time was spent making
sure that these fit well
together would play well
together.
Madam.
But I guess my question is the
question or.
He's he's on go ahead the madam
chair I would privilege of
Council Service I'm here for the
sole purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before this committee and
I do not appear before the
committee in support or
opposition to the.
Bill before you
Madam chair representative I did
not personally take a look at
legislation and other states
when this legislation was
initially drafted in two
thousand nineteen I worked with
senator white on this bill and I
do not recall this time whether
or not we looked at other states
I know that when I drafted this
bill it was patterned after the
two thousand nineteen bills and
I did not consult other states I
don't know whether Mr
Representative K. that was
looking other states wherein he
made some suggestions that were
in this bill or not.
Thank you for your comments
Sergei and madam chair good the
perhaps Mr in case respond yes
I'm Mr and you go ahead.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder
out for first one clarify and
that is that New Mexico is one
of fourteen states who currently
does not have legislation the
remainders of states do specific
to that thank you.
Specific to that the bill that
is being proposed really aligns
itself with the majority of the
legislation that has been put
into effect and in surrounding
states and throughout the state
first and foremost is to make
sure that there's a lot of
consensus on what we're
considering to be at a time in
this vehicle and those that
consensus is based upon a
standard by the society of
automotive engineers call J.
three oh one six and that really
defines of six levels of
autonomy adopting that allows us
to make sure that we are in fact
aligned with what the rest of
the nation is taking accepting
as the basis of what a Connie is
for on Google so we're very much
in line with what's been
proposed Mustang and acted in
fact there's quite a few state
eight six hundred get very
early.
On enacting legislation and they
really kind of went beyond what
was permissible by the national
highway transportation safety
administration specifically very
similar to the motor vehicle
safety standards that are
currently in play just for
regular vehicles the National
Nitzer national how it transfer
traffic transportation safety
administration has set aside
eleven safety specific elements
that deal with various aspects
such as security such as privacy
such as being able to ensure
that their standards associated
with the crash worthiness of the
system after it's been hit the
human machine interface all
those things are really kind of
all from limits to states to be
able to regulate what they told
us that but the agency has told
us from that regulations has
been you need to stick with what
you're currently responsible for
which includes traffic law
enforcement registration of
vehicles licensing your drivers
as well as ensuring there's
insurance regulations in place.
Madam chair district you thank
you I I I think the short answer
would be yes we looked at it and
we're in concert with them is
that correct.
Madam chair representative
Crowder yes Sir all right that
great answer I appreciated very
much thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
we have next representative
headed for.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Your own through for bringing in
and vice chair Garcia for
bringing this legislation thank
you I to support this bill
Echo in there there's no reason
for me to repeat what
Representative are for thirty
discussed I think those are
going to work its way through
Representative Crowder also
actually question the.
Sorry about
I I
I see the screen.
Control huge economic driver for
us in the future and excited to
see how we can make this work in
southeastern New Mexico R. I
agree with chair Lundstrom so
statements of this is going to
to change the way we look at
structure planning
significantly
just so what I'd.
My clients are all across.
New Mexico and and how we look
at stuff and and I'm excited to
see how how we adjust for those.
For lunch from if there's anyway
that I can give any support from
the from the engineering
community of happy to do that
thank you very much ready madam
chair and I I need that help you
would have a much better handle
on the nuts and bolts of the
kind of engineering and the kind
of thinking now that goes into
these requests for proposals and
scopes of work and and all that
kind of business that J. E.
local governments would have to
look at that don't think about
that today because I've never
had to so I certainly appreciate
that and you know we we want to
we want the best strongest piece
legislation we can get through
thank you.
Thank you Representative we have
of vice chair Garcia go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the opportunity to speak
again I've been listening to all
the presenters and and people on
this committee and it is really
a good honor and it's hard
feeling to hear the
bipartisanship of the bill it is
really nice to all just what
the.
Of the last project not the
presenter of.
Representative up in but I think
his name what you just mentioned
no longer just go to the the
thoughts and above all but it
all worked out for everybody
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Just one quick question I was
just wondering are to any of our
experts out there federal
dollars that are available.
New Mexico.
go down this road and in any
way.
Madam chair and I call on the
secretary cabinet secretary one
of the DOT people especially
with the new infrastructure bill
that's being proposed.
Okay I'll put all bring in the
secretary
One second.
I don't think he's on anymore.
Is there anyone else you would.
We can bring in our Jerry do you
do you have any idea madam chair
sure let's from members of the
committee.
When it comes to federal dollars
there actually is opportunity
around innovation we have
federal dollars that are tied to
innovation and encouraging of
technologies around the state
that's one of the conversations
that Charles when can I have
just yesterday about where the
best place to put this in house
it within your tier and as they
are emerging technologies coming
into the transportation or not
they are absolutely now what
those dollars Representative and
how much is something that we
will absolutely explore
but that being said as well
Representative part of the cover
is that we're already testing in
the state of New Mexico there
there's programs that are
already occurring now so we
don't want to do is get bogged
down with Mr the infrastructure
that it's gonna be necessary to
expand and grow this initiative
we're able to move rather
quickly if we allow these
companies for state they're able
to come in yes and we commit
more realize their participation
in the state but those federal
dollars as this program is
evolving it is withdrawing the
technology that shifting in the
innovation is coming there will
absolutely be opportunities to
spend some federal dollars for
the innovation the technology
and the infrastructure needs of
communities.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative there
is no other no one else on the
list to speak
Representative Lundstrom is
there anything that you want to
say before we we move on I thank
you madam madam chair I just
like to thank the committee and
I'd like to thank all the
experts for helping with the
presentation on this bill today
and it's been very I've learned
a lot I've been taking a lot of
notes myself as as I've been
listening to the various
comments made.
I just think that this kind of
initiative is bigger than one or
two people it is a group group
initiative I think you should be
led by house transportation and
public works I thank you
you know we can help them make
HSC east side.
I think it's important also that
we set funding aside for some
planning don't know what that
percentage looks like yet but I
can certainly work with D. O. T.
and getting some sense so that
there's gonna be some
communities that really are
gonna jump on and think that
this is a good thing and I hope
they do and there's others that
may not but they're going to
need some help in really
understanding the impact to
their own community.
And
you know I just would be again
just thank everyone for your
help and your perspective as you
all come from different parts of
the state.
Thank you chairwoman can I
entertain a motion from.
And
then from Representative
Powdrell Culbert and a second
from Representative Crowder.
is there any opposition.
Chairman long term you have in
the past.
Thank you.
Great.
I'm.
Finally you all we have
Representative Madrid are you
are you ready for here.
For your many.
Yes ma'am madam chair we let in
Franklin Garcia please.
Thanks for.
Mike Santa Fe please available.
Franklin right now and I don't
believe the secretary is on
right now okay.
When you're ready when you're
ready.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee as we
do as you recall this is one of
the very first one that we
brought through and that it
lacked if our our and we have
that today so I'd like to this
week kind of reintroduce and
then all of your to my expert
witness as well please madam
chair.
This is the transfer of certain
department of public safety
authority to New Mexico
department of transportation
related to the trip tax act
weight and distance can tax act
and the motor transportation act
including administrative
rule making authority and it
clarifies a safety enforcement
features the taxation and
revenue department retains
administrative tax authority
with that being said I'd like to
yield to my experts with this
Frank Garcia.
From duty please go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Franklin Garcia
with the agency to do T. mobile
division under mortal we have
oversight of our ports of entry
program so and as we discussed
earlier when we presented the
bill what we're doing is
transferring the authority for
this thing of permits and permit
sales for commercial vehicles
from deep part of public safety
to the department transportation
all that activity is currently
being done under a memorandum of
agreement between DOT DPS in tax
and Rev we have provided the
committee with a a one page
sheet I noticed a thirty page
bill and we did a breakdown of
of what all the the changes in
the bill will do the majority of
them will take that
responsibility from DPS to DOT
there are some times where we
have to include taxed rapid duty
together for some eligibility
also DPS as we mentioned before
will maintain Forsman duties
duty isn't taking over any of
those we are working with DPS I
know there was some language in
the FIR that there was concern
about them losing ninety four
thousand dollars annually which
they have been utilizing for
over time we have budgeted that
money so we would still have
that money available to DPS
enforcements and and ensuring
that the commercial vehicles are
compliance is eligible under
this funding so we could make
that funding available to DPS
and with that'll stand for
questions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative will move to the
attendees is there anyone in
support of this legislation.
We have one person Mr Johnson if
you want to go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee the.
We want to support this bill for
several different reasons number
one this is just to us as
housekeeping
that's something that needs to
be done in the ports of entry
the other thing is that in the
past bill you have to understand
the point of entry are going to
be very important to the
autonomous vehicles and so
having one entity to deal with
at the point it's going to be
much more efficient and so we
totally support this thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Madam chair it.
Thanks is there any opposition
to this to this legislation from
attendees.
there is none that will head to
the committee Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
I think chairman and
Representative Madrid I just
have a couple of technical
questions I guess for Franklin
Representative I know you
touched on what I'm was the
concern about the PS building
the necessity of being DPS of
the general fund.
And I think I heard you said
that that's not going to be
necessary we could otherwise on
your a court to transfer charge.
I noticed that there is not a
line here that talks about
enforcement of the weight
distance.
Act when I look down to all the
categories for DPS would play a
role the end.
It's not on that list and I
think that's where I heard you
state because of the enforcement
you'll be able to pay I'm out of
the the fund
as you always have is that
correct madam chair and
district.
Madam chair and the members of
the committee and Representative
Crowder yeah we do want to touch
anything that was dealing with
enforcement because that is
still a DPS role as far as the
inspections or the enforcement
but because the funding does
allow for been forced out of the
the way distance Act that money
would be eligible so we could
provide that to DPS in that
through this existing frontier.
Okay well it's good to hear that
that was that was one of my
major concerns is is if we're
gonna have to depended General
Fund specific up well back show
up of naked six are madam chair
my other question is on.
H. three of the bill.
Online six.
White thirteen in line sixteen.
They strike the word or the
phrase the department of public
safety.
Which which leaves a.
We'll go back to line six
legislative account for which
the department.
And the department of
transportation says they're
stricken the department of
public safety who is the
department now I it was
clarified defined as the
department of public safety but
because they left the word
Department is that now the
department of taxed Rav or.
That we know that is Madam.
Madam chair members committee
and Representative founder in
the definitions prior to that
page in in the weight in the
motor vehicle code department as
defined in that area as the tax
Representative department if
you're correct okay I think just
because they've been identified
it was stricken at the kind of
left it open to interpretation
in my mind
but if it's identified earlier
that's fine and if it was the
department and the department of
transportation I need to be
somebody else or or lose you
know
Representative Garrett would
have called your hand on it so.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your comments Mr
percent.
Representative Garrett.
I'm sure what
I wanted to move the amendment.
Thank you
Representative and yes
Representative Madrid we didn't
we didn't do that initially can
you I I know everybody has the
amendment and but can you just
read it out just briefly explain
it and then we can go ahead and
and move it.
Yes so madam chair and we give
you the the two oh two number
point two one nine five five
nine point one.
Well my experts.
Two senses probably little
better more concerns that's
agency I yield to my ex replace
madam chair.
Thank you
madam chair members the
committee as I mentioned the
bill the thirty page bill and as
we kept going through the
analysis and identifying
different areas that needed to
be clarified and updated
hundred technical assistance or
technical corrections we
identified that there was a
section in up the.
Should tax computation that
needed to be changed as well and
so we included that in this
ammendment to ensure that all
the eligible funding and all the
proper entities were involved
and so this amendment adds that
that same clear Education by
changing department of
transportation from department
of public safety.
So just a technical fix on the
bill.
Thank you Franklin we have aim a
motion to adopt the amendment
from Representative Garrett is
their second.
Representative Harper seconds it
is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Okay great so no opposition
Mario and so we're back on the
bill the amended bill is there
any other questions for
Representative Madrid or for
Franklin.
Then I will entertain a motion
for this the amended bill is
there anyone who would want to
do that.
Some of Madam.
Representative Harper moves on
Representative Crowder seconds
that is there any opposition to
the motion.
So great Representative Madrid
you do you have in the past for
house bill one nineteen ninety
eight as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
You're pregnant I'm thank you
all committee members we are
done with the the pandemic
and
and what we're we're scheduled
to be back on the floor at
eleven so you have a bit of a
break hopefully to maybe take
your dog out or something like
me but if will we'll we're we're
a trucking along with with
legislation so we'll be we'll be
hearing some more on Tuesday and
so will we'll see you all then.
Thank you madam chair centre
Committee thank you all.
It's time to go down and sign on
to HB to seventy would run up to
the clerk's office absolutely.
Have a great job.
Thank you.
