OK.
OK.
All right, let's go ahead and
start with um supporting
comments.
Or
I'll spill 120. Please raise
your hand.
Good good afternoon. Well,
I don't even know anymore.
Hello, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Nathan Gumm, I'm from the
commission for Deaf and hard of
hearing. I speak in support of
this bill. Um, I've been a part
of many of the meetings as uh we
started hearing about these
changes for specifically for um
the accessibility on websites in
2024 and having this happen
would be a huge step in the
right direction for the state
and making sure that we're able
to effectively educate and
support.
our community and also the state
agencies, and I appreciate your
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines, representing the
Disability Coalition and we
stand in support of the bill and
urge the committee's support
what's left of it, um,
uh, this bill is about
accessibility, um, and that's a
shorthand term for the ability
to engage and participate, um,
about making the operations of
our state government accessible
to all citizens, um, all people
living in New Mexico and not
just the.
those who are able bodied, um.
The Americans with Disabilities
Act as Geiny pointed out a few
minutes ago, was enacted. It
became the law of the land 35
years ago, and yet 35 years
later, we have our general
services department complaining
that this bill would be so
expensive because they actually
have to do what they've been
required to do for 35 years. So
I think it's high time that we
move forward on this, and we
urge your support of the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Arturo Castillo and I'm
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Voters
New Mexico. As we navigate a
world where executive orders
have the potential to take away
access to services, resources,
and funding. We must do what we
can to ensure that our
communities always have access
to the institutions that impact
their daily lives.
Conservation voters supports
this legislation because among
other things, we want to ensure
that the most deeply impacted by
changes in our climate and
environment are fully engaged in
the solutions we pursue
together. Thank you.
We have anyone else outside.
Have any Zoom, Zoom.
Michael Murphy, can you hear us?
Yes, can you hear me? Yes, we
can. Yeah, one minute. Thank you
so much.
Great, um, my name is Michael
Murphy. I'm a resident of
Albuquerque and I'm in favor of
this bill. I am a full-time
wheelchair user and so even
though I've had or I have very
significant mobility
impairments. I've personally
benefited a great deal from
being able to access government
services through access to
buildings and other accessible
features, and I think this bill
would strengthen this
accessibility for me, but
especially for people with other
impairments with uh digital
content accessibility.
Thank you so much, Michael.
Add Alice, can you hear us?
Yes, good morning. Can you hear
me?
Yes. Thank you so much.
Good morning, committee. My name
is Katie Ellis. I'm an 8DA
coordinator.
And I'm also able to user in
thely blind. I'm advocating for
a due pass from this committee
on House Bill 120, the office of
accessibility.
Here's why
New Mexico.
Can be a state
Where we set the standard of
what it means to be an
accessible state.
everyone with a disability.
And with that said, anyone in
the country.
into the community of disability
at any time. So why not be, why
not us?
The disability community in New
Mexico set this gold standard of
what it means.
To have an accessible country
and an accessible state where
everyone can live to their
fullest potential.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak today.
Thank you so much, Katie.
Somewhere here under admin. Can
you hear us?
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. I am
speaking on House Bill 120. My
primary comments will be related
to ADA physical accessibility,
not on the WCAG compliance.
There were 9 responses to the
fiscal impact report, although
one was mistakenly placed on
this bill but belonged to
another bill. The majority of
responses indicated significant
concerns in performance
measures, the GCD was unable to
state the actual number of site
visits or architects.
plan reviews for ADA
accessibility performed,
including in person director
responses in house
appropriations and finance. In
the executive's budget, the
performance measures are noted
as 100%, which is not an actual
number of sites or plans, GCD is
rarely able to answer phone
calls and responses to calls,
emails, or mailed inquiries are
delayed or do not occur. The
website frequently lacks many
forms. The information supplied
is often not up to date or
accurate and frequently lack.
Some mechanism to connect to a
robust list of other external
resources or programs. Cross
pollination is essential for
harnessing every possible
resource to improve all access
for all persons. For many, many
months, the website was
corrupted and linked directly to
an Indonesian gaming website,
even when corrected, many
important forms remained
unavailable or are still in a
coming soon status. The ultimate
goal is to support improving
programs and resources, but
improving the existing programs
and services first.
is a better step before pushing
more programming, funding and
larger performance burdens to an
entity that is struggling to
improve current performance
measures. I am only an improving
access, but it must be done well
and with measurable quality
implementation.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Do we have any comments in
opposition to the bill.
Any comments on Zoom?
Anybody here in opposition? HG
120.
Please raise your hand.
Yeah.
Representative Barrego.
Hey, committee members, what is
the pleasure of committee. Madam
Chair, I move a do pass.
Oh, the amendment. OK. I move
the amendment.
We have um
Motion to adopt the amendment.
We have a second.
And now we'll go back to the
Amended Bill
Did we go through the amendment?
Is there any opposition on the
amendment?
Seeing none, we have an amended
bill.
And now we have a motion by
Representative Aa Nonu for a Du
pass.
The
Or leader
Please call roll.
Representative.
Representative Blanc.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan
Representative Mejia.
Madame Floorlier
Representative Zamora, madam
vice chair.
Madam Chair
50
Thank you, Representative and
expert witnesses, you have a due
pass on House Bill 120.
As amended. Thank you.
And I believe we have handouts
for House Bill 6.
What
That's fine.
All righty, Madam floor leader,
you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
here to, and members, I'm here
to present House Bill 6, and
House Bill 6 is basically
extending the uh public.
Works, minimum wage Act.
To cover projects.
That are uh subject to
industrial revenue bonds via the
county revenue bond or the
municipal industrial revenue
bond. So basically what we are
doing with this legislation is
ensuring that the workers on
industrial revenue bond projects
are being paid a living wage,
they're being paid the
prevailing wage and the benefits
rates that other public projects
are subject to. So currently, if
you have a capital outlay,
Project, the workers on those
projects are paid prevailing
wage, um, that is determined by
the Department of Workforce
Solutions, and we want to make
sure, um, for all intents and
purposes, these IRB projects are
public works projects, um, and,
uh, we wanna make sure that
those workers are also being
paid a, uh, a prevailing wage.
Um, I have with me Mr. Brian
Condit, who is president of the
New Mexico Building Trades, uh,
and
Uh, as well as an expert
witness, Kelly O'Donnell, who is
on Zoom.
Um, and hopefully we can, yes,
great. She's on Zoom, um, and so
I, I don't know if either of
them would like to make a
statement, my co-sponsors are
Representative Joseph Sanchez,
uh, Representative Royal
Caballero, speaker, Martinez,
who are all in other committees
right now. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, if my experts would like to
say anything.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Brian Condit,
executive director.
and I'll be glad to assist with
answering any questions.
Thank you.
Um, your expert witness on Zoom.
Ms. O'Donnell, would you like to
add anything?
I'm
um.
Yes, I, I would. I
Thank you. Um, my name is Kelly
O'Donnell. I don't know if you
can see me. I cannot see you.
Um,
and your comment.
Apologize. Um, my name is Kelly
O'Donnell. I'm an economist.
I've been working in New Mexico
as an economist for the last 25
years in a variety of positions
in state government as well as,
as a research professor at UNM
and uh and as a public finance
consultant. Um, I, the, I'm here
as an expert witness on this
bill. Um, both IRBs and the
public works Minimum Wage Act,
uh, seek to create good paying
jobs for New Mexicans. IRBs are
tools of economic.
Development, they make the
projects, they make projects,
the property of government for
purposes of taxes. They exempt
projects from taxes, um, and
Yeah, the public works minimum
Wage Act is also a tool of job
creation in that it requires
that any project funded by
government pay um a prevailing
wage. So these two bills are
very well aligned. Happy to
answer any specific questions
that arise, um, but again, the
objective here is to bring
projects that are funded by
government
on yeah
under the same umbrella as
projects that are um subject
that are treated as
property for purposes of
taxation.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now, we'll go to the
audience for those who aren't
support of the bill, please
raise your hands.
Thank you. Let's quickly do one
minute comments starting my
right or left.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Robin LaChapelle.
I'm a journeyman wireman of
IBEW vocal 611.
And I ask that you support this
bill.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Matthew Schwarz, Western states
Carpenter here in New Mexico. We
said in strong support of the
bill and appreciate the sponsor
bringing it forward. Thank you.
My name is Mark Trujillo with
the IBEW, um.
Also a member of the Joint
Apprenticeship and Training
Committee and
The um opportunities that this
bill will create for
apprenticeship or
Youth are um hardworking New
Mexicans cannot be understated.
Um, and we urge the support of
this bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and thank you to the
sponsors for introducing this
bill. My name is Michael Leon
Guerrero. I'm with the Center
for Civic Policy. We provide
support to grassroots in New
Mexico-based organizations to
amplify community and worker
voices and policy decisions that
affect their lives.
The prevailing wage provisions.
Uh, apply to projects financed
by public dollars. These
provisions should also apply to
private companies receiving
public subsidies.
IRBs, property is deeded to the
local government, making it
publicly owned at that point.
This is how companies are able
to bypass paying taxes.
Public subsidies should come
with an expectation that these
jobs pay good wages and
benefits, and the collective
bargaining process and
prevailing wage system helped to
assure that we meet that
expectation. So we urge your
support for this bill. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, John
Lipshutz with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor AFL-CIO
representing over 40,000 workers
throughout the state, uh, both
in the public and private
sector. We have always been
strong advocates for uh paying
all workers a fair wage.
and that uh is regardless of
what job they do and what sector
they're in. We're talking about
paying people a prevailing wage,
uh, that's pretty much enough
said as far as taking care of
workers, and we urge your
support. Thank you.
Anybody outside or.
OK.
Um have a Richard Mason,
Richard, can you hear us?
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women voters of New
Mexico, based upon the league's
support for a living wage, the
league stands in strong support
of HB 6. we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing it forward
and urges the committee to give
it a due pass. Thank you so
much, Richard.
Joanne, Joanne Baker, can you
hear us?
I can, yes. Thank you. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Joan Baker. I'm the
political affairs director for
the United Association Local
412, that's the plumber and
pipefitters.
I urge your support on House
Bill 6, I think um this is long
overdue when our state says that
we value workers, we value
workers' wages, um, and we
decided that we would use our
tax dollars to ensure that there
was a prevailing wage for
projects that we do as a state
that this just levels that out.
This says if your private
organization, you're using
public dollars, um, we're gonna
maximize those tax dollars.
Like we do on our own projects.
I urge you to vote yes. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, John.
Have a run. Ron, can you hear
us?
Yes, can you hear me? Yes, we
can go ahead.
OK, perfect. My name is Ron
Ayers, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
speak. How many apprenticeship
program with the IBEW Local 611
and the joint the apprenticeship
program, um, HB 6 is a very
important bill. It's gonna
provide construction and trade
professionals working on IRB
projects, prevailing wage
protections, and that's very
important right now in this
economy, and it's really common
sense legislation. Uh, this bill
will benefit New Mexicans, New
Mexicans who voted to send you
to the legislature, uh, it'll
benefit contractors by leveling
the playing field, whether
you're union, non-union,
in-state, out of state, um,
labor will be something that's
balanced in their bids when they
submit, which will attract more
work and secure more work for
New Mexican contractors and
workers. I can't imagine any
opposition to this bill, uh, so
I strongly supported and I
strongly urge you to pass HB 6.
Thank you so much, Ron.
OK, do we have any comments in
opposition to the bill?
Jason.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thanks for the
opportunity to speak today on
behalf of New Mexico IDEA, the
state's economic development
professional association and the
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico on a first really
begin my comments expressing my
appreciation for the sponsors of
House Bill 6 and their
commitment to ensuring fair
wages for workers in our state.
We fully support creating high
quality jobs and growing our
economy as well.
However, we do have concerns
about the potential impact this
bill could have on New Mexico's
ability to attract new
businesses in industries through
by utilizing IRPs. Our concern
is that by adding a condition
that many competing states do
not have, we risk making New
Mexico less attractive for
investment. If a project faces
additional regulatory
requirements here that would
not, that it would not face
elsewhere, that could become a
deciding factor in choosing a
different location.
The reality is that if we lose
those projects, we lose both
construction jobs, and long-term
permanent jobs. Without the
project, there are no wages, no
opportunity for local workers,
suppliers, or communities to
benefit. We must strike the
right balance to ensure New
Mexico remains competitive so
that we can continue to attract
investment. We appreciate the
hard work that has gone into
this legislation and help these
concerns can be part of the
discussion. Uh, thank you for
your time. We look forward to
working with the committee and
the sponsors to support policies
that strengthen New Mexico's
economy and the workforce.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla shows
registered lobbyist for Neop,
New Mexico, the real estate,
commercial real estate
developers. Uh, we stand in
opposition as well for the
reasons stated by Mr. Espinoza,
but we thank the sponsor and uh
Mr. Condit and hope to work
through some of these issues so
we can continue to see economic
development in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you.
OK. Anybody on Zoom?
We have a Terry Cole. Terry, can
you hear us?
Yes, I can. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Terry
Cole. I am president CEO of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I'm here this morning
to testify against HB 6. It will
make New Mexico less
competitive, we believe in
attracting private investment
for industrial development. We
all know that New Mexico already
has trouble attracting capital,
so we shouldn't make the problem
worse. We also know that raising
the
price of anything generally
results in getting less of that
thing. It's among the best basic
laws of economics. States around
us don't put this kind of
additional cost burden on their
industrial revenue bonds,
developers are consumers like
the rest of us. If they can get
the same thing for a lower cost,
they'll shop there instead.
While perhaps this bill is well
intended. We believe that HB 6
violates another immutable law,
the
law of unintended consequences.
We ask for you to vote no this
morning. Thank you so much for
the time.
Thank you so much, Terry.
Yeah
Wayne Johnson.
Wayne, can you hear us? I can
hear you. Thank you. Uh, good
morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the commission, um, I
am Wayne Johnson. I am the uh
county manager for Sandoval
County. In my career, I've been
involved in probably close to 50
industrial revenue bond
projects, and as you've heard er
uh by other uh opponents to this
bill.
We're in a competition with,
with other states, and other
jurisdictions and anything that
increases the cost either
administratively or otherwise
for these projects count against
us. Currently, Sandoval County
is working with uh project that
would bring 200.
Quite literally rocket science
jobs to Sandoval County. These
are great paid jobs. The project
itself would largely be above
prevailing wage, um, in fact,
most of these projects are
already above um uh prevailing
wage during the, the work. I
would also note here that uh
these are not public dollars.
Industrial revenue bonds are
funded by private dollars and
not public dollars. So it's very
different than a public works
project that's funded by
government and tax dollars.
It is basically a tax abatement
mechanism to bring and attract
business to New Mexico. And what
we're looking for are jobs, jobs
for certainly pipefitters and
union folks, but also for uh
blue and white collar jobs
across this, this state. I urge
you not to pass this, uh, this
bill. Thank you so much, Wayne.
Adam Silverman, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. Thank you.
Great. You have one minute.
Thank you. Uh, committee, my
name is Adam Silverman, I'm a
commercial real estate
developer, uh, with Gilmore LLC
also the president of the board
at NaO chapter uh for this year,
and I appreciate, uh,
everybody's time. I'm here to
oppose um HB 6 is a private
developer, it's hard enough and
challenging enough as it is to
deal with rising construction
costs, the rising labor costs
that we already have, and the
problem is our rents aren't
going up fast enough to match
the
Erection costs. So,
unfortunately, I echo.
Comments of
Wayne Johnson and Terry Cole and
Marla Schulz says that this is
just something that's just gonna
hurt us down the way with
unintended consequences. So,
thank you for your time.
Thank you so much, Adam.
OK, thank you.
Committee members.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and my apologies I've been
running back and forth across
the next meeting. So thank you
for, for bearing with me here.
So, I read the bill, read the
analyses, Madam Chair
Representative. So I, I just
want to make clear, uh, do we
have a definition of what
prevailing wages, cause I know
some places, they say, uh,
median submits an average of the
and I believe it's the
I wrote it down, Madam Chair.
Uh, average wage of
Majority of workers, how did we,
uh, calculate that here and
representative Madam Fleur.
I'm sure that is defined in the
public works minimum wage Act,
and it's done through Department
of Workforce Solutions that
determines a specific wage for
each.
Type of position.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative.
That
Good to hear that it's in there.
So I guess my, I've heard the
concerns and I know one thing
was the IRB is is indeed funded
with private dollars.
Not public. Uh, could you just
address
Uh, that concern that we heard,
I think maybe in the comments
today, and then also just in
some analysis, would you be able
to
Comment on that Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
and I'll also ask Ms O'Donnell
to weigh in on this, um, but,
uh, briefly,
Uh, an industrial revenue bond
is a type of public private uh
partnership kind of a blended
endeavor. The public dollars
that are implicated are the tax
dollars that are not received by
communities, so while there's
not an outlay of public dollars,
there's certainly a cost to
every municipality or county
that participates in an IRB
because they are choosing to
forego those tax dollars, um,
and Ms O'Donnell, uh, I'm sure
add to that.
Thank you, Madam Madam Chair,
Representative, the IRB is
essentially a way that local
governments can forgive taxes in
it by treating a project as
though it is owned by
government. So on paper, the
project is owned by government
and thus it is exempt from
property tax compensating tax
and some gross receipts taxes.
So essentially the the project,
although it is a private
project.
is treated as a government
project for purposes of
taxation.
And thus, as, as uh as as the as
the representative mentioned,
uh, there are taxes foregone,
which is, which are public
funds, uh, and in addition, the
The project is technically owned
by the government, so
technically it is a public
project, despite the fact that
the funds typically are solely
provided by the company that's
getting the IRB. They typically
buy their own bonds, so they're
essentially loaning money to
themselves. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, representative and
expert. So,
But I mean, I guess these my my
question and my concerns with
this legislation are these
Fire bees are meant to be
economic development drivers and
communities.
And so when we start making it
more difficult.
Or more expensive to
Do these projects. I'm just
wondering, Madam Chair.
I, I, I don't know what other
states have.
This kind of structure with the
prevailing wage. I'm just
wondering, have, have we seen a
An impact on those economic
development projects, and are we
anticipating any of that in the
state because I always, I always
look probably 10 years ahead
when it comes to legislation. I
want to make sure that
legislation that we pass is
going to benefit our economy,
and I just wonder if you might
just comment on that if you have
the information, Madam Chair,
representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
Um, excellent question because
there have been a lot of studies
of the impact of
Requiring a prevailing wage for
construction projects, and those
studies unequivocally show that
they do not.
Ray's construction costs because
These are highly trained workers
that specialize in the skills
that they're providing that
construction project.
Um, so their productivity is
through the roof.
Um, and we're also ensuring that
these workers are able to bring
that living wage home to take
care of their families, take
care of themselves. Um, and so
you're actually uh not
increasing construction costs.
There's also been shown that
your workplace injury rate is
lower.
With prevailing wage projects.
And you're also contributing to
the workforce long term because
of the apprenticeship. So,
ultimately, you're contributing
to a more efficient construction
workforce. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you
Representative and I'm looking
at my comparative.
Notes here and
And I, I haven't looked at the
studies, so I apologize.
But so have we considered
incentives to
Raise
Wages rather than these mandates
for prevailing wages, and do we
know if those have worked in
other states.
I haven't looked, but I would
certainly be interested in that.
Representative, sorry my
microphone keeps cutting out.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'm not aware of the research on
um those kinds of incentives and
certainly that would be
something that would be
interested at.
Um
What, what this bill does is it
creates a structure that is um
enforceable and of uniform
across the state.
Ms. O'Donnell, I don't know if
you, you are aware of that
there, we can see you now.
Um, if uh, if you have any
comment on that?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I'd only state that New
Mexico's IRB program is, is
fairly unique and although many,
many states have um prevailing
wage laws like New Mexico's
public works minimum wage Act.
They too are similar, you know,
somewhat unique and so there are
almost no states as far as I can
tell that have both and are
directly comparable to New
Mexico, um, in, in terms of, of
that, that configuration of an
IRB statute that works.
like ours, and a and a public
works minimum wage Act that
works like ours as well.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative. That's,
that's helpful to me. I guess I
was just thinking, cause I, I
like to think in terms of
incentives, rather than
mandatory, you must do this. So
I was just thinking something
like a voluntary.
Compliance, tax breaks. So if
you voluntarily comply with
prevailing wage law, then you'll
get a tax incentive.
Somewhere, and I, I guess that's
kind of where I approach it, and
I, I would love that, but um I
know that.
That's not in the legislature,
so I, I will stick to the bill
and I
Do you want to stay on topic.
So, I guess that's kind of all
my questions that I had on this
legislation. I still have some
concerns, and I need to speak
with some of the stakeholders,
especially the, the
A lot of the folks who do.
construction and not only NAO,
for example, that that do.
Commercial real estate, but all,
all the other.
folks, because I've spoken to
some realtors and some folks who
who've given me some data but
also regarding these IRBs. I
know that they can get very
complicated, and I just don't
want to put a wrench into
anything that's currently
pending. I want to make sure
that those projects get on the
ground and they, they get funded
and and approved and everything.
So I will, I'll continue to look
at this legislation and I
appreciate your time and
bringing this forward and I, I
think it's good to have the
discussion because at least we
all can see where people stand
and what what this intends to do
and then what we can do to
make New Mexico better. So I
really appreciate it, Madam
Floor leader, and thank you,
Madam Chair and.
I'll give it back to you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Anya Nonu.
Madam Chair, I moved you pass.
Representative Lujan.
Just, I just had a quick
question or comment. Thank you.
Um,
Is it my turn? OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. It's weird holding
a microphone like this, um.
I know
Some karaoke in here.
Yep.
Uh
Right, so
As we're, as we're listening to
some of the, the testimony from
feel
you, um
Can, can anyone, uh, tell me
what
What are, what are the, what are
the best circumstances?
No, keeping on a lot of these.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um,
You know, and I don't know if
Mr. Condit would like to weigh
in on this as well. Um, but, you
know,
Paying a livable wage, having
benefits, ensuring that there's
a, uh
Uh, career path.
So that you are starting at one
level and you're
Receiving opportunities to get
to the next level with excellent
training.
You know, in my experience and
as, as a manager, those are all
critical elements of retaining
workers, and I would love for
Mr. Condit to come in as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, exactly the
competition for trained fully
qualified.
Professionals is
Higher than I've ever seen it.
So if you are not
Then you are not using fully
qualify.
They certified.
Craftsman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's a
matter of safety as a matter of
Of making sure that when we have
these projects that we have the
best qualified individuals
there, my
Experience a background and
understanding.
What our labor does for our.
Our industries
And I would just, um, I don't
think there's an argument. I
mean, I think that this is
This has been proven time and
time again that
When we, we have a workforce in
place, it is highly qualified
and trained.
And
They're going to be kept in
their positions are gonna work
is gonna continue to come to
them, but also the projects are
going to benefit them and have
high level.
Of, of competency. Therefore,
uh, level of retention, Madam,
um,
Man, we, it's no secret that
we're we're having a hard time
in all of our
across the board with all of our
workforce, so the better that
we, the better we have them, uh,
workforce that's trained in the
benefits and everything.
The better, um, I believe that
we're going to maintain that
work.
Where we have
Thank you, ma'am.
Representative Barrego, thank
you, ma'am Chair. I'd just like
to, uh, second, uh,
representative Ananors.
Um, motion. OK. I have a motion
for I do pass a second, please,
Carl.
Representative on.
Representative block? No, sir.
Representative Boreco.
Representative Lujan.
Presented Mejia.
Madam Flo leader. Yes.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Madam Floor leader.
You have a due pass. Thank you.
OK. Thank you, everyone. We now
have to go into subcommittee.
And we'll have you introduce
your bill, do public comment,
and continue on Monday. Is that
OK with you, Senator?
Hey, you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. I appreciate the
time.
Um, this is my first bill I'm
introducing ever in the whole
wide world. So thank you for
your attention.
Um, so, House Bill 143.
First, would modernize our
state's lobbying reporting
system in order to give
legislators, constituents, and
other stakeholders.
A full picture of what's
happening and who's shaping
bills and defining the playing
field during each legislative
session.
Transparency enables New
Mexicans to understand how their
government operates. This bill
would enhance public oversight
and democratic engagement.
What this would do is, uh,
section one would create a a
whole new section of the act
that would require a lobbyist or
their employer who is required
to file an expenditure report or
registration statement to also
file a lobbying activity report
with the Secretary of State.
Prior to the end of the
legislative session.
One that details the specific
legislation lobbied.
2, the lobbyists or the employer
support, opposition, or other
position on the legislation,
whether it changed.
And 3 name of the lobbyist
employer that lobbied on the
legislation either directly or
through the lobby.
There's some more details on
section one if you have
questions, and then section 2 of
the bill, um amends the statute
to reflect the addition of
lobbying activity reports.
And requires that the Secretary
of State publish reports filed
by the lobbyists under the Act.
And then section 3, discusses
the effective date of January 1,
20. So I'll stop there. I'll
co-sponsor, Senator Jeff
Steinborn, if you have any.
Oh, interesting. OK. Red means
stopping.
That means
Um,
great to be with you, Madam
Chair. Thanks for hearing the
bill.
This is an incredibly important
bill for the functioning of
government.
And leveling the playing field
for the citizens of the state
and legislators.
No
Who and what is behind every
piece of legislation we hear.
Um
The public has a right to know
this information about 20 states
require.
Um, lobbyists and lobbyists
employers, it's really more
about the employers, those that
are
Hiring lobbyists, but those that
are trying to shape policy one
way or another, no matter who
they are.
Whether they're identified as a
progressive cause or a
conservative cause, equal
opportunity for those entities,
activities to be publicly
disclosed in the same way, we
require that disclosure during
our campaign.
We recognize the public has a
right to know that.
Equally, the public has a right
to know who is shaping
legislation so that we can make
good decisions, and that's why I
started working on this many
years ago. This is a
legislature, I felt like I never
really knew.
And I feel like it's actually
intentionally opaque.
When this has been done before
and we can require disclosures
so that we know all the facts in
front of us when we make
decisions.
But then this translates down to
the citizen level.
So that the media can know, the
public can know, and that they
can actually be involved in the
debate.
And know if something's really
good for him or not, know that,
you know, maybe
We know the full facts. It might
make us more inclined to support
something or to think, you know,
we might need to ask a few more
questions here. And then this
translates up to the governor
before a governor signs a bill,
governor needs to know also
what's really behind it. So this
is about providing the crucial
missing information that we
don't have now, which is that
those that lobby, and there's a
very legal term of who would
have to file this. It's not
every citizen that advocates,
the only people that are
professionally engaging the
legislature.
In various capacities that are
triggered to have to file a
report with Secretary of State
already as a lobbyist would then
have to file this additional
report just once, saying we
lobbied on this issue. We took,
we were in favor or against or
didn't have a position.
And then
Further that that would then be
linked up on the bill page.
That somebody looking at a bill
could then
With a click, see ledger of
basically.
Who's engaged. So that's the way
it works and I think this would
be a quantum leap forward in our
transparency, the governance of
the states.
It
Interest.
Thank you. Now we'll go to
public comment in the audience,
those in favor, please raise
your hands. OK. One minute,
please.
I'm Madam Chair. I'm Jeremy
Ferris. I'm the director of the
ethics commission. Every year,
the ethics commission provides a
report to the legislature and
the governor for recommendations
for legislation, and since 2020,
the, the ethics commission has
has want to thank the sponsors
for for bringing it forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Any comments on Zoom?
Have a Richard Mason, Richard,
can you hear us?
Yes, um, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Oh, it's good afternoon, isn't
it? Um, my name is Dick Mason
and um I'm board member and
registered lobbyist for the
League of Wom Voters I of New
Mexico, based upon the following
league of women's voters
position, the League of Women
Voters stands in strong support
of HB 143. The league's position
is that the League of voters in
New Mexico believes that methods
of financing political campaigns
in public office.
should ensure the public's right
to know, combat corruption and
undue influence and maximize
fiscal accountability and
transparency. Um, HB 143 meets
it the criteria to put forward
in that position. I want to
thank Representative Silver and
Senator Steinbor were putting
forward um legislation that will
strengthen our lobby regulations
and urge you to give HB 143 adu
pass. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Richard.
Hey, that's it for committee
members. Do we have any
discussion representative Wuhan?
Thank you. um
Thank you for bringing this
forward, um.
I'm gonna
Be my best
party.
So, um, this would just simply
do with um what you said with
the secretary of state's office
responsible.
Additional component for
Who to see on what
Uh, Representative Lujan, can
you repeat the question?
So the secretary of state would
house the.
They, they have it.
Obvious
In their database that they.
And
They record all the information
I don't know who's doing what
now they're.
Um
So
Now that there would be a second
component, uh, for the.
Secretary of State's office to
Capture
Specific information, so where
would that be? Because
I don't know if of think
probably many of us know this,
madam, it's not a very, there's
some glitches and concerns with
the current.
Um
Database that the Secretary of
State uses now and they are
asking for.
Big updates to our budget and.
So I wanna make sure that we're
captured. I'm capturing.
What those asks are
Look at the budget
Give us, um,
Got you. And what that, what
that would look like to us, the
viewer.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative uh Wuhan.
So it
Could be the first this is up to
the discretion of the Secretary
of State and how many places.
They put um this information,
but there's two places that they
could put it. One is in the
activity report under the
lobbying activity that you can
search now under a lobbyist.
So it would live there, but it
would also live under the, for
example, HB 143, um, they'd be
able to, uh, citizen would they
be able to click on legislation
just like you can now in the NM
legis website.
And then see sponsors,
co-sponsors, votes, committees,
then you could also see an extra
button that says lobbying
activity report.
And you could click and see all
the entities that lobbied on
behalf of monitored or uh
lobbied in opposition to.
Bill.
Thank you
Thank you. So then there would
have to be uh.
Moe will with um.
Legislative council.
Office
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, uh, that would be up to
the discretion of the Secretary
of State to decide how to do
that and um and
Previous conversations with the
secretary of state, um, they
did, uh, affirm that they would
have money in the budget for any
new legislation as this.
Um, I'm less worried about the
funding and more worried about.
Who has jurisdiction.
SOS very specific I I would say
they would be able to handle.
portion of what you're
fire here, second portion would
be under.
Council
How they would um
Uh, apply that information.
State's office to
Our reports
Make sure things are, that's
all. Thank you, ma'am.
Madam Floor leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And representative senator, um,
Uh, I'm so pleased that you have
brought this bill forward, um.
I, I think it's
I have some questions about
maybe the way that um
This is gonna work.
Practically.
But, um, you know, I think for
the public.
To understand
A piece of legislation that they
are.
Interested in who is supporting
it, who is opposed it.
It's really important
information, you know,
sometimes.
When I, uh, returned after the
session and.
Meet with people and they said,
what happened to that bill or or
why would anybody be against
that or who and this gives them.
Um
You know, who's involved with
specific.
translation.
Um
So, um, I, but I am curious.
Is it going to be the kind of
database where you could search
by a bill number.
Or is that
Has that been determined?
I chair, uh, Madam floor leader,
um,
Yes, ideally that people would
be able and the bill states.
A little bit, but the bill does
define that um person may be
able to uh search.
This information by piece of
legislation.
OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That's.
Um, I think that's great because
that will really make it.
It's very difficult for
Um, members of the public to
know who the lobbyists are and
who they represent.
a lot
Um
The, the, the nature of the work
that they're doing, um, and I, I
think this is a simple step.
Um, so I really appreciate you
bringing this forward and
clarifying that.
Question. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair.
You representative Onon Arnu.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, was
there any questions from
Representative Brego I move a do
pass.
motion for due pass by
representative Ononornu is
seconded by Madame Floor leader.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due pass
on your
I'll pill one.
Or 3. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you audience for joining
us today and participating on a
Saturday.
Your jour.
