Let's go ahead and begin with
house Bill 98presentative Anya
Nonu.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members, fellow members of
the committee, House Bill 98, as
you can see before you is very
short and very straightforward.
This bill seeks to expunge
eviction records after a
five-year period, as we all
know, eviction um can have
lasting consequences for anyone.
And I believe that expunging
those records after a fair and
suitable amount of time and help
people improve their credit
scores and secure access to
housing.
So honestly, with that, Madam
Chair, I stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go ahead and
move along to
Comments from the audience in
support of the bill, please
raise your hands.
OK. Comments in opposition to
the bill.
OK, we have several on this side
of the room.
Uh, one minute, please.
Thank you.
So my name is Alan Lise. I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association and, you
know, we do have some concerns
with how this bill is drafted
and, you know, I think the first
concern is there's not really a
definition of what eviction is
and it, I mean, it says
eviction, but is it it were a
judgment um that finds cause for
an eviction. Is that when we
start the clock? Is it when the
person is actually evicted. Um,
I think that makes it tough
because there's not a clear
definition. Um, you know, I
looked at other states that have
kind of have somewhat.
Similar laws, but they're
limited in scope to where a
resident wins or a resident pays
the judgment. Um, and this bill
is not limited just to
collection of rents. This bill
is anybody, so a substantial
violation, somebody who maybe,
you know, was evicted for
assaulting their neighbor would
be given the same protections as
somebody for a non-payment of
rent. And the non-payment of
rent judgments generally go on
your record for 14 years. Um, so
5 years is kind of an arbitrary
number. Um, it doesn't really
fit with credit scores.
It doesn't really fit with, um,
a typical judgment, and so it
seems that almost a tenant would
be evicted for a substantial
violation may actually benefit
more than somebody who this is,
I think is intended to protect,
which is somebody who may not
have paid.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Chuck Sheldon.
I own TNC management in
Albuquerque. I'm against this
bill.
For the following reasons.
Uh,
last year we had 109 evictions.
Over $500,000 in losses.
Damages to property and lost
rents.
We can't recover those.
Right now we're looking at
expunging that and so we're what
we're doing is we're teaching
people not to pay their bills.
We're going to expunge this bill
in 5 years and let people walk
without paying.
And what does that mean to an
owner? It means to an owner. I
need to raise my rents.
And we're always pushing against
rents.
Another $20 to $25 apiece in
order to recover what was lost.
And so people are going to see
that pain.
One of the things that we're
doing is, you know, we're
de-incentivizing people to pay.
And that makes that makes little
sense in our society.
Um
One of the things that Alan just
mentioned, and I think this is,
this is also critical to us.
Is that you evict someone for
payment, that's one thing. Out
of 109 evictions we had about
60% due to payment, right? Some
about 65.
We had about 35,
sir.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors, and we stand in
opposition to this bill, and I
would tell you two things about
the bill that I think are
helpful as you consider the
bill. First, in our discussions,
we, we think that something that
is missing from this, um, this
debate is the fact that there
are eviction records doesn't
mean that there's an automatic
bar to somebody getting into a
rental property. It's a piece of
information that can be
considered by the landlord, and
they can make a decision based
on that. Uh, the second thing
that I would note for you is, if
you deprive the landlords of
this information, they would
need to, to take steps to be
more protective of, of their
position. And some of the things
that might occur is that they
could require higher security
deposits. They could be stricter
with looking at credit
requirements. They could
increase rental rates, all of
those things in order to
mitigate the risk of potentially
not knowing whether or not
Somebody has been evicted
previously and so those are
factors that I think you should
consider. Thank you very much.
Mount you, oh, sorry, if that
was everyone, I would like to
respond to some of those
comments.
We can go back to that.
Uh, do we have comments on Zoom?
We have a few. OK. Let's go
ahead and start with a
supporting comments.
Uh, Duval Westfall, can you hear
us?
Hello Duval, can you hear us?
There's one more.
OK
Uh
Bernadette, can you hear us?
Bernadette?
OK, I'm gonna go back to Duval.
Hi, can you hear us?
Thank you.
Committee members and, uh,
You can address the your, your
concerns along the way,
representative.
Committee members represented a
block.
I didn't know I was going first,
so I have a few questions. Thank
you, Representative Annie Nonu
for the bill, and I have a few
questions.
About this bill and a few, I
mean, an unspecified number of
questions. So,
First of all, I guess I'm
looking at other states that
have done this, Madam Chair, and
I haven't really researched them
specifically California and
Minnesota, I believe, according
to the
One of the analyses, I'm
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, how is a policy
such as this one worked in
states like that.
Madam Chair and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Block.
First, I have to say, sorry,
Ivan, I'm getting texts from
people on the Zoom and they are
not able to see or hear us.
They're just getting a black
screen. Um, so I'm very sorry,
representative. Can you restate
just that, the, the question
portion and Madam Chair, I don't
know if we have to stop until we
fix that.
Yeah, let's go back to public
comment.
The table just a little
bit they do some.
Push the table a little. Hello.
And I
On
Do I speak,
um, we're ready for your public
comment.
Oh, hello. Sorry, I didn't I the
picture went out and I couldn't
hear. I didn't know what was
happening. Hello, I'm here in
support of HB 98, uh, to support
our rental community. Um,
Thank you, Chair and committee
and thank you to sponsors for
bringing up this bill. I live in
a high rental area of the
International District. Most of
us are rentals. We rent for long
term, we rent for more than 15
to 20 years. We have a lot of
elders, people with
disabilities, um, people who,
who are live in rentals, the,
the majority of their lives, um,
we've seen recently new
landlords come in and just raise
our rent, and people are forced
evicted all the time. We believe
this bill would support our
communities uh to support.
um, just them trying to find a
new place to live, um, these
forced evictions are because of
rental increases in our
community. It's not because of
anything the renter did, we
noticed our renters have very
little rights, and we're hoping
this bill would support our
communities um especially the
one where I live. I'm also the
secretary of Trumbull Village,
and we've seen rentals just uh
landlords come and go, and we're
still here. So, thank you for
listening.
Duval Westbo, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. Can you
hear me? Yes, we can hear you.
We're ready for your public
comment.
Thank you so much for your
patience with the, the tech
issues this morning. Good
morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Duval
Westfall, executive vice
president of Policy and Programs
for the greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce.
And I'm here to testify in
strong opposition to House Bill
98.
Landlords have a lot at stake
when they rent a property. It's
their livelihood, and many have
poured their life savings into a
duplex, a quadruplex, a town
home or an apartment building,
and they have a fundamental
right and they need to know who
they're running to. It's often
said that past actions are the
best predictor of future
behavior and prior evictions can
reveal everything from a pattern
of nonpayment to extensive
property damage to illegal and
illicit behavior. Eviction's not
an easy process. They're done on
a whim. The landlord must
establish legal
grounds serve notice to the
tenant for response or
compliance, file an eviction
suit, attend a court hearing,
and prevail in the case.
The landlord-tenant relationship
should be one entered into with
all the facts on the table.
erasing eviction records after
just 5 years would essentially
blindfold landlords to
prospective tenants rental
history. It's Patently unfair to
someone who's putting their
property in someone else's
hands. And we respectfully ask
that you vote no on how scale
98. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
And we were ready to hear a
supporting comments, if there's
anyone else, it's everyone.
And then go ahead and opposing
comments on Zoom.
OK, next up we have Carlos
Santag.
Carla, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Carlos Santag, president and CEO
of the New Mexico Business
Coalition, and we are here in
opposition to House Bill 98 in
the rental market, it's crucial
for managers of properties to
have full information. I don't
know any manager that won't give
consideration to someone that
had a hard time and has gotten
over it.
But they cannot make an informed
decision if they're unaware of
what has happened in the past.
This is not only a problem for
managers of properties and
owners of properties, it's a
map, it's a problem for renters
as well, because when you start
taxing the system this way,
putting rental properties at
risk.
Then you're putting renters at
risk as well. Full information
is the key to good decision
making, and we urge you to say
no to this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you so much.
Now we're moving to Enrique
Cardiel.
And good, can you hear us?
Yes.
Hello, my name is uh Enrique
Cardiel. I'm the director of the
Health Equity Council, and I'm
here to speak, uh, in support of
this bill. I think, uh,
As Bernadette Hardy stated
earlier, this is important to uh
allow access and stability.
To community members who uh
don't always have the resources
to keep up.
Uh, with things and have
different issues and struggles,
and so I think this is an
important public health issue
and
I strongly urge you to support
this. Thank you so much.
Up next we have Judy.
Judy, can you hear us?
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico, and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches.
We think that, um, keeping the
eviction records open
indefinitely does present
barriers to families and others
for having stable housing, and
we believe that people can
recover from the challenges that
led to an eviction, and that
eviction records should not
follow them indefinitely. Thank
you very much.
Thank you so much, Judy.
Up next, and next we have Zoe
Kraft. Zoe, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you so much. Um, good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you so
much for the opportunity to
speak on this bill this morning.
Um, my name is Zoe Craft. I'm
here on behalf of Earthcare,
which is a community-based
organization here in northern
New Mexico with thousands of
members and supporters dedicated
to environmental justice,
education, and community
well-being.
Earth care strongly supports
House Bill 98 because we believe
that no one should be
permanently denied housing due
to an eviction that happened
years ago. The artwork
coordinating the Santa Fem
Mutual Aid Network, we've seen
firsthand how many of our member
families were struggling to pay
rent, especially during the
pandemic. Hundreds of our
members faced eviction, and we
distributed tens of thousands of
dollars in rental assistance to
help keep families housed, but
even after people got back on
their feet, finding housing
remained nearly impossible for
those who already had an
eviction.
on their record. Um, we really
believe that New Mexico's
housing market is already
difficult enough, so we can't
allow an old eviction often
caused by medical emergencies,
job loss, or rising rents to
haunt people for the rest of
their lives. We believe that
this bill is the bare minimum
step towards fairness, dignity,
and a more humane housing
system. So this morning I wanted
to urge you all to pass House
Bill 98 because every person
deserves housing, um, and we
need to remove these unnecessary
barriers for stable housing.
Thank you so much for your
testimony today.
Are your public comment.
Austin Weate, uh, can you hear
us, Austin?
Yes, hello, thank you very much,
Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Austin
Wiake. I'm with New Mexico
Working Families Party. Uh, and
we stand today in strong support
of House Bill 98. 1st of all,
because we understand that there
are a lot of factors that can go
into somebody having an
eviction. Um, one of those being
rising costs and very few
protections for renters
themselves. I personally had my
rent raised, despite having a
lease signed that was for a full
12 months. My rent was raised an
additional $150 in.
January. Now, not a lot of
people have the flexibility to
make that that work and
addiction can go on somebody's
record. And I just want to
underline how long 5 years is,
uh, 5 years ago, we had yet to
have our COVID shutdowns, and I
think a lot of that would have
been unimaginable, uh, 5 years
ago, uh, I was multiple jobs
away from where I'm at now. And
5 years ago, we had yet to see
Patrick Mahomes win his first
Super Bowl. So, uh, and now
we're coming up on the 3 beats.
So, um,
We are now, we, we understand
how long 5 years can be. This is
really like a no nonsense uh
bill that allows people to
access greater housing stock.
Thank you. Thank you so much for
public comment.
And lastly, we have Jean Vance.
Gene, can you hear us?
Can you hear me.
Thank you so much. And I'm, I'm
speaking in opposition to the
bill. I'm a a
An attorney representing folks
in the landlord tenant area and
had been for 45 years. There are
some serious technical issues.
The landlords themselves can
talk about what, what the issues
are with knowing uh needing to
know what someone's past is, but
there are serious technical
issues with this bill, the way
it's written. First off, to have
an eviction go to a conclusion,
you'll end up with a judgment.
Either the landlord is going to
be to uh
Get a judgment in the landlord's
favor for rent or damages or the
residents can get a judgment in
their favor, uh, which may be
for a counterclaims. A judgment
is good for 14 years. It's, it's
a lien on the property of the
person against whom it is
entered.
And that was reaffirmed by the
legislature in just the last
session. So this 5 years to
destroy the file is in conflict.
Thank you so much.
And that's it.
Thank you. Back to
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So, I
guess my, my first question.
Which may have changed a little
bit actually, but
First question is about other
states and what they are doing
in terms of this, I think, I
believe I saw the AOC.
Analysis on that, and it had a
few states, and I didn't have
time to just go individually
through the ones that it was
mentioning, I think Florida.
Utah, Kentucky, California, and
Minnesota, and Madame Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering how does ours
A line with other states like
that. I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So our state
does not align with any of
those. Um, currently, you heard
from some of the public comment
that
An eviction will fall off your
credit record after 7 years, and
that is correct. But currently
in the state of New Mexico, AOC
records of evictions are held
indefinitely. They do not go
away at all. So this 5 year
period that we settled on.
was really out of practic
practicality and fairness. Um, I
do believe that prior evictions
is legitimate and important
information for a property
manager or landlord to have.
They have a 5-year record that
they can look at for any one
individual to see if they are
habitual.
Um, evictees, and I picked 5
years because 7 years is a
little too long, Minnesota, for
example, has um automatic
expungement after 3 years, and I
did not think that a 3 year
window was enough time. So 5
years I thought was a healthy
balance between being um too
punitive and not getting a good
snapshot of where a person's at.
So that's where fibers settled
on. But here in New Mexico.
AOC keeps those records forever.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative Annie
Nornu and that helps me. So I
guess.
I guess I'm just looking at this
first page at Florida. They
passed something in 2021.
And this is on the AOC analysis,
it's on page, they don't have
page numbers on these, but I
think it's the 2nd page of that
analysis.
And so what it does say is the
defendant's not eligible for
relief if during any
twelve-month period, the
defendant had a judgment entered
against them in two or more
eviction proceedings, and then
it also says mimicking Oregon's
law, uh, during any 24 months,
the defendant had a judgment
entered against them in 3 or
more eviction proceedings. So
Madam Chair Representative, I
guess my my question is.
With your legislation, would it,
would a landlord be able to see
that if it was 5 years ago when
they had 3 evictions within 2
years. Would they be able to see
that and unworthiness I guess of
a renter in some kind of report.
I would just want to make sure
if they were a habitual offender
in a certain instance that we
are at least keeping that record
somewhere. Would they still be
able to see that with this
legislation, Madam,
over 5 years will stay on the
record.
Um, I also want to, so yes, if
it's older, if it's, sorry, if
it's within 5 years, any
property manager will be able to
see that when they pull a
person's reports, um, I want to
also be clear since it was
raised that if a, if a tenant
owes money, this does not
relieve them of that. If there
were any criminal convictions
that went along with the
eviction, this does not cover,
this does not expunge any
criminal or relieve any money
owed to any previous property
manager. If there are multiple
offenses within one year.
If it's younger than 5 years,
that will stay on the.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, that makes
sense. But if it's past 5 years,
so let's just say they were
living with a relative for the
last 5 years cause they couldn't
get.
rent, they couldn't be rented
something, then that would
Fall off after 5 years, just to
be clear with that. OK, got it.
And then,
Next here, OK, we're talking
about the actual
offense of
Being evicted. I don't know if
you'd call it an offense, or
just the eviction itself. So
what if that charge was mixed
with other charges such as, I
don't know, drug possession or
um
Or domestic violence, etc. So on
that record, I'm just wondering
how that works in practice with
the AOC. How did that, if we're
taking off part of the record
and let's just say it was plead
pleaded out or something like
that. Is it kept on the record
for those other offenses, and is
it just like blacked out? I just
don't know how that works in
practice, Madam Chair,
Madam representative, so like I
mentioned before, if there are
any criminal convictions that go
along with the eviction, that go
along with the eviction. Those
criminal convictions would stay
on the record, they would not be
expended.
an eviction is a civil suit is a
civil procedure. So because that
is a separate part of.
The Department of Justice, yeah,
um, so the eviction goes away.
But any criminal convictions
would not.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, that, that
makes sense. So I guess.
If it was a civil case and there
were civil charges along with
that.
They would just like redacted or
or whatever when it comes to the
actual.
The actual eviction.
If it was a civil case.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
Representative. Can you, can you
crystallize that a little bit.
Sorry, we're all, we're all, I
only had one cup of coffee, so I
apologize. Uh, so.
There we go. So Madam Chair, I
guess I'm wondering like in a
civil suit.
If this was like mixed.
With other damages from that
property owner that we're not
necessarily the actual eviction.
So, if there were um
I don't know, maybe
There's some other civil.
flame
From the renter.
Represented a block, I believe
she just answered that, so.
Can we go ahead and move along.
Thank you. We agenda.
Yeah, I understand. I just want
to make sure that we're all
clear on this.
And so I guess I'll just get
with you on that question.
Madam Chair, uh, next year.
Madam Chair, I did have a few
questions that were brought up
in the conversation.
Madam Chair, how many
individuals are we projecting
that this will affect.
If this goes into effect, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe it was in the 01 of
these reports, I believe it was
in the FIR maybe.
I have to.
See how many
Eviction cases were reported for
2023, you know, Madam Chair
representative at this moment, I
can't give you that exact
number. I know I saw it in one
of the agency analyses.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative Ya, I feel
like I may have seen a number
somewhere, but there are so many
agency analyses on this bill.
It's
Yeah, OK. I just am wondering
how many folks this will affect.
All right, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, so,
We talked about the differences
between the state's proposals.
Are there any that are that are
higher than cause I know you
said 7 for I think was it.
One of those states is this kind
of in the in the middle ground.
Because I know we said 7, we
said 3 for, was it California or
Minnesota or something. I'm just
wondering if this goes with the
status quo with some of those
states, Madam Chair represented
that 7 years was in reference to
how long an eviction stays on
your credit record, um, the
Missouri
I believe, has the 3 years.
And um,
And and to answer your previous
question, Representative Block.
It's 17,400 evictions.
A year in New Mexico.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Right, that was total universe,
not per year. I misspoke.
That, that's cool. OK, so around
17,400 that it could affect.
OK, got it. All right. uh, let's
see.
One more question.
I mean, I guess I'm, I'm
thinking about the landlords and
what they're saying about it,
and I've heard their concerns
and I think that it's valid,
especially someone who's a
property owner who wants to make
sure that their investment keeps
on
At least breaking even. I'm just
wondering, could you address
some of those concerns from
property owners since they,
there is a loss when it comes to
an eviction.
Inevitably, and I know it may
not necessarily be a tangible,
like, like the wall was beaten
in or something, you know, but
The just the lost time from that
eviction to the next person to
rent to. Can you just address
some of those concerns that we
heard this morning, Madam Chair
and Representative. Certainly,
Madam Chair Representative, I
Bring this bill and it's 5 years
because like I stated before,
Prior evictions are legitimate,
valid and important information
for any landlord or property
manager to have. And I think a 5
year window of behavior is.
plenty of time to assess where a
person is at to see what sort of
patterns of behavior they have.
What I, um, the reason why I
bring this bill.
It's because an indefinite
screenshot of behavior I believe
is unfair and unnecessarily
punitive.
And Kesler's records currently
stay on, stay with AOC and are
accessible at the moment
forever. I bring this pill
because I think a five-year
window of time is plenty of time
for a property manager to see
where a person is at currently.
I don't think people should be
continue to be punished for
mistakes or behavior that they
had when they were.
23 versus someone getting their
act together, getting ready to
maybe seek a home loan, buy a
house in their early 30s. So I
completely agree that property
managers and landlords should
have access to this information,
and they do. They have a 5 year
window to look at to see if this
is a repeatable habitual pattern
or to see if someone has um
maybe at the, like maybe the
older years, they had like an
eviction or two, but since they
have been completely on the
level, paying their rent on
time, um, you know, maintaining
a decent credit score.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, and I
appreciate the answers. Thank
you. Presented block.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative,
when, when you
We're in the process of looking
at this issue and, and drafting
this bill. Did you consider the
rent going up?
Madam Chair Representative, no,
because we are not taking
information away. We are
establishing a window of time
for where a person is at, a 5
years is plenty of time to see
behaviors, see if someone's
capable of paying a rent.
And if they are paying rent and
they've been a good tenant for 5
years. I don't see why anybody's
rent would go up. I'm chair
representative. Madam Chair and
Representative, my concerns were
with the testimony that
And, and it seems like anytime
we regulate something.
It makes the price go up. And,
and this is, this is more
regulations on rentals and
And businesses that rent homes,
uh,
So, that concerns me uh quite a
bit.
And then, uh
One more thing I was thinking.
When we're going through the
debate and stuff, you know,
there's
There's people that
Maybe come through a hard bump
on the road every now and then
and, and
Maybe they, this one person
would get evicted.
Would you consider
On your bill to change.
To, to something like if a
person gets evicted once in 5
years?
That it could be expunged.
Or would, would, would you even
consider that, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, um, no, I would
not be willing to consider that
as we heard in public comment, a
lot of these eviction records
are forced eviction records
because a person is unable to
continue to pay rent after a
rent hike, whether they were
responsible for any property
damage to that apartment or not.
And being forced out of your
apartment, not because of
something you did, but because
you cannot be able to pay is
still going to show up on court
records and it will look unless
you request that specific case
file and do the digging, it
appears on your record just like
any other eviction. So no,
unfortunately, I'm not willing
to make those sort of changes
because we don't differentiate
between types of eviction cases.
They all look the same, unless
you're going to file the the
IPRA and like look at each
individual.
case and most property managers
when they're doing searches for
people, just kind of count the
numbers of cases they don't have
time necessarily to do those
deep dives. And like I've said
many, many times, 5 years of
time is plenty of time in
definite record keeping is far
too punitive.
representative.
And Madam Chair and
Representative.
Maybe I misunderstood your
response, but I think it sounded
kind of contradictory as to
You said that
If you do the deep dive, all
those records will still be
there, even if you did.
The expungement
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
no, sorry, I'm, I apologize if
there was any miscommunication
there.
Any eviction that is currently
on your record, it'll just say
eviction case, eviction case,
eviction case, unless you
request the file and look at
each individual case, you will
not see if somebody was evicted,
took their landlord to court,
won their case, it still comes
up as eviction case if they were
forced out of their apartment,
it still comes out in his
eviction case, so if you're
looking at that snapshot of
time.
And right now, that snapshot of
time is from now till time
immemorial.
Without looking at each
individual case, you cannot know
the result.
And, and Madam Chair, and
Representative. So how do you
feel about people that are
chronically evicted all the
time. How, how is this gonna
help the landlord and them.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
asking that question. And
because these property managers,
landlords will have access to 5
years of history if someone is a
habitual offender and constantly
getting kicked out, you will see
that in 5 years, absolutely.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, so
Does this thing go along for 5
years with nothing happening and
then something gets brought out
or.
After 5 years, is somebody gonna
have to be keep tracking,
tracking this weekly, daily,
monthly, or
Or how is that gonna work, Madam
Chair Representative, Madam
Chair Representative, no, since
the since the expungements,
excuse me, will be automatic.
It'll be the same process for
automatic expungement that we
use for cannabis convictions
after that 5 years, once it hits
that 5 year date, it will
automatically roll off.
So Madam Chair and
Representative.
Uh
Will the courts have to hire
extra people to watch this or
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, no, again, if we
refer to the FIR, there will be
an initial cost.
To expunge the um records that
are 5 years old right now, so
like.
A first wave of updating
records, and then there will be,
um,
Minimal cost going forward that
we already essentially do for um
cannabis expungement.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative.
Thank you, Representative.
Vice chair little
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to move a due pass on this
bill.
second.
I have a motion for a due pass
and a second, please call roll.
Representative Ona Nonu.
Yes.
Representative block.
No, sir.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mia.
Represented a madamme floor
leader.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair.
It is 63.
Thank you, Representative Anya
Nonu, you have a due pass. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
members, uh, committee members.
Ladies and gentlemen, I uh was
remiss to tell you that we are
Thank you, Representative, you
may begin
and you
introduce your expert witnesses.
Madam Chair. We're here for a
House Bill 113 and
Our animal welfare program and
trust fund and I, I will have,
um,
Representative of beta, um,
introduced the bill with our
expert witnesses, and they will
introduce themselves as well.
Good morning, um, Madam Chair,
committee members, my name is
Stacy Sutton Kirby, Chief
Government Affairs Officer for
Animal protection voters for
more than 40 years along with
our um program arm we've
represented thousands of New
Mexicans who care deeply about
addressing the root causes of
animal overpopulation and
neglect and the interest of both
the animals in the communities
where they dwell.
We do an introduction.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I am
Judy Wolf, Chief Humane
Communities Officer at Animal
Protection New Mexico, Animal
protection voters.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Representative Michelle
Paulinabada, and I will be
assisting as a co-sponsor to
this bill, House Bill 113.
Which is a bill relating to
animals, creating the animal
welfare program to provide
funding for projects that
support the welfare of domestic
cats and dogs, creating the
animal welfare trust fund and
animal welfare program fun,
making an appropriation,
providing for a transfer from
the general fund to the animal
welfare Trust Fund. Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, we have a
little bit more information to
give, but I'd like to address
the appropriation part as um a
member of, of House
Appropriations, and we are
working on the funding of this
as this will be uh a topic of
conversation or of question
today. Um, and with that, I'm
gonna allow our expert witness,
uh, to give a little more
information and then we'll give
it back to the committee. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Animal protection
voters supports House Bill 113
as a responsible approach to
addressing animal care needs in
our state, investing in animal
care makes our community safer
and leads to cost savings by
preventing unwanted litters of
dogs and cats, those surplus
animals lead to increased costs
for sheltering, increased costs
when animal control must respond
to loose and feral animals, and
the public
health and safety issues
stemming from the lack of animal
care and control services
includes increased risk of
rabies transmission from
unvaccinated animals, increased
risk of dog bites, increased
risk of deprivation of cattle
and vehicular collisions with
loose dogs. I'm sure you can all
see that picture ultimately
investments in animal
infrastructure, our investments
in human well-being and do save
taxpayer dollars. House Bill 113
would create a
liable funding stream for a wide
array of projects that could
lower these risks, including
purchasing equipment and
supplies for critical shelter
operations, offering
microchipping and vaccination
clinics for dogs and cats,
supplying animal control
officers with the tools they
need, uh, as I said, there's a
wide array of projects that
could be funded. House Bill 113
does this by investing a small
fraction of the current revenue
surplus instead of spending and
appropriation down.
Instead, that money would grow
to support projects that could
stem the tide of unwanted
animals and keep animals healthy
and with their families.
Currently, no single statewide
entity is in a position to
evaluate proposed projects, that
process is spread out over
different agencies and boards
with disparate funding
mechanisms and without a
strategy for identifying the
most impactful projects, New
Mexico will continue to suffer
from an inefficient piecemeal
approach. House Bill 113
includes a competitive process
for reviewing proposals for
projects to identify the ones
that are going to have the
greatest impact and this is
especially important in the
animal welfare deserts that
we've heard of, particularly in
rural areas, um, and I do want
to mention some boots on the
ground entities that have come
out in support of House Bill
113, including the New Mexico
Sheriff's Association, the Rio
Ariba County Sheriff, Bernalillo
County Sheriff.
Town of Edgewood, uh, this, um,
Mayor Brennan and the city
commission, City of Grant's
police chief Maxine Monte, the
Santa Rosa City Council, uh, 4th
judicial district DA Thomas
Clayton, an 8th judicial DA
Marcus Montoya, that's just some
of the entities that support
this approach to um expanding
our ability to meet the needs of
our community.
and the animals where they
dwell. Thank you. I'll be happy
to take any questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
a, this is legislation we had
last year as well, so this is
the 2nd year, uh, full year of
working on this. We've tightened
things up, we've had a lot of
really um amazing conversations
and how to get this done. And
we've settled that the amount uh
that you see in the
appropriation that is in the
bill at $10 million and as a
As outlined how that that fund
functions and hopefully through
the years, we can, we can uh put
more money into it and uh with
that, I'm gonna turn this over
to my co-sponsor, and I do have
another bill up in the next
committee. So Representative
Abeta will be here for the, the
rest. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to provide an opportunity for
other expert witness to provide
testimony. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I
would like to speak to some of
the animal welfare conditions
across our beloved New Mexico
State that underscored the need
for House Bill 113.
Most of the 40 plus dog and cat
shelters in New Mexico are
chronically at or over capacity.
In communities where shelters
are overcrowded, animals are
more likely to be abandoned.
Rome go unvaccinated and
reproduce.
Further, when shelters are
overfull, hard decisions must be
made.
Indeed, in 2023, 1 in 5 animals
were
That entered the sheltering
system were euthanized. And I
just, I want to let that number
settle a little bit. Almost 22%
of animals were euthanized when
they entered the sheltering
system.
Many shelters also operate with
inadequate infrastructure.
As shelters outgrow their
capacity, they are less able to
meet the needs for exercise,
enrichment, and behavior
modification that helped to
facilitate higher adoption
rates.
Animals deteriorate behaviorally
as their stay in shelter
environments is extended.
Rural shelters in some areas
lack the resources to fully
comply with the state's humane
minimum shelter standards.
Bringing struggling shelters
into compliance with basic
public supported standards of
care will enhance animal welfare
and decrease taxpayer spending.
There are animal welfare deserts
in rural areas of New Mexico.
For example, based on our
research of about 33 counties,
we found that 2 counties lack
any type of animal welfare
service at all. And we found
multiple counties are served
solely by nonprofits, as there
are no government shelters in
the area.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, these are serious
issues. In HB 113 is crucial to
addressing these concerns that
exist all across New Mexico.
You.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you to our witness. Uh, Madam
Chair, I'd like to provide just
a brief testimony as well about
this.
Thank you. Um, as you know, my
district, District 69 is one of
the larger rural districts in
New Mexico that encompasses 6
counties, and Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I've
grown up in a home where pets
were respected and loved and
cherished and just recently, we
lost one of our pets after 16
years, and I can't describe the
Influential role that our little
Lila and Skibby played in My
Four Children's Life. I have two
older children, preteens, and I
have two toddlers that are that
I have through kinship care, and
the valuable lessons and the
companionship that we can build
with our animals is
extraordinary. Um, as you had
heard about the animal welfare
desert.
In my district primarily, one of
the key components coming from
the local school board is
education and by educating our
children about prevention and
prevention and care of our
domestic animals is one of the
key components to making sure
that we're part of the solution
and caring for our domestic
pets. So I, I fully support this
and I see that there's a strong
need to provide these types of
services, especially in our
rural communities, and I see so
many benefits that our
community.
could embrace from this and with
that, I hope to have this
committee's support. Thank you,
Chair.
Thank you. Let's go to a public
comment in the audience, those
in support of the bill, please
raise your hands.
OK, please uh provide your
comment within one minute. Let's
begin with uh my right.
Your left side of the room.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for allowing me to speak.
I'm Tammy Feeblelkorn. I'm in
Albuquerque City councilor, um,
and I am here in full support of
this bill. Our city shelters
just like every shelter across
our state is at capacity and
overcapacity right now. And we
really need to help our
companion animals. One of the
things that I wanted to point
out that we could use these
funds for that would be very
helpful is we have a lot of
domestic violence in our state,
and we have a lot of animals
that are being brought in.
to shelters for safekeeping, um,
after domestic violence event
and it is very expensive for
local shelters to cover the care
of those animals, although, of
course, we have to do so. And so
we need to have funds available
to provide that service for
domestic violence victims so
that they can maintain their
animals who are often their only
source of unconditional love. So
that's one of the things that
the city of Albuquerque would be
interested in using these funds
for, for that and all.
other reasons, we ask you to
please support 113.
Hello, my name is Bridget Beak.
I'm representing New Mexico
Wildlife Center, and we support
this bill. It directly affects,
uh, the welfare of the wildlife
as well. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Janice Herrera.
I'm a volunteer with Mutual A of
Albuquerque and um recently, a
man in my neighborhood was run
over by a hit and run driver,
um, him and his wife had a total
of 4 dogs, and they lived in a
tent that was visible from my
front door. I happened on the
accident before paramedics got
there and over a period of 2
months, tried to find options
for them, for their dogs. They
did not want them to be killed.
I called every shelter. I called
place I could think of across
the state on the municipal
level, county level, nonprofits,
people I personally know who
foster, there's no capacity.
These providers are completely
overstretched, um, our city
voucher program does not provide
emergency housing hotel vouchers
for people who have pets, and so
this man indicated he would
rather go into a tent back on
the street than to send his 4
dogs and have them killed when
he was hit by the car, he was
carrying his chihuahua and his
fast, and he turned to block the
force of the impact from the dog
and took it in the ribs. His
ribs were all broken to save the
dog, so please think of how
people regard their animals as
family. Thank you.
Um
Madam Chair and honor and
committee members, uh thank you
for having us speak here today.
My name is Ken Brennan. I am the
mayor of Edgewood, New Mexico,
and I am here in support of HB
113, not only on a personal
level, but also for the town of
Edgewood. The commission
recently supported these, this
measure by passing resolution
2025-006 supporting HB 113. Ro
communities have a lot of wide
open spaces and unfortunately,
people tend to have a feeling
that way they can.
Come out there, release their
dogs or cats and say they're
gonna be fine out in the
wilderness and they'll survive,
which that is definitely not the
issue. The other problem is
especially with dogs, when you
start releasing a lot of dogs
into the area. They start to
form packs and these packs will
go ahead and have impact on
those who are ranching, uh,
those just who have backyard
chickens. A lot of times we have
found that, uh, these dogs will
break into their hen houses.
And uh kill off their flock, um,
being close to large
metropolitan areas like Edgewood
is to Albuquerque. People from
the cities also have that same
attitude that we'll just take
them out. So I strongly
recommend HB 113 and I hope that
this passes. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Crystal Trujillo and I
am the animal control director
in Santa Rosa, New Mexico. Santa
Rosa is a small rural community
with a population of a little
under 3000 people. We are a
community of animal lovers, but
we have little to no resources
out there. And one of the most
important resources we are
missing is access to spay and
neuter. We rely heavily on spay
neuter clinics. These clinics
bring in a veterinary group that
specializes in doing high volume
spaces and neuters.
And this is our best chance at
uh getting our pet pet
population under control and
more manageable. There are many
benefits to spay and neuter. Um,
one of them is it can reduce
behavior issues such as
aggression, roaming, and urine
marking, and most importantly,
it helps to decrease our pet
population. So I believe
investing in animal welfare is
strongly needed to help keep our
communities clean, safe, and to
keep the animals and our
citizens safe. And I thank you
for allowing me to speak on how
HB 113 would benefit our
community.
and I urge you to vote yes on
behalf of HB 113. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representatives, my
name's Lady Van Cava. I'm an
attorney with Best Friends
Animal Society, and we work with
um shelters in the Navajo Nation
on animal issues throughout New
Mexico. New Mexicans love their
animals. They do, but in 2023,
87,546 dogs and cats entered the
shelters. Um, New Mexico has the
highest rate of animals entering
shelters per capita of any state
in the union.
Which is, you know, it, it's so
tragic. We worked recently with
Otero County. Um, they just
adopted a new animal control
ordinance, um, basically to help
try to deal with the population.
So again, we urge you to pass
this. We thank the the
representatives for bringing
this important bill, and this is
a taxpayer issue. These animals
that come into county shelters
cost taxpayer dollars, and so
this is just not a humanitarian
issue. It is a fiscal impact
issue.
That needs to be addressed.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any further comments
in support of the bill in the
audience before I go to
opposing. OK, thank you.
Mr. Madam Chair Committee, I'm
Misha Goodman, director of
Berlio County Animal Care
Services. I'm also the president
of the New Mexico Companion
Animal Network, shelters
throughout New Mexico are
struggling. We are struggling
with increased populations,
increase aggressiveness in dogs
and the inability to house them
properly or to bring them in. We
also have court cases that go on
for extended periods of time
because the courts are limited.
how many cases they can take and
how quickly we have animals
currently in our facility that
we've been holding over a year.
This is at a cost. It's at a
cost for capacity for care and
what we can do for these
animals. In Berlio County,
Sandoval County, and in
Albuquerque this past year.
We had extreme maulings with
dogs that resulted in the loss
of limbs and in one case loss of
life.
We can't deal with these kinds
of situations without capacity
to take in these animals and
care for them properly. We have
an immediate need for expansion,
for equipment, for mass high
volume span neuter in this
state, vaccinating clinics to
increase the ability to decrease
sickness and illness. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Do we have any
further comments in support of
the bill. All right, let's move
to opposition, uh, any opposing
comments in the audience.
Any outside?
Seeing none, let's go to the
zoom.
Do we have any on Zoom in
support of the bill.
Stacy, can you hear us?
Yes. Great. You have one minute.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Stacy
Voss, and I am the former animal
welfare director for the
Farmington Regional Animal
Shelter that serves San Juan
County. I'm the current chair
for the state's animal
sheltering Committee that serves
underneath the New Mexico Board
of Veterinary Medicine.
This bill is vital to the
progression of animal shelters
in our state. Shelters are
chronically understaffed and
underfunded, and yet there are
critical community resource and
often touches animals and
citizens beyond their designated
jurisdictions. However, these
shelters cannot provide the
needed resources for the health
and safety of their community if
they are not well resourced to
themselves. Animal shelters
touch and help community members
from all walks of life, and I
believe that as a state, we
should do everything we can to
ensure that shelters can serve
the animals and peoples of their
communities. Thank you so much
for your consideration. Thank
you so much.
Nina Benavides, can you hear us?
Yes. Hi. Good morning, Madam
Chair, committee members. My
name is Nana Benavides. I'm a
community member from Pinos
Altos, New Mexico, which is
located in Grant County. Um, I
would like to speak in strong
support of the bill for all the
reasons stated um earlier. Um,
however, also, um,
has a place with a shelter that
does the best that it can. We
also know that we have several
high kill shelters in New
Mexico, and um we try to get
them to rescues and homes, but
that's not always possible. And
um like I said, just for all the
reasons previously spoken, and I
won't take more time. Um, I
would ask for your strong
support of this bill.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Nana.
Do we have any opposing comments
on Zoom.
Seeing none, let's go back to
committee members and
representative of Beta, I
believe we have a, an amendment.
Yes, Madam Chair, that's
correct.
I would move the amendment for
discussion.
Thank you. We have um
Motion to uh.
Discuss the amendment. So our
representative.
Um
Please read the bottom.
2 number and then explain your
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The amendment, the first
amendment, I, excuse me, I
proposed to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee the following
amendment to House Bill 113,
number 1 on page one, line 24.
After county insert or an Indian
nation, tribe or pueblo.
End quote.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have any
discussion on the amendment,
Representative Block. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Just a point of
clarification, so I, this is the
first time I'm seeing this
amendment. Is this, was this
given to the committee 24 hours
in advance. I'm looking at my
email and I, I don't see it.
Could you just tell me when that
was added to the drive,
Lockett was emailed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I would move we
adopt Amendment number 1 to
House Bill 113 202 number.
230146.1.
Second.
We have um uh a motion and a
second to adopt the amendment.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none
Let's go ahead and continue with
the amended bill.
Committee members.
Represented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and good to
finally see you and I, I saw you
on energy committee, I think a
few days ago, but I haven't been
able to say hello, so I will
have to go say hello on the
floor, but good to see you in
committee. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I guess, first
of all, I just want to say I
I like the idea of the bill. I
think it's a good idea.
But I also, on the other hand,
At least in my district, we've
got so many different people and
I feel like it's a problem. It's
becoming an epidemic in my
opinion. People get
A dog, then they get another
dog, and then they have 5 or 6
dogs, and then it gets to a
point, Madam Chair, where these
individuals are not taking care
of these dogs properly. Uh, some
people are abandoning dogs on
the side of the road, and I
guess what I would like to see,
and I know it's probably a
controversial uh stance, but I
would like to see increased
penalties for people who abuse
and have cruelty toward animals
because I think that would be a
help in disincentivizing this
kind of mistreat.
of animals because these, these
are innocent little animals. I
mean, it's just, it's horrifying
to me. So that's, that's just
one thing I would add. I know
it's not necessarily on your
bill, but I do want to make
sure, Madam Chair
Representative.
So where do we have a formula on
how this gets distributed to the
counties and then we're adding
tribes, nations, and pueblos. So
I guess that would be diluted
further and I, I hate to say it
that that way, but the funds is
10 million. So how do we know
which county gets what? And is
it based on need and if it is,
how do we, how do we measure
that, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I will go
ahead and defer to my expert
witness to answer the division
of the money. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, there is not an
explicit formula written into
the bill. However, there will be
a competitive review process
conducted by Department of
Finance and Administration to
evaluate which would be the most
effective projects and programs
funded by House Bill 113 and in
particular, looking at is this
project proposed for an animal
welfare desert in a rural area.
in a place that currently has no
services. There has been a lot
of discussion around making sure
that entities that would be able
to provide those types of
services would have access to
the funding, the qualified
entities. Um, I would like to,
if you would allow, I can speak
to whether or not the funds
provided through House Bill 113
would enable local authorities
to investigate animal cruelty,
suspected animal cruelty, um.
If you look on page 2 of the
bill provision to improving the
enforcement of animal cruelty
laws, including investigating
and responding to reports of
animal cruelty. I believe that
would fall into that category of
behavior that you described
where folks are not taking care
of their animals, neglecting
their animals, maybe not being
able to provide them with their
needs another component, of
course, is education, helping
people to understand what is the
best way to care for their
animals, and again in the bill.
Um
There is the ability for
entities that provide that type
of education to folks, so they
don't get into the place of
neglecting their animals. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives and
experts, and I agree. I think
that education is key,
especially because unfortunately
it happens a lot. People say,
oh, it's, it's Christmas time,
let me buy a new puppy for my
kid, and then they say, oh, this
is a lot of work. Let's send it
to the pound, and it's just like
a recurring cycle. So if there's
some way that we could have a
multi-pronged approach to not
only say, OK, if you abandon
this, this dog on the side of
the road, that's gonna be
You're going to have to pay for
that, whether it be community
service or have to go to.
Jail or prison, as well as,
yeah, maybe, maybe don't pick up
a dog, maybe get like a stuffed
animal toy, cause that kid I'm
sure would be super happy with
that instead of a brand new
puppy, you get tired of having
to care for it, etc. cause I, I
love dogs. I love cats. I'm a
big animal lover and I just want
to make sure that those folks
They know what they're getting
into. It's, it's a lot of work.
I don't have a dog myself,
because I work a job where I
have to travel all the time, and
I would just hate to not give
that adequate time and attention
to a puppy or or a cat.
For example. So I just, I know
I'm getting on a little tangent,
Madam Chair, on that, but I
just, I'm super passionate about
protecting animals, and I don't
want them to be.
You know
taking advantage of. So, uh,
next here, Madam Chair, and I
guess my big concern on that was
regarding the, the counties. I
know $10 million maybe may sound
like a lot of money right now.
But if it goes to 33 counties
and then it has to be chopped
up. I want to make sure that we
are also prioritizing.
The, the places where there are
big instances per capita of
Animal abuse or, or uh like kill
shelters, for example, how are
we going to think about those
funds when it comes to
prioritizing kill shelters, if
that's even the proper term, I
apologize if it's not, Madam
Chair, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll go
ahead and defer again.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
the good news about investing
this money and letting it grow
is that it'll, it won't be until
July of 2028 before
disbursements are made and
department of um finance will be
able to
evaluate
Uh
They'll, they'll be able to
evaluate the needs and take a
good look at what is, as I said,
the most, um, what are the most
effective projects and what is
the best distribution of funds
so that it does go to those
places where um there are the
huge problems with loose dogs,
dogs being abandoned,
overcrowded shelters. I'm
actually
Um, very sympathetic to the
situation that you're in. I, I
understand that in Alamogordo in
May of this year, there were a
reported nearly 500 dogs, uh, at
the local animal shelter and so
many loose dogs that animal
control could not respond to the
situation. Um, so, my
understanding is that there will
be enough of a lead up time
before money is distributed to
take a good look at um what is
the best distribution for the
most impact.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and representative
and experts and, and I
appreciate that. I guess I, I
kind of have a little pause when
it comes to that because, and no
pun intended different pause,
but I just want to make sure.
I know it's a bad bad dad joke,
I know.
But I just want to make sure
that those funds get to the
counties and, and I know $10
million in 2028 is it's in my
opinion, it's peanuts,
especially if it's
Invested, maybe it's a good
investment, maybe it's 10%.
What are we withdrawing from
that fund and I guess I just
have some concerns, the actual
amount. So I'll, I'll go on, uh,
but Madam Chair Representative
Page.
I believe page.
Page 3, we're talking about the
application process and I did
have a concern because I know in
in my county, we have
communities such as Chaparral,
they're not incorporated. And
I've been down to Chaparral and
I've, I've walked a lot of doors
and chaparral, and there are
dogs that are just roaming the
streets. A lot of them are
aggressive and
Since it's not technically its
own entity, the county would be
responsible for that, and I know
our county is working
extraordinarily hard. How would
that go into play when it comes
to somewhere that isn't
necessarily a fiscal agency, and
the counties is pretty much
responsible for the entire uh
enforcement. Are we going to be
prioritizing counties so that
they can indeed get that cause I
know some counties, they have 3
or 4 municipalities. Some only
have a couple. How does that
work? And I know it's kind of
tying into my previous question,
but
I want to make sure that they,
that they are also on the
priority list, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members,
representative.
In terms of prioritizing the, it
is explicit in the legislation
that the counties could apply,
and I hopefully, I'm
understanding your question
correctly. Um,
Are you talking about a
situation where a county doesn't
have an actual brick and mortar
shelter, and they might need to
rely on other entities such as
nonprofits to contract with in
order to be able to address
those problems, or are you
talking about naming particular
counties in need. I, I think I
could answer both questions.
Well, um,
In preparing for this version of
the bill, um, House Bill 113. We
took a good hard look at which
counties don't have any services
or which have a blend of
services those provided by
municipal or government agencies
and, and
Which have 0. Debaca and Harding
were two counties where we
identified that their 0
services available and so, with
regard to review of projects,
those would be the kinds of
projects that would be
considered the most impactful to
be able to address animal
overpopulation and control
problems.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you for that. And
yeah, I guess I just, I just
have.
Some concerns regarding where
how these funds get to the
counties, which ones are
prioritized because I would just
hate to pass something that is
$10 million and then $3 million
of that goes to Albuquerque, and
then the other part of that goes
to Santa Fe, Riar Rancho, and
Las Cruces, for example, and
then local, local municipalities
and really small counties.
They're not necessarily on the
top of the food chain cause they
may not have so many cases, but
it may be per capita they are
bigger. So I just think that's
one of my big concerns, and I'm,
I'm gonna leave it there, but I,
I'm definitely gonna be
listening to the rest of the
debate and I appreciate you guys
for supporting animals. I love
animals and uh yeah, I just, I
have some concerns, but I will
continue to listen to the
debate. Thank you, Madam
Ona Nonu.
Madam.
Uh, before we take that motion,
Representative Zamora.
I'll second that.
Please call roll. We have a
motion for due pass in a second.
Representative uh Anya Nornin.
Representative block.
Ha.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Madam floor leader, yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative uh
Oh
Reserve, uh, or I'm sorry, uh,
yeah.
Oh, black, right.
Uh
Yes, with an explanation.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Would you explain your vote?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that. And I, I was
hoping we'd have more
conversation on this, but I, I
wanted to put this forward. I
definitely want it to be
continued discussion, but I do
have some concerns, at least
about the amount and how these
are allocated, and I may be a
guest in the committee, maybe no
on the floor, depending on what,
what has changed, but I'll, I'll
get with you guys and see what
we can do, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much.
Your representative and expert
witnesses, you have to pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Let's move along to
Representative Ortiz, House Bill
108, ladies and gentlemen, we
have to be on the house floor at
10:30. So please let's do our
best. And then we have uh house
Bill 91.
As well.
And others.
Thank you.
OK, ladies and gentlemen,
audience, let's settle ourselves
and let's begin.
Representative Ortiz.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, members of the
public. I will be very, very
brief. well as brief as I can.
Uh, thank you for hearing this
bill today. House Bill 108. Uh,
we are in a climate crisis. Our
local communities are, are
suffering from um bad ozone days
from wildfires, uh, from the
effects of flooding and extreme
heat, um, what this bill does is
establishes a program at the
Department of Health that will,
um, really integrate public
health and climate so that our
local communities are safer.
There will be more coordination,
uh,
um integration of climate
science and emergency
preparedness and this program
will also work with our tribes
Indian Asian and pueblos to help
those local communities, um,
develop disaster preparedness
and uh
And all the things that they
need to do to be climate
resilience, resilient. I have
two experts with me.
Shelly Man love and oh gosh.
Stephanie Marraga Michele.
They will be, they will speak
very briefly, manager.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Stephanie Moraga Malley.
I'm a member of Healthy Climate
New Mexico and Apariante of La
Canna and Chase in Chimayo and I
support House Bill 108 because
there are no, there are people
in our state who are suffering
climate-related diseases and
dying from them now and the
Department of Health has very
little capacity with sister
respond, and I'm speaking from
firsthand experience, having
recently retired as program
manager for the New Mexico
Environment.
public health tracking program
in the environmental health
epidemiology bureau. The bureau
receives calls from the public
and other agencies every year to
assist with climate-related
health needs, and this includes
provision of clean air filters
to homes and children with
children with asthma during
wildfire smoke events, providing
policy guidance to schools on
operating during smoke events,
uh, private wells water testing,
uh, post-flooding and
recommendations and data on
heat-related illnesses in
communities and many other
needs.
Uh, the program would enhance
planning efforts led by Amner
and uh the in New Mexico
Environment Department and would
not duplicate them.
Uh, by assuring that health
protection is integrated in
climate resilience plans across
the state. We need to strengthen
the expertise and capacity of
the Department of Health to
respond to climate effects
during climate events. There are
no other, there is no other
health authority respond. Uh, I
know that hazard preparedness
plans in some counties have
inaccurate data, uh, showing
zero deaths, and I just, uh,
thank you for your
consideration.
With that, Madam Chair, we stand
for questions.
You. Let's go to the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands.
OK. I will start with my right,
your left, please express
yourselves within one minute.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Anna Lindon Weller. I am
a senior policy advisor for
Western Resource advocates.
And we are in full support of
this bill. I used to work at
Enerd, um, and when we were at
Mner, we uh often wished that
the Department of Health was
able to be more involved in our
climate planning. Um, I still
believe that, uh, the Department
of Health really needs to be
part of the state's effort, and
this bill allows them to
officially contribute what
they're already trying to do.
Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Justin
Garroot. I'm a registered
lobbyist with Conservation
Voters New Mexico, and this is
one of our priority bills this
session. Uh, New Mexico is
getting hotter and the frequency
and intensity of our extreme
weather events is increasing. HP
108 is key to protecting the
health of New Mexicans, which is
increasingly at risk from
climate change. These include
heat waves, wildfires, poor air
quality, severe storms,
flooding, water contamination.
Water scare.
s ty drought and more with HB
108, the New Mexico Department
of Health would be better
equipped to track the health
impacts linked to climate change
among those most at risk, like
our children, our communities of
color, older adults, people with
disabilities, people who are
unhoused, and families earning
low incomes, please support this
bill.
Hi, good morning. My name is
Ashley Wigley. I'm here to speak
and support HB 108 to create a
state climate program.
I'm an MPH graduate from UNM.
I'm currently pursuing a
doctorate of Public Health and
Epidemiology, and I work as a
senior program manager for
university environmental Health
Research Group. So, I understand
how climate change directly and
indirectly impacts New Mexicans'
health and livelihoods. While
our universities conduct
valuable environmental research
to investigate impacts of health
and ways to mitigate harm. We
need dedicated state
infrastructure to implement the
findings into action. HB 108
will establish survey
coordinate responses and help
communities develop
evidence-based action plans.
Recent challenges like wildfire
and floods highlight this need.
Although I'm sure we're all
enjoying the lovely weather this
week. Temperatures are running
at 20 degrees above average, and
combine that with the current
snowpack that's 26% of normal,
drought conditions that are just
already growing, you can only
imagine what this is gonna mean
for our state in the coming
months.
With rapidly increasing
uncertainty around federal
support for the NIH, the EPA,
the CDC, and FEMA. New Mexico
must take decisive action to
build independent capacity to
protect our communities through
surveillance, communication, and
evidence-based solutions. Thanks
for consideration of those
legislation.
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Alyssa Kenny
Guyer. I'm a member of Healthy
Climate New Mexico and the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter,
uh, with a master's in public
health. I served in the Oregon
legislature on the Healthcare
Committee for 10 years, as well
as on the health and Human
Services Budget Committee, where
we spend an increasing amount of
time focused on responding to
weather-related disasters,
extreme weather events in my
last summer in Oregon in
Portland.
We had something called a heat
dome. Typically, we used to have
summers that reached into the
80s, and in this case, we went
from 1 day 108, the next day
112, the next day 116, hundreds
of people died because there
were not enough cooling centers.
So in response, the Oregon
legislature passed a bill
somewhat similar to this, and I
sent a link to you this morning
by email. Um, I moved here in
21, the summer of 21 and then
experience the Hermit's Creek
and Kaf Canyon.
Uh, fires, worked at the Penasco
Center, OK, I urge you to
support the bill. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Ken Hughes,
registered lobbyist for the coal
and sustainable Communities
comprised of 7 local governments
around the state it's about half
the population. The reasons I
already stated by the previous
uh witnesses I support the bill.
There's your support for the
bill, sorry.
next
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Amy
Barrabe registered lobbyist for
New Mexico Gas Company. We
sincerely appreciates
representatives Ortez and
Sapansy or their continued
commitment to both the
environment and the New Mexicans
who are living in it, um, and as
a former employee of DOH, I can
speak to the professionalism and
the expertise at the
epidemiology bureau and like to
have them have all the resources
necessary to help our citizens.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Doctor Wendy Johnson. I'm a
family physician who's practiced
in Santa Fe, Las Vegas, Taos,
and Espanola. I've seen the
devastation from the fires and
floods and other extreme weather
events brought to these
communities, including new
diagnosis of lung diseases,
increased rates of strokes and
heart attacks from breathing
wildfire smoke, higher rates of
dementia and low birth weight,
which our state is one of the
highest states in the country
for those, those uh afflictions.
And higher rates of behavioral
health problems, especially in
the wake of the hermit's peak,
Caf Canyon fires, 16 states have
departments like this and the
kinds of things that they can
support for small communities
are evidence-based like cooling
centers, distributing masks,
these interventions can decrease
hospital visits and can decrease
mortality by as much as 2/3 from
things like extreme heat events
or wild
Wildfire smoke events. So I urge
you to support this. We've
learned the past two weeks, we
cannot rely on the federal
government for data and support,
so we have to create our own
systems in this state. And right
now, this is very critical. It
will affect all your districts
of these extreme weather events
if they haven't already, and we
need to be prepared. Thank you
very much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Janice Herrera. I'm a
multi-generational New Mexican.
I work at the Health Equity
Council as a health promotion
specialist were recently is a
part of my work, uh, members of
my team, the Public Health
initiatives Group did a hot
weather and cold weather action
plan review for our
municipality, we looked at what
structure is in place and what
we found is that we are
critically underprepared for the
type of extreme events that we
may expect.
I'm sure you all remember in
November when more than 50,000
PNM customers were without heat.
In my city, people were opening
their ovens and leaving them on,
which we know is an
environmental health hazard for
their lung and air quality in
extreme heat, what would people
do?
We have a few libraries that are
designated cooling centers. They
do not have backup generators.
They do not have flats of water
staged. I encourage your
support. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair
Representatives. Jennifer
Romero, Santa Fe County
Community Services Deputy
Director. I previously served as
the Health Services director.
Santa Fe Community Services
department, um,
Sorry, this past year, our board
of County commission adopted the
newly updated health action plan
that includes increasing access
to social determinative health
supports and increasing
awareness of public health harms
due to climate change.
HB 108 would help address
challenges we are facing,
especially with our vulnerable
populations and support the work
that the Santa Fe County
Community Services Department
and Office of Emergency Medical
Management is doing.
HB 108 has also been endorsed by
the New Mexico Association of
Counties, and I serve on the
Health Services affiliate as
well. Thank you.
Any further comments in support
of the bill outside.
Seeing now any comments in
opposition to the bill.
Seeing no, let's go to a zoom.
He, uh, supporting comments on
Zoom. Let's hear 3 comments in
support of the bill.
Giovanni Rasa, Giovanna Rossi,
can you hear us?
Good morning. Yes, I can hear
you.
Great, you got one minute. Thank
you so much.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Giovanna Rossi, and I'm
a here as a mother and as the
New Mexico field organizer for
Mom's Clean Air Force, which is
an organization of over 1.5
million parents and caregivers
concerned about the impacts.
of air pollution and climate
change on children's health, and
I'm speaking today on behalf of
over 20,000 moms Clean Air Force
members right here in New
Mexico.
Parents across the state support
House Bill 108, which creates
the uh state climate health
program at the Department of
Health to safeguard the
well-being of New Mexico kids
and families. We stand in
support. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, Giovanna.
Monica Ray, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Thank you, madam. Oh
yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Monico Otero and I am
the health research and policy
analyst at New Mexico Voices for
Children. Children are often
disproportionately affected by
the impact of extreme weather
events, especially when it comes
to their health and well-being.
Climate change is also a health
equity issue. Addressing climate
change is essential to
protecting the health of all,
especially those most at risk,
including our children.
The public health and climate
program will be will be
beneficial for New Mexico
communities, especially those
most at risk because it aims to
create a coordinated approach to
understanding and preparing for
public health and climate
changes. As an advocate for
children and families, New
Mexico Voices for Children
stands in support of House Bill
108. Thank you.
Thank you.
Finally, we have uh Enrique
Cardiel. Can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Good morning.
Thank you so much.
Yes, my name is Enrique Carillo.
I'm the director of the Health
Equity Council. The uh state
Health council for Bernalillo
County.
And I'm here to speak in favor
of this, um, besides all of the
things that people have
mentioned, uh, are unhoused
population are the folks who
feel the impact of climate
change the most.
People who are outside without a
traditional housing, have to
deal with the heat directly,
have to deal with the cold
directly, um.
We know that people die.
Um
During the extreme weather
events, uh, that are housed and
folks who are in-house have to
deal with those challenges, um,
disproportionately higher than
everyone else.
So I'm here strongly in favor of
this, and I hope that you all
vote for this. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Henrika.
Thank you. Do we have any
opposing comments on Zoom?
Hoa Porter? Are you speaking in
opposition?
Oh no.
No, I am in support.
OK, thank you. That concludes
our comments. Committee members,
Representative Mejia.
Madam Chair, Representative.
How are you?
have some questions. What
criteria?
will be used to measure the
effectiveness of the program in
reducing climate-related health
impact.
Madam Chair Representative
Mejia, um,
department of Department of
Health will be, uh, developing
criteria to uh create the
program and then, of course,
monitor and evaluate those
programs, and I'm happy to turn
it over to my expert who will.
Oh
Madam Chair, representative,
that is why we need the program
exactly for what you're saying.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
one more question. Um, what are
the key health informed
decisions that local communities
will be assisted under this
program.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Mejia, well, the, the
epidemiologists and the staff
that are working um in the
program will um collect data,
uh, evaluate that data, uh, and
then get that data out to, you
know, look like local health
councils, tribal health
councils, local communities that
may be applying for grants that
hopefully will also exist in our
state for for these um for these
public health um issues. So,
You know, they'll be they'll be
working with them directly uh to
develop those plans, uh, to make
that community more climate
resilient.
Madam Chen, thank you for that
answer. One more question.
How does the HGB one or a
defined communities most harmed
by extreme weather events. What
data or methodology will be used
to determine the eligibility
assistance.
Mainer members of the committee,
uh, the Department of Health has
done analysis on um the impacts
of climate.
Uh
Using the uh CDC social
determinants of health and
overlaying maps um of climate
regions within the state and
with that, uh, they've developed
a list of 22 of the most
impacted communities. Um, and
this would be acted upon.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
answer.
Thank you. I have vice chair
Little.
Madam Chair, um, I would like to
move a deep pass on this bill.
OK. We'll come back to uh your
motion in your second.
Uh, Representative Block.
Represented a block and then
represented Brego.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I mean ladies first, if the
representative wants to go
first, I'll go after her. Go
ahead.
Madam Chair, I'd prefer
Representative Blanco first
because he always answers most
of my questions.
block, please. OK, I'll go
first, Madam Chair, just wanted
to offer that. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I heard we
talked about the CDC's data on
the 22 most impacted communities
was that over
Across the nation or was that in
New Mexico and you have a list
of those communities in the
state, Madam Chair and
representative.
I don't have the list, but I
believe the information is
available at the Department of
Health, uh, uh, New Mexico
public health tracking website.
And it is a um a national
I, I can't go into the
methodology here, but it, it's
uh nationally generated.
You based on uh
Uh, Department of
CDC.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I'll
look for that data.
I like to look at maps and
stuff. That's something I like
to look at, especially when it
comes to communities like mine,
if we're affected at all. So,
Madam Chair Representative next
here, uh, I guess the elephant
in the room, the appropriation,
1.1 million. Is this in the
budget, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative Block, it is not
yet in the budget, but we are
working furiously and feverishly
on it.
OK, sounds good, Madam Chair
Representative, then I will
trust your, uh, your sway with
those committees and I don't
know how much sway I have, but
you know, so I guess, Madam
Chair Representative.
Money wise
So 1.1 million, are we expecting
this?
I know it's, I don't believe
it's recurring in the bill, but
are we expecting it to increase
in the future if we find more
impacts, etc. Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, that's a great question.
I believe it is recurring. Um,
it, the, the money would go to
establish the program and hire
the staff, um, and I imagine
that every year with cola
increases and all of that, it,
it may go up, but that the money
that we're asking for will
establish the program and allow
for um for that to be stacked
up.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative. So that is
helpful, so it is recurring. And
so on the, I'm going to be on
page 2 here at the top.
And I'm just wondering
definition wise.
The first line it says help
improve interagency
collaboration focused on health
equity, so Madam Chair
representative, first of all,
interagency collaboration. I
know this is talking about the
Department of Health, but how
does this affect uh all the
other departments that may be
collaborating, Madam Chair. That
is a great question, Madam Chair
and Representative Block, um,
really the whole purpose of this
program is to work with all the
agencies that are dealing with
climate right now, Mexico
Environment Department, uh, MEd.
Uh, I think most importantly,
the, the Homeland Security
emergency management agency, um,
they all have different ways of
approaching climate change and
um sort of before and after
effects. So this program would
really bring those agencies
together to make sure that we
have a coordinated approach.
That's really critical to make
our dollars go further.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I guess that
was kind of my, my next
question, but you already
answered it, so, good job,
because I don't want to
duplicate efforts. So, uh, as
long as they're collaborating,
that's good. And then how are we
defining health equity and how
does that
Let's just say, um, like 33
counties, how are we defining
that? And which counties we
prioritize when that.
is to find somewhere, Madam
Chair and representatives. Madam
Chair Representative Health
Equity has to do with the
disparities that different
populations experience in terms
of the harms related to health,
and that is defined in terms of
the data, right? So that that
is, again, an important part of
this program will be to track
and look at what populations are
disparately affected and to
ensure that they get the support
they need.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I, I know
data wise, we're looking at CDC
data and in this state, I'm sure
collaborates with them to get
data. So I'm just wondering how
like equitability.
Our state is a majority minority
population state. So I'm just
wondering how, how that affects
Could you just give me an
example of like which community
could be affected more if it's
like if it's urban, we have
more, more uh
Buildings that reflect light,
things like that. I mean, how,
how do we look at that
holistically, Madam Chair and
representative. Uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, I think we
have to look at it holistically
and also very targeted, right?
There are extreme weather events
that um have an impact in one
community like the fires in Mora
San Miguel, and then of course
down south as well, right? That
affected those communities
differently than the communities
in Berlingo County or, you know,
that were far away from the
fires, flood events, same thing,
extreme heat, extreme cold.
You know, so that's, that's
really how this program is
developed, is to ensure that
those local communities um are
relying on, you know, both state
and federal data and local data
that's being collected to make
Science backed decisions. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair and
Representative. So would this go
Into helping.
Forest management, for example,
because I know some of the fires
were caused by
Lack of forest management on
federal lands, and I know we
can't really go on federal lands
when it comes to, for example,
Riodoso and the Lincoln National
Forest. So I, I don't want to
be.
Reactive in legislation, I'd
rather be proactive and try to
stop some of this, like, let's
clean up forests. Let's, let's
make sure that we can do things
to not have big fires in the
future with this in any way
affect this because I know it's
technically toward health, but
that's all encompassing, Madam
Chair, Representative. Madam
Chair, Representative Block, I
love that you use the word
proactive because that's exactly
what this program is all about.
There are lots of programs right
now and I think more to come in
in Ener and state forestry to
manage.
This is not focused on, on that,
but it is focused on helping
communities plan for events and
um there's no doubt in my mind
that um DOH will be working with
um with MED and with state
forestry to get their data to
help them make informed
decisions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I.
I, I do like data driven stuff.
I think that's important. And I
also want to understand, Madam
Chair Representative.
What enforcement powers are also
included in this with Department
of Health.
Are there any Madam Chair
Representative, there are none.
If you'd like for there to be we
write that in as I'm just really
super kidding man.
Thank you, madam and
representative that, that helps
me a lot. And then, uh,
Does this require changes to the
public Health Act on the
creation of a new program, Madam
Chair, representative.
Madam Cha representative block,
no, it does not.
Beyond the beyond the
development of the program
manager I'm sure.
Got it. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. And I guess my
other question I kind of talked
about just equitable
distribution between counties,
municipalities, but we kind of
got into that data. We're going
to look at the data and I need
to see some of that before.
Continuing here, but I'm gonna
try to be brief, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, next year we're
talking about uh where that data
comes from. Are we utilizing our
local universities, UNM NMSU,
Eastern, Western, uh, North,
Central, I mean, all these,
there's so many different great
universities are, are they going
to be helping with this data
collection because I don't want
to also be duplicating efforts,
but in a microeconomic fashion
in New Mexico, for example.
I would rather have New Mexico
based data rather than just
national stuff that we have to
report. So how does that
integrate in your structure,
Madam Chair, and Madam Chair,
uh, representatives, uh, the
Department of Health, um, in
epidemiology and response.
Uh, Senator for health
protection is the um entity that
collects, uh, hospitalizations,
emergency department, and death
data in the state, and those are
the data primarily used, so that
is the basis of the health data
that that are used to develop
these measures.
Madam Chair and Representative,
because I know that when it
comes to some health data,
A lot of the, the factors can be
overlapping. So if a certain
community has a lot of people
who may be sick from a certain
illness and then they die of
that illness. I just don't want
there to be like a causation.
Versus correlation.
Um
Mapping with your data. So I'm
just wondering, Madam Chair, is
that also tied to, like I, I
just want to know how we get
that data to make sure that OK,
if it is climate related,
And how, how is that affecting
the population and may, maybe
it's not. Maybe they just have
A certain
Certain thing in their community
that
Makes it different
Those kinds of diseases, they
have a higher proclivity to
that, and I'm sure Madam Chair
Representative, this is exactly
why we need more than 0.2 8
hours a week of an
epidemiologist because it is
complex. It requires expertise
and training, and so that is why
we need people with public
health epidemiology experience
in this program, looking at this
issue so that we get accurate
and useful data in a timely way.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. And when we
talk about epidemiology and all
these different
wrap up your I'm on my last page
of questions, Madam Chair. So,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
So I mean, I, and I go back to
the appropriation, like 1.1
million, right? I know all this
data collection, all these
people doing different things or
is this
I guess in the Department of
Health currently, how many
people are we going to be adding
to this bureau or this
department or agency so that
they can be solely focused on
this mission, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative blocks, uh, 6 or
6.5.
Currently there is 0.2.
Of an FTE
So that someone working 8 hours
a week.
very, very part time.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. And
then last question, maybe, uh,
other states, what are they,
what are they doing regarding
these uh types of programs. Do
we have data on who's who's
doing that in our region or just
nationally, Madam Chair, and
which ones? If you have that.
Madam Chair Representative
currently with our. 2 FTE we are
able to track heat-related
deaths and hospitalizations, not
including federal entities like
VA and IHS. That's it. Thank
you.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think Michigan has a program and
potentially
16 other states, representative
Block, thank you from the
audience. Phone a friend.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative VA and, and what
do we know if there are any that
are in our region in the
southwestern region of the
country.
I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chair Representatives,
Arizona is uh our most closely
um close region that has a
program.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. And
I, I guess I asked that question
because I want to know what our
neighboring states are doing.
And then what kind of data have
they, have they gotten from
theirs and how is that
implementing policy making in
that state
I really can't answer that
question and I know it's a big
to get that information for you.
Thank you so much and I'll look
into that and uh I believe
that's all the questions I have,
Madam Chair, but I will reserve
the right to maybe ask more
questions later. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Barrego and then
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
Thank you guys for bringing this
bill forward. Um,
So
Let's see, where do I start?
Um, I just want to respond a
little bit to Representative uh
block's question about data
because data.
Generally comes from the census
information that we get and then
it's distributed throughout the
counties and the cities, and
it's broken down by um
socioeconomic status, housing,
availability, um, I mean, age
population, etc. etc. So a lot
of that information serves as
the basis for, um, and I, I have
to respond to that, but as a
planner, but.
You know, I just think it's
important that.
That
We understand that, you know,
With a really good GIS system.
Um, that information can be kept
up every year.
So I just wanted to respond to
that.
Um, I wanted to thank you guys
for bringing this forward, um,
because 3 years ago, I was the
president of Albuquerque City
Council, and I sent a memorial
down to all of our legislators,
and I don't have that number
right in front of me, but I will
get it to you asking for these
types of programs to be created.
So I'm, I'm
You know, I would like to offer
that as something that you guys
might want to have as some of
your justification moving
forward and it was supported
unanimously by the city council
and it, and it was directed to
legislators. I wasn't here 3
years ago, so, um, I will call
city council and try to get you
that.
Memorial.
My question um is with regard to
the money that you guys are
asking for, um, and you
mentioned that there's 6
individuals that you're looking
to hire to create this program,
Madam Chair Representative
Barrego, um, that is what
Department of Health has
indicated, 6.5.
I'm, I'm a little concerned
about the funding because I
think that you should be asking
for more.
Money because if you think about
FTEs and how they're created,
usually they're about $100,000
of um an FTE and I see Ken
Hughes in the back, and he knows
what I'm talking about when you
include the, the pension system,
etc. etc. all the benefits, it's
about $100,000 per person,
depending on the, the position,
but that's a higher level
position, making about $70,000 a
year plus their benefits.
So that cuts your appropriation
in half.
And um.
That would only leave you with
about maybe.
600
100 $0.
To implement this program, so I
would consider, Madam Chair,
that maybe and if they're moving
on to the next committee that
they really take a strong look
at that amount and maybe
consider increasing that fund or
that ask.
Um, Madam Chair, with that, I
would move if I'm the last
speaker, I don't know.
That um we adopt, we have an
emotion on the floor.
I didn't know if there was
another person.
And za.
Maura.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'll
try to be quick. So,
And
With putting this program
together, is it gonna be housed
with some other department or
To, to work and collaborate with
somebody or is this an expansion
of a department? Is that how you
describe it, Madam Chair Madam
Chair represents more. It
creates the program within the
Department of Health.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
And this
This program, it doesn't, Madam
Chair and Representative, it
doesn't put boots on the ground,
right? It's just, it's just data
collecting.
From, from whatever comes in
from, from other programs that
we have across the state.
Uh,
Madam Chair, Representative
Zamora, it, um, yeah, it does
put boots on the ground, you
know, there's somebody who's,
um, managing the program.
There's a health promotion
coordinator who's working with
communities to develop their own
localized plans, there's a
tribal liaison, so there are
folks who are working out in
community as well. So, so, Madam
Chair, and, and Representative
maybe clarifying that a little
more. Like you're not, you're
not gonna send somebody out to
the field to look at the forest
fire.
To, to make some kind of uh
assumption as to
How it's hurting the people or
something, you're gonna collect
data from that.
And
And then put it together for.
For health councils and other,
other people across the state,
Madam Chair representative, uh,
Madam Chair Zamora, um, I think
that the folks who are going to
be working with this program,
we'll be, you know, working with
other agencies who can collect
some of that data. They'll be
collecting data themselves.
They'll be working with the
local communities to analyze
that data and help them develop
those plans, that's sort of what
the intent of the program, the
um the FIR has um a lot of good
information on what those um
Those employees could look like
what what the DOH is thinking
about.
Thank you for that. And, and
Madam Chair and Representative,
You're not just gonna be dealing
with stuff due to climate
change. What's, what's, I, I see
climate change all over the bill
and is the reason for that is it
to qualify for the federal
programs, the way this bill is
written, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Zamora, um, it's a, it's a
climate program at the
Department of Health that links
public health and climate
change. So it's really, it's
focused on what exists right
now. Climate change exists,
we've got health impacts that
come from that due to, you know,
floods, fires, um, extreme cold,
extreme heat, um, that's, that's
really what this program is
about, to then
Take data that's collected at
various agencies that the
federal government as well to
develop local plans to really
help our vulnerable communities,
um, respond and be resilient.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, but this isn't
gonna limit you to, so, so the
fire in Riodoso uh was men, man
caused.
Somebody somebody started that
fire.
This bill isn't gonna limit you
to
Not work on that fire, right?
And, and look at issues with,
cause, cause we keep saying
climate change, climate change,
climate change. And, and I just
wonder if this strictly for
climate change related issues,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Madam Chair represented Samoa,
if there's a fire, uh, DOH
regardless of how it's caused,
that is a public health crisis
and concern and this program
will support those communities
in developing a public health
response.
So, so, Madam Chair and
Representative, why is climate
change so strong in this
building? What, what was the
reasoning behind that? Madam
Chair Representative, because
climate change is real and we
have to develop adaptation and
resilience plans, um, at the
local community level.
That's supported by state data,
um, and state um expertise to
mitigate that.
OK, and I, Madam Chair, I think
we could debate for another hour
on that, but I think, I think
you said that we need to be on
the floor at 10:30, so.
Uh
And, and Madam Chair, one last
question, uh.
How much federal money is
expected to bring in. And I, and
I'll compound that question,
why, why 1,100,000. We see 1
million, 3 million, 2 million,
but we never see the 1,100,000
Madam Chair representative, um,
let me answer the first
question. I, I don't believe
that we have an expectation that
federal funding will come in,
but we hope so, of course, um,
which is why it's important to
coordinate efforts uh related to
this with the other agencies.
Um.
The 1.1 million I'm going to let
my expert answer.
Madam Chair, Representative, 1.1
million is the amount that the
Department of Health did after
doing all the calculations that
represented Frego talked about
and requested as part of their
budget, so it is based on actual
figures of costs for staff and
program and uh we would expect,
I have to say in 2021, the uh
environmental Public Health
Tracking Bureau in which this
program would be housed did
apply for a federal grant, you
know, we have no idea what's
going to happen on the federal
level. They were told their
grant was
excellent but no capacity. You
know, it's the chicken and the
egg with the egg and the
chicken, I know they're costing
more, but thank you.
Chair, um, 7.09 right now for.
Car, cartons.
Madam Chair, what was that
comment? Representative.
And
Just, just being cute, Madam
Chair,
It went right over my head and
egg, Madam Chair.
It went right over my head and
egg, Madam,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representative.
You have on the list
representative Lujan, and then
we'll go back to Representative
Barrego, and then we'll go to
the motion. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you uh for the sponsors, uh,
sponsor to bring this bill
forward, um,
And
Adressing the preparation for
1.1 million.
Uh, this is a recurring expense,
and I think
I just like to say the 1.1
million is kind of a magic
number in appropriation, so I
just wanted to.
Um, express that. um, and in
regards to this, um,
Being uh very um related to and
encompassing the issue of
climate change. Can you
elaborate on that?
On climate change in general and
why, why.
And I, I will elaborate, Madam
Chair, if you will, when we're
looking at heat-related
emergency uh visits to the ER at
In a 49% increase, I think.
That is due to um what is going
on when we are looking at these
um events that are going on, uh,
fires in in others.
Um
And I just mentioned in a 20.
2020 and then epidemiology
report projected heat-related
hospital hospitalizations.
And emergency visits will double
by 2030. So in regards to us,
we're having a conversation
about climate, climate change.
We know that, yes, even if
things are man, uh, man-made
fires into such who start the
fire when those fires or those
those um events happen.
They are.
Um
They reach higher degrees of
concern and heat
because of climate change,
because the amount of carbon
that's in our atmosphere, and
I'm being a little general here,
but these added effects due to
due to what we call climate
change or climate, um shift, I
think is another way we're
looking at that is because of
those factors. So if you start a
fire,
You know, 30.
60 years ago, it wouldn't reach
the levels that we're seeing
today as far as, um, degree of
severity, Madam Chair, and then
because of that, then we're
having these other um health um
health issues, excuse me, I lost
my voice uh earlier uh this
morning. So these are, these are
the, these are the reasons why
we have legislation like this,
Madam Cha, can.
Can the sponsor concur or add to
that?
And I'm Chair Representative
Luhan, I, I agree
wholeheartedly. I think that
there are um what we're seeing,
uh are uh deaths and illnesses
directly related to the effects
of um of climate change and
climate related events, which
include, um, you know, lung
issues, heart issues, um,
waterborne illnesses, new
diseases, old diseases that are
coming back up, um, that are
affecting our communities.
Thank you Madam Chair, I really,
I, I read through the bill. I,
I.
I like the bill. I may have some
other questions, but
Bringing our communities
together and planning is
probably the most critical thing
we can be doing, Madam Chair. So
I just like to lend my support
to this bill and say, I'm, I'm
glad that we have this in front
of us because we are addressing
what is happening when we have
these crises and what we can
expect because it's not when
it's an if when, um, not an if,
it's a when, excuse me, when
these occur again. Thank you.
Represented Berego for a 2nd
time.
Oh, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to make the motion to for do you
have a motion on the table I
representative Vice Chair Little
and a second by Representative
Onion Arnu. Please Caro.
Representative Ona Norman.
Yes.
Representative uh? No, sir.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lu Han. Yes.
Representative Mejia? No.
Madam Flo? Yes.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Yes, Madam Chair.
Yeah
60
Um, Representative and expert
witnesses, you have a due pass
on your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
numbers stay for housekeeping
message.
Susanna Ortez, my apologies. We
do not have time for House Bill
93 and 118.
Uh, no, 91 and 93, we'll
continue those first thing in
the morning on Friday 8 a.m. 8
a.m. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Committee members, we will meet
on Friday at 8:00 a.m.
And we have 7 bills to cover and
one house joint resolution by
Saturday.
