Many experts or it
Representative Ely who we need
to be let in yes my co sponsor
representative Ely needs to be
let in and also my expert
witness Michael stay out.
Okay we'll give them a couple of
seconds that's the
representative Ely.
And there's there was called the
Representative stay out but.
You get in a groove so
Representative bash and Eli
whenever you're ready it's your
show are all right well we're
here today to present house bill
two twenty six which is also
known as the grand jury target
states and evidence bill.
And I am not a law here and so I
wasn't familiar with some of the
basics and for those of you who
are also not lawyers I'd like to
introduce you to my imaginary
friend Joe.
Joe has been arrested and
accused of robbing a convenience
store.
Now following his arrest one of
two things will happen to Joe
he will either be given a
preliminary hearing.
Or he will have a grand jury.
And there's a difference between
the two in a preliminary hearing
the public is invited it's a
public event and the grand jury
is a secret proceeding and Joe
will not be able to see what's
being presented.
In a preliminary hearing the
rules of evidence supply.
In a grand jury rules of
evidence do not apply.
In the preliminary hearing Joe
has right to counsel.
In a grand jury there is no
right to counsel at the hearing
unless Joe himself testifies.
In a preliminary hearing Joe can
present witnesses and evidence.
In a grand jury Joe has no right
to question the evidence.
In a preliminary hearing a
neutral magistrate will decide
if Joe is to be bound over to
District Court.
In the grand jury the prosecutor
will instruct the jurors.
As you can see there are two
very different proceedings.
And
I would like to invite my co
counsel Daymon Ely who is a
lawyer.
To help explain this bill.
so madam chair members the
committee I like being referred
to as co counsel
I referred.
I am the co counsel with
Representative bash
I what I wanted to Graham the
amendment number there is an
amendment talk about pretty
quickly madam chair it is
two one nine eight five four and
I believe you have a point to
version I I hope we're on the
same page that that's the one
that should be in front of the
committee I will move that for
discussion if you and I and I
can describe that madam chair so
let's start with the topic
sentence.
what we should all be about is
swift and certain justice.
that is what this bill
ultimately is about is about the
district attorney's having to
front load this process it
basically says if you're going
to put a case in front of the
grand jury.
Current law is.
Is that the grand jury and I'm
not a criminal lawyer so bear
with me
has to find competent lawful and
relevant evidence what this does
is is about to decline it it
details records what that needs
what we intent what we intend is
evidence that would be
admissible under the next budget
we're not winning and what the
court does and then the court
yes to review.
Whether or not.
On on the average would manage
so the whole idea in an
indictment no that's it's
settled expression we some
lawyers additional expression
and it DA can indict a ham
sandwich and what that really
means is is that then take much
to not so much it should take
something two nights.
I mean I I indictments are
meaningful they can destroy
lives but that's what we're
talking we're talking about
front loading the process so
that the DA right to get goes
right now and that is going to
assist us in all of the criminal
justice reform that we're trying
to do which is subject to swift
and certain justice because you
have to do a from to process yes
it out there early everybody
knows not just the DNA but also
defended whether really got the
evidence we're gonna be in
trouble now with the assistance
of your analysts but also with
Representative Romero on your
committee on the amendments
exclude a couple of things they
exempt cases that involved short
child witnesses thirteen and
under and informants because we
heard from the Santa Fe district
attorney Mr stout worked with
that that was going to be a
problem with this bill and so I
don't have any problem saying
let's take those out but this is
consistent frankly and why I
signed on late is when I found
out this bill is out there are
this is totally consistent with
why on adjusters Travis and I
pushed couple years ago is
trying to get descriptions for
justice work we're making
everybody not just the dust of
the public defender supports
everybody jumping quickly people
are going to be held accountable
for their actions on the all of
the scientific evidence is it
becomes much more effective as a
deterrent if it happens quickly
and without madam chair I'll
turn it back to my.
Now co counsel Representative
bash.
All.
If you're muted.
Thank you madam chair and
with your permission I'd like to
invite our expert witness to say
a few words go ahead Michael.
Thank you and I I'm not co
counsel I think I was promoted
to Representative a minute to
get us.
I agree I appreciate that very
much
I am happy to answer as many
questions as members of the
committee would have and I am
thankful to Representative bash
a representative Ely for for
their introductions
But for now I'm simply going to
summarize a little bit of of the
bill not gonna talk at length
about it but if there are any
questions about the procedure or
language or any technical thanks
whatever I'll be happy to try to
answer those.
We put the.
The bill requires.
Proper evidence that a grand
jury.
But more accurately.
it it provides for the
enforcement of the present rule
the present law requires proper
evidence but it doesn't have is
a Representative Ely said that
it have the teeth and so it's
not it's not followed the
present law requires Compton
lawful real relevant evidence
but that is not routinely follow
so this.
This the.
Provides a requires for
enforcement of proper evidence
and when it does that is by
first defining yet under the.
Rules of evidence as as
representative Representative
Ely discussed and secondly by
allowing a review of the
District Court the reason it has
this review is because
though the legislature required
this back in two thousand three
the court has sent said Supreme
Court New Mexico since that well
it's not enforceable because the
legislature didn't say what so
this provides that.
Now.
There are is again I'm repeating
representative Ely but they.
In negotiation and discussion
about issues and so forth
it was decided that it was quite
appropriate to make some
exemptions we certainly don't
want to.
Her children in any way and.
Child witnesses are exempted so
they're not a standard there is
just they're exempted from this
provision and got you would be
the same as it is now also the
same is true for informers they
are informed we don't want to
give up any confidential and
important information on the
coverages that kind of thing so
they are that is exempted also
from this requirement the result
is that the stronger cases will
go forward the week basis will
not very many more resolutions I
think it will be many more
resolutions of cases earlier on
in the system.
As Representative bash out live
it and I appreciate that she
was.
Claiming not to be a lawyer or I
don't know she was bragging
about that misuse thank you is
not a lawyer and so it the but
seriously the things that she
was recognizing was the
differences the stark
differences in the party to
possible proceedings in New
Mexico one is preliminary
hearings one is grand jury and
since grand juries are different
in that they are secret private
no one can be there they're not
public.
Of there's nobody there to.
The staff to with if you will
our to make decisions because it
is a private proceeding.
Then that's why this the
provision is even more necessary
here that it would be somewhere
else so
this will result in I believe we
all believe in more
quicker and easier resolution of
cases
so thank I will leave it at that
if you have the committee has
any questions for me I'd be
happy to try the answer thank
you very much.
Thank you Michael and I'm not
sure that that especially ask us
on day fifty nine if if
promotion if being a
Representative is a promotion.
No I understand I don't want to
be in that.
Well we will go to a poll of the
audience so Allison will put up
a poll and if you work here
in support or opposition please
vote will give you a few seconds
to do that.
Listen I'm not seeing any votes
is that what you're saying are
my somehow on a different
version madam chair I am seeing
boats right now because of their
sport favored I an opposition I
can go ahead and share the
results okay okay that's good
usually I can see that but I
never I never trust my tech
knowledge or my tech in general
okay so we have four or forty
four percent in favor by and
fifty six percent in opposition
so we will close the poll and
and we will go to the audience
if you are here in opposition
please raise your hands.
And again that's under
participants click on that and
there you will see a raise and.
Okay we will start with Terry
Cole go ahead and there is a
timer I'm sorry we look I'm I'm
I will I'm sorry I should have
done this before we will have a
one minute timer I will ask that
you stay on the bill nine
hopefully these aren't so
controversial I have to remind
people to stay stable but but go
ahead Terry Cole.
Share good afternoon my name is
Terry hold on president and CEO
of the greater the.
On
issue this afternoon I am here
to hold school to see.
Representative.
The suffering for a while.
Despite a long standing
partnership with our distributes
more.
The serious violent.
One more community.
We believe this legislation will
make the charging process you
will need to show all on Sunday
which is the are you on the the.
Walden from Wall important this
legislation undermines public
safety and once the job part of
but not the kind of local roots
Office of Mormon.
Our officers need more obstacles
than losses.
Particular problem.
By the bill will job excuse me
extraordinarily thanks for
prosecutors to charge someone on
we have a tremendous back off
and so on the basis initiation
of Bill.
Our problem is backwards.
The resource overall
circumstances nonrecurring
charges against all those.
Of the and now the legislature
this bill would significantly
affect to that problem more more
criminals we
will we will start on the screen
the business community and we're
sure the forms yes.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee here
usable wall on house bill two
thousand six thank you.
Thank you we will go to Diana
loose.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you term hearing
for me I know that the district
attorney's well as the New
Mexico District Attorney
Association president we also
hear today from the Santa Fe
district attorney merry are
correct all laws but I wanted to
say specifically we appreciate
them the amendment that the
sponsors have made because we
recognize that are what we're
all trying to do is not re
victimize children or any
better.
I really in the process of the
judicial system but the term
limits I am This bill are still
a problem the modification of
this bill would require that we
give notice for person in
custody the date of the crime.
That's not possible cases not
even fall the day of the Koran
and rested and there's a process
for that and notice Ramon and
everything else so that that is
a problem with discussed that
with the sponsor I'm we oppose
this bill because at a time and
I can't see the timer I
apologize at a time when we
obviously want citizens are
involved a citizen grand jury is
our community and they are the
ones that say are whether or not
we've met that standard thank
you.
Thank you I'm Henry Valdez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I'm Henry Valdez I'm the
director of administrative
office of disk tourney's and I
know of miss Lewis and.
Miss all place will cover much
of what
the dust concerns are but I
would like to just reiterate.
That
In addition to being a.
We are at best a unnamed
convenience for law enforcement
it does take them away from
their ability to be patrolling
our streets and making them
safer and that what would
require a few minutes in front
of the grand jury will probably
require several hours up in
front of a magistrate were
little have to sit and wait till
everything's done instead of the
efficiency that a grand jury can
proceed with and I would also
like to add that so there's many
up items that aren't really
disputed but are necessary to
prove for instance somebody's
blood alcohol on that we can do
a grand jury just by showing the
results where we have to
actually call the actual chemist
the did the exam for testimony
from prison thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next we have share of
RChain Ferrari.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me OK yes we can hear you
okay the and fortunately with
the way technology is here
they've already covered some of
the issues on it I was going to
address and I'm like to be in an
in person hearing normally would
take the Mike so I'll go ahead
and pass it next person the
issues I wanted to dress have
been brought up thank you thank
you and last we have
polysilicon.
Are you in good afternoon
everyone this is actually Mary
Carmack all twice for some
reason my zoom always comes up
as my assistant's name I am the
judicial the district attorney
in the first year additional
district which encompasses Santa
Fe Los Alamos and Rio Arriba
I first wanted to address I did
work with Mr stout with Michael
stout on the compromise language
in this bill and I do appreciate
that I did tell him the that in
all honesty I was still not a
big fan of this bill I do think
that that the compromise gets us
gets us somewhere the other
concern that I have is the
district judge review of
anything that happens in the
grand jury.
That's already a rate that
defense attorneys have I I know
as a as when I was a defense
attorney I used it was called
the board Jones letter and if
the district attorney rejects
that they can go to the district
add that to a district judge so
I think it's not necessary but
it also adds another level of
Of litigation and we never
actually get to the facts at
hand and so I just want to
express concern with that I do
think that the ins are admirable
to reform grand jury and I do
appreciate Mr start compromise.
Madam chair if you're talking
your muted
that's going to be we all need a
teacher that says that I'm thank
you so we will now go to anyone
who wants to speak in support of
the bill thank drill raise your
hand under participants.
Okay Kim Chavez Cook go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender we do stand in
support of this legislation that
largely because it does allow
for grand jury indictments to
carry some of the reliability of
evidence that it goes along with
preliminary hearings I think
that representative Ely
explained very well so a lot of
what I was going to say today I
want to just as a practical
matter let the committee members
know that currently the most
common practice in indictments
for in grand jury proceedings is
for a police officer to read a
police report out loud and it's
not necessarily the officer who
created the report or spoke with
witnesses or gather the
information it contains they
just read it they have no idea
whether that witness would say
the same thing today they have
no idea even who that witness
might be that they're now
relaying the information from a
police report and so I think
that having a little bit more
reliability at grand jury could
reduce the amount of charges
that get filed that end up
getting thrown out later or
reduced later and make the
system more efficient thank you
so much.
Thank you Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
primal defense lawyers
association we to stand in
strong support we appreciate the
work of the sponsors and their
advocates we encourage you to
also support this is a positive
reform to our criminal justice
system it also takes this into
another step forward madam chair
and when we stop seen our
criminal justice system as a
division of that the criminals
and us the non criminal.
So I encourage you.
Rikki Lee we lost you.
That was the end of my statement
Adam chair okay thank you okay
so now we will go to the
committee.
For questions.
And I have Representative Lord
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I do have a
question here on this section
that's being struck out can you
explain to me
why I think it's a good idea to
remove the rules of evidence
because what I'm understanding
is the difference between or
maybe I don't fully understand
again I'm not a lawyer either
it's come from a long line of
lawyers
and the grand jury they're
trying to get together and
decide whether they should move
forward or not whether there's
enough evidence so explain to me
why removing the rules of
evidence would be a good idea.
All right.
I'm sorry madam chair Michael
who is quite an honor madam
chair
it was a committee
representative we are we are not
removing rules it's in fact just
the opposite we are applying the
rules of evidence to the grand
jury process.
Okay so excuse me I
Representative Mentzer semi
misunderstanding this part where
it's being stricken out.
On page on page two.
All right it's two o'clock.
Because it could be a very good
case I'm not understanding what
what that stricken through line
is completely meaning.
I'm sorry I I.
Just a second I'm pulling it up.
Representative Lord why don't
you give him the line number as
well as the number H. two line
six.
Thank you what started at the
rules of evidence.
You madam chair I am if it's
alright with Representative bash
I am gonna turn it over to.
Mr stout because I can't pull up
so I will have a look at it well
I.
Thank you I can say I can see it
thank you madam chair
Representative Lord
Yes Mr Representative Ely is
correct that it's kind of the
opposite the old language said
the rules of evidence shall not
apply to a grand jury proceeding
of the day.
But it also at the same time
required competent evidence
which is ordinarily
determined it engaged by the
rules of evidence and so the the
new language says lawful Compton
relevant evidence this would be
on I think line.
No not yet and yes that would be
it okay lawful Compton relevant
evidence is evidence that would
be admissible under the New
Mexico rules of evidence to a
does in fact have the rules of
evidence there okay reworded I
understand thank you I thank you
madam chair and
Representative so I have a
question Sir right now there's
forty eight states that use the
grand jury
so.
With this bill you're not
necessarily saying we're getting
where the grand jury just
reporting it is that correct and
that it's not lawful competent
and relevant evidence
that would be admissible to a
trial is that correct.
Madam can you can you hear me
now I can't see you now got the
document out.
I'm not laughing at the
technology we can we can see you
and hear you okay yeah short
answers right we're just simply
now defining with competent
lawful evidence yes so it means
we're not delving into the
court's prior we're just saying
it would be admissible that a
trial meaning under the rules
that so you could for example
use here say that would not
otherwise be admissible you
couldn't read a police report at
trial so that would not be
admissible evidence a grand jury
your which is which really doing
as sure making every.
Do the work early on and what
that means is is that everybody
knows yeah we got the goods on
this guy now let's let's figure
it out.
And that's not all ideas and and
by the way I just want to say
and I and Madam chair
representative lord I are for
the debate looses comments about
time it's honestly she I and I
will place you should talk to me
about it not our fault but I am
happy to work with people on you
know trying to register
something in here that it's
unfair that that's not the idea
this the idea of this is really
to say look I I mean if you're
going to indict somebody if
you're gonna take the power of
the government I somebody Lisa
Stewart right you know don't
don't leave it to chance have
evidence that's really
admissible and that way not just
the DA but the defendant David
knows wow we got a problem you
know maybe their lawyer will
know you got a problem they got
a witness that's really gonna be
a problem and we need to you
know just leave this out or
whatever but it really
jumpstart's is process to get
things moving quickly and by the
way I would at most here is the
state don't use great trees I I
don't think
district attorney Bruce uses on
all I could be wrong.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair
I guess one of the concerns that
I have is that I look at it is.
Let's say there's an example
that we see somebody and they're
they're trying to review to see
if there's enough evidence to
proceed forward my concern is is
that.
If they're on the right track
and there somebody let's say
who's doing something that we
need to act on a little bit more
quickly my concern is if we have
for having to wait because
sometimes you have to wait
especially if there's an
investigation that we're waiting
for this competent relevant
evidence and I sure would hate
to have somebody let's say whose
human trafficking in or that
they are moving large amounts of
narcotics and we're still having
to wait for this competent and
relevant evidence instead of
moving forward can you tell me
whether that would be a concern
or not if we make changes to
this as far as the this a roll
of this change in this bill
Madam chair representative all
at Mr stout and so as well that
would not be inappropriate use
of grand juries right here is so
no I don't think we need
teaching in college street
status that question.
Thank you madam chair
representatives of.
No it would not have any effect
the Representative Lord because
the.
The district attorney now has
control over when the grand jury
meets there's no they don't so
they as long as they're within
the statute of limitations which
of course is many years so it
would not affect whether or not
they bring a case it wouldn't it
wouldn't prevent them preventing
from my presenting a case.
Thank you Representative and Mr
stout and and madam chair
manager for the question on
this.
So that leads me to a question
on this
Are there other states because I
want looked up to see almost all
the state forty eight of the
state use the grand jury twenty
two other states United States
require.
The grand jury that's how
important it is are we even has
the Fifth Amendment is the grand
jury are there any other states
you know the have re worded
there.
Their grand jury proceedings
similar to what you're about to
do here in New Mexico.
I'm sure Representative I I
don't know Mr stout can answer
that but I will turn it to you
thank you.
Well I don't have a complete
answer for you representative
madam chair representative but I
I have done considerable
research over the years I know
that there are many many many
different approaches to grand
juries depending on what
jurisdiction you're in summer
more
wide wide ranging and others
you're right that the fifteen
member that report that applies
to the federal grand jury and
we're not anything like that nor
would we want to be I think but
California for example had.
Has had changes over the years
and it has evidence re uh rules
that have changed I'm no expert
on California Arizona has done
the size different jurisdictions
have different rules so I can't.
I give you a real chapter and
verse the comparison okay thank
thank you for that effort okay
Sir was another comment yeah
Madam chair representative I'm
sure your I I just want to say
meeting after I did get a tax
from district attorney loose who
says that the guys have grand
juries from time to time in
Charlestown eight then she adds
the M. C. which is the opposite
administrative reports
complaints about the budget
since we're for magistrates Lea
County three any judges allow it
but director Peyton stocks on
the budget that's what it says
but I mean I think I said they
didn't have it we she's
answering they do have it from
time to time so I apologize I
did look at it all but
apparently it's yeah I'm I'm
writing this on a regular
practice.
I'm sorry thank you for that
thank you Representative.
Thank you for the update on that
Representative thank you madam
chair representative my final
question I have on this
there was either the exact same
biller Semel beryl I think it
was actually it and and I may be
incorrect I think was SB four
sixty it was presented and that
was I believe tabled before has
there been any change of that
one amendment the one amendment
they brought forward with
children is this bill pretty
much the same as the one that
was tabled or as we like to use
were killed but I hate using
that word.
In two thousand nineteen.
All I could add to that if you
if you want Representative I'll
turn over to districts to help
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative yes SB four sixty
was introduced like in the last
two or three days of the
session.
A couple years ago and.
So it was not going to make it
any of that there was.
I think it's it's just it's
basically a relevant it is a
very similar bill except it does
not have the exceptions
exemptions of the with the child
support but it did not have of
forbidding I do not believe and.
For I can discuss it with you if
you live that I don't think it
has much to do with this bill
thank you that's all the
questions I have I yield my time
thank you.
Okay Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for us well
I'm.
On the same it doesn't make
sense to me.
One of the first things in the
in the presentation on this it
is.
Insinuated.
That we do grand juries in
secret.
When the reality is yes not no
this is not a secret this is a
long long.
Process I guess the first
question I have is how long we
had the grand jury process in
New Mexico.
Madam chair and representative
just to answer your question by
secret I mean they're not open
to the public
try it public cannot go into a
Grainger so they are in secret
the fact that we have the is not
in secret we we know and we've
had it I mean unless our Mr
stout says I'm wrong about this
since our founding the stated
before when we were territory
we've we've always had Granger's
say go back to the time of the
Keene New England and a lot of
our common law is based on and
be to be clear madam chair
representative we're getting rid
of grand jurors what we're
saying is an no frankly I think
that should appeal to both.
Democrats and Republicans we're
just saying that when you're
going to indict somebody do it
on evidence that would otherwise
be admissible court that
protection from the over
regional government which I know
would appeal to Republicans but
also appeals to both parties in
that front loading and that's
just I guess a lawyer term but
you're putting all your efforts
into the beginning the process
rather than later you've got a
couple of things one you told
everybody hears arguments so get
ready gap that shares it with
the district attorney as well as
with the defendant I have just
give you an example hi
Representative I don't do any
criminal work I have actually
in thirty eight years of
practice for however long I've
been in practice I did have a
case where a African American
woman
was accused of assaulting a
police officer at a funeral the
this was and our Clovis she had
come in from Dallas she was a
banker in Dallas and attended
her aunt's funeral and they were
having and gathering outside of
the house the officer showed up.
And she October rasta nephew and
she went over the options are
you doing this now and the
officers turned forward just
very tiny woman and she touched
the officer the officer
arrested.
So they took it before a grand
jury.
And I was really interesting
process I never been one and I
was allowed in is from where I
was allowed to ask any questions
was no cross examination was no
nothing.
And the district attorney
interestingly enough lost at the
grand jury which is very unusual
is that what's called a Nobel so
that was taken and the reason I
was there was because we were
going to be showing the entity
it was then taken to a
preliminary hearing and this is
what most of the dust down use
outside of Albuquerque.
And the judge heard
independently from the witnesses
against my client.
And when that was over with the
judge L. district many years ago
the judge Judy all the district
attorney apologize to my client
for the charges having been
brought and it was over because
at that point the district
attorney understood from an
independent source Hey you don't
have a case and you do not abuse
this process I'm not accusing
the district attorney's of
abusing the process on a regular
basis not all I'm saying to all
of you district attorney should
not go with their employees
early on do we have a case or
don't we.
Should just stop and if they do
not only should proceed with the
defendants on notice that they
are problems well and that's the
swift and certain justice to
both Democrats and Republicans
and every member of the
community should one isn't early
resolution of these cases and
this bill does that it is one
step in the process of trying to
get early resolution of cases
which will help us reduce crime
and I love to recall and I heard
her testify but she is just
wrong about this the idea of
getting swept in certain justice
helps the community become safer
so I know that's a long answer
but I appreciate your patience
Madam chair representative.
Have you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I would like
for you to keep answers on on
target and the opportunity to
present to build schools long
past.
In the position of bills
Madam chair.
One of the one of them analysis
but I have analyses that I have
is under the New Mexico
constitution the legislature has
no authority.
To revise the rules of grand
jury The New Mexico constitution
article six section three.
States the Supreme Court.
Currencies.
Shall have the superintending
control over inferior courts
this is held by.
the decision in nineteen seventy
six Ammerman verses however.
However broad and so.
Without getting into all the
legal stuff because the I think.
you Senator this no matter what.
The.
I guess the question that I have
this out of all of these
documents that I have for those
I don't have anything from.
From the Supreme Court saying
you know what we're going to
give up our rights to the
article six section three and
let the legislature make.
That's one of the understand
what position.
The bill Ryder and in the
experts have with respect to
the.
Article six section three thank
you.
Madam chair and representative
like Mr stabs talking at first
and then to add some.
Your staff.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
your question Representative
Pettigrew.
It's it's interesting and ironic
I guessing.
With respect to your question
that the.
The way this bill the reason
this bill came about is because
of the New Mexico Supreme Court
opinion.
And I I don't want to give too
long answer but the basically
that the parties agreed
everybody agreed back in two
thousand three that they wanted
to have competent Laughlin
relevant evidence.
That's that was prosecutors and
defense attorneys and everybody
in the system of agreed to that
and that's why I have that law
came about.
But in two thousand eighteen the
New Mexico Supreme Court said
well you didn't say that the
You didn't find the authority
for the court to review you have
to put that down specifically to
do that in a case called state
versus Isaac Martinez that I
know Mr Wegman is familiar with.
And that's why that's how this
came about this is to give the
authority the statutory
authority that the Supreme Court
said was lacking from from that
bill so this is a perfectly
legal process as indicated by
the New Mexico Supreme Court.
And madam chair representative I
would say was invited by the
Supreme Court their master's
story on us and we want to
comment just for a second one
Representative Pettigrew sat
Representative Pettigrew this is
the opportunity for us to talk
about the bill that there's not
another opportunity as we're
discussing it that's why I don't
think my answers shorter just so
you know this is the
opportunities start to really
get into the merits of bills is
the committee process so Madam
chair representative thank.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much for that and and I
thought so but I've had other
committees were up and should.
Was trying to respond and in
your position and been told to
keep my my answers to the point
so I assume.
So that's the reason why I said
that and so
I'm trying to be offensive just.
Trying to follow the rules that
seem to be a moving target
around.
And madam chair that was not
directed towards the way you're
running this committee.
So please don't take it that way
So.
Okay.
Yes.
I'm sorry madam chair
representative I wanted to just
make one comment I made quickly
and which is that in terms of
grand juries.
Most countries almost all
countries in the world have
abolished creatures and so.
I've got I got a text that said
that the only two countries who
have not about scripture is are
you the US in Liberia.
But so this is an attempt to
make to come a little bit closer
to a preliminary hearing make a
little bit fair may have some
procedural protections because
of the secrecy that we talked
about Representative Pettigrew
it yes is that Mr yes
Representative Ely says the the
target can't be in the grand
jury room can't see what the
evidence is the public can't be
there no one can be there except
the grand jurors and the and the
prosecutor and that's why it's
called it is a secret proceed.
Thank you and and madam chair
representative and and
Mr stout I I hear you I do
believe I just heard a story
from Representative Ely where.
We're.
M. self and the defendant was
allowed in the grand jury and my
understanding with the grand
jury process.
Seatings are thank you either
but that they cannot speak.
That
seems to go back and forth.
Madam chair representative but
let me clarify I'm sorry they
made to mislead the rule is
that.
No one could be in the grand
jury room except.
The target can be there if the
target testifies so the target
to be there only for his or her
testimony that the target it
cannot be there during the other
testimony so the target will not
hear what is being said about
him or her it will not be able
to challenge that only has to go
in and testify and then has to
leave and the attorney can be in
the room while.
His or her client is in the room
testified but not at any other
time.
Representative that is what
happened I was there only for
her yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you Mr
stop outside that's where
participants.
The.
The other question I have is.
Is.
The purpose of the grand jury is
to review evidence.
And determined based on the
evidence presented from law
enforcement or
prosecutor.
On whether or not they think
that there's enough evidence to
continue this process and go to.
Go to trial go to a pre trial
hearing or go to trial is and my
misunderstanding the intent of
the grand jury.
If that for me Madam chair
representative.
The.
Purpose of the grand jury is as
I Representative bash outlined
there are to proceed proceed
proceedings in New Mexico under
the constitution to determine
probable cause one is a primary
one is a grand jury so the
purpose is to determine is there
probable cause to believe that
the target committed to crime or
that there was a crime committed
and to that the target committed
it so they have to have adequate
evidence that's a that's a low
standard but the.
It's not a reasonable estimate
of course so it's a matter of
will we take this to the
District Court and go through
all the proceedings that are
necessary which would mean
discovery proceedings interviews
investigation trial trial
hearings and so forth so we we
have to have a certain level of
evidence to get to that.
To that stage of the proceedings
and that's the purpose of the
grand jury to see if there's
enough strong evidence to make
this a serious situation in
other words.
So thank you madam chair thank
you Mr stout for that response
so you think by grand juries are
actually a leak.
Is less expensive than a normal
jury trial because it it doesn't
have the same amount of people
involved
Bring in
By group of people they were
thank there are proof presented
evidence a prosecutor officer
and
And so they analyze that and say
you know what there's not enough
information to go forward with
that and so.
The the quote speaker it
Meeting is actually a good thing
because it keeps the defendant's
name from being thrown all
across the newspaper in a public
trial when a group of people
Worries that in in a closed
meeting.
Have have a and said no this
isn't enough to go forward so
like this is a good prospects
yup.
Matt may miss out paying madam
chair representative I think you
misunderstand this is not
instead of a trial.
This is a preliminary step
you're either going to do a
grand jury are you going to do a
preliminary hearing it's got to
be one of the other.
You're going to charge a
personal item but you can't you
can't go to trial with this
process so it's not a substitute
for trial.
The question is is are we going
to require the dust which we
should be doing when the dust
should be welcoming at two
percent admissible evidence as
opposed to.
Evidence that might not be
admissible like just reading a
police report you can't do that
trial.
And what is unfortunate about a
grand jury system that doesn't
require any oversight.
Or competent evidence is that
people can be enlighten that is
not secret most cases
indictments are not under seal
people are indicted lives ruined
and sometimes that's on the
basis of evidence is not
admissible and that's what we're
trying to protect our statute
already says you have to have
competent evidence we are now
defining that term to mean
admissible at trial you can just
read a police report you got a
call with this that makes sense
with the exception of the cases
involving children affirmative
that just makes sense and with
respect to the district
attorney's concern about
timelines will work with our but
this isn't subject to perjury
okay.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and and I hear
the.
Not a substitute but you know
one of the the the beliefs that
I've always had and and it could
be wrong I think I'm wrong often
The.
The purpose of a grand jury.
It is necessary for the indicted
as for the victim nine times out
of ten and that's the purpose of
having that.
Closed meeting I'm gonna call it
closed because I don't want to
start calling every every time
our county commissions and city
commission gonna close session
secret meetings so I'm just
gonna called closed meeting so
I'm would you agree that really
the reason why we're everything
is set up the way that that so
that and has been for all these
years it's really to protect the
eight the.
The target not the indicted.
There are Madam chair
representative Ronald excel at
somewhere graduation out sure I
mean if we're talking about the
in form of the child we we card
that no it's not intended grand
jury process is not intended to
protect the victim it just
having to do with.
May I.
May I respond Representative.
Mr staff.
Madam chair representative I.
Yeah I think that that would
would be a misreading the
potentially in old England the
original.
Your the original grand jury the
whole purpose of it was
supposedly to be a buffer
between the crown and the
citizens so that you wouldn't
have people railroaded by
the by the crown so you have
these independent citizens would
come in and and evaluate whether
or not there was a fair.
It was fair to charge somebody
the problem is that it's turned
into the the cliche that
Representative Ely referred to
is the indictment of a ham
sandwich.
What that means is that you can
present you know just about
anything and get enough evidence
to get a great and I make
through quickly.
There are if you look at the
statistics I don't know the
exact the district but I'm I
would bet.
A pretty heavy bet on it most.
Huge percentage of cases that
are taking of the grand jury.
Our true builder there is an
indictment brought and there's a
very few where there's what's
called a no bill where there is
no indictment brought so yes
there are situations where
you're there are a few
situations where it actually
help somebody not have that
knowledge but that's so rare.
that the in on the whole we
would be much better to have a
fair process up front and what
happens when you don't as you
have a backlog of cases where
the weight of the evidence of
the strength of the evidence is
not really known until months or
years later and then the case is
resolved the waste off a lot of
time expense and energy and
stress on victims and on
witnesses on people in the
system in order to get a final
resolution when you could result
in a lot quicker much more
easily.
Thank you Matt thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Mr staff thank you for your
patience where.
Educating me on on.
Your thought process behind the
bill and and.
Give me some clarity on on.
Trial system so I hope I never
experience.
We all well that's part of the
problem we all hope that we
don't get involved if you beat
your if you've been indicted
that's a really really serious
deal and it doesn't take much to
get an indictment.
Thank you very much madam chair
I yield back.
Thank you and just a reminder
the chairs the boss I'll just
put it that way that sorry
excuse me no no no I'm not I'm
not calling anybody out I'm just
saying that different years do
things differently and and this
is indeed the place to explain
the bill this is where we are
trying to and I personally in my
introduction to the bill I'm
presenting keep it try to keep
it brief because I don't know
what what the people I'm
presenting to you know so
answering these questions is
perfect and and this is this is
how we run this committee so
next I will go to a vice chair
Romero for questions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you to
the members of the audience for
their committee shout out to my
DA from Santa Fe for providing
some input on this just because
I think what was important to me
is that what we decide is what
they inherit
so we have had that discussion
so I just want to appreciate the
sponsors and the experts the
folks who've worked on this
that said madam chair I'm I'm
just wanting to clarify a few
things because I'm we've been
back and forth on some of the
information regarding where
Janet grand jury's still even
exists and I understand madam
chair representative that we
only have really two or three
maybe three counties that use
this process currently is that
right and can you name them
madam chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative I
have to turn that over Mr staff.
Thanks a lot.
Madam chair representative and
the vice chair Romero
Primarily those districts in my
understanding the those
districts you have grand juries
are what are called the Rio
Grande corridor which is Santa
Fe Albuquerque and Los crucis up
and down the quarter there are
grand juries.
Ely held Joe need there is been
an exception.
Due to the pandemic in Los
crucis end in Albuquerque and
I'm not sure what's happened in
Santa Fe but the.
due to the pandemic they have.
suspended grand juries because
you couldn't have so many people
in a row.
In socially distant distant and
so they conduct a grant of
primary hearing process.
other parts of the state I I cut
my teeth in the fifth district
where Mr this list is from and
there was nothing but
preliminary hearings and they
did a tremendous number of cases
but they did them all by
preliminary hearing which made
for much easier resolutions and
that's kind of what this is.
Aiming toward.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Mr stout so I
guess if that's the case with
how has the reform worked in the
past why are we doing a
statewide bill how of the
counties already come to
understand where they wanted
more they don't why would we
leave that sort of local
you know local rural up to that
at their decision making and how
have we already involved at this
point really three perhaps
counties are are using that
process madam chair.
Michael let me just talk
permanent madam chair
representative
so I mean the short answer is we
are not getting Rick answers.
so if if local jurisdictions
want to use some they can all
we're saying is is that
they should use admissible
evidence and they should be
supervised your it so and that
is a legislative function it is
to unify the process cross state
over No Way getting rid of
printers thank you madam chair
thank you representative that
helps at least me understand why
we need to do this at this level
and that said to I guess working
through the process and.
Just learning the process of
even trial and you know the jury
process and the outcomes from
what gets decided should this be
put in place Madam chair
representative so in the at the
end of the process if we
subscribe to this version of it
where we have competent evidence
like you said it's a closed loop
as far as how those decisions
are made if that gets challenged
madam chair representative what
currently happens to re open the
process and at the end of the
day how does that work when
we're sort of limiting that.
Some of that evidence at the
beginning when those decisions
are made by that jury how does
how are we how does the process
re read it read it restart I
guess Madam chair representative
so Madam chair representative as
you probably know from law
school on double jeopardy
doesn't apply until after you've
gone through trial and so this
also weights that prop right so
if there's a flaw at the
beginning the case where they're
not presenting admissible
evidence and you get through the
whole process and then it gets
flipped you don't get to do a do
over you're done people have
protections against the DA doing
that on the other hand if
there's a mistake made a grand
jury was not admissible evidence
well we get to do it again but
with this letter and so long as
it's within the statute of
limitations so the idea is is to
make sure we're catching
mistakes early in the process
fixing those mistakes and then
moving forward with the process
before there are other resources
that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative having been part
of a bit of this process early
and up front even for this
legislation and I appreciate
that and hope that we can that
that in the but I'm interested
in seeing this get to Judiciary
just because it is so technical
from I think the perspective of
what we're trying to improve
upon
and and of course just because
this isn't this is well above I
think this committee is a great
as to the technicality of of how
the jury process works and how
this will affect the process I
think will for me at least be
interesting to hear in New in
the Judiciary Committee so
with that said I I appreciate
the time you've taken to to hear
from at the folks and work with
you on this and I support your
real thank you madam chair thank
you Representative thank you
Representative thank you madam
vice chair so I do have a couple
questions so what are the
parameters why why would a
prosecutor choose a grand jury
versus a preliminary hearing in
terms of of the the
What what might be put out there
in the legal world as opposed to
the real world I mean what are
that what can what factors are
taken into consideration and
what factors are supposed to be
taken into consideration.
Thank you madam chair for that I
really do need to turn it over
to Mr stout plead with him to
give you just you know short
concise answers possible.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Ely out
I'll try my best.
To meet that standard
The district attorney the
prosecutor get under under case
law gets to decide what form
they want to take.
I think I'm biased on this but I
think that district attorneys.
You are experience to realize
that a preliminary hearing
system is actually better but.
No question that a grand jury
process is quicker is the so you
and takes.
Far less evidence so if you I
think prosecutors often go to a
grand jury in order to get an
indictment pretty quickly so
they can go on to get the
indictment and push the case
staff over to District Court
whether they're the one trying
it or not and that happens many
times I think in Albuquerque I
could stand to be corrected but
I believe they have horizontal
representation there where the
person does a grand jury done do
the trial that just getting
indictment in Senate on to the
District Court so they decided
for a variety of administrative
and practical reasons
on page form to pick but they
get to pick.
I have another question and why
in the were I mean it seems like
we always want the truth we are
you know we we want people to be
indicted to meet who deserve to
be indicted why was it ever
allowable that that a grand jury
could you is evidence that
wouldn't hold up in court what
was that what was the thinking
behind ever allowing that in the
first place it just seems count
counter intuitive to what the
system is about.
Then.
Madam chair
Well.
First of all I thank you most of
the time everybody in the system
has good intentions not all the
time but there are abuses of
course but if you I think there
are many times where you have
good intentions and and either
the police rely on something
that they don't realize is not
true it could be challenged or
the prosecutor relies on
evidence that isn't strong even
though it appears strong on if
you hear a couple of times of
here so.
So you know they may have good
intentions but be presenting
something that is if challenged
would be shown to be not true so
there's a and then of course
there are actually abuses of the
system which I think about that
not the norm but this system has
become abusive in a way because
it's so.
quick and not and there's no
enforcement of the competent
evidence rule madam chair I
think I can give you a I do
think I've new mutual respect
question because I've seen in my
practice having nothing to do
with criminal law there's no
we'll superstition office the DA
is basically supervised selves
and what happens in that
situation to human nature you
get more more relaxed about
senator Senator bodies doing
things deliberately and I I grew
the second half of this from
really what we're dressing but
once you start to rigorously say
listen this is the kind of
evidence that you clearly define
this is the kind of evidence
that has to be presented and
it's going to be supervised by
district judge you a much
different process and that leads
to a much more careful process
in front of the grand jury which
is why we're trying to get at.
Thank you both of that kind of
reminds me of when you're
driving when there's that a law
enforcement officer behind you
you're much more careful about
stopping thirty seconds and us
turn signals and all those kind
of things so I I hear you there.
Absolutely this is not.
I don't know so if in fact the
prosecutor.
I had knew that or or had a
reason to believe that there was
someone else who had committed
the crime they had actually
confessed that they could
actually go into the grand jury
and leave that out is that
correct.
Madam chair
and some weight.
there's a case called Brady
versus Maryland this is limited
knowledge I have of criminal law
we're if there's exculpatory
evidence meeting evidence that
would be
are in it helpful to the
defendant they have to find that
and whether that happens to
grand jury process I think so I
guess Mr stout can answer that
question.
Well there are.
The the law would support.
There.
Any sanction for the use of
procedure like that but that's
very rare to happen
unfortunately but if I
understand your hypothetical
madam chair where they don't
present exculpatory evidence
that would be an ethical problem
on the part of the the
prosecutor for one thing and it
would be a legal problem but
those problems are very very
rarely have rulings on and that.
The more common thing is when
it's no.
Whether it's a there's a gray
area and where there's no
supervision and you're just
trying to get through the day
I'm sorry it's not a very good
answer but the.
I think I should not have those
abuses okay I think and then I
have one final question are
there any areas in our law that
will affect you as an indicted
individual even you know if you
go to the grand jury are there
like professional licenses you
can not get because you've been
indicted are there and I'm sure
there are jobs you can't get
because you're indicted but are
there are there are other legal
The goals that you may get just
from being indicted.
Madam chair I know I can think
of I and we you know we've had
that down the box legislation I
don't think so Mr stout
something I'd be glad to do for
now this is an indictment of
look at it but I don't think so
that I could think.
Well I don't know that I don't
know the list but I.
If you hear that someone was
been indicted for a couple
accounts armed robbery you know
and that's that that's not
something good to hear or
whatever so madam chair let me
may I I do a more complete.
So the short answer jobs are
grants and raise it so there are
lots of collateral consequences
affect benefits can come up on
background checks and might
cause termination so the answer
is yes.
Okay thank you thank you for
those answers I learned more
today than now and watching law
and order so what.
So I am open for a motion.
I'm chairman of the to pass Hey
we have a motion by a vice chair
Romero more seconds.
I second madam chair
representative but it just so
I'm Allison will you please take
the role.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Now.
I'm having trouble beating on
meeting hopefully you got that.
I thank you we heard you.
Representative Pettigrew.
Share more of.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Okay bye at three to two hi you
have a do pass on okay you know
actually did we ever I don't
think we ever approved the
amendment.
So let's back up right and do I
hear a motion to approve the
amendment.
I'm sure some of do we need to
move it's it's it's not a
substitutes just do we need to
or what we what we already moved
it for discussion we did okay
justice for got amended as
amended so though actually this
is a motion to approve the
amendment so do I have a second.
I second okay is there any
opposition to the amendment.
Okay seeing that you have an
amended bill and now
Representative Romero will you
make your motion again for the
amended bill and I'm sorry I let
that pass I got so engrossed in
a conversation.
Many years this is a test of
madam chair I move into house on
house bill two twenty six as
amended.
Okay Representative second madam
chair okay so we have a motion
and a second and I'm sorry
outlets that now what you call
the roll please do you give me
one one day without committee
and I forget how to do
everything so I wasn't going to
take the role again this is on
the amended bill.
Representative Burris.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
And I'm sure let me grab your
attention.
She's coming in.
I also wanted to continue and.
Are you sure sorry sorry sorry
sorry it was just voting on the
amended bill correct okay I
think you get the amendment to
approve before we voted that's
fine yet still no thank you
okay.
Representative Pettigrew.
You know.
Thanks chair Mero.
All.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes okay now by a
three to do to vote you have a
happy to pass on house bill two
twenty six as amended so good
luck in Judiciary I sure
wouldn't want to have to sit
through that one.
You madam chair thank you madam
chair okay thank you members of
the committee committee thank
you very thank you all and now
we will once I get my agenda
back up
We are not yet at three o'clock
and I can't find my agenda.
I have to.
Okay.
What's what's the big I know
that Representative Roybal
Caballero expert is that.
Is in a meeting so what is our
third agenda item I can't seem
to find my agenda the third
agenda item is house bill two
seventy six crime of target
residential picketing.
Okay that's representative Ely
and Representative Harper I
believe.
Correct is Representative Harper
here.
I just.
All right areas.
Okay just a little bit of an
update we did get an amendment
on this bill but it was not
within the twenty four hours and
as per committee rules what what
they Sanchez have agreed to do
is to have us here the bill
without the amendment and then
present the amendment at the
next committee so with that
Sanchez I'm go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members it's a.
Thank you again
So I I just start by.
This briefly reading are
sharing.
A couple.
Current events that's a I think
it's a good background for why I
think this is important.
So are.
After the last presidential
election.
Are trump supporters.
made a scene in New York
protesting outside homes of
governor Andrew Cuomo and former
secretary of state Hillary
Clinton.
I don't remember too is a
neighbor of the Clintons.
Said that the.
there were signs that said
Walker up.
And that she was sad for the
Clintons she says I feel like
they can't win fields are being
targeted of course the secret
service will keep them safe.
I just think this is beyond the
pale.
It's like where we going with
this just keeps getting ratchet
up more and more.
And the former.
First or just even tweeted
that that Sunday evening that as
far as route Senator parents
home shouting.
Well this doesn't just happen on
on that side of the aisle
happens on the other side this
is an issue that crosses boasts
both parties stab with.
So
Also very recently.
US senator John Holly Republican
from Missouri.
Was.
I'm not at home but there is a
group
call shut down BC that
organized.
And a protest from his home.
because he was planning to
challenge the electoral college
results when he was at home but
his wife and their infant
daughter Abigail.
was at home.
and the crowd was should note
showing you know what chanting
shame on you one section one
point Erin Hawley his wife opens
the door and asked protesters to
leave she says we've got
neighbors and a baby thank you.
Well
At they didn't leave they
started shouting come out come
out.
And she said that she was
frightened she goes and walks
the door.
Interestingly this was in our
Virginia home she was ever filed
a criminal complaint against the
protesters it's a illegal
protest in charge a misdemeanor
in Virginia I thought that was
interesting.
One more example not too far
away this was from Salt Lake
City.
Dr Angela don served as the face
of the COVID nineteen
information in Utah since the
time of the pandemic.
She's the state of ideology
just.
She help provide input to state
leaders also made the final
decisions on public health
measures and she also important
Utah ins of the trip you know
traditional public health
measures aimed at curbing the
spread well.
Our restaurants address home
address was shared online with a
group called utopians for
medical freedom.
And they encourage people to go
to our home
in the morning and the evening.
and protest and so they are in
that morning a bunch people
showed up with signs.
and they were met by a solid
State police officer would form
the signs violated city
ordinance.
When the protesters that they
would be cited or arrested if
the dental signs away so they
could stay as long as they're
not targeting any specific house
you're not being vocal chanting
picketing holding signs up.
All those who came to protest
quickly obliged State packed up
their homemade signs.
and about it another group
showed up later that evening but
they stayed out side of the
neighborhood and and are gonna
protest in front of our home and
are.
One of her neighbors out walking
a dog in the morning and and he
said that
wasn't surprised at this kind of
stuff is happening but he said
people showing up at her home
was crossing the line so this is
supposed to be a sanctuary.
I mean protesters from the
capital government building
wherever public places but not
from a person's house that's
just wrong.
So.
What I'm bringing this to you
all is.
We happened in my home town of
Rio Rancho eight.
There was a retired couple
really sweet couple
and there's actually a protest
organized protests in further
home every Saturday for three
for four weeks.
there was food for the
protesters and they're
protesting this couple because
they had a flag hanging in their
yards at the the group just
like.
And the.
No if if this can happen in my
hometown actually can happen.
You know anywhere in the state
into any of us and so
House Bill
Two seventy six.
Is essentially
Are based on the Salt Lake City
ordinance defines targeted
residential picketing.
As our best bang specifically
directed towards a person taking
place within one hundred feet of
that person's residence.
Consist of
Vocally marching sign banner
application device.
R. a message to a particular
person.
And I just I feel really
strongly doesn't matter.
What issue of the bunch of for
our publicans wanted to go in
protest at someone's house some
of the data and you know we
something I don't believe that
would be totally wrong.
you can't get away at your home.
So
I think I will yield at this
point to my cosponsored the
esteemed Representative Ely but
to.
I'm sure that's that's the
background that's table.
Madam chair before I proceed I
would like Representative Harper
just briefly describe the
proposed amendment since he's
talked about the bill.
Yeah I'd be happy to so madam
chair and representative you why
we're not gonna do the amendment
here.
we'll do it the next committee
but in the F. I. R.
that there was an excellent
COVID raised which was alright
that hundred feature persons
residents at the park physical
structure or the property line
and the property line was what
was used in the Utah board and
so we're we're gonna then those
four words the line of property.
I'll be watching them our
manager high return ratios on
because sure talked about
delaying the vote so we will
madam chair what will be asking
for votes today because the
amendment will just get it
Judiciary along with a up I
talked to Representative Harper
about what coming years will
lawyers General for to a
mandatory requirement eight
willful intent requirement I do
want to tell the committee a
quick story Representative
Harper reproach me about running
this bill I called my dad sold
as I and my dad is still alive
who is the first executive
director of the ACLU of Arizona
and I said you know what do you
think about this bill I mean
it's getting kind of scary that
these people are doing this and
he goes on to only for this bill
and I don't question that
surprises me since you're no big
first amendment or my dad's very
well known in years.
I guess it yeah I really care
about my daughter in law school
so I want to know if others care
about me pretty church my
daughter law I am concerned that
this is getting scarier and
scarier and I do think this is a
reasonable restriction on first
amendment rights I grew up in a
family that very much believed
to the first amendment still do
by this is a reasonable
limitation based on what we're
saying we're nipping this the
bride and I am happy to be
sharing this legislation
Representative Harper and with
that madam chair members the
committee will stand for
questions.
You both and Representative Eli
I believe my mother would have
thrown me away and kept my
husband's.
So that that's a good
relationship with in laws that
they're they're the preferred.
So with that are.
Weston will you please put up
the pole.
Okay so there there's a poll
please wait and if you would
like either support or
opposition.
Okay it looks like to in support
and zero in opposition so just
to be sure that I have been that
there is somebody who didn't
want to be called but is in
opposition if you are in
opposition please raise your
hand.
and again that's under
participates there's a place
where you can raise your hand.
So.
Okay.
I'm not seeing any hands raised
in opposition is there anyone in
the audience who wants to speak
in support again raise your
hand.
Okay I I see a couple okay so we
will start with Terry Cole go
ahead Terry.
You madam chair members of the
committee one legislative
chamber to say a few words in
support of this bill Hey.
We can then Representative you
all right Representative more
hearing test you know we need a
Senator community respect for
one another under stress
on a conflict and we think this
bill goes a long way to
communicating that message so we
support calls to the committee
for thank you very much for the
opportunity to say a few words
thank you and next we have Sean
will be.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me we can hear you madam chair I
just come to you today in this
committee thank you so much I
just have the opportunity of of
hearing this bill I'm waiting
for another bill and I I I
represent myself as a member of
the community and state of New
Mexico this is common sense this
is what unity looks like nobody
should be accosted at their home
their place of residence four
opinion that's not a founding
ideology of the United States of
America it's used constantly as
a mechanism to intimidate and
harass through threatening
actions when you go to
somebody's house and you will
cost them and their family I
support this bill I'm fortunate
to have heard the presentation
I'm glad to be able to speak on
it thank you for the opportunity
and I hope that you consider
this as a do pass and move this
through the legislature under
the premise of this is what
leadership in unity looks like
because there's a lot of talk
about unity when it comes to
leadership to in today's world
and I just think it's important
thank you.
Okay thank you I'm we will go to
the committee our
representatives did you have
that there wasn't a lot of
public comment did you have any
response that you wanted to give
to the public comment
madam chair only that in
response to your comment my dad
was still practicing law the
only picture you have behind his
desk of the numbers white was of
my wife so if you want my
picture you have to go round the
corner to see it so just wanna
let you know thank you madam
thank you we'll we'll go first
to our Representative Lord I
thank you madam chair and
representative I do have some
questions on this
Representative Harper brought up
about the protest in Rio Rancho
and I do have some questions
about that because I'm very
familiar with that one that was
a case where resident had flags
and there's protesters.
But there's a there's people are
coming to harass them and their
front yard and actually coming
into the yard and destroying the
property and then there was
another group of what I would
consider good protesters that
we're trying to counter them
those people actually want to
them so let's say that that
family and Rio Rancho said yes I
want the good protesters are the
good whatever you want to call
in to calm.
How would that play out because
what if they said we can't we
allow them to come within a
hundred feet can there be an
exception for them.
So so madam chair and
Representative Lord.
So I I wasn't planning to go to
the daps on what happened in Rio
Rancho but since you brought it
up.
I'm I'm really trying to be
objective here.
A group of protesters that came
to protest the protesters.
Kmart.
And I did not.
Appreciate that although I
understood.
And so this look to me like
something that could escalate
and boil over very quickly.
and again this should not be
happening in our neighborhoods
in New Mexico.
And so to directly answer your
question this bill would not
give anyone latitude to protest
to a talk a target protest
protest to a person.
Within a hundred feet of that
person's rest would be across
that would be a maybe a crime if
we pass this legislation.
Madam chair and representative
it is really an excellent
question because you know you're
saying we'll do these people
that are there in support and so
that is something we're gonna
have to wrestle with the
judiciary that when I talked
about the ministry of the intent
requirement that's what I was
referring to is and just
something Representative Harper
and I have to you know kind of
work our way through the idea is
really to stop the harassment
and intimidation right it's not
necessarily to stop people from
being supportive
bye we we've got our work our
way through that but I it is an
excellent question and in
reading legislation you would be
correct to say it doesn't
distinguish and I think that is
right and that's what we're
gonna wrestle it surely has the
class I think that's that's
something we do address with and
I know that we do.
jumping your first second and
state you know maybe that person
wants to have the counter
protesters maybe their neighbor
doesn't so I'm it you know it
that you you really have to look
at that because I may differ
from my neighbor and they may
want group a and I may want
group B. and we're both work
hopefully you know if if this
works out that I'll leave it at
that so go ahead Representative
law.
Thank you representative Ely for
that answer and thank you madam
chair representative yeah I
think that is something you're
going to have to figure out
because you know like in my next
question I'm thinking about so
the freedom of assembly right so
I'm gonna ask a question on that
as far as like a freedom of
assembly has there been anything
in the Supreme Court or any kind
of a ruling on that about these
kind of limit so where people
can and can't do there freedom
of assembly.
Madam chair representative I'm
not an expert on the first
amendment I do know that they
have come up in the context of
political protest in businesses
but I don't know I'm assuming
they've come up with private
residence but I don't honestly
know I've done the research on.
Madam chair representative so I
could add to that
right yes I are although it
short does have some some good
material in that regard.
the more significant issues
about halfway through that first
paragraph.
The talks about.
Mortgaging.
No.
This is Chris your
Representative really coming in
are you are not muted.
So so so again it's the US
records in knowledge that
constitutional free speech
protections do not preclude
ticketing and similar activities
in certain circumstances.
And this is.
From hill versus Colorado
And going to the end of the
paragraph it says
Protections are not always
afforded
in the case of offensive speech
that is intrusive and the
audience is unwilling and cannot
avoid.
so obviously being at your home
being unable to avoid it
looks like the Supreme Court
has.
Comment on that also again I
would point to the fact that so
what city ordinance and Virginia
state at least have laws to this
effect I I did not even try to
do a search to see what states
are students happens laws on the
books but some of those.
Representative Lord you are
muted great eleven I'm talking
to meet okay thank you madam
chair representative so.
I guess it leads to the question
of.
I personally I understand but
I'm selfish as far as a
legislator I have a person who's
followed me to Starbucks and
slashed my card he could have
said easily he was protest scene
and wanted to be close to me and
I do get that I don't I think we
should all have a home at that's
our sanctuary right but I do
worry about like like I'm just
going to be perfectly honest I
cannot stand the people from the
Westboro church that are filled
with hate but I'm pretty sure
they rule because we had to do
counter protests of them right
they came to funerals and had a
horrific signed to went to
people's houses I'm not going to
even say what they works are
filled with racism and hate.
And I don't like that but I'm
pretty sure the reason we
counter protest wherever they go
is because they have the right
to still do that so I think that
something.
That needs to be considered with
this bill is with moving forward
that.
And I'm just gonna sit those
disgusting people are allowed to
have their freedom of assembly
and picketing because they've
been doing it from the people's
houses I'm thinking as you move
forward this bill you're gonna
have to look at those situations
because I think you could
technically be open to a lawsuit
because our lake with the west
pro people came and they they
they come to a widow's house
who's just lost her husband and.
and they're veteran.
And they've been killed and they
will come with the most horrific
science but I'm pretty sure
because we've had to do counter
protests around the misuse
revolve around us either putting
giant wings around them so that
you block them or take it are
motorcycles and Revenue I'm so
loudly that you can't hear their
disgusting chants I think at
some point you guys are gonna
have to maybe sit down and
address this issue of their
freedom to assemble.
Even when they're horribly
disgusting and vile things that
they say so I think that might
be an issue that's going to come
up with this I do have another
question so who can okay again
just how we want to put this
this is applied to everybody so
let's go back to the other
question I had.
Let's say this person decides
they want counter protesters to
come to their house because
other people been protest in
front of their house and even
lets this go a step further
let's say of the Westboro calms
and somebody on the street like
salmon and somebody doesn't how
do we determine who's going to
win out on that do we move them.
If somebody wanted them to they
still have to move them I guess
that's my question or can they
say no I want them but then the
neighbor can move them so that's
I think that's going to be
another question's going to come
up.
One.
Representative couple things one
right now nothing can be and so
that's the whole purpose you
start this process yes with
discussions talking about intend
to and the chairs point about
neighbors and try to drafters
careful legislation is you can't
you don't do anything there's
nothing but it's legislature
passes a law that we think is
narrowly tailored to provide
some bumpers on the right to
assembly the right to free
speech none of those are on
limited by the way people think
they are not no there's not a
single bill of rights is
unlimited there are bumpers to
put on ultimately what happens
is once we passed that law then
it's up to the courts to look at
and give us guidance as to you
know how we exceeded people's
fundamental rights liberty which
we don't want to do obviously
but we don't really know where
they are if you look at the F.
I. R. there is a six certain
case that struck down a law that
is similar to the one we drafted
right now so we got a look at
that case kind of figure out no
what can we do to give us the
best shot at trying to protect
people from this is kind of you
know conduct while at the same
time protecting people's right
so when you talk about the west
for a church I know exactly what
you're talking about and you
know if there's no loss of the
box nothing that could be.
But if you have a law then
that's something that could be
challenged and you know the
legislature if it struck down
can learn from the opinion all
right let's revisit what can we
do to make this constitutional
but it starts with the statute
which starts with a thoughtful
discussion like we're having now
you know hopefully discussion on
the floor in the Senate where we
pass piece of legislation that
we think passes constitutional
muster but we're never gonna
know that until we pass it and
somebody sues us on it and it
gets no money damages it just
gets decided by the court as to
whether it's an infringement or
proper bumper on a on a civil
liberty and I hope that answers
your question.
No I did thank you very much
Representative thank you madam
chair you know it this is a hard
it's it's not a hard focus will
look at we go okay nobody wants
to have protesters from the
house is not fair right and I I
letterman will fairness and I'm
also trying to think about the
freedom of assembly and I try to
think about how horrible would
be if I came home there was this
big group of people in front of
my house and they don't have the
right to do that we should have
a sanctuary I just I my concerns
are like who can report what if
the person says a like and
things like that and and
definitely a Ives far as I'm
concerned the Westboro church
should have no rights but that
when we go against the
constitution so I thank you
that's all the question I
haven't thank you for answering
my questions.
Thank you Representative lord we
have Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair
representative this is a.
Super complete hated free speech
as we all know is what the.
Try not to open up because it's
if you're gonna need it's just
so tough
Madam chair representative I
think you know the logistics of
this is about behavior and how
you define it and that's what
we've been sort of chatting
about because you know we're
talking about today you know
everyone could be a journalist
so when you look at the media of
your with social media and what
people are protesting or seeking
to observe in your residence
Madam chair representative I
think there's just questions
surrounding what men's rate is
what is the intent there and how
do you define it
when someone is going to file
the claim that becomes a
misdemeanor and I and I just
wonder to about that threshold
of punishment in particular when
it could be a he said she said I
wonder about restraining orders
and how this gets into play can
you preempt that is there
preventive mechanism in place
for this as well before
criminalizing activity that
maybe message interpreted or
that is there are designated
free speech zone in front of
anybody's home
in the case that you know is
that the street you know as I
used to live on a really
actually I live on a really busy
street and so does that count
even within the hundred feet of
a of the property line and then
what if I share a wall with my
you know
Admit building buddy who has an
aggressive sign that I don't
agree with so I guess there's
just so many questions about
that behavioral mechanism Madam
chair representative as to how
we define those things and I
just feel like the bill is super
duper duper bag.
And what I could perhaps
understand in practice how that
would work because I could
essentially just not like the
guy who walks his dog and it is
offensive perhaps and I don't
know if that's the case but if
there's something vocal and the
dogs bark I mean what are we
talking about that behavioral
threshold so I'm.
You know in trouble there this
is a lot to unpack for me
because of in particular as
people who can be targeted by
neediest people who can be
targeted by you know certain
protest for a vote or something
that we take
what's fair and what's not Madam
chair representative and I'm
just kind of waxing on a lot of
that but I I would love a
responsive on how we better
define that because I'm I'm
having a my own had just turning
with all the reasons why this is
impossible to hone in one of to
hear what you think you're
thinking yes so Madam let me
take a stab at this now I'd love
to.
Representative Ely order so
thank you Representative Romero
for the question so let's let's
talk a bit about what this bill
is.
All right so we've had a lot of
session about right to assemble.
Right to pick it right to share
opinions so.
This legislation doesn't do
anything to change any of that.
We've also talked a lot about
free speech as if you I
mentioned that.
There are no no no no right is
and what.
And I'm not going to be a free
speech expert why would a lot
this these last few months for
example our former president no
longer has a Twitter account.
Did that violate his free
speech.
No because Twitter is not a
public entity it's a private
and.
Right wait we already have a law
on the books right now that
deals with people trespassing on
private property right so so
what's what's your strategy you
know as we have access to think
this through what's understand
those things.
So then going to the bill which.
is designed to be narrow and
specific.
The the bill has.
Two short sections that define
what we're talking about here
section a sense.
Target residential picking.
Consist of picketing that is
specifically directed or focused
towards a person.
And takes place was and one
hundred feet of that person's
property lines what will
actually say.
K. we're not talking about a
gathering in a city square from
Capitol Building on a road
they are trying to build a
business we're talking about a
person's.
Personal property one hundred
feet out so that might be public
space it might be a public road.
But it's directed at that
person.
Section see it says what is
says.
Yes there are present a person's
presence to apprise the public
vocally or by expanding or
marching with the sign of
banner sun advocation of by
other means.
Of an opinion or a message.
So.
Going to your example of Madam
chair representative Romero
someone walking their dog and
shouting at a person.
It's directed at that person and
it's loud.
What is it to apprise the public
of an opinion or a message or is
it.
I'm just your money.
Does that make sense.
I understand madam chair and I
and I this is more of a
conversation at this point I
think because that is where it's
going to get
Tricky when we're talking about
this because I mean I I in my
district we have a lot of live
work places as well so we're a
residents can also be a business
you know so there is the we're
getting into some you know
really tricky Water and
territory about one thing or
another and what defines and I
see you Representative Ely
looking at that because you know
we've we've it could be as at
mean any number of protests
things and and I you know we're
we see how how we've come to
this place where you know we
want folks to voice their
opinions and ideas and and
absolutely the intent makes
sense from from the safety
spurred perspective in your
sanctuary perspective but it
does tend to in my opinion
reward those who don't live.
Right in the forefront of their
community where that is going to
be the hardest thing to defend
them from if I lived in a
fortress and had several acres
of property in my you know it be
easier to keep people off of
that but you know for for for
the folks in those smaller
confined spaces to I'm thinking
how does that work Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative I have to step
back for a minute and just tell
the whole committee.
This is just such a need
discussion I have been in the
legislature for five years and I
don't remember of bills.
We're everybody's basically
wrestling with the same thing
with the same kind of passion
and commitment to getting it
right I I I it is just a cool
moment for me as a legislator
listen to this discussion
because you're all basically
saying the same thing it is we
know this is wrong.
We do this in a way that doesn't
improperly infringe on people's
rights both Representative
Romero and Representative Lord
and my dad is don't agree on
very much but on this issue you
guys are the same and it's
completely legitimate and
appropriate that you would be
yes it is It goes to the very
definition of what we are
Senator is we're trying to give
people the right to protest
freedom of assembly freedom of
speech and not having and I I I
have to say Representative
Romero I don't need to make fun
my daughter would say the same
way super duper bank which I
really think is right this is
super duper day and there is a
maintenance problem so when you
have a statute why our proposed
statutes like this on the the
courts could strike it down as
being void for vagueness that is
actually a term of art in our
in the civil liberty steel but I
just have to tell you we will
wrestle with this I promise the
committee that if this gets out
of this committee if you let
this out when it's Judiciary
move forward does Representative
Harper and are going to take a
strong look at this to see where
we can make a little more
specific that's why I wanted to
introduce the men's race subject
but I do think it's a moment for
us to think about the fact that
we're all kind of on the same
page in terms of understanding
what the goals are well at the
same time not over extending the
power of the government to limit
people should leverage and I I
mean it's what I grew up around
as a kid and I have not had a
first amendment issue that I can
remember the legislature but I
wish I had more of because this
is a really cool discussion I'm
a nerd on this stuff and I love
this discussion so I I don't
really have anything to add
Representative Harper I just
wanted to give that some
perspective and thank you for
that and.
Madam chair representative
Romero thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and I
had to and and I'm enjoying this
because I have had just my brain
is just churning but that said
you know because we're sort of
in this conversation already and
and and and has been brought up
by our analysts as well as that
that behavioral pieces more
about the imminent danger that
fear that anxiety that is
provoked you know because you
know all they always come out
here and they hate my lawn or
whatever but they come out every
data bird protest by this or
that for any individual whatever
may be your my slider my
whatever with that said it may
not be anything but just have
you know good for community
bands R. but that said if there
I think that behavioral
component that men's read that
creates that fear the imminent
danger I think that needs to be
added in here as to be able to
prove where that where the
rabbit is and I think that that
might be helpful just because
we've been discussing how to be
able to sort of be get it past
that point of you know we still
have free assembly but where do
you draw the line and I think
that's where we're we're trying
to find that that pressure point
and where it makes sense so
I don't know what I if that's
what we do before we pass it
through because the super duper
vagueness at this point madam
chair representatives but you
know a it's you know I I agree
with the intense I just you know
we I would love to help with the
language but I I you know from
the from what it is that we do
in this committee it's it's
great to have this conversation
and you know with that would be
because you're going to
Judiciary we often just say like
great that's where the the
letter makes more sense but the
intent makes sense here so
continue to listen to the the
discussion and look to your
wrist.
Thanks Madam chair
representative.
Thank you thank you are.
Representative Ely for for
claiming for the world to hear
that we are the best committee
in the building.
Madam chair until I get to the
next community.
Hello I have never heard.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative the
lines are for for bringing this
bill.
And it does okay.
It does open up debate along.
We have the.
I'm curious is that then turns
to the presenters can can talk
about them.
Some potential unintended
consequences.
As we've seen over the last five
to six years.
The media can be just as
aggressive on no matter left or
right side doesn't matter just
as aggressive on people coming
to their homes this is just
going to address
how do you feel like this
addresses stop in the media in
keeping them within the limits
of the distances well.
So.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew great question.
Yeah we we've all seen them yet
to be lower addressing the times
This this was not to address
media at all you can see that
here.
When you're looking at.
The last section will remotely
from even the first section
eight.
Is talking about picketing and
defining what picketing is.
I don't believe I would argue
that.
media.
actions are picking.
So I I.
Right question and when we look
at the language as we know right
to go to.
Judiciary and and.
No take in all of this great
feedback we've been receiving
we can look at that but I.
I personally don't see how media
actions could be defined as
picketing I think you've got
sure at the moment.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative for
that answer I just you know I
read this that that beginning
consists of.
Thank you that is specifically
directed her focus towards a
person that takes place within a
within a hundred feet of
restaurants and so media showing
up to the specific houses
definitely focused on a single
person or.
Okay then.
There is always a
you know defined signs and
banners because media doesn't
show up unannounced and sound
amplification devices as well I
you can you know maybe for
preaching I'm not an attorney
but I'm I am a guy that has a
school of outside the box so I
just see that in in.
and so that was a question and I
I understand you guys are going
to build this judiciary Madam
chair representative so I could
so this is a language that I
we're looking at I mean I I
don't know that I would want to
run it by Legislative Council
Service but that many help us in
this is something like this
willful behavior that causes a
person to fear imminent unlawful
toucher damage to personal
property when actor is
reasonable reasonably can be
criminalized I don't know if
that would work
We would have language something
like that because I I I am
listening to you and
Representative Lord
Representative Romero it really
points out statutes to bank I I
totally agree with all of you
and so we're gonna have to work
on some language I just I I that
language is texted to me I'm
looking at and thinking that
makes some sense but I don't
want to proposes an amendment
because I don't know that that
language is good enough and I
would like to have a to the wash
but I guess the commitment I
would make to the committee is
that and I want to hear from
Representative Harper is that we
would have to have some language
in the bill that hits the floor
that would have something like
this in there so that you know
your concern about she maybe
would be criminalized and media
representatives aren't Romero's
concerned it's too great
Representative rewards Jr that
would capture other things I
think we're totally legitimate
and and we just need to think
through I I hope Madam chair
representative can answer
questions.
Yes Sir thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative I I
you know I.
I feel like if this does make it
to law it's going to be tested
pretty quickly and and and I
think some of those Supreme
Court decisions are because
it'll get there
they're going to help clarify
some of this I believe the
intent was wonderful.
So I want to take a few more
steps and so as as several of
you may know I'm an engineer by
trade so.
one of the many things that that
I do is the subdivision.
And so a typical property.
Just like a typical road.
Road went to somewhere between
thirty twenty eight thirty six
statewide back to on the curbs
if that has occurred we got our
and in the right way is
somewhere depending on where
you're at Santa Fe significantly
different than other areas.
We want roads but despair right
away is sixty feet wide.
The typical subdivision.
An even older subdivisions of
You end up with a twenty five
foot setback.
So as soon as you start doing
the math.
Each time I do the math on every
different area this actually
puts the protesters in front of
somebody else's fault.
In less.
Your in a five acre subdivision
and then by that staff side you
know you're typically you're not
gonna have a lot of hundred foot
issue with that and so
that's the first concern okay
you want to come protest may
that's fine come protest me but
you were making a rule that
says.
You can protest Randal pedigree
in front of me Potts's home.
That's going to create a
problem.
In my opinion and so I think
that that
in a probably should disseminate
name of but anyway
At the end of the day.
That creates a concern for me as
as a person trying to be a good
neighbor.
And messed up because I was I
shop at State Farm so
They represent over for a laugh
by specific info and
with that I I would I would ask
that you guys continue to look
at that because that really it
is unnerving to me that it's not
okay for you to protest in front
of my house but is okay for you
to protest mail from my
neighbor's house and and and one
of my neighborhood one and they
push it to the next slide and we
push it to the next one how far
is far enough to keep my lawyer
is a three miles away your this
is this has the potential.
Just waiting to a point where
now we're pushing people where
they where they should be on
private and public property to
begin with protesters.
That's my opinion my opinion
only.
In and one paid for so you don't
have to take it that way but
just grow the drugs concerns for
me.
And.
Like I said I I like this bill.
I am I am curious specific
question.
How do you how do you feel like
this is gonna affect.
Everyone of every campaigner.
In in a year and a half.
to earn a year when people start
campaigning again and and just
slightly to seventy six does
become law.
We are targeting a specific
person we do have signs we do
have things that we're putting
out there if the person feels
like we're being aggressive how
many how many thousand dollar
fines as everybody but.
So madam chair and
representative thank you again
for a a soft full question.
I.
Again the intent which I think
we all agree is something that
we we was good is.
Harassing focused ticketing.
I'm I'm not a lawyer I don't
know our election laws.
but I know that we have
definitions of what politicking
R. and.
you know for for example there's
laws on where we can put our
sites and we can't put them in
certain places.
We have laws about who can touch
our sites and it's like a.
Representative Ely contract me
was like a certain degree
misdemeanor for someone to to
face a political sign.
You know so
aware of political activities
cross over into getting.
no that would have to be.
So we we look into I don't have
a good answer for you at this
point well Madam chair
representative I think that is
why we have to have this what
I'm becoming a mandatory require
we have to have some kind of
behavior that really threatens
people along with the picketing
I mean I there is political
activity clearly would be
covered by this I mean the
simple idea of because there and
and the funny story is that when
I was up in Santa Fe last year
people were putting up wanted
science you know criticizing
some of my positions around
south corral us so my wife
called and said there are it is
use wanted posters with your
picture on it so what do you
think you chose well nice
picture but no reward those
would not be prohibited by the
statute it would have to be this
bill you would have to be
picketing and I think now
everybody's made an excellent
point you would have to be
something that would on
reasonably cost people to be in
fear of their safety into their
property or shallots that's what
we we are going to try and
target behavior so would just be
the act picketing it would have
to be intimidating in some way
but
the other kinds of political
activity should not be impacted
by this and by the time we get
it through Judiciary hopefully
you won't have that question but
it's a legitimate question to
that.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair I think
I look forward to seeing this
debate as it continues on down
the road
But I would I would think that
maybe we could all agree that
just Justin and a multitude of
the bill so we seen through
session are any.
We're redefining.
Behavior and taking away a
different statutes on behavior
and and so.
For us to put a law in here put
the region here that the allows
different definitions of
aggressive behavior.
Yes with law enforcement a bit
with the just the public
You know I would I would
challenge everybody go back and
look at some of the ways that
the some of the birds just been
struck out of some existing
statutes right now attention we
could affect.
Burr ridge that that that you're
considering for this so I would
ask that you look at that and
Yeah like I said I think this is
a great bill I I do have
concerns about pushing the
protest down the road and it
impacting.
Thank you to the fact of the
neighborhood and so
and
No and and I think the Saint
Louis and it's a perfect example
of why something like this would
be good.
Because we wouldn't have to
people with felony counts of of
cooling weapons on people that
were bang and trying to bang
down.
For a couple store in Saint
Louis and so again I think this
this has potential.
In in I do appreciate the COVID
the the discussion I do
appreciate the debate I look
forward to seeing.
This house bill gross thank you
very much madam chair thank you
Representative Harper and Eli
for bringing this.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew I think Representative
Lord are you do you have your
hand up again okay go ahead I do
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I did go
look up Westboro and of course
the I am absent fortune I'm very
biased towards them they are
allowed to protest they can hold
up discussing signs and stand in
front of somebody's house the
Supreme Court did decide that
they are allowed to do that I
just wanna let you know they did
go look that up so I see that
being used against this bill I
absolutely agree I don't want
people protesting in front of my
house necessarily but if they
have opposing views they have
opposing views I checked with
law enforcement to and they just
told me that if you feel there's
imminent danger they can
disperse them so the eminent
danger thing is already handled
for what I talked about law
enforcement it's one double
check on that they said if you
feel that your there's a threat
and there is imminent danger if
they're blocking traffic if
they're trespassing.
I'm that you can already called
law enforcement and they will
come and dispersed those people
Sir ready have that on the books
where I am getting hung up on is
and I get it we're getting hung
up on is okay I don't
particularly like this group
so I called law enforcement and
they tell them to disperse but
they're on a public sidewalk and
again west Burrel had they've
said that they can they have the
right to do that is discussed in
the state are and we do have the
freedom of assembly and I think
the eminent danger thing is
already been addressed when I
just spoke to to law enforcement
officers who said that you half
there's imminent danger they
will come and dispersed them.
So I mean I had to get a
restraining order against nay so
I know it's like to feel to be
stalked and harassed and how my
property damaged
but I I still always have to
stand with the constitution and
what the Supreme Court says even
if I don't agree with that
necessarily about your freedoms
and where they should begin
where they should and and my
biggest concern is what
Representative Pettigrew brought
up which is okay.
There from my house.
I don't want them because we
can't use them data examine a
danger would come and they would
be asked to disbursed by the
place of us to say we don't like
them harassing us to pick it
them and we don't have to move
when I got to send more to my
neighbor's house you know what
my neighbors not there to town
they don't want them there or
what if they are and then they
move them down another hundred
feet and another hundred feet
and another hundred feet and
another hundred feet where does
that and to where people can
peacefully assemble and walk
past your house on the sidewalk
and walked back and forth as
much as we hate it I think the
eminent danger thing and it has
already been addressed so
because I'm just letting you
know that that's why I'm gonna
be voting no on that I totally
understand what you're trying to
get across and I'm selfishly
thinking to myself how much I
don't want people are harassing
me from my house the same time
they do have the right to
assemble so I just want to make
a final comment on that that I
did go look up west for on the
are allowed to be just
discussing as they want to be
but thank you Representative
Harper thank you and I both you
for answers your questions and
and and being very thoughtful
it's it's been a very good
discussion and I get the concept
I were about the
constitutionality of it and I
worry about moving those people
into someone else's yard and
then where are they gonna end up
and and added that there's
there's a lot of stuff in there
that need to be addressed and if
it moves forward I hope you guys
can deal with that but I I would
want to know just because of
that thank you.
No further questions I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair all movie due past
okay you I will second I'm
Allison will you call the roll.
Representative returns.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Now.
Representative Pettigrew.
Madam chair can you come back to
me please.
Mr Mero.
Yes and I'd like to explain more
about.
Madam Thompson please go back to
Representative Pettigrew
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes and I would like to explain
more of a.
Madam Thompson yes.
So by a vote of four to one you
do have it you you do have a due
pass you also have a lot of work
to do from what I hear so we'll
go back first two of
Representative pedigree to
explain his boat.
Thank you madam chair thank you
again thank you Representative
for bringing this bill I I soon
we will be seeing us on the
house floor and with that I hope
to let some of the things that
that that I talked about today
at least will be addressed.
So that that that I can continue
to support this bill this.
Probably one of the few bills
out there that I'm I'm willing
to.
That that I've taken a stance
that.
Intuitively I say no.
But I want to see where this
goes so wanted to make sure
maybe thank you.
Representative I vice chair
Romero thank you madam chair I
agree with the intuition it's so
tough.
Speaker Representative to get
something like this right I'm
really interested to see if it
makes the house floor to be
quite honest as the democratic
experiment continues to try to
figure that out Madam chair
representative so best of luck
and look forward to what we do
see.
Point
thank you madam chair.
And and just for hopefully
choose to settle your your
nerves Representative Pettigrew
I don't know if you've ever sat
through a judiciary hearing if
you haven't do you and then you
will never again thank they will
let anything out as I I was
quoted earlier this session that
that committee make sure they
have the right amount of ink on
the COVID not just where the
COVID is but that the COVID is
dark enough but not too dark
they will they will take it
apart with a fine tooth comb and
not I would just say I am very
thankful I do not sit on that
committee because that's not.
I'm more of a big picture person
now than that every teeny little
teeny teeny next so you do have
a due pass and now and with that
we will move on to our house
bill two fifty four and we have
Representative Roybal Caballero
and not Senator Sedillo Lopez
welcome Senator you are the
first senator I believe we've
had in this committee so far the
session although I could be
wrong
I I it would be the first time
today.
What do you want to be here for
that you need to promote well we
need to promote undress
undressed I'm sorry that not the
wanted Representative okay
thank you senator
Representative and chair I just
got a message that
I Elaine Maestas may be already
she had to reconnect that's why
I was trying to manage the tax
right now so what I've heard in
other committees is that it's
Elaine what's your name if you
are in the participants please
raise your hand that will help
us provide you more okay.
Representative and senator could
she be under a different name or
I'm I'm looking at her she's
under number and the number the
last four digits are seven four
to five okay
so madam chair there I can't log
in the panelists by Callum to
talk okay okay so.
And then the other
expert witnesses on this land
this.
Representative madam chair I
don't see him anywhere.
All right he's he's probably
having the same issue ball I
don't know if you're aware of
where you all are but there's a
section in on two sections in
Albuquerque that are having band
with broadband issues and they
got knocked out of the internet
and I don't know what that has
to do and they're both in those
sections including me so I'm
hoping to god that we're not
gonna I won't get knocked out
that the senators here so.
It's it'll be good.
Okay just keep that if I
suddenly blank out it's because
of that okay well we all blank
out in one way or not.
Go ahead and present your bill
okay thank thank you madam chair
members of the committee
Senator Antoinette Sedillo Lopez
and I are here to present house
bill two fifty four AM.
And
It's.
That we're working on for
several years now and it is
intended to address improving
transparency and accountability
as many of you may know madam
chair and members of the
committee New Mexico has the
second highest per capita rate
of people killed by police in
the country over the past five
years according to two national
databases this is also a point
that's referenced in your FIR on
page five.
So it indicates that from twenty
sixteen to twenty twenty between
ninety seven and a hundred and
eight individuals were killed by
police which is an average rate
of nine point three two ten
point three per million
residents per year.
Comparatively in New York madam
chair with the over nine times
New Mexico's population roughly
some roughly the same number of
people killed by police during
this period and I'm glad that
the FIR mentioned this because
what this bill does is it
Requires madam chair very timely
reporting processes set up and
that is to safeguard the
integrity of the incident and
the transparency of the incident
and second it is specifically
names the agencies responsible
for the investigations and
reporting so that we have
improved accountability and I
will now on asset Senator
Sedillo Lopez follow but also
I'm going to ask if they are
connected whoever is now
connected of the expert witness
as follows Senator Sedillo Lopez
in her presentation madam chair
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative aero has been
working on police reform for
many years and has you know I
joined I joined two years ago I
joined this that this body and
one of my experts of one of our
experts
undressed.
King Committee and that we need
to do something about police
misconduct and he should ability
and I and and has Center Cup I
was that we start working on.
What happened then was Lisa sero
was killed two years ago well
almost two years ago now year
and a half ago with twenty one
bullets in her body by the
sheriff's office.
This young woman was was a tiny
young women and it was on a
mental health call.
And when I read about that in
the paper I I just changed me it
was this is going to be my
priority is to try to fix the
way these cases are handled
there is still been no report no
consequences of of what of the
police of what of what.
Any consequences for the police
who will stick somehow managed
to put twenty one bullets in
this young woman's body.
And I had the option to meet
Elaine and that and and the
family and I was just.
Emotionally.
Fired up to do something about
it so what I did we we got in
this bill and we worked very
closely with the attorney
general's office and also with
the state police office to to
come to a bill that would work
in our state not a model bill
because this this bill was
originally modeled over.
Legislation federal legislation.
And so we took that federal
legislation or that bill that
was modeled on federal
legislation and then we work
very closely with the attorney
general's office to modify it.
And then we presented it during
the intersession and during the
intersession the state police
called me the department at the.
State police office called me
and said they had some
suggestions for the bill but
they thought it was a really
good idea.
And one of the things they said
that was really important was we
need to have that we need for
people to have confidence in the
process and confidence that
officers have consequences when
something goes bad and when
they're exonerated that people
have consequences that people
have confidence in that so that
was really a powerful moment for
the when the state when the so I
felt it was important we met
with the community members who
brought this bill and we talked
about what the what the attorney
general's office wanted and what
the state police.
And we can system compromises
and I noticed the for picked up
one of those cons compromises
the community wanted.
That every single case to be
brought before in a preliminary
hearing before a judge every
single one no prosecutorial
discretion.
And of course the attorney
general's office was not going
to sign off on a bill that took
away all prosecutorial
discretion and would make
everyone every single day have
to take these two a preliminary
hearing.
Well so that's one of the little
confusing things in this bill it
says that these cases will be
brought in a preliminary hearing
but then it says that it shall
not that this nothing is
actually interfere with
prosecutorial discretion.
I agree that that's confusing
but what I think that you can
read the bill and present could
clarify it to be a preference
for a preliminary hearing.
And then if the prosecutors felt
that a grand jury proceeding
with more appropriate they would
but there would be a strong
preference for preliminary
hearing.
You also you you may be aware
that the Supreme Court in New
Mexico is trying to do away with
the grand jury process period
and have everything go to
preliminary hearing and when
that happens then this issue
will be moved
the other thing this bill does
is it the major thing to it is
the.
To promote accountability and by
accountability I need to
eliminate the perception or
actual conflict of interest when
you prosecute when you
investigate a case.
The police department expected
whether it's a share for the
local the local peace officers
are not to investigate
themselves alone.
The state police offices is to
come in and either take over the
investigation or too cold
of co investigate.
And and that would eliminate the
perception of the individual the
individual police department
investigating their own.
Yes our accountability issue is
when you have such a close
relationship with the police
department and then you have
the prosecutors.
And they work with each other
every day.
And that naturally gives rise to
this this difficulty and
prosecuting somebody that they
work with every day.
So what this bill does is the
attorney general's office comes
in and they either call
prosecute or they take over the
investigation.
And and that that process is
worked out based on on what's
happening now you may be aware
that the current practice is
that the DA's office may ask the
AG's office to take over.
And in fact that has happened in
this particular in the case
involving the Zimmer Cerro.
The case was taken over by the
AG's office years later.
and we still have have nothing.
The other thing this bill does
is very important is it there's
accountability and I mean
there's a transparency in that
there is a report every few
months about the progress of the
investigation that has to be
made.
And that and that public report
has to be made if there is a
determination not to prosecute
and that report must be very
clear about why the decision to
not prosecute would be made and
the reason that's important is
because if they exonerate the
police officer the public needs
to know why.
And it needs to be thorough
about whether police officer was
exonerated I forgot to ask you
if you have time limits madam
chair I do you have time limits.
Senator we do not wait we we
deal for public comment but for
nothing else but I'm okay
because they've been imposing up
time limits to all of trying to
be quick I I think that it would
be very important to turn it
over and and all stand for
questions I'm sure after reading
the bill and and the for their
probably have a lot of questions
I will turn it over to our our
experts I let me let me just
interject real quickly Senator
just add one more point in and
I'm not
and and I would point out to you
on on page two of the bill
within that reporting period
time period which is twenty four
hours we also provided for the
governor and the Attorney
General being involved and then
the very important in a very
important step on in the
transparency and accountability
because now we have third eyes
involved in all of this process
in order to be able to check and
check off and that's an
important element within that
twenty four hour time period
everything has to be logged on
so I do did want to highlight
that and then also and I was
just texted that are expert
witness Elaine Maestas is ready
to speak at this point so thank
you senator.
Lane I believe you're unmuted.
I thank you all for having me
here with you today
I'm thinking directly off of my
experience following the death
of my history we should Lucero
you know following her death and
we have heard nothing for quite
some time and honestly we found
out when a lot of the rest of
New Mexico found out through the
media with the sheriff's
department had today about at
least at that.
I'm.
We eventually I had put in a
request for public records
however we were denied
that request that should have
honestly been made available to
us and perhaps I'm so we had to
do for those records
and get them their litigation.
Shortly after receiving those
records we found out that the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department you're headed the
investigation actually shocked
that and that the multi task
force that that that was.
I'm and this was a huge shock
an injustice to our family I I
feel that you know Department
should ever be able to spearhead
investigation into themselves.
So and because they were allowed
to hear that had that
investigation into themselves
we at the family were given
hello many alarming
inconsistencies
with the investigation report
that was submitted.
So I'm.
Eventually we got to the year
mark and we committed a letter
over to the Attorney General
requesting that he would take
over the case because we were
getting nowhere with the
district attorney's office at
the time and we had not heard
anything one so ever so I just
want to say that you know there
there was a huge lack of
oversight
in Alicia's case and that that
should have never been allowed
to to happen Department should
never be allowed to be
investigation and due to their
overuse supports whether it's
lack legal or legal like and we
showcase.
So I I really want to ask each
of you for your support again
I'm speaking
from direct experience that that
happened to my family and I had
a lot of that deficiency all
hardy in the process of our
greeting
this bill really is to give
transparency to families in the
midst of the unthinkable and add
accountability when it comes to
the investigation that followed
the horrific incident.
You know when you go through a
tragic loss like we have the
days until like week and the
week well like month.
And the Michael like here
families and victims should
never be waiting eighteen months
like we have for answers thank I
want to thank you again having
me here with you today.
Thank you thank you so much it's
always very hard fell to hear
on.
The families of victims express
what they've gone through and I
just want to thank you Lane for
being strong and in pursuing in
the name of her sister on and
and being so
Strong in her pursuit of justice
so I I really do appreciate it
and madam chair I think on the
Senator and I are ready for
questions we stand for questions
right Senator and thank you
especially E. lane I'm it for
the public if you thought I was
smiling and things I have a
twenty one month old
granddaughter here who's them
into.
I can so we will go to the.
To uphold so Allison we'll put
that up and you are you will
have an opportunity to to weigh
in in support or opposition to
this bill.
And I'll give you a few more
seconds okay that looks pretty
stable okay so we have
We have sixty three percent or
five people in support and
thirty eight percent for three
people in opposition so we will
close the poll and I'm I'm we
will take public comment you
will see a I'm.
You will see a timer we have a
one minute limit on public
comment so please are.
Pay attention to that and we
will start with people who are
in opposition to this bill if
you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand and again it's under
participants just raise your
hand.
N. okay I see one and that is
John Willoughby go ahead John.
Thank you I hope you can hear me
madam chair thank you for the
opportunity one minutes quick
I'd like to get my condolences
to
The family of a lost loved one
that is definitely a tragedy on
both sides of the fence this
bill does not speak to anything
in regards to police reform one
of the cornerstones and I'm with
the Albuquerque police officers
association one of the
cornerstones of reform is that
police have to prove to their
own communities that they can
police themselves now I do agree
wholeheartedly that the move
that a multi agency task force
should be used in incidents of
deadly force which is customary
in Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county it's also customary in
the majority of agencies
throughout the state of New
Mexico but over politicizing
this environment and pretending
that the AG has the time
resources or staffing to be able
to make an impact it's just not
paying attention to the
realities that we deal with in
law enforcement as as as ours
expert witness testified now
this cases before the AG and
still they have nothing proving
that this bill will not be
effective the work thank you so
much I wish I could say more
have a great day.
Thank you and we have Sarah
Glenn Hamilton.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I would first like
to say I don't oppose this bill
on the on the grounds that I
believe that every a use of
force and counter or
specifically officer involved
shootings that involve the death
of a cover of the individual
should have the most extreme
transparency possible from a
recent poll that I conducted
with the New Mexico sure start
throughout the state indicate
that thirty of the thirty three.
Currently actually use the
department of public safety New
Mexico state police in
conducting their officer
involved shootings
the task forces and and or.
Agencies that conduct their own
type of up that type of
investigations are are those
larger agencies throughout the
state so and I do support
transparency in that regard I
will however draw your attention
to the cost the cost of
currently are borne by the
counties if if it takes place
with the local city police
department and I don't think the
county should have to pay for
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you and now we.
To
People in support please raise
your hand.
Okay we will start with dynamic.
Good afternoon chair and
committee members I'm Diane the
cash and I'm a resident of
Bernalillo county where we have
had more than our share of
killings of community members by
police I strongly support this
bill it's never made sense to me
that the DA's offices our law
enforcement agencies work with
on a regular basis should be the
investigating and possibly
prosecuting entities when deadly
force is used these people are
each other's peers and possibly
friends surely they have the
opportunity to become acquainted
as they work on prosecutions
together in the normal course of
doing their jobs on a daily
basis this relationship or
appearance of a relationship
makes it difficult to trust the
process please vote yes on H. B.
two fifty four and create a
system of accountability that
will help us better trust the
process of the investigation and
possible prosecution of the use
of deadly force against us thank
you very much.
Thank you day and we have the
skill that Campos.
And members of the committee my
name is Lucy let them both I'm a
policy associate at apple to
futures formally known as young
women United we stand in support
of HB two fifty four I live in
Albuquerque but I grew up in
Espanola and I still have strong
ties there.
Sadly I know too well what over
policing and police violence
looks like I know the feeling of
limited to no avenues for
accountability and our
communities at the age of
thirteen I would miss my brother
who was sixteen at the time we
see the most brutal beating by
at least a police officers right
outside of our home the building
was such that he spent five days
hospitalized in hand cuffs
recovering from broken ribs
internal bleeding and severe
head injuries although my family
filed a lawsuit for deadly force
against the city of Espanola my
brother soon chose to self
deport because our home was
daily patrolled he was come
continuously harassed and
threatened by the same officers
it has been sixteen years since
I've seen my brother.
These officers were never held
accountable for their actions I
know that my story is not unique
across the country.
Okay Marshall Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marshall Martinez can you
hear me.
Yes Marshall.
My name is our Martinez I'm the
intermix active director of the
quality New Mexico the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights organization
LGBTQ people have a long history
of experiencing violence that
and that includes at the hands
of law enforcement as a reminder
the Stonewall riots the
beginning of the modern LGBTQ
civil rights movement was the
result of consistent abuse of
queer and trans people by police
the road to reconciliation is
long and we've been walking
alone for far too many years and
let me be really clear we know
that not all law enforcement
officers are overly violent
towards queer and trans people
or anyone we believe that
members of the LGBTQ community
can never build trust in law
enforcement will never feel
safer in the presence of law
enforcement if there aren't real
mechanisms for accountability
and transparency we support and
are grateful for all attempts to
offer the public greater
confidence in law enforcement
officers and I want to specially
applied and thank the sponsors
of this legislation for offering
meaningful change meaningful
police reform policies that will
help LGBTQ people especially
queer and trans people of color
on our journey to full
operation.
Thank you Charlotte.
But what I'll just state
Charlotte all right Charlotte
pronounce our own last name go
ahead Charlie.
Each good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Charlotte mother when you all
I work with Julie on the COVID
and you're on behalf of ACLU no
we ask you to stand with us in
support of house bill at two
twenty six thank you so much.
Thank you for what Margarita
sorry on.
Hi good evening madam chair
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes we can I am I was.
Board member I was born and
raised in Travis county I
remember the first time dealing
with law enforcement
I was six years old my dad is
coming home after working a
twelve hour shift in the dairies
at the time he didn't know too
much English and it was around
two o'clock AM and he ran a stop
sign and was just about to turn
into our house and two police
officers pull them over and
excessively took him out of his
car and I just manhandled him
and my mom came out to calm them
down and translate because they
didn't know Spanish and again we
lived in the to read the area
and to see that as like a six
year old that really stuck with
me so I was always has attacked
the police I'm not saying all
police officers are bad but I
think accountability breeds
responsibility and I urge you to
support house bill two fifty
four thank you.
Okay thank you I'm and.
I understand that you Lane would
like to respond as the expert
witness so.
Yes I'm thank you I just wanted
to give a quick comment though I
know that when it'd be a COVID
what are state police are
already being utilized in the
investigation through the mall
type cap for and you know that
was something that was displayed
on the media by the sheriff on
the day that we celebrated a
leisure will like elevation
however the report shows that
that what they call.
The report shows that beating
the market.
had location investigation.
Want to point out that if that
can happen in the leisure Kate I
know that that's not an isolated
incident and that it is
happening and that's why we
might the
you know let legislation like
that.
That these loopholes are not not
allowed to continue to happen
and all I have to say thank you.
Madam chair of one of our
experts as I told you was
address led by this who is a
constituent of mine who brought
this issue to me when I first
got elected I think I had I mean
not elected selected by the
county commission and appointed
and I just he called me and he's
on speaker because somehow he
can't get in I don't know if
that would be appropriate or or
what you'd like but he just he
just called me.
I don't know I didn't know how
to madam chair he caught the
pass just trying to contact me
while I was in the other session
but I don't know how to do that
I I I didn't know how to do
that.
This so madam chair it's up to
you what to do about it he's
been unable to get in okay
Allison.
Okay areas okay.
Okay go ahead and
let him speak okay Mister
Hernandez Mr about this
would you please go ahead and
give your your testimony.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Okay let's go ahead.
Committee members thank you so
much originals United.
Could be allowed to continue to
do our work.
the issue those United began its
work in.
After seeing
a police shooting.
That could possibly be tested
but yet.
They were justified.
Questions.
We're governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham.
Ritual.
Cosponsored the legislation
addressing solid major reforms
particularly.
The.
The state.
Yes excessive forces.
This report.
Alecia.
She also provided included with
the what we're doing in the
educators.
And prosecutors.
Currency.
Hello.
Well because.
And the governor's.
Our culture share correctly
point out that there is
yes I think they should ship
between local prosecutors and
law enforcement.
House bill two fifty four as
Senate bill two seventy four
correctly addressed that issue
you're speaking special
prosecutors.
Speaking probable cause here.
And hi where I could actually.
The where is broken.
I think thank you for this
opportunity to speak.
Straight away and I might say
that.
The second because my computer
gets up.
Yes right in the beginning of a
very important meeting so I was
suspicious but thank you again.
I hope that the.
We can get through this this
year I think it's been a long
time over do you.
I do ask the committee for a
bill cash thank you.
Okay thank you and we will now
go to that to the committee
Representative Lord.
Thank you one second get my
camera okay thank you madam
chair and representative
I.
I hear somebody still talking.
How does all put him on mute
hold on one second I'm.
So.
I have some questions on this
bill because I talked to a law
enforcement about it how they
feel and they all agree with
transparency and they've all
told me that the state police
already handle in a lot of the
stuff so I do have some
questions about the bill itself
I notice you said twenty four
hours to report a death the
district attorney twenty four
hours to report to the governor
and then that becomes public
notice does that mean that have
some but if they have not found
the next of kin that they would
find out on this website.
Madam chair Senators going to
begin the question and answer
thank you.
Thank you thank you for that
question it is very unlikely
that the family would find out
on the website because it
doesn't required immediately in
the previous posting to an
immediate posting on the website
What it does is it just requires
notice to the governor and it's
it would be the governor and the
Attorney General who would
decide.
You know within a reasonable
time what we did is we made it
subject to impress so that it
couldn't that this information
would be transparent I would
hope that a governor would
decide that they want to if you
know it does give the governor
that discretion I would hope
that they would want to do it
immediately after the family was
notified.
And but we're not of
micromanaging that decision that
that's something that
That would happen in the
governor and the attorney
general's office discretion.
Thank you Representative
then chairs when I think I'm
deeply concerned about and the
police are also concerned about
was families finding out because
information does get leaked out
and I would hate for that
information it so is it going to
be sent and and what way is
going to be sent in encrypted
email and how can we actually
insured that that information
will get leaked out so the
family does not find out in the
media.
Madam chair representative those
are subject to the discretion of
the again I don't think it's
appropriate to in my set myself
my own thing is I don't think
it's a state program to
micromanage those kinds of
decisions the police department
and the governor's office and
the AG's office would probably
use what what procedures they
have and build on them to
accomplish this.
And other this is the point that
you made about
The family family finding out
it leaks happen they'll and many
many times the family finds out
by observing what happened on
the news and that's very very
distressing.
Madam chair and and if I may
also go back to that page two
that you're referring to item
C..
And it's it's it's very clear
and and and I guess the question
is on exactly what the concern
is because what it's saying
there is that report the
incident report shall be kept in
a log of reported incidents as
all subject and considered under
public records pursuant to
inspection of public records act
so this is a long and it
includes the very minimum and it
describes that madam chair the
date of occurrence of data the
report the location victim
information.
Everything that subject to
impress to begin with so there's
nothing in outside of that now
this is very different than
notice of whatever occurred
happening to the victim and the
victim's family being notified
so I just want to make sure that
it has nothing to do with that
process because that process is
very very personal very
immediate it occurs on when an
incident occurs and that's not I
don't think Senator nine what
are talking about in the bill
this is a very different type of
reporting and again very much
secured by impressed thank you
madam chair thank you senator
thank you Representative thank
you representative madam chair
madam chair my second question
on that is how long does it take
to you should receive an effort
report.
Madam chair I believe that
it could take thirty days I have
the applied for it printed
reports and I've gotten them
within a day
but I believe that there's a
maximum time and I can't
remember if it's thirty or sixty
days but as I said
Those if reports there's a whole
process.
And that process will will
happen with regard to the log
that is kept by the governor.
Okay I thank you representative
madam chair I just I just got a
text of the deadline is fifteen
days so they can be sued so the
days yeah thank you I'm so I.
And I'm.
I get the bill like it you're
trying to say but I have a
series of questions about the
In general and if we did not put
an appropriation on this bill
because it's not clear I did
commit to the Attorney General
and to the state police to to
support as much increased
funding as possible.
With the state with the Attorney
General suggested is that he
would love to have an elite
agency that focused on these
kinds of cases an element of not
in the lead agency but only
group within the AG's office
very highly trained and to work
on these cases the state state
police departments and he's the
one that suggested there wasn't
there was an of public comment
about the concern of suggests of
moving the costs over to the
county what we tried to do and
I'm not sure that we did it
perfectly what we tried to do
was make sure that
the that there was a way to if
this if the county saved money
from not having to prosecute a
case that though that money goes
over to the AG's office and that
was at the suggestion of the AG
I'm not sure that we did is
exactly right so I definitely
want to talk to the analyst to
see if we can
Make that clear because it is
not fair that the counties would
fund the whole thing but they
the Attorney General wants some
reimbursement if they
displace the county prosecution.
Madam chair and representative
and senator if I may.
Excuse me add to that
throughout the years that I've
been working on this legislation
the committee has been made both
by the Attorney General and all
of all of the other apartment
agencies involved that you've
given
The proper timing and the
anticipation which they've been
anticipating this legislation
for for quite a few years now on
and I'm hoping being that we can
get it to that point they
through their administrative
Annual requirements are able to
include in their budgetary
requests
growth and expansion of their
divisions in this case we're
talking about the Attorney
General and ways in which they
can work within inter agency
Division staffing that also
include in their budget requests
the inclusion of additional
budgetary item request so that
they can obviously
follow the mandates of the laws
that we pass and that's how
they've been doing things all
along anyway however none of us
anticipated being set back in in
the ways that we have madam
chair due to you know the budget
growth all of a sudden and then
the budget
following due to unforeseen
circumstances however that is
part of what agencies do.
Excuse me as their intent
anticipating on ways in which to
rollout legislation and statutes
that limit thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative thank
you madam chair madam chairman
next question so how many of
these only agents are going to
need to know we're gonna need
some of the state police and
then you also said that possibly
some and the district attorney's
office so how many of those
elite agency agents do
anticipate that will need.
Matt madam chair Representative
Lord
those would be decisions
staffing decisions made by the
Attorney General and by each of
the.
Each of the various officer
units are up not officer peace
officer units.
so the the this I into
anticipate would grow
organically has I wish that we
had fewer and fewer and fewer
cases and we wouldn't need this
however that has not been the
pattern.
Thank you I'm trying to delay a
little bit K. either one of you
have a question so thank you for
that thank you representative
madam chair the reason that I
ask and and madam chair the
reason that I ask is because in
a lead officer are they usually
get twenty thousand dollars more
so when you're doing your
financing you have to understand
that that's going to be another
twenty thousand to match them
because whenever there's an
elite force you have to bring
them up there's also going to be
per diem over time where in
terror and cars so there there's
going to be a lot of expense to
this and I do get concerned that
we don't have the money well the
intentions going to get concern
would not gonna have the money
to even precious bill forward so
I do have a question I'd I'd
asked about that hold on one
second go through this because
I'm trying to I jumped around a
little bit so with with the
chain of custody of the
information madam chair
representatives
what will the chain of custody
look like and how and how will
become public.
Excuse me are you talking Madam
chair representative retirement
a chain of custody of evidence
yes okay I this bill doesn't
address that issue
this this bill has nothing to do
with how police officers
handle their evidence.
That they had a concern and
thank you Representative they
had a concern about where is
this chain evidence going if we
have to people looking at staff
is it going to this one place
over the other is this person
holding it how will it get from
this group to the other group so
they were very concerned about
the chain of custody of evidence
how is it going up the chain
who's it going to who's going to
first who's going to next how
they're going to be sharing the
the custody of information
you madam chair Representative I
I again think that that would be
micromanaging how the police
officers handle their evidence
and now that how this process is
gonna work I will note in
response to last point that this
bill this this this mechanism
can be followed even without a
dime of additional money because
it's simply a different way of
handling these cases.
Thank you Madam chair
representative hold on lay
because I'd like I said I jumped
around other something in
section C..
That was concerning.
Maybe it didn't have to do
section see maybe how to do with
the overall thing what they're
worried about the most and again
they all agreed that things need
to be handled correctly and
transparency etcetera just like
all of us legislators want
transparency what we do.
The the biggest thing they have
is that this twenty four hour to
report and then twenty four hour
to the governor and then things
being effort in fifteen days.
The bill comes across to them as
that there's an assumption of
guilt are what they're worried
about and I'm just gonna make a
statement on that's not really a
question they're very concerned
that it could take weeks or
months to work through these and
I understand you want to be a
shorter time frame.
Their biggest fears that they
get tried all the stuff gets
released everything gets effort
because there's different
sources it's going to end gets
out.
That there's no way that they're
ever going to get a fair trial
so just keep that in mind it's
very concerning for the law
enforcement so madam chair
representative you have a
question that is very concerned
for every single person I talked
about in the all the
municipalities and all the
counties in in the rural
counties of that section in
there about.
Of the county has to pay out of
the general fund so general fund
money comes from tax dollars is
that correct.
Madam chair Representative Lord
yes.
Okay so my concern is is is well
my County Burlington county is a
prosperous county and Santa Fe
County in Santa Fe County or
more or more process counties
compared to others I worry about
counties I Torrance County or
Sierra County where they don't
have enough money so what is
going to happen if they don't
have because basically we can
ask him to as well have
anticipate how many murders you
thank your please may do and
it's going to cost ax and set
that money aside so I guess it
so that they wouldn't have to
raise the taxes right to cover
those costs.
Madam chair representative lower
if that is what I mentioned
before that I think maybe the
some work because I did get of
calls from county commissioners
who were concerned about it and
as I mentioned to them this was
a suggestion by the attorney
general's office and this may
not be the the best way to fund
it what I understand we are not
the best way funded I should try
to restate that better this may
this statute may not be clear on
what was intended what was
intended is that if the tourney
general's involvement saved
money because the local
prosecutor did not have to
expended on and on
Experts and all those kinds of
things that are that can make a
trial very expensive that that
would be the savings would be
transferred to the Attorney
General I realize when you read
the bill that it it's not very
clear about that but this was a
suggestion by the attorney
general's office to try to
because their work load will go
up and the assumption is is they
take over the red at the.
The investigation I mean the
prosecution then the local dust
Resources will be saved and so
they wanted to capture some of
that savings I don't think that
the bill is is clear about that
is it should be and so I
appreciate you bringing that up
to again to our attention I I
agree it's a problem.
Madam chair and can
Representative if I may you're
referring to page four a letter
and.
Two it's a very bottom lines
twenty one through twenty four
so we in the bill we do
acknowledge that the costs of
the investigation shall be paid
out of the general fund of the
county in which the
investigation is made.
And the costs of any prosecution
arising out of the investigation
shall be paid as are the cost in
cases prosecuted by the district
attorney's and although I agree
with on the Senator that these
are questions that have come up
as you have raised them I also
go back to what I said earlier
and that is in anticipation as
with any other administrative
body when you're budgeting and
you're preparing your
administrative budget and when
you're preparing all of the
costs associated with what you
have to do within that
obligation as an administration
you account for how you're going
to budget out those funds and
you request additional funds as
needed to address these
particular
administrative duties as per.
The laws and statutes and
governance that apply to you
carrying out your duties so even
though we know that this is
referring to the general fund of
the county madam chair we're
also saying that it will be paid
as part of the costs already
prosecuted or in line with the
prosecution all at as tied into
the duties of the district
attorney's so it's it goes back
to the same issue and so that
everything that is being passed
that's being required either by
federal law or by state law has
an associated cost and so we
passed some bills this summer
that
Related to the beginning of
police reform packages as we
move along those are costs that
have to be met and so those are
costs that the governing bodies
and administrative bodies
begin to allow within their
budget request so again it's not
meant to
Separate or distinguish between
those counties that have money
in those counties that don't
have many it's meant as a
protection across the board and
a way in which we can as those
governing bodies
begin to address what has to be
put in place in order to meet
our obligations thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative thank you
senator.
Thank you representative madam
chairs are one of the concerns
they did bring up going back to
that county is that they cannot
project how many offer and
officer involved shootings that
they're going to be there's no
way to predict that they have no
idea how long the
investigation's gonna take in
you're saying they pay for the
best occasion there's no way of
knowing how much it's gonna cost
them the and they have to you
know the prosecutors have to pay
the investigators have to be
paid they have X. amount of
dollars for the budget so
apparently it what it sounds
like it's going to come from the
tax dollars and something else
that I found out to that was
that
You know like we look at costs
and stuff Osaka one police
officer who told me that we are
supposed to be giving them money
to when they go and transfer but
if they have to go get somebody
on a warrant from out of state
and they haven't received in
that money since I think
nineteen ninety nine so I get
concerned about when they're
supposed to be monies will be
going certain places and these
counties
you know I I.
I think it's it's not fair to
put the burden on the county to
try to gas I think I'm gonna
have ten officer involved
shootings and then raise taxes
to have that much money into the
funding I don't think that is
for all I think that's all the
questions I have right now but I
may be back with some more as I
may have missed something as a
chapter here thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative vice
chair Romero thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and senator
welcome you're not our first I
will director and
but this is a always an honor to
have you thank you
Madam chair representative I I'm
really grateful to to see you
know because progress made in
this area just given the
statistics that you're
discussing and I think what
we've been trying to understand
nationally surrounding this
epidemic as well and and getting
a handle on a lot of the data
and information regarding a lot
of these situations interleague
crimes that you're talking about
Madam chair representative and
senator might no you know
Michael line of questioning is
going to have to deal a lot with
I think the FIR just because and
a lot of the analysis that we've
been receiving and I'm wondering
too if you would be willing
before I think that there to to
roll the bill because of the big
confusion I think even in the
definitions being that their
circular
you know a lot of the the faster
confusion I think as to what the
intent is in the bill is
unfortunately lost in this the
structure of a lot of the the
way the statue is writ written
and I don't want to and I don't
want to kill your bill because I
think the intent is important
but I you know going through the
analysis and reading through the
a lot of the circular definition
and trying to understand how to
unpack that Madam chair
representative and senator and
I'm having trouble because of
the structure
and and and and understanding
the intent and I think most most
alarmingly and just just because
we're been wrestling through
this as a as a crew of folks
here on this.
Committee madam chair
representative and senator is is
about how the structure of the
investigation is currently posed
and I just want to flag that
because if we define what rate
with the debt circular
definitions this is the most
troubling to me and the
structure of the.
Of the statute so far is just
that
in defining deadly force great
bodily harm and in custody
death.
What we're asking right now all
of the creation of this process
is that we're requiring
notification an investigation
Basically before we know what
actually happened and so.
I guess are we what is the
intention and I heard your
testimony and I'm really I want
to make sure that this is
actually the intent because
we're what I'm understanding is
that we're trying to we're we're
you're creating a different
standard for police verses
everybody else okay and the
investigation and then
prosecution of that person so
that's what I want to clarify
because the way that it's
currently written is that
there's basically the intent
requirement and all of those at
all of the investigation so far
is that it's
Is that it's a different
standard than everybody else who
commits a crime or commits any
sort of issue is that where's
the impartiality that we're
looking for when we're we're
we're prescribing an
investigation and
I'm currently with the structure
of of how all of those
investigations are defined with
notification and then the
investigation so that's where
I'm stock currently is that
we're we're basically defining a
separate
standard for police in this
investigation category and I
don't think that's your intent
but if it is they want to know
Madam chair representative and
senator.
Madam chair Representative so
madam
I don't see where you see a
different standard what it is is
a different process and the
definitions that you describe
great bodily harm and
Deadly force were provided to us
by the did by the state police
departments
or the department of public
safety act is is more
appropriate but I always called
the state police because they
wear the black the black in
thank you provided those
definitions and they provided
those definitions because they
said they are commonly known and
used with in the department and
so we about we oblige them by
including those definitions this
is not about changing the
standards any kind of standards
of intent or any kinds of of
standard of the criteria they
would be prosecuted under
current law all this does is it
changes the procedure and the
procedure would be
a joint investigation any joint
prosecution that's all join us
for the task force if if they
could meet the deadline it also
provides for a procedure of
transparency in terms of the
reports that are required
nothing else the rest of
criminal law that gives this is
just a procedural change not a
change in any kind of intent in
any statute.
Nothing.
The criminal law which is is
intact.
This criminalizing tech Madam
chair representative in center
Senator I think that's where I'm
I'm trying to understand like
the different that the process
and the difference between this
so currently
What's happening is that there
we're not investigating
these these situations for
saying we wanted impartial
investigation that should take
place that should produce enough
evidence that would persuade the
prosecutor so with the
definition as it's currently
defines on insects subsection AA
it pre it basically presupposes
the problem already happening in
the way that it's worded in the
way that I'm understanding both
the analysis and then even if
the DPS
did draft best what we're seeing
in in the way that it's drafted
is that the that the definition
presupposes the crime and so
what we're talking about the
impartiality when we're
investigating these types of of
of crimes we I'm I just want to
be able to know that they're not
preempted we being charged and
then going into a hearing so
that's that's where I'm trying
to
make sense of that and and per
the analysis on the technical
issues is really within the
definitional structures subject
subsection AA which sort of
takes away that impartiality
which which any other crime
would not have the have that
burden attached to it
preemptively so that's that's
what more so how I'm reading
into these
It's the way that it's currently
structured and I know that's a
technical problem but I don't
want that to be you know to
basically take away what what I
think you're intending to do
here however Madam chair
representative I would really
really like to see that
that that language cleaned up
even and in partnership with CPS
but that said you know it it it
is circular and so when we're
sick if we I mean I could yeah
I'm sure you've read the at the
FIR but on page nine you know
when we're using terms to define
other terms that's where I am
you know worried that we that
the impartiality is not built
into that structure so chair
representative I don't know if
we want to how how we want to
respond to that I'm happy to
call center and then I'll fall
I'm happy to respond to that I
think you have to keep in mind
that this process is not going
to happen unless there's a
police officer involved there is
a shooting.
Or or that has has the
department of state the defined
it.
Right bodily harm.
they said they they from the use
of deadly force and they said
they're very well everybody
knows when a case like this
happens this is a police
involved shooting and somebody
died for somebody was was really
really hurt and so the language
before was a little simpler
and they got more specific and
the reason is they suggested
that they wanted to use the
language that is used in police
departments at that and around
the country and that would be
recognizable again you have to
remember this is just procedure
this has nothing to do with what
the prosecutor has to prove or
what the defense has to prove
it's simply a process.
So so you know I I don't
understand the issue of of pre
judgments or anything like that
everybody knows is an officer
was involved in a shooting those
police officer those shares who
were involved in injecting
twenty one bullets into which
would sorrows of body there's no
question that this would be the
kind of case that would apply to
that.
And so I don't I don't see the
issue.
Madam chair and representative
and senator and thank you for
for clarifying the the pages
that you refer to and and the
language that you refer to Madam
chair representative for example
it's pretty clear in section
eight on page two continuing
that it talks about I and this
is with the senator just
described in terms of the clear
definitions that result in great
bodily harm or death and any
other definite Kerr's well a
person is in custody that is not
the result of natural causes
that's it's important to note
that there are again these
definitions were definitions
thanks to Senator Sedillo Lopez
spending so much time with the
various law enforcement
Representative that we talked to
this if you'd seen the bill that
I presented in previous years we
really got into a lot of detail
in murky water and what we were
it what has transpired madam
chair since then is that just
what Senator Sedillo Lopez and
this is a procedural step that
in fact none of the law
enforcement entities even those
testifying today countered
because it is part of the
transparency accountability and
it will be part of the whole
training capacity building and
it's part and parcel of what's
happening with the entire reform
but it's a necessary procedural
step that contributes to the
immediacy madam chair
Representative and to the
transparency the M. transparency
associated with the immediacy.
The logging in the recordkeeping
part of that and the
accountability because now we
have through procedure steps
madam chair and representative
that can be followed it has
nothing to do with the process
Torio nature of what will
happen.
Should these cases be taken to
the following steps it's also
it's only providing additional
mechanisms on reporting
mechanisms that will contribute
to that investigation and that
adds a lot more on transparency
and accountability to that but
not necessarily so that
assumption of guilt is one that
we worked very tirelessly trying
to break down and we finally
everybody understood so it's not
part of that.
Assumption or presumption or any
of that that's that's a whole
separate process and this is why
this bill became so very
important in the bigger
conversation of on police reform
and one that was absolutely the.
Decided by everybody involved
law enforcement entities as well
that would be acceptable and one
that in which.
You know no one's going to argue
transparency and accountability
in the process or procedure and
that's what they were telling us
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative yeah I'm I'm
gonna step in here and maybe
save us some time.
Looking at the fiscal impact
report there are many concerns
and I I do appreciate and and I
truly support the intent of this
bill but there are concerns from
the AG's office from the
district the district attorneys
there are pages and pages of
concern and I really don't want
to see this just be tabled
because of confusion so I would
suggest that the Sanchez would
agree that we wrote this over
until to date and not and work
and perhaps you know get with
that the the.
The analyst and folks and try
and try and.
Greatness out I mean you could
see that there's a lot of
confusion going on here and I
don't I really don't want this
bill to be tabled today but I'm
afraid that what is what will
happen if we go forward at this
point and so is the Sanchez
would agree to roll it over we
will put you on for Tuesday and
continue with some amendments
are you amenable to that.
That we just step in real
quickly and and we're always
amenable to to looking at and
what we need to look at but I
just will note that I read the
the FIR very carefully and there
are a lot of statements they do
need clarification however they
really are in the positive
rather than in the negative if
you read the line by line on
there quite a few so I I would I
would Senator what what is your
wish well if that's what it's
going to take to get it out of
this committee I'm happy to do
it I I only got their FIR to
date so I was shocked because
we've worked so hard with the
with the attorney general's
office and we work so hard with
this the department of and
safety and so I actually called
to see Hey what's going on of
but of course I didn't I I was
on the floor it is impossible to
deal with so I didn't make the
connection because I have in
another with another bill in the
Senate actually had in FY are
changed because the person who
wrote the FIR of made mistakes
frankly and so
again I was shocked and I
thought well
I thought what might be nice is
if we can get this committee and
then address it on the way to
Judiciary because Judiciary I
know will go over with a fine
tooth comb if they're like any
any Judiciary Committee we have
and in the Senate with regard to
the language that you're
describing and then the cost as
I see this bill and has the
Attorney General acknowledge.
This is simply changes a
procedure it starts with the
procedures in this section so
they could follow these
procedures without changing
anything else.
and yes if you wanted to do the
best job possible you would have
an elite unit you would have an
elite unit in every state in
every county you would have
just a massively beautiful
system.
All we're saying is a very
simple thing you're going to get
the AG's office involved early.
And you're going to get the
state police involved early for
you're going to use your multi
disciplinary teams if you've
already done that which many
counties that are not many but a
few counties have you're gonna
use that team but this time we
use the team you're gonna have
to make a report every four
months that's all this bill does
and so when I saw the pages and
pages of like.
This is a simple bill I I was
surprised.
So with that I I will say I mean
it it's up to you if you want us
to go forward as I said I don't
want this to die here but I also
don't think it's ready we have
moved some whatever we built on
but I'm sorry this one is is to
just by the line of questioning
actually even partly from the
public comment
people don't really know what
this does and I think we it it's
and and I will be the first one
to say this is not Judiciary we
do not look at that as some of
us don't some of us do look at
the nitty gritty of how it fits
in legally but I think it's just
incredibly confusing I
understand what you say that you
wanted to do but I don't think
that's what any of us are
reading that it does so madam
chair though the only thing I
would say based on what Senator
just mention because that was
not part of my what I was going
to add on to what would be that
if we come back on Tuesday this
would be if we can get the F. I.
R. further clarified and
have the commentaries or
whatever and is troubling are
what appears to be confusing
clarified
I'm not quite sure whether we'll
be able to do that but you know
what I'm willing to give the
we're willing to give it a shot
and I just don't know in what
form will will come back and
that was just my only comment
Senator.
Absolutely I would what I tried
to make happen today was a
somebody from the attorney
general's office to you hear
that.
Obviously didn't happen because
they're not here
And this committee is going to
be in the so there's we have
more bills so similar ability is
in the Senate tomorrow and
hopefully we can make that
happen tomorrow to have the the
attorney general's office Tom.
I have
If I'm I've been on the floor
and on committee all day so I
actually don't know if the FY
are came out to the Senate bill
and I don't even know whether
Senate FIR is look like House
empires and curious to see what
what that looks like so if
rolling it over would would
reassure the committee I I am
fine with that
one thing this to me is a very
very small step in police reform
that is bringing some confidence
into the prosecutorial
investigator in investigatory
process we did build on what New
Mexico has in place now and we
did not create an independent
commission or try to get
complicated we tried to do it
very simply.
Thank you madam I will go ahead
and roll it over okay and I will
okay sorry she was told no
I what we will not do public
comment we will just go back to
a question from the committee I
see Representative Pettigrew
waving at me I believe did you
have something on this but I we
will do committee questions once
we get
either a substitute bill or or a
different FIR or or whatever it
is but I'm gonna let
Representative Pettigrew go
ahead but you will be first on
Tuesday and we will not with it
hopefully it will be much
shorter than we did today so go
ahead Representative at a group.
Representative Pettigrew we
can't hear you.
Can you hear me now yes.
Okay.
Hopefully my office making it
Madam
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and senator
for bringing this bill I would
ask that in addition to the F.
I. R. you go through the agency
analysis they AD are they dust
it and of see for actions in a
in.
Oh my gosh there's tons of one
of oil out certain things that
yes some of which are addressed
in the FIR states some of which
are not and so
I would actually you look at
that
I would also ask very seriously
the that you define relevant
prosecuting authority just about
everybody called that out.
Clarify.
Precisely the entities involved.
Will be responsible for that
definition are gross bodily harm
Licks with the criminal code is
written today there's multiple
things in here the that that
Chair Thompson and and and vice
chair Romero and I agree on that
that without those things being
clarified and.
The items on the FY are the are.
Identified is technical issues
and I would disagree.
What we disagree with
Representative the third
statements there are the some of
these are very specific and and
so what their issues are so I
would ask each one of those and
if if you're not ready by next
Tuesday you're not ready by next
Tuesday
There there is a significant
amount in your and that and and
madam chair loans is worded
Committee still being a last
question bro I'll hold all my
questions
until next week or whatever the
bill comes back on thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative sobre.
Thank you Representative and
senator so we we are going to
move on to our next bill and not
as I said we what we what's
essentially can pick up where we
left off today no public comment
no one no polls any of that
we're just gonna go back to to
committee professionals so what
that Allison can you put in the
next.
Thank you senator and
representative.
Okay so we are.
We are going thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee okay thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the.
Okay so we will move on to H. J.
R. six which is our
Representative Snyder and you're
right I think you like do you
do.
Warriors need experts know about
on this bill shared I am way I
was just talking around nine
point I know he's coming on and
I'll keep this relatively short
I know this is been kind of the
Daymon Ely showed.
Short.
The second see you guys this
time last time it was just the
doctor bill.
It looks like we have
Representative night Burt my
phone is ringing now and my
granddaughter is is that
screaming and life goes on so
whenever you're ready Sanchez.
Madam chair I think we were
great that I'm gonna start this
so I I'll be I'll try to be very
brief this is an emergency
proclamation our proposed
constitutional amendment.
So we actually have a bill as
well that went through I think
was labor and Representative
diver can correctly and is
headed to Judiciary this house
joint resolution six will also
be headed to Judiciary if it
were to get out of this
committee
the idea is to put it both a
constitutional amendment and the
bill in front of the judiciary
to decide which one to go to the
floor and the building will but
we'll see basically this is
crucial.
This starts with Representative
Nighbor last when one of the
special sessions I see
trying to
putting a bill on the floor Lee
was house bill ten
to put some limitations on the
governor's powers on that
immediately caught my attention.
Not because I believe the
governor has done anything wrong
I think the governor has done an
outstanding job I'm gonna keep
saying that in the public health
region which is so much better
off in other states but I don't
want to have a long discussion
about that that is something
which all of us have our own
opinions on can disagree we're
Representative Nibert and I we
is that the legislature in these
emergency declarations took
themselves out of the process
the government to do that we did
it to ourselves and so what this
would do is put the legislature
back in a position where we have
some ability to influence policy
as well as provide oversight
both our financial and policy
while at the same time giving
the executive branch the
flexibility to respond to a
crisis so basically the way this
works is pretty simple governor
declares an emergency
declaration if it goes on for a
while if it's too short
emergency no problem but it's
like what we just experienced it
goes on for over a year after
ninety days the governor has got
to call us into a special
session now that point with this
constitutional amendment what
would happen is if the
Legislature by
a three fifths vote decides each
chamber that emergency
declaration either needs to
current yes easy there and the
or the amended we do that but if
I have three yes votes in both
chambers we don't and madam
regency decoration continues now
under the proposed house joint
resolution
and then she just calls back
every sixty days after that
process just repeats itself that
is likely to change before
Judiciary to make it from sixty
to ninety days we've done that
yet today it's just sixty days
on there is also another bill in
the Senate that provides some
oversight into specifically the
final.
Angel picture what this does is
in my mind is it restores three
branches of government and
whether the governor is a
Democrat or Republican done
matter me the bottom line is
principal issue and I think this
is where representative Nibert I
see eye to eye yes the system
works best when all three
branches of government or vault
in this case Legislature to
consult on we can disagree about
whether the governor's center
good job or bad job I have as
I've said I keep promising back
Garcia said many times of the
governor's an excellent job done
matter legislation should still
be involved and that's what this
is about and as opposed to a
bill this allows us to do three
yes instead of a major because
you can't do that in a bill and
it goes directly to the voters
as opposed to passing governor's
yes so that insurance rural my
co sponsor Representative night
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
might just have a couple of
things the
house bill one thirty nine
actually was passed out of state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee and is
currently pending and Judiciary
and then this this joint
resolution is our first in front
of this committee and if passed
it will likewise go to our
judiciary and our comments to
the chair judiciary of band to
see of both pieces of
legislation since they are
almost word for word identical
except for the three this
provision that both of them do I
heard at the same time I think
you covered it very well I would
just point out to to my
colleagues on the committee that
the legislature does have a roll
R. under the constitution to to
do a variety of things and
article four section two
specifically talks about our
role in the disaster emergencies
but the emergencies contemplated
and that the provision of the
constitution bill specifically
where
here is the time when basically
martial laws are.
Declared and in that instance
the executive has seven days to
call us in the session and we
have to remain in session with
no more than three days of
recess we can only recess for up
to three days under the
provisions of the constitution
with respect of that type of
emergency we are course divested
ourselves of a lot of four PM in
the early two thousands under
the for a disaster emergency
bills that that it just now and
what we are trying to do is
simply claw back some of that
authority and power to the
legislative branch so that we
meet our obligations to the
citizens of New Mexico by
appropriating money to deal with
emergencies as well as.
Agreeing with the executive or
modifying or even terminating
any order that the executive
then secretary and I would echo
the
words of of my co sponsor the
the representative from Sandoval
County but this really are
particularly at this timing of
the current emergency
declaration this legislation
should have no effect on the
current pandemic I am hopeful
and remain hopeful that the this
thing will be certainly on its
last leg by the time we run
around to July of this year and
hopefully
we will have all those things
are taking care of so this
legislation well this
legislation certainly won't be
affected because of it goes
before the voters and in two
thousand twenty two if it passes
are both the house and the
Senate and is it is and on to
the ballot in two thousand
twenty two the bill if it gets
past it wouldn't in my mind be
affected either for this
pandemic it would only deal with
with the future friends M. the
only other thing I would say it
has never been my intention to
put handcuffs on the executive
order to
Keep the executive from dealing
with emergencies most
emergencies and we we see
emergencies each and every year
and executive has to deal with
those and most emergencies thank
goodness are a very short
duration and do not consume of
the tremendous
resources of the state that we
find ourselves in now and I
think it's because of this
Pandemic that we've seen the
operation and and I think it's
incumbent upon us as legislators
to reform our constitutional
duty of maybe
bring back some power into the
house and Senate that properly
resides there with that madam
chair we will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you so let's put up
the whole.
Okay.
That looks stable we have about
eight people are eighty nine
percent in support and one
person and a Levin percent in
opposition so we will now go to
public comment and if you would
like to speak in opposition of
this bill please raise your hand
and again it's under the
participants link at the bottom
of your screen.
So I am not seeing anyone in
opposition okay please raise
your hand if you would like to
speak in support of this bill.
Okay it looks like we have
Carlaw car look go ahead.
Good evening madam chair it's
actually Leri Sonntag here
representing the New Mexico
business coalition hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans our focus is to make
New Mexico a better place to do
business so that our people have
jobs and can provide for their
families.
New Mexico business coalition
strongly supports HDR Centers
because it will provide much
needed balance of powers between
the executive and legislative
branches as the Sanchez
mentioned.
The original legislation was
created after the nine one one
of tax and the legislature could
not have known that the pandemic
of this magnitude.
Could affect the world as of yet
by the legislation was necessary
and well intentioned this become
important to correct the
deficiency created of not
allowing the legislature
oversight.
On extended use of executive
authority.
H. T. R. six allows the public
to make the decision about this
important matter for a
constitutional amendment we urge
you to say yes to support HDR
set termination of emergency
declarations and.
That looks like all of the R..
The public comments so we will
go to our Representative Lord.
Thank you I'm sorry about that
have turned that back on
my only question is so I I thank
you both for bringing this bill
forward madam chair
representative I appreciate it I
I can can you hear me OK.
Okay I just.
Like
others have said I don't care if
it was a Republican or Democrat
I really believe that there
should be a balance and I don't
ever think that anybody should
be all powerful whether it's by
choice or by what our
constitution says so
I do agree with this bill
however I do wish it was sixty
days unless the government and
then.
Thirty days but that's just my
only grievance with that I just
wish it was a shorter time
period so that we can get in
there quicker I'm that's all I'm
really upset about the bill but
I felt if I didn't say something
people would think percent wrong
so thank you.
Thank you Representative our
vice chair Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives this is so
interesting in the approach to
how this goes just based on a
lot of the analysis and and
again knowing that we do have a
more sort of approach that goes
through statute which is what I
think a lot of states have done
more so in the past so I'm I'm
trying to understand why we're
why we're going to the voters
and then the second part of that
question is in any case does the
governor have to sign off on on
either piece even if it goes to
the voters madam chair
representative.
So madam chair Representative
okay with Representative driver
all take a crack at that first
because it really is the
excellent question
there are two reasons why we're
talking about a constitutional
amendment one is is that because
it doesn't go to the car
under our process constitutional
amendments are passes joint
resolutions are fine Jordy both
on both chambers and then it
goes directly on the ballot so
voters and decided and so I it
never hits the governor that's
why for example constitutional
limits can happen and thirty A.
sessions because it requires no
governor ash the other reason
that we're doing a
constitutional amendment is
because I really I mean this is
just me talking now I'm not
talking Representative Nibert is
is very important that in a
crisis like this we not be in
the position we find other
states and we're just like the
Democrats control say the
legislature and the governor's
Republic and and so you get in
this partisan fight in the
middle of the pandemic I don't
want to I really want both
chambers to have to wrestle with
having a bipartisan process
that's why the three yes that's
what's required by the way in
order for us to come back into
extraordinary session we're
calling ourselves industry that
she would have bipartisan groups
in both chambers you can't do
that in a bill.
Bill you can only try future
legislators to a majority vote
otherwise if we really like this
legislation we always put the
bill takes ninety five percent
to so you don't can't be that
you can only change the
percentage about in a
constitutional but I also think
it's just fair not to be sending
this to the governor I I just
like the idea of the motion be
weighing in and so I I hope
Madam chair representative that
passionate request.
That's really interesting chair
representative just to
understand the process and and
the approach
I I mean I'm with you I think we
should never take away
legislative power if we should
have it that's what our oath is
about is being legislators is
always providing that additional
balance and finding ways to have
given the people more of the the
voice in the matter madam chair
representative so I completely
agree with the
With the with the methodology
but in practice I am I'm also
just I wrestle with the fact of
the citizen legislature and then
the logistics of the zombie
apocalypse that comes in we all
have to stay at home and the
logistics of being being able to
understand the in the emergency
property with the couple in of
the logistics X. on what that
means for us to show up and even
in this circumstance chair
representative you think about
all the rules and the ways that
we've had to work out how to be
participate in this emergency
Madam chair representative and I
just wonder you know if it was a
grid air you know I am trying to
run through all of the possible
emergencies including the zombie
apoc.
That we could foresee it so I
just I want to
you know I'm trying to wrestle
with the the the balance of
power with the live with the
reality of of the make up of our
citizen legislature madam chair
representative and so because of
of that challenge you know.
How does this address that I
guess effectively in the way
that when we're talking about
emergency situations and
responses and the fact that the
majority of our emergency last
longer than ninety days and some
of the situations that we've
heard about with with wild fires
and other responses that is
required why do we need to get
together to know what an
emergency is and what the
response should be when we do
rely on that balance of power
the governor to make those
decisions in the best interest
of New Mexicans regardless of
party madam chair representative
so Madam chair representative I
mean you've reached three really
excellent points all of which
you are trying to wrestle with I
no Representative Nibert has
well some of these first one is
we have a citizen legislature
right and so we're really asking
these volunteers to keep coming
back so it is clearly going to
be work I there's no way around
it frankly one of the things
that I if I was going to get
involved in anything after my
time in public life is to really
start to push to have a a
legislature this rate and has
staff because I do think this
doesn't pose an additional and
chair Chasey mentioned that in
respect to the bill when we were
in state government I think
she's right and we have that
since the second test is you
know how do we do this I mean we
don't know we don't the if the
zombie apocalypse comes or
there's a shut down on me can we
somehow got ourselves together
well in fact the zombie
apocalypse came with this
pandemic and the legislature was
able to respond to that even
though the health guidelines
were we can be in the same room
together and yet at least from
my perspective well as then
perfect and while I really heat
soon and can't seem to navigate
for well it is work we've been
able to do our business and
continue to function as.
Finally no the whole notion of
can we anticipate you know all
of the crises that are going to
happen no but think about why
we're doing this one of the
things happens pandemic as
people are calling us and saying
and why has this grocery store
been shut down but not the box
stores you know we don't have
your X. we don't bring people in
so that the public can hear from
their elector representatives we
bring you know the secretary of
health and to asking questions
what's going on to the public
can really see it that's our
process to work that the public
has access to what's going on
through us.
And so right now the process is
really no no I can not ascribing
blame the governor just wage
working the governor and the
secretary of health press
counties in the process but in
terms of direct access to their
elected representatives what's
going on Representative that and
we don't have real oversight
however the executive branch
should have the flexibility to
respond to this crisis think
about how bad it would be and if
we had micro managed the
executive I wouldn't want to do
that I think that be a lousy
process and I'm glad that
Michelle Lujan Grisham is our
governor because she I mean
really she's just responded so
well to this
and kept our hospitals from
being full among other things we
don't want to get involved that
dated a stuff but it's not
unreasonable state governor you
have ninety days and then call
us in so that the public can
have some input to their elected
representatives of the local
level we can have some oversight
we can bring the secretary and
we can ask questions you know we
gather documents we can pass
legislation as needed to address
what we perceive the problems or
get rid of the course so
either way I think it's a good
balance for all of announcer for
two Representative night or to
see if he has anything to add.
Madam chair the only thing that
I would have to address the
question that was posed was and
we also have the absolute
authority of appropriating money
from the treasury to deal with
whatever more urgency arises and
you know if you read the
constitution the executive does
not have the keys to the
treasury it's solely in the
province of the legislative
branch and it's it it's
imperative and I I think even
studying of this pandemic I
believe fully that it was
imperative upon us to be a
number of times to to to do the
appropriation well there's some
argument as to whether they
executive should be able to
spam federal funds that maybe
don't go through our normal
treasury process I would dispute
that saw I think this makes it
clear we have a role to play and
we need to step up to the plate
even in bad times and and you
know when the aircraft of the
language and in the
constitution people were riding
horses up here talk about a a
tough deal riding horses and and
and some people having to ride
horses for three hundred or more
miles
and assemble so I I think
whenever we have have a margin
sees it's incumbent upon us as
the elected representatives of
the the people in our respective
districts to come together to
engage in political discourse
and be able to go back home and
discuss with our constituents.
Why things are happening the way
they're happening and and the
you know I've been asked a lot
of questions and and frankly I
haven't been able to answer
those questions and I have
simply have to refer people to
the executive branch of
government and so I think that
that it's our responsibility as
legislators to be able to
address our own constituents
with respect to the how's and
why's of what's.
Of the world.
So I hope that helps answer the
question.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so another
question just regarding the
logistics of of the emergency if
we are in session because I I I
would look I mean I'm with
Representative Ely on the
broader approach to modernizing
our legislature and that the
system the system of things
needs to improve overall and
even the amount of time that we
meet
you know to do the people's
business is just not enough and
and that that said and you know
modernizing legislature so on
and so forth.
if we are in session and there
is an emergency declared what
does happen with that is this
talk about special only special
sessions being declared but I
think we all happen to be in
session like right now what what
what how does that work given
the just the what the people are
relying on and and choosing this
approach madam chair
representative.
Well I think two things are
clear answer that question madam
chair first if we are in session
when the ninety days are
terminates.
Then that's an issue we're going
to have to address it's teed up
if the if the executive wants to
extend that then legislative
action obviously there doesn't
need to be called a special
session because we're in session
but the issue has to get teed up
for that extension
If.
The.
Legislature is in session when
the emergency first arises them
by the very definition of the
terms of our session we will not
be in session when that ninety
days are expires and we will be
forced to be called into session
if the executive feels an
extension beyond ninety days is
necessary.
Madam chair representative yeah
because it does explicitly only
call the special session so I
would just think about the at it
so that if we were in session
you would have to call a special
session I think that's the only
would challenge I think in the
way that it's worded at this
point
so that that you wouldn't
preempt yourself from having
that discussion if we were
already in discussion of madam
chair representatives
But I mean I I think I missed a
green meant with the with the
concept I just as it plays out
though with with the the
challenges of the the the
systemic challenges of our
legislative
Structure is is going to be
tough but I look forward to
continuing the conversation and
you know power to the people
hundred percent so I support
your bill thank you madam chair
representatives.
I think I have a couple
questions specifically from the
FIR so I'm of course there were
concerns from the governor's
office G. O. H. R. department of
homeland security and emergency
management that it could
restrict that executives ability
to respond promptly
let's see.
Is it talks about federal
funding for emergencies and
disaster relief that often
depends in part on the state's
declaration of an emergency and
expressed concerns that critical
funding and distribution of
resources for emergency response
may be terminated or otherwise
inhibited by automatic
termination or
Of a declared state of emergency
so how how can you be here
helping you make us feel better
that you know come ninety days
if for some reason we we
couldn't get ourselves back into
a special session you know let's
say there or we couldn't get
quorum because of what was
happening throughout the state
what would happen with with
emergency funding and things
like that from federal funding
particularly.
I'm madam chair I think we're
both a little stumped by the
question nah it's not that it's
not a good question I'm just
trying to think this through.
I can maybe address for a little
bit the madam chair.
The.
The automatic termination
provision only.
Comes into effect if the
executive decides not to call us
in the session.
It is wholly within the
executive power.
To to to have that thing
automatically terminate so if
the executive bills that the
emergency needs to be continued
and is concerned about the
federal dollars that may be
coming to the state as a result
of that emergency them it's a
executive decision to call us at
the session or not and if if if
the executive for whatever
reason decides not to call us at
the station and we lose federal
dollars that's the decision of
the executive.
The decision of the executive is
to call us and the second
M. the governor can do so and we
committee and and then we can
decide what to do and I suspect
that the as as the political
discourse
that would that we state in our
body
is pursued we're certainly not
going to take a blind eye to
federal monies that may be
available to the state of New
Mexico in dealing with whatever
emergency it is but but gives
within our province.
Legislative province to make
some of those decisions and I
would argue.
Okay decide how that money
Should be appropriated now the
governor's concerns that the you
know we we interject ourselves
into
maybe the efficiencies of
dealing with an emergency the
whole idea behind this was to
get the executive car launch for
for ninety days.
To allow the executive make all
the decisions and and if the.
Emergency goes beyond those
ninety days call us in the
session where we where yeah now
the the backstop in the beauty
of the three Phil says.
If we can't agree by a
supermajority on modifying or
terminating or restricting the
emergency order.
Urgency order remains in effect
it's going to require that
supermajority to.
Override the plans of the
executive and then thank all of
you realize that it it's hard to
get some of those super
majorities
to to do that so that's the
beauty of a constitutional
amendment portion of it madam
chair me just add what what he
said.
Thank you.
It was very helpful.
We and maybe I'm in I'm not
thinking of the zombie
apocalypse but maybe something
in New and if you if you been
paying attention and
unfortunately pandemics are
probably going to become more
frequent and now perhaps more
virulent and deadly and and I
know that just getting us into a
special session and into the
best session in terms of coming
up with ways to make it safe and
last chance of us reading very
contagious virus let's see what
you know what that.
For some reason the governor
doesn't decide until you know
until Daley seventy that that
it's going to go longer than
ninety days and for whatever
reason that you know that
there's ten percent of us have
the virus or what.
Do you see where I'm going with
this what happens if the if the
emergency is so severe that
getting into special session is
going to be dangerous or
difficult or is there any way
around that well madam chair I
can definitely speak to that
since I was rules says I am the
rules.
And it I can tell you that as we
can on just not that long ago
that we faced you know something
very similar.
pandemic there was no vaccine
at that point or at least when
we started thinking about how we
were going to conduct the
sessions I'm going back not to
the sixty day but to this the
special session and how we were
going to conductors and you know
I actually think we got through
it I'm not because of me but
because the legislature itself
we got through pretty well and
there's just no way to
anticipate kind of in every
piece of legislation
constitutional amendment.
What every situation that we can
address I mean think about how
this is developed when the
legislature passed this our
motion to declaration provision
it's not martial law
we didn't have a roll Lewis now
we've had a long term pandemic
and the problem that we're
addressing is what we've learnt.
And that is she we cut the
legislature out of the process
we need to put them back in.
And so that's what's going to
happen if this is it's kind of
like being a legislator there's
there's no substitute for
experience and as we experience
more more it'll get more more
but there's just no way to
anticipate or put in writing
need to get so bad what we do I
I I guess at that point the
legend the governor would call
us into special session could be
if we really could meet that I
would assume Legislative Council
which is the you know body that
exists outside when the
legislature's meeting would be
meeting and deciding and could
do it by zoom and could figure
out how we would do it safely
and it was that dangerous I
think that well I would hope we
get cooperation of the entire
body to do that rather than kill
people and that's what we be apt
to just really no way to
anticipate a scenario where we
really literally could not be
used by zoom credits down don't
know and we know how to address
you just this is just something
you just have to learn as we go
along.
And madam chair
You know the.
Article four section two was
last amended at the height of
the Cold War when two of the top
ten.
Nuclear
targets.
In the nation.
Were in the state of New Mexico.
And yet.
They didn't do anything to
modify the requirement for us to
be called in the special session
within seven days of the
declaration of martial law and
for us to remain in session with
only recesses of no more than
three days so you know that was
at the height of the Cold War
when you have a very significant
force based
as a major target you have one
stands missile range is a major
target and
You know yep but they have those
provisions in place and again I
agree with the representative
for that we can anticipate all
that but I think that that when
emergencies arise we as a
legislative body.
Can arise to the level of that
emergency and figure out.
You know we may not be able to
meet in Santa Fe
Santa Fe whatever reason is the
epicenter about emergency women
have to have to figure out where
the see the government's going
to temporarily be placed
so you know I think we can rise
to whatever occasions befall us
in those emergencies and we will
we will do that but if if it's
still incumbent upon us to to do
our constitutional job continue
to recognize the separation of
power and respect the duties of
the to the branch of the
government.
I think I just have one more so
wildfire season and declaring
emergencies unfortunately those
are getting longer and longer so
if a wildfire season it gets
declared and and goes longer
than ninety days when we have
to.
Be called into special session
to deal with that.
Madam chair
Eight if I don't know of any
fires even those horrific
California fires did not burn
for for over ninety days
that's quite a long time I I
think that the bad significant
buyers for a long time but
remember the chance of and it's
it's not it's not a fire season
is emergency if so this fire
give state declaration of
emergency and then if there's a
fire in another for us that gets
a declaration of emergency and
then you have a fire down on the
Hilla that gets a declaration of
emergency
it would be it would be very
unusual to see a fire
declaration of former agency
last four for three months we
I would be I'd be very surprised
if one were to occur then yes
would be called in the session
and and probably have to
appropriate funds to deal with
that the huge fire that is B.
following the state of New
Mexico and I might add of those
types of emergencies of course
do not affect the entire state
those are limited in their
aerial extent to
whatever
are counties are being affected
by the fire but the.
Now there's a lot of divergences
that the but I guess we can
ponder but fire with fire floods
would generally not when
themselves to a three month
emergency.
Okay and then actually on the
last page of the FIR it says
under H. J. R. six as drafted it
seems the governor could not
declare both a disaster
emergency and the public health
emergency or Dick clear
emergency for toxic spell at the
same time as a public health
emergency if that is not the
kind of situation intended in
the constitutional amendment
perhaps the word event could be
defined for clarity.
Madam chair the the word of man
is on page two line twenty five.
And my reading of it it's fairly
clear that that
The vent would be in your
hypothetical.
One of them would be a public
health emergency and the other
of them would be the
another example you maybe that
will be two separate events even
though that on the same day.
there's nothing in here that
prohibits the governor from
declaring multiple declarations
of emergency if they indeed
of.
Occur if you have a fire in Rio
Arriba county and a fire in
Sierra County and a fire in
Lincoln County all
you know all.
By blowing up at the same time.
That would be three separate
events and three separate
emergency.
As I was created you madam chair
and and
R. the way I would respond to
that is that what this was
really designed to do I think
does is stop a governor from the
seriously trying to get around
the ninety S. by having a state
of emergency for the pandemic
let's say waiting thirty days
say okay it's over and then
doing it again the next day
that's what we're trying to
avoid and I do think it does
that I I appreciate the comment
in the UP I are but I think I I
I think the language is
relatively clear so what we're
trying to stop as the governor
of getting around the ninety day
requirement by just simply
suspending the declaration and
reinstating it on the outside
the eighty ninth day so that's
what we're trying to do so I
think I'm comfortable with that
but I'm sure we get this
committee we will hear that
comment again Judiciary and on
the floor.
Right the FIR staff continue to
hound us.
So with that I will entertain a
motion.
Yes okay that's Representative
Pettigrew do I have a second.
Yes Representative Barreras
Allison can you please take the
role.
And madam chair a little bit of
a surprise that is that
Gabrielle taking their all this
evening thank you for letting me
join your committee members
thank thank you for helping out.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Thank you madam yes.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
In the affirmative and negative
thank you Gabby so
Representative you have a do
pass and what your next
committee thank you madam chair
thank your committee.
Okay and we will go on to our
last I was gonna say fail but
it's not really a bill is that
our last item I'll put it that
way.
And that is H. J. R. seven and
that is Representative Strickler
and Dow so they are and.
In the waiting room if they
could be promoted to panelists.
And madam chair I have
Representative Dow in as a
Palestinian not Representative
Strickler in the waiting room
okay so maybe Representative Dow
has some
they are they are together.
And I will remind you that the
house rules are you must wear a
mask if you are with another
person.
Thank you.
Okay and I think we are ready
for you to go ahead so please
proceed.
Representative down Strickler
you I believe you are muted now
thank you thank you madam chair
I do have some expert witnesses
that we needed to have notice.
Representative down to where
thank you Ashlee.
There.
The
Representative Dow and strictly
I believe all of your expert
witnesses are now in as
panelists thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair it if I'll
give a brief introduction and
mid turnover record now.
She's coordinating with the very
six point if that's okay with
you madam chair yes please go
ahead okay so resolution seven
would lead voters decide whether
to amend the New Mexico
constitution to allow public
school funding for home school I
school or public school
districts education.
We have school choice it's about
the fundamental rights for the
courage to have access to the
educational environment that
best fits their children's
Nate's.
The wide range of high quality
schools
educational options to choose
from for additional public
schools public charter schools
private schools or virtual
learning every child deserves
access to quality education it
provides the knowledge skills
and values necessary prepare for
successful careers and
fulfilling fulfilling life
unfortunately Milik many
children or residentially
assigned schools it might not
fit your unique needs and
learning styles the philosophy
of education choices a belief
that every child deserves access
to quality education
opportunities as the Legislature
we can support equitable access
to these opportunities by
supporting the ability to choose
one of our schools one more
expanding services one one more
providers and I will say I want
to pass it on to thank you down
and all of the.
Questions thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
members of the committee and I
thought Representative Strickler
budget funding and bill increase
educational opportunities for
students in New Mexico yeah it
was okay for me to sign on.
And I was
part of this the overall overall
theme since our session even our
specials last year have been
racial equality social justice.
Institutional racism and I'm
running.
Yes Representative that's what
social justice blows from human
dignity and to establish justice
our society must provide
conditions.
All people to attainment or do
you and that includes education
that prepares them to be
productive citizens education is
a basic human rights.
Secular system supports this
principle every New Mexico child
is guaranteed in education for
parents providing education
publication.
Look across education landscape
we see that some parents.
Especially from families of
color they have no choice but to
send their children to a certain
school based on the thank you
for the lead.
That is why discussion all
school twenties as defining
social justice it's in the
fighting social justice issue.
Last night in just one school
district Albuquerque public
school district voted to stay
closed is have no choice but to
keep their children in online
mode of learning which may or
not be working for older
students right now in just
Albuquerque public school
district alone sixteen thousand
students are failing.
Six.
Sixteen thousand students the
vast majority or minority color
they are at risk disabilities
joining us today.
With me we'll go ahead and turn
it over to what this bill
allows the motors of New Mexico
of which we are forty nine
thirty state
they believe that they should
have educational choices for
their students and for their
children and their families and
so we do as expert witnesses the
first one is actually only it
actually is a recipient of a for
not scholarship.
Thank you Representative Dow
okay everybody hear me.
We go ahead all right good
afternoon madam chair the
members of the committee my name
is Ashley Elliot I'm twenty two
years old and I'm originally
from Lakeland Florida first I
would like to thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to
speak to you today.
Madam chair members of the
committee today I would like to
share my story with you from the
moment I was born the odds for
stacked against me my parents
were both born.
Addicted to drugs and as a
result they lost custody of me
and I was placed into a foster
home I was very fortunate to
have a loving grandmother cry
referred to as my mom to drive
me and my siblings you seem my
mom was not expecting to be
taking care of children and her
golden years now under sixty she
was raising three kids with what
little she got from her
retirement and social security
checks she raised us with the
love of two parents but
unfortunately no amount of love
can fix the struggles of
poverty.
It got so bad that sometimes our
electricity would be turned off
or we would have very little to
eat my mother tried to keep me
on the right track but in my
eighth grade year due to my home
life lack of resources and in
school building I began to fail
by the end of my first semester
it was decided that it would be
best for me to go to an
alternative school so I could
remedy my field classes
unfortunately the school was
still not right for me it was at
the school that my behavior took
a turn for the worse I began
failing all my classes skipping
classes for feeding school
property cursing in my teachers
and getting into fights.
Most of the teachers they're
dismissed students as another
lost cause when really we were
just reacting to situations that
we couldn't control is not until
one teacher there truly tried to
help me that things started to
get better and then that teacher
told me she would be leaving the
school.
I was devastated thinking that
the only teacher who still
believed in me would be gone and
then she asked me to go with her
in my junior year of high school
I transferred to the three
percent had any with my tuition
paid by a scholarship that's our
ship was made possible because
of the scholarship program
passed by Florida lawmakers and
supported by the state similar
programs exist in more than two
dozen states across America in
Washington DC And importer Rico
at first I did not want to
attend a tree because it was a
private school and I thought it
would be full of some rich
snobby kids and teachers who
wouldn't like me but fortunately
I was wrong here every teacher
invested me and I made a lot of
friends three offered smaller
classroom sizes and more
personalized approach to
learning something which I
desperately needed in my first
year my grades went from these
apps to Aizen bees and I
participated in my first sport
track and field and graduated
with honors something nobody
would have guessed two years
earlier I am now in my senior
year at the university of
central Florida and my mom could
not be more proud of me I do not
know where I would be without
the opportunity to go to victory
but it certainly wouldn't be in
college to me having the
opportunity to choose my screen
change the directory for my life
statistics show that I should be
a high school drop out not a
college graduate to me this is a
matter of social justice every
child has the right to an
education that is right for them
including the children New
Mexico something is important as
education should not be
determined by income it was for
me I don't know where I would be
unfortunately and occasional
opportunities too often
determined by zip code rather
than what is best for each child
this perpetuates a system of
inequality and it is time that
it stopped all kids deserve a
right to an education that is
right for them whether they live
in my home state of Florida your
state of New Mexico or any place
in between thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you madam chair next we
have never seen a national
policy director for the American
federation for children.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair members of the
committee I'll keep it short
mostly because I think actually
is testimony was so moving thank
you actually for sharing your
story with us
I do want to say that as a
parent and former seventh eighth
grade teacher and now a policy
national policy director I have
come over the past fifteen years
to deeply believe in the power
of school choice to number one
impair empower parents number to
transform a school system and
number three most importantly to
give more and better educational
opportunities for particularly
low income students and students
of color
you know there are some politics
sometimes around school choice
or educational options but the
truth is that every parent wants
high quality options for their
kids whether that means of
moving to a neighborhood with a
good school whether that means
like getting in with that school
board member who can help your
kid get into that good charter
school like we all at the end of
the day just want our kids to be
in a place where they feel safe
and they feel loved and the more
options there are for parents
the more choices they have in
terms of where they can go to
school or how they can pay for
home schooling and how they can
get support with tutoring the
better it is you know across our
whole country and we really see
these results panning out in
data so in your neighboring
state for example Arizona the
nape scores the scores on the
national assessment of
educational progress continue to
creep up year after year when as
most of us know the National
neet scores are really staying
flat they've been stagnant for
at least a decade and Arizona is
really a stand out when it comes
to providing school choice of
all different kinds for students
magnet schools open enrollment
charter schools education
savings account programs and
there are a handful of other
states to like Florida and
Minnesota
sorry Wisconsin that have
continue to see you know the
whole education system grow and
thrive and really transform with
more and more you know options
different schooling options for
parents and the last thing I'll
say before wrapping up is that.
You know I think one thing that
of them one of the many things
that the pandemic has
illuminated is the ways in which
our education system is really
outdated right like when it
comes to choosing soup at a
grocery store there are fifteen
soups to choose from and to to
me are different dietary needs
in our tastes and our
preferences and all that stuff
but when it comes education
we're still we've still been
stuck in this one size fits all
model and I think the pandemic
has really shown us that
different kids need different
things different parents need
different things different
families different districts
different you know states even
need different programs to meet
the needs of of their parents
and their kids so I'm excited
about this you know legislation
are
Opposition I know it's not
legislation that's been
introduced and I I'm happy to be
here so thank you madam chair
and members of the committee for
having me all and it there.
Thank thank you madam chair and
next we have Kerr looked
wonderful and she is the
director of education
opportunity at the county center
for excellence of education.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
apologize in advance if you're
one of my three children coming
here because it's late at night
after dinner I am I'm just as we
said my name is here Kandel and
I am the director of educational
opportunity at the foundation
for excellence in education also
known as Exelon that in I should
I want to introduce myself by
way of saying before I came to
excel in that I too was both a
public school and private school
teacher and also a professor in
the school of education at
Boston University for ten years
I mean it was during my time as
a researcher and a professor
that I really came to focus on
the kinds of issues that you're
confronted today and think about
school choice and I came at it
first from the angle of trying
to understand what it is who
uses it and why it matters and
and what the data tell us and I
I went on to leave the
university and and become the
policy director for education
opportunity and excel in that
because I so fundamentally
believe that this is the way
that we provide opportunities
for all children but especially
for those who have historically
been denied opportunity in our
society so what kind of the
resolution that you have before
you today what this really does
exist in powers students and
families who have traditionally
been marginalized in our society
to take advantage of the kind of
options that many of us who are
middle or upper middle class I'm
might might just simply take for
granted right if I want to
choose a better public school I
might have the means to buy a
house in a different
neighborhood or if I'm just
dissatisfied with the options
before me I might choose to send
my child to a private school
down the street all of these
things cost money and they are
not an option for all folks and
this is why school choice is so
important so a couple others
have talked about Florida I want
to take a minute to talk about
Florida where we have the most
school choice of any state in
the nation we have education
savings accounts and home
schooling and charter schools
and tuition tax credit
scholarship all.
To say that there are no like
more children and for their
using some form of public or
private school choice than those
who aren't it's something that
families take for granted and
what we've seen in that state
highly touched upon this is that
over time what is gone from
being one of the lowest
performing states in the nation
so one of the highest on me it's
really we've seen and we've seen
achievement gaps close and so
that's one thing is educational
outcomes educational outcomes
for the students to have access
to school choice to the kinds of
programs you're considering
today are are heightened we also
see improved cognitive and non
cognitive outcomes for the
children who could participated
but choose not to in this
program so that we know that
school choice the kind that
you're considering today has a
benefit all around I'd like to
point out and has how we did
that the pandemic has really
shone a light so we're as once
we might have had just a certain
number of people who expressed
dissatisfaction mainly folks who
haven't had a choice now what we
have and I think this is both
fortunate and unfortunate is
because so many of us have been
dissatisfied with what's been
available plus for of the
pandemic those who have
traditionally had choices are
suddenly feeling like they don't
have one
this is sad in that you know
there been so many folks that
haven't had choice for so long
but it's good in the fact that
now we're seeing legislation
moved I think to date some one
of my colleagues will correct me
in fourteen states I think that
are considering legislation like
this and so there are states has
already gone through them that
are really on the cutting edge
of this the bottom line is that
I can tell you as a researcher
as an advocate as a mom that
these programs work they don't
just work for the kids to
participate they work for all
kids and they are incredibly
important to changing the
trajectory for so many in our
society and really making
education student centered and.
Families so I'll and there thank
you very much for your time
tonight.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee and
the last person is Rachel in and
she is with the institute for
justice education into the
twenty hello.
Good evening everyone madam
chair and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak before you tonight
my name is Michelle Indian and
as Representative Dow said I am
the educational choice fellow at
the institute for justice at the
institute for justice we help
legislators and policymakers
draft private educational choice
programs or propositions are
resolutions that are
constitutionally defensible and
after those programs are passed
in when they're challenged in
court we intervene on behalf of
parents and children to defend
the right of parents to pursue
the best educational option for
their child to date with
Representative parents and their
children to defend these types
of programs in over thirty state
and federal courts we've also
successfully defended three
programs at the United States
Supreme Court including the
Espinoza verses Montana
department of revenue case which
was decided in June today over
five hundred and eighty three
thousand students participate in
some type of choice program in
twenty nine states DC importer
Rico educational choice programs
like the one you are considering
are making a real difference in
the students flights and for
that reason I ask you to support
this proposition for two main
reasons first the research shows
that educational choice programs
benefit everyone the students to
participate in them the students
to stay in public schools and
taxpayers evidence
overwhelmingly demonstrates that
these programs improve academic
educational and life outcomes
for those who participate in
that.
Thirty additionally there have
been thirty four studies on the
effects of these programs on
traditional public schools the
overwhelming majority thirty to
provide these programs to have a
positive effect on public
schools well only one found no
one fact and one found a
negative back and last as of two
thousand sixteen there were
twenty eight studies on the
fiscal effects at these types of
programs I'm taxpayers and
public schools twenty five of
those found the program save the
state money the rest on the
programs were revenue neutral.
I'd like to talk briefly to the
constitutionality of educational
choice New Mexico is open to all
manners of educational choice
the state Supreme Court has had
a sea change in its
jurisprudence in recent years
despite having a plan amendment
that is construed restrictively
the court reversed course and
textbook landing K. Moses versus
risk owski holding that Trinity
Lutheran church verses of
Columbia versus Homer clarified
that the state plan amendment
could not be used to deny a
generally available public
benefit unless justified by
state interest of the highest
order the Espinoza decision I
mentioned earlier further
cements the decision and Moses
there is therefore no state
constitutional obstacle to
enacting a robust educational
choice program in New Mexico.
I do strongly believe all
parents regardless of mean
should enjoy the freedom to
choose where and how their
children are educated therefore
I ask you just like for these
programs do and twenty nine
other states the district of
Columbia importer Rico a program
in New Mexico would grant
students the ability to pursue
the education that will best
serve their academic needs I ask
you to requests these students
in New Mexico the same option
thousands of students nationwide
have and I will and then if you
have any questions I'm happy to
answer them thank you.
Just before we go to the public
and to the committee committee
questions I raised two children
in New Mexico and they all
completed their education here
in New Mexico depending on the
year where they were
academically what was going on a
moped only what what was offered
at that they were at their
academic enrichment
opportunities I chose for my
children public school private
school home school and dual
enrollment and so you know I was
able to afford private school
and that's what we needed I had
a family network that was able
to support this and home
schooling when that was what we
needed the most disadvantaged
families those of color those
minority women have those at
risk that cannot thrive in a
traditional school setting are
the ones that benefit when we
allow school choice to occur and
I will stand for questions.
Okay we will go to the audience
for a whole Gabby if I if I say
Allison I'm sorry that's just
the what I'm recommendation to
do so Gabby if you put up the
pole.
Okay it looks like gets stopped
so we have twelve people are
eighty six percent in support
and two people or fourteen
percent in opposition so we will
now go to public comment and
again participants there is a
one minute timer that you can
see I will call on you please
raise your hand if you are in
opposition we will start with
opposition first.
Okay we will start with Paul
guessing.
maybe he changed his mind we'll
go to any a New Mexico.
And please introduce yourself.
Hi madam chair I'm in favor of
this legislation I apologize is
if there's any confusion this is
Paul guessing okay why don't you
want.
Put your hand out and we'll
we'll go ahead with the
opposition and then you can come
you can come back on okay thank
you we will start with that any
a New Mexico.
Yes can you hear me yes we can
hear you okay good evening and
thank you madam chair.
We can no longer hear you you
are muted.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you now okay so
I'm gonna try to avoid touching
anything here so good evening
and thank you madam chair
members of the committee stage
Yang is government relations
director for any New Mexico on
behalf of our members from
across the state we strongly
oppose of this bill we believe
the bill is fundamentally
unsound on the grounds that it
is not aligned with the state
division of providing guaranteed
we'll put in the trash in the
trash.
Hello yes.
I'm sorry go ahead yes and if
any if I may can I can I get my
equipment reset it just yes you
can that was my fault I'm sorry
didn't mean you and I'm trying
to babysit a twenty one month
old and.
Well in my hand so put it over
thank you so we have our members
from across the state we
strongly oppose this bill we
believe the bill is
fundamentally unsound on the
grounds that it is not aligned
with the state's vision of
providing and guaranteeing the
sufficient equitable public
education to all New Mexicans
students.
It was contrary to the anti
donation clause in our state
constitution and puts into
question the fundamental
philosophy of the uniform public
education for all students.
The bill jeopardizes the ongoing
work of our state in closing the
achievement gap especially for
the students group's name the
Martinez.
The bill also raises questions
around both the U. S.
constitution state constitution
specifically around the
establishment clause and free
exercise clause of the first
amendment we have center
legislators keep their eyes on
the prize provided equitable and
insufficient public education
for all students and avoid
legislation that seeks to the
funded by placing public funds
into private hands for these
reasons we oppose this bill and
ask you to vote no thank you.
Again I apologize
I turned not to do that but how
well I'm John church.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John direction with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico I don't want to be
duplicative of any of New
Mexicos comments but we do share
the same concerns about how H.
J. R. seven would affect
equitable school funding the
potential for state dollars to
go to private schools which
could discriminate and the
practicality of this legislation
during a time when our
neighborhood public schools are
not appropriately funded we urge
you to table this measure and do
not allow it to advance out of
this committee thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you John okay now we will
go to people who are in support
who would like to give public
comment.
Okay we will go back to
podcasting go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I come to
you today both as the head of
the Rio Grande foundation public
policy research institute based
in New Mexico that advocates for
increased freedom economic and
otherwise I also come to you as
a parent of two children who
have been home schooled for the
last year because my family does
have the flexibility to give our
children a quality education
even though the schools had not
succeeded and that effort
because they've been shut down
since last March I am able to do
that my wife and I have the
means to do that we would also
be able to send their kids to a
public or private school
unfortunately the shutdown and
the lack of choice in education
in the state hurts the very
children that we're supposed to
be benefiting and helping the
most ironically the only two
oppositions to this bill are
from the unions who benefit from
a monopoly on our education
system thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have lived
Campbell.
Good evening and thank you madam
chair on a committee members my
name is live Campbell I'm in
Albuquerque you kids and a
mentor to an advocate for you
impacted by foster care my
family has used home school
public school and private school
in search of what our children
need to thrive children have
different academic and psycho
social needs and those needs can
change over time tragically New
Mexico is consistently forty
ninth and fiftieth for education
in the nation what we have done
and what we are doing is not
working.
Our tax dollars to work
according to resources that our
children need to learn and
thrive.
I have the right to make the
choices their families will our
tax dollars are intended to make
education are quickly accessible
to all children.
Support.
House joint resolution seven and
help us all make New Mexico a
great place for kids to grow up
and build futures here.
Every New Mexican child deserves
equitable educational
opportunity.
Thank you.
Okay we have Christy Jeter.
Thank you near me yes we can
hear you hi my name is Christy
GM the executive director of the
program in the south valley that
provides childcare elementary
education and home visiting
programs for students from all
incomes and all demographics we
have a very very diverse
population and families in New
Mexico need a better option for
education more importantly than
that I'm a parent and I have
students in private school it
and public schools and charter
schools I feel like parents have
a choice to put their student
where they feel like they're
going to be most benefited where
they're going to learn the best
and have the most resources and
each family should be able to
choose that for themselves
I believe that public schools
should not be the only option
obviously because right now it's
not even an option some of our
most neglected and most at risk
kids are not being served in
public school right now and they
need to places where they can
send their child to get the
appropriate programs that they
need.
Please support house resolution
seven.
Okay next week Brenda boatman.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Brenda boatman
a registered lobbyist for
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico.
Additional freedom legislation
is a high priority for HSD
people are capable of achieving
extraordinary things when they
have the freedom and the
opportunity to do so education
freedom empowers families to
make schooling choices that meet
their needs and allows parents
or guardians to help children
realize their full potential
every person has unique talents
and every family has unique
needs we appreciate the intent
behind H. R. seven and the
Sanchez efforts towards
educational freedom in New
Mexico we are reviewing this
resolution but we greatly
appreciate you for the time and
attention on this very important
issue thank you.
We have to Mellon.
Okay okay sorry sorry I'm hi my
name is Kim McMillan and I am a
former special education teacher
and I currently home school my
children I mean everyone is now
in Albuquerque but I have seen
that all the kids have different
educational needs and it's
important to address these needs
and I'm in support of this bill
because it can help our most
disadvantaged students I'm
fortunate enough to be able to
home school my kids now but I
know that each of them has their
own needs as well.
Thank you.
Thank you all thank you all we
will now go to the committee
for.
Okay Representative Pettigrew.
Thank.
First thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this bill I want to be
crystal clear I I support.
The concept of.
The school twice and and and I
don't oppose the idea of
Is that the.
Allocates funds to that.
I will say that over the last
twelve months we've shown
significant amount of weakness
in our in our public education
department and and and
A complete.
Crystal clear understanding that
our chief executive doesn't take
the advice of our public
education department as stated
very clearly and some in the
future this last year.
So.
I guess my first question to the
presenters madam chair would be
does this come what does this
money come directly out of each
individual schools if if
applied.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
madam chair and thank you
Representative paper now it is
not that we have at this bill
takes the that goes to the
voters to decide if the voters
which are minority majority in
our state so the minority
population in New Mexico the
people of color and minorities
will decide if they want to see
our land grant permanent fund
dollars and our federal and
state dollars used in equitably
applied wait to follow the
student rather than an
institution so in these however
we set up in the approach in the
enabling act would determine how
the dollars well that it would
come from the existing full of
state and federal dollars.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I'm having
a really hard time hearing you
through that mask and so
and then my speakers all the way
up so
Let me clarify so the state
gives goals are funds from the
two funds that you're talking
about the voters making the
decision to.
Allocate towards.
Any student that goes this way
so it does come from the same
pool of funds that feeds an
existing school district.
Across the state.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and Representative Pettigrew it
comes from the dollars that are
generated to benefit students
not institutions our facilities.
These dollar to benefit
students.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna keep changed my question
and.
My point and
to understanding my point not
too much.
Okay.
State school district get stand
all.
Per student.
And they have ten students
Amarinder really simple math I'm
not gonna do this above the line
below the line between wants to
discuss state school district
gets.
And I have ten students one
student decides to go somewhere
else that ten dollars go with
them the allocated somewhere
else.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Pettigrew it
would depend on how the enabling
act would be determined and
that's up to the legislative
body in the future time right
now we're putting a vote this
bill simply put the vote to the
voters to decide if they believe
that families in New Mexico who
have been attending public
schools that are performing in
the thirty eight to fifty eight
percent but brought in the
nation forty I'm sorry forty
eight to fifty the nation if
they does urban opportunity if
the voters who are low income at
risk minorities the five at the
educational twice we will come
back as a body and create an
enabling act that enabling act
could provide at funds generated
by enrollment it could be a tax
credit can be doctors that would
be determined by the body at a
future time.
Thank you for that explanation
so so what I understand then
this is if I was to vote yes on
this I'm not.
Right I Representative full for
school districts and I believe
in the mission that they have.
And I believe in the intent I
will will be crystal clear.
All of them struggled through
this last year.
Because they couldn't get the
computers they were committed
what they needed and they had to
take out of an unfunded mandate.
And it's very frustrating one of
my school districts just now
that computers.
Over two thousand computers that
they ordered last June that they
were supposed to have a bye last
August.
So.
That's not the school system's
fault.
Yes stated issues that we have
between the state of New Mexico
and the vendors and not holding
our state accountable for.
So.
If I understand I voted yes on
this today what made it all the
way through the system.
And it made it to the voters and
twenty twenty two.
That's when I would go to the
voters madam chair and and
Representative in twenty twenty
two.
Then and and and if it was
approved then it would come back
to the legislative body maybe
and that thirty day session and
twenty twenty three.
And
at that point in time the
legislative body would have to
decide on how we're going to
allocate funds for.
Is is that thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for pedigree I
can't I don't know that the
timeline would be that quick or
particular sessions but yes we
as the enabling body would
determine what what school
choice would look like New
Mexico.
Okay thank you very much chair
representative to be crystal
clear I I cannot look for
something that would take money
away from the schools that are
trying to provide to the cluster
of people and and
we're not gonna get into the
debate on the above the line
below the line and all the other
criteria and all the other stuff
is being shipped and now
so it is this point in time all
we're trying to do is sit here
and say.
Individual parents and students
the the choice and we think that
the state the the residents the
legal residents of the state of
New Mexico should have a vote on
how that don't have that stuff.
Is that correct madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative that
is correct thank you very much
madam chair thank you
representatives are you know
back.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you so much madam chair so
I was eating a pretzel request
happening all day today so.
I love the concept I absolutely
love that allowing the voters to
vote because I live in a
district that fifty fifty and
sometimes it is difficult to
make a decision on how to do
something because half of my
district feels one one half
feels the other way I think this
is absent the way it should be
handled my grandchildren a home
schooled I would love school
choice I love everything about
school choice so thank you for
bringing this bill forward and
that was a short and sweet to
the point and thank you I yield.
Eight.
I will entertain a motion madam
chair do I get to close.
I'm so I'm so sorry thank you
wait may I'm sorry yes yes well
thank you very much madam chair
and thank you members of the
committee for hearing this very
important conversation and in
this year when our over riding
theme is the end of
institutional racism we cannot
ignore the disparity and the
disadvantage that children of
color that children at risk and
minorities across our state face
based on the zip code that they
live in and the education
they're able to access access
to pass house bill for it house
bill four passes the Civil
Rights Act I think that
violations will be filed before
the each even drive on the
governor's signature and it will
be people of minority it will be
children are at risk it'll be
children that are disabled
really the first to file a civil
rights violation we can have
that off by following the lead
of other states like Illinois
there is on and the and many
many other states and yes family
especially New Mexico which is a
majority minority state the
right to decide if they would
like educational opportunities.
Thank you Representative Dow.
And again I apologize for
jumping the gun I guess were our
stomachs are starting to growl
or other body parts are speaking
to us I will say so I am open to
a motion for to pass please for
H. share some of the motion for
to pass and chairman to table.
Okay and the tabling motion
takes precedence so we we have a
table the motion by
Representative Romero and a
second by Representative but
Barreras Gabby can you please
call the roll.
Motion to table house joint
resolution seven Representative
about us yes to table.
Representative Lord.
Very sad no to table
Representative Pettigrew.
No to table and I'm like to have
an explanation.
Representative sorry vice chair
Romero.
Yes to table.
Madam chair Thompson yes to
table.
You have three in the
affirmative and two in the
negative for the table in
motion.
Okay Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair thank you
bye I just want to say that I
find it very discouraging that
as a legislative body we're
we're willing to let.
the residents of you of New
Mexico make decisions I think
that's highly unfortunate thank
you.
Okay so with that completes our
agenda for this evening we will
not be meeting Saturday we did
get some some new referrals I
believe today so we will we will
be back on Tuesday I'm not sure
what time because I don't think
the floor sessions I.
I can't remember what the
speaker said about floor session
sessions next week so just kind
of keep track of the agendas
that I will make announcements
when we have floor session so
madam chair side chair record I
think you've pretty much he said
eleven to three every day thank
you I was thinking that so that
we will we will take about a
five minute break after the
floor and and it will we will
take ten minutes so that's what
