Representative Hernandez here
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Stapleton.
Thank you see Representative
stable tensions having audio
issues Representative Terrazas.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Mr chairman Alcon Representative
Danielle we have a warm Sir
relations of we are first of the
engine the house Senate bill two
seventy two is amended the
hostages here Sir whenever
you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I'm here to talk about
Senate bill two seventy two
amended military family relief
school enrollment there about a
hundred and eighty five thousand
military children change schools
annually due to a permanent
change of station move the
challenger transferring records
say differences in education and
graduation requirements
enrollment barriers and sports
electives in extracurricular
activities can be daunting.
If your child is on individual
education program you add
another layer of concern.
The department of defense
working with the national center
for interstate compacts
establish the interstate compact
on educational opportunities for
military children in two
thousand eight.
This covers common policies for
records transfer enrollment
placement and graduation
requirements these reforms were
great but still we families to
deal with issues once they've
arrived at a new duty station.
The DOT has been working with
states to make the task of
transferring to a new school
easier by giving military
parents a temporary waiver to
residents requirement.
This will enable them to pre
enroll their children in the
school district before they
arrive at the PCS destination
this initiative is called
advanced enrollment.
And it's now policy and nineteen
states is currently going to the
Vermont legislature and so we
have a chance to to be the
twenty of the twenty first St.
So what is the best enrollment.
Infants enrollment lets your
child register in a new school
district at the same time as the
general student population which
is generally at the end of the
previous school year military
children moving to a
participating state will no
longer have to prove physical
residence within the school
district boundaries before the
rules.
The benefits of this is they
have the opportunity to to
participate and random lotteries
for charter and magnet schools
they have the chance to enroll
in specialized academic programs
the opportunity to begin
coordinating IEP and five oh one
five oh four plan requirements
they have the ability to
register for courses and plan
their course of study and they
also have the comfort of knowing
which school they will attend
before arriving at a new
location.
So how does this process work.
First.
The military parent will supply
the documentation and that
documentation is usually gonna
be their military orders of
their pending military location
to the state.
The second part of the process
is once they arrive in the state
they will need to have a proof
of residency providing provided
to the school district within
the required number of days
after rival to a new location.
This bill will allow forty five
days to do that you know taking
into consideration some folks
might arrive at a basically in
some type of temporary billeting
for a little while and we just
want to give enough time for the
parents to do that.
So.
This is some important
legislation here in our state
and I realize that some school
districts already do this
especially those that are near
military bases but it's
important that we take care of
our members of our National
Guard or reserves we even have
some active duty members that
are super remote locations here
in the state or who are military
recruiters that are not near
military installations and we
must make sure that we take care
of you know our military kids
that come to the state.
With that being said that's the
end of my presentation Mr chair
committee members I'm ready for
any public comment or any
questions thank you.
Okay senator do you have any
info in the system here we have
the food inside the two wanted
to bring in our.
I do not.
Okay awesome at this time what
I'll do is I will go to the
audience and I will ask for
public comment
The the the.
Representative Stapleton.
Is the attendees.
It's just her phone.
I guess audio issues so it's
she is on to find.
Okay we can't promote phone
attendees so we've just given up
Representative Stapleton ability
to talk but it doesn't actually
just promote somebody who called
in okay.
Okay at this like I said before
I will go to the user to the
attendees and see there's
anybody who wants to comment for
against ability do you raise
your hand I will call on you to
give you approximately a minute
to speak up a and I see I have
one hand raised heather
McDaniel.
I'm I apologize my name is Sarah
fitz Gerald and senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
it chambers in strong support of
this bill and we think Senator
poke bringing it.
Currently with military families
move to a new area other
children may have to just and
roll and whatever courses are
still available and I can leave
in the classes that may not suit
their credit needs or their
elected interests other times
they Mr charters lottery and if
I have to resign themselves to
wait list or another option
that's still in rolling this
bill creates a more supportive
and welcoming environment for
military families as we move to
the area we are to the committee
to cross this bill through its
very last committee to help
boost our children's success
through a challenging transition
to a new thank you.
Thank you I don't have anybody
else last chance raise your
hand.
All right I will go to the
committee.
And to relax with your hand
raised.
Representative four years.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm so Senator I just have what
I think this is a great all
I am.
I mean support just had one
question so if what would a
military member use for proof of
residency if.
They moved to to the station and
they actually reside in base
housing what would there be a
document that they would have to
prove residency.
Mr chair representative black
The the documentation on the
residency when they arrive would
be similar to what we do now you
know showing up a utility bill
cable bill or some type of
documentation like that would be
good enough.
Okay thank you for that I'm that
was the only question I had
thanks for your thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator this is a great bill and
as many of you know I grew up in
a military family my dad was the
life are for thirty three years
and we traveled all over the
place and one of my mother's
biggest
Concerns Mr chair was about
school and what that was gonna
look like how she was going to
have a choice in the US and all
of the all of the items that you
described in the bill were major
concerns and this was way back
then so can you imagine all the
progress we've been making and
then the progress that we can
make with this bill so I just
wanted to say thank you so very
much for
Taking into consideration our
military families I I know that
the heart and soul
of your representation for all
of them all of us and now in the
Senate and and as a legislature
or and I just want to say thank
you this is a extremely
beneficial bill and I'm glad
that we're gonna be
what's that I forgot how many
states were already in line.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
we would either be the twentieth
of the twenty first I believe
it's still in the Vermont
legislature thank you hello I we
seem to be the twentieth and
twenty first on a lot of bills
this the session including the
community solar and a bunch of
other bills that have been on
going back and forth but anyway
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator I just wanted
to commend you and say thank you
on behalf of all of our military
Benham Sam Reese thank you thank
you.
Anybody else.
What is the will of the
committee.
And I move in the past and that.
I have a proper motion on and do
that Senate bill two seventy two
is amended and I have a proper
second.
I just want to comment Senator
thankful that you brought this
bill forward like I said before
it's an improvement on my house
bill fourteen of a thousand
eleven.
So with that the madam secretary
want to call the roll yes Sir
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black.
Yes Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Stapleton.
Yes.
Representative Terrazas.
Yes.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Yes.
Mr chair Alcon.
corn yes.
Nine in the affirmative Sir.
Okay with infirmity with Senator
onto the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members thank you Sir
what we want to belong to Senate
Bill.
Senator Munoz and.
Background.
Moving over Senator Meneses
expert witness.
And I'm looking for Senator.
Sir we don't have Senator my
nose right now would you like me
to promote as Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Do that.
Yes Sir
are you ready.
Your muted Senator.
Thank thank you
thank you I apologize for the
mess Comanche sitting in the
lounge and because we're
debating a pretty important bill
So I'm.
We've just a pleasure to be here
this bill is basically about
educators having a voice in
overseeing their pension and how
it's invested and what that does
is it increases pension
Confidence in the pension plan
it also enhances communication
between the board members and
the people who are invested in
these pension plans tension
plans I have an ex I have a an
expert in your to experts I'm
John chair and I also have
Melanie Meyers who is
Action plan
administered a ministration
expert.
and so I will turn it over now
to ms Myers but for comments on
this that this bill with this
bill does I'm sorry I didn't
even mention that what this bill
does is it adds to members to
the to the E. R. B. more board.
And
The members would be one that is
elected by the FG and the other
one is someone who would be
appointed by the H. U. D. what
will either the HUD secretary
him or herself or somebody
appointed by them who has
financial experience in is a
resident of New Mexico.
With that I'll turn it over to
my experts militant fire.
Mr chairman and distinguished
members of the committee my name
is Melanie Meyers I work for the
American federation of teachers
as associate director of
research and I work with a team
members who service pension fund
trustees overseeing their
retirement systems these funds
include large funds like at the
California state teachers
retirement system the New York
state teachers retirement system
as well as many small and medium
sized education and public
employee pension funds across
the country.
Funds include prison and
trustees as Senator Sedillo
Lopez mentioned because having
them participate in board
deliberations and decisions
creates legitimacy retired and
active members have confidence
that their pension is in good
hands when they of the people
like them who also participate
in the system are represented on
the board and can act as a
liaison to facilitate better
communication.
We ask our pensioners to trust
the system and this legislation
allows them to trust but also to
verify those participate
trustees bring pension boards
both legitimacy and an important
form of diversity existing
research on pension board
governance supports the changes
proposed in this bill while some
legislators in prior hearings
had concerns that adding members
may make the fund less effective
governance experts actually
recommend that pension boards
contains six to ten members
that's a size that allows for
adequate stakeholder
representation while still being
able to function efficiently.
Educational retirement board to
nine members but also bring it
closer to the public pension
fund industry standard that
association of state retirement
administrators reported in
twenty nineteen that nine member
boards for actually most common
among state public pension
funds.
Adversity earlier adding two
seats to the E. R. B. will also
encourage a more diverse
representation of your points
business leaders and public
pension funds alike are
affirming a growing consensus
that board diversity actually
enhances board performance and
oversight which leads to
improved outcomes most of this
research is actually focused on
corporate board diversity but
the same principles apply to our
pension funds.
The center for retirement
research at Boston College did a
recent study on pension fund
governance structures actually
found that strong governance
correlates with better pension
fund financial performance I'm
into the queue governance
structures they studied were
henshin Fund board size and
board composition specifically
the share of plan participate
representation both of which
this bill addresses while some
may argue that retirement board
decisions should really just be
left in the hands of financial
experts the research actually
does not backed up experts
recommend that stakeholders
account for twenty to seventy
percent of board members the
average plan participant
representation on public pension
funds is fifty four percent
currently in the ERP
participants account for forty
three percent and this bill
would increase that share to
forty four percent which is
slightly closer to the average
well adding important
professional diversity and both
the participants and activist
Yossi.
I wanted to talk for diversity
for a moment it's well
documented that corporate board
diversity correlates with
improved performance making.
A little bit I think it would
help sure I'm almost yeah I'm
almost finished I just wanted to
share a little bit about how the
investment industry is looking
at this because that relates to
our pension funds as well the
national business roundtable
states that America's business
leaders are increasing emphasis
and commitment supporting
diversity in the boardroom and
there's the Harvard Business
Review also found that
demographic and professional
diversity are important for
increasing the diversity of
perspectives and of the long
term performance of our pension
funds.
So just to summarize expanding
the RB to nine members increases
its diverse city and participant
representation is supported by
research is consistent with
these governance practices
importantly allow allows plan
participants to not only trust
their pension system but also
verify that is working for them
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Senator are you ready to go to
the audience for a.
Yes I am thank you thank you
this discussion I have some
people in the attendee list that
I want to speak if you don't
raise your hand of you the
approximately a minute to speak
up.
I don't see any has raised so I
guess we're in good shape.
Thank you I will go back to the.
To the committee
Committee members anybody have a
question on this is a
legislation.
If not no I have a motion.
Just.
You madam chair.
Yeah.
This merger
Thank you and good when.
less than E. R. B. as is in
attendance as an attending.
I wanted to see if she would
entertain a question.
What the ERP thinks of this bill
is a mild chair.
Should should I promote her Sir.
The issue of racial and and
would wish to answer if she
doesn't want answered and okay
now go ahead and go ahead and
let her speak.
Okay.
Do you just go Mr is good when
your question.
Why one.
Yes members of the committee
this is Jan Goodwin on the
executive director of the
educational retirement board.
Our board had its first meeting
on February nineteenth after the
introduction of Senate bill
three oh three.
And at the February nineteenth
board meeting the board voted
took a vote on this bill the
board voted to take no position
on this bill but instead we
requested the study be done to
look at the membership of the E.
year the board the board is not
opposed per se to changing the
board composition well let's do
this in the studied deliberate
way to ensure that there is the
appropriate diversity of
membership and representation of
members on the board.
More and so what the way that
this would happen is that here
be what higher a governance
expert there are many
consultants to work in this area
and they that person would look
at that here are B. yes it is
currently constituents
constituted and I come up with
recommendations to make changes
if any to that make up and then
that would be so that would be
legislation for you to consider
next year in the twenty twenty
to legislative session.
Thank you Mr chair she answered
the question.
Okay thank you.
Okay.
Thank you so.
This
is.
The chairman I make a motion for
a bill passed.
Okay I have a proper motion on a
proper check in on Senate bill
three oh three
I don't have any other
discussion
madam secretary call the roll.
Yes Sir Representative bash yes
Representative black.
Now.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez no.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton.
Yes Representative Terrazas.
No.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Yes.
Mr chairman Alcon yes we have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative for you Sir
thank you.
Okay Senator on the floor and we
simply bills would be a one here
in.
Follow money that to.
The Senate side thank.
Members of the committee.
Thank you I will go to a what we
really need for a.
The senator Munoz a round.
So Sir I believe that.
Representative Stapleton is
going to.
Present this bill is that
correct Representative
Stapleton.
Madam leader are you ready to
present the.
Senate Bill.
Ninety.
You are muted ma'am.
Representative stable.
Yes I'm madam secretary Mr
chairman I
have asked me to present the
bill but I do not have the bill
with me.
And we do have a both expert
witnesses for Senator.
This bill Elian.
In in with.
Did.
Now when.
Mr chairman and I have the bill
will fall would fall
presentation with the expert
witnesses.
Do hear what we.
Representative stable.
What I'll do is really envision
did tonight will be a back up if
you need it okay.
I need your back up now.
Okay I'll go ahead and get
started on a pretty amazing the
members of the committee.
You are here home committees to
for Senate bill ninety.
Is a.
And we don't do provided
database for a.
Members of the.
Regular
scheduled tour of duty.
for a members of the fire
departments and fire department
personnel.
And the.
Bill before you got it all
the way into the house floor
last year and
They were made to the governor's
desk.
Well I will now turn it over to.
Okay.
In addition we has faced.
Mr DN and then we also have
Robert Sanchez who is an expert
witness.
Your internet or wants to go
ahead and explain the bill more
than I can.
So so Mister chairman thank you
very much if it's okay Vitali it
does that I appreciate it.
Mr chairman members the
committee you're actually
correct this is the the second
attempt at legislation for this
what you ran out of time at last
year's session with us Senate
finance committee substitute FOR
SB ninety does is it allows our
regular scheduled work hours to
be accepted by para all right
now we only most fire
departments are all fire
departments across the state are
able to only accept eighty four
to ninety two percent of their
base annual wages
the committee substitute SB
ninety correct this unfair
situation it's a very unique
bill it is not a pension spiking
Bill it does not allow
firefighters to receive anything
more than the base annual salary
so right now to give you an
example if their base annual
salary is forty thousand dollars
a year Hera is only able to
accept thirty four thousand
dollars a year.
By the change of Senate bill
ninety eight would allow those
forty thousand dollars to be
reported to pair up if they work
a bunch of overtime which we've
had a lot of people out sick
with a very situations due to
the pandemic and they work a lot
of overtime to make eighty
thousand dollars a year but
their base salaries forty
thousand her will only accept
forty thousand dollars as their
based annual salary so what it
does is put us in line with all
the other power plants are out
there you State General planter
please plans it puts it in line
is we're able to report a
hundred percent.
SB ninety is a fairness bill it
is not a pension spiking Bill it
does not and will not allow
anybody to report more than
their annual salaries Mr
chairman members this committee
thank you for your time on this
and I'll stand for any questions
that you may have.
Sir Sir I just received an email
from Senator minuses assistant
and he should be joining us
shortly.
For senator Munoz LOC name lock
in after the bills being passed.
Receive the.
Representative Stapleton job.
So at this stage Representative
do is to that's okay with the
other one of the attendees and
see if there's anybody there
wants to comment on this bill
for or against I will be in the.
You should and
There J. so we'll start with the
Robert.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning thank you
for hearing me and I dont also
like to thank all of you for the
job that you do for the state my
name is Robert not long ago I'm
retired firefighter and Akkerman
currently chairman of the New
Mexico fire protection grant
council I served thirty seven
years as a volunteer firefighter
in a P. firefighter of the
twenty years of paid firefighter
I was not the recipient of the
P. R. A. contributions that I
probably should have received so
that left hundreds of hours
where I was on duty are beyond
the the traditional forty hour
work week that I was not
I stay appropriately compensated
but I was not compensated for
the actual hours that I was was
working
I support Senate bill ninety
eight believe it's the right
thing to do for working
firefighters and if there's any
clarification that needs to be
made I personally nor any of the
retirees that are my
Associates are are not a budget
or will not benefit from this
bill but going forward I do
believe it is the right thing to
do thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee.
John.
Thank you.
Members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO we
represent Wirth New Mexicans
throughout the state and we
stand in strong support of this
bill thank the sponsor who are
you there Senator Munoz or art
wonderful temporary Sanchez well
and the leader Williams
Stapleton for bringing this to
the attention of the committee
this as was stated in the
introduction this is the bill
about fairness and putting
firefighters are quite honestly
our heroes especially during
this pandemic on equal footing
with other public employees and
just making sure that all of
their our regular time counts
towards their retirement just
being fair with everyone else
so for that reason and others
stated we again standing very
strong support thank you.
Councillor Joe and a helicopter.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Joanne
to help popular I am a city
councillor for the City of Santa
Fe and we follow this bill last
year all the way to the end and
we're very much in support of it
down and the city council passed
a resolution we are very much
and for in favor of this today
and we hope we ask for your of
passage today I would like to
say that in addition to what the
other yes a fires have said that
the the other thing to consider
is when we if we don't fix this
particular problem with this P.
E. R. a bill of this results in
a compounding effect not only is
do firefighters not get their
their regular hours of total
regular hours of difference
reported to P. R. eight but when
that's done and they retired it
compound so the losses even it
continues and so it is it is a
fairness issue we at the City of
Santa Fe see it as a matter of
equity because we are treating
our firefighters differently
between administration and shift
work and so of the yet they both
make the same salary and so one
gets a bit better PR right
benefit by working regular hours
and the other shift workers get
less and so we would really like
to correct this inequity and we
appreciate the support that you
can give this bill thank you.
The new Justin state in the.
Mr chairman committee members my
name's Justin Cheney and the
president the Albuquerque area
firefighters represent
approximately nine hundred
firefighters we up for all the
reasons stated by the previous
speakers we stand in strong
support of the committee
substitute for SB ninety we ask
you to do the same thank you.
To heal.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members Gregory you on the
interim director for a New
Mexico public employees
retirement association of the
board does support the committee
substitute I do want to mention
that there is a cost to this
bill but the committee
substitute does address that
cost and we stand in full
support and available for any
other questions Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay that's the last of the last
of my hand so we'll go to the
committee.
The.
Sir and and senator Munoz is on
now.
Many office on thank you
senator Munoz know that when
done all the hard work you
honest add something to this.
Yes.
Okay is not on the wrong side.
So I understand when we read are
you ready to
One of the committee.
Your muted Senator.
Hold on one second.
The speaker going on the Senate
floor near my office I'm sorry
Mr chairman what did you say are
you ready to go to the committee
for questions yes Sir we are
thank you.
Okay and I have vice chair
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator my only beef I have with
you today is that the as your
vice chairman I pod I would love
to present your bill for you in
this although our leader was
ready and are chair was ready so
I just wanted to say we're and
in complete support
I think this is a long time
coming we've been unfolding this
bill for several years now and
the timing is right and I want
to commend our firefighters for
taking us a step forward in
moving the committee substitute
and as always they're putting in
extra time and extra effort and
extra money into all that they
do and they are truly are
frontline essential I don't even
want to call essential they're
just are frontline on everything
on out west of what so I just
wanted to step up and say that
in and the Senator thank you for
bringing it forward thank you Mr
chair.
You are muted Sir.
Thank you Representative up I'm
glad I have a lot of friends in
the house that want to carry a
bill so that means that I'm good
all the way through I have that
many friends.
Representative representative on
this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Munoz for reading this
bill what a great bill I move
for it to pass.
A second.
I just wanted to address that do
I guess the Senator the it the
FIR and I know this is going to
come of says that there's going
to be in the median cost of so
much.
When.
In saying that most of the
people that are sitting here
promoting this bill I'm probably
not even going to benefit from
it it's going to be for the
future more than anything else.
What you want.
How this work from here on out.
Thank.
Yes yes Sir Mr chairman members
the committee thank you for the
question and it absolutely it
does move forward but in the
fire service we believe it's a
calling it's it's truly a
brothers or sisters that we're
looking forward for the future
we're not gonna see immediate
impact so if I were to retire
tomorrow I'm not going to see
this benefit the way that her
rules are written based off of
that year but your one or two or
two it's going to require at
least thirty six months before
we'll be able to see the full
benefit to petition so because
of that we do look toward our
brothers our sisters for the
future and just like our our
brother a retired brother he was
unforeseen not able to benefit
from this bill but he's a full
support because he understands
the value of that so that is
correct Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you.
Okay with that I have the proper
motion for Representative
Hernandez and due to did we get
a second yes Representative bash
okay so in that case is a good
day would you call the roll
please yes Sir Representative
bash yes Representative black
yes yes Representative Garcia
yes Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Terrazas.
Yes ma'am.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Mr chairman Alcon yes we have
nine in the affirmative they're
on the negative where do passed.
Thank you.
Your memory appreciate your time
I'm sure were willing to I'll
give you a ride on the shiny
fire trucks okay and don't
to take care will are built on
the other side okay be as nice
as we are.
Senator were always nice in the
Senate we're just a more
thoughtful.
Thank you.
Over the members of the
committee I believe we're done
for the day.
stay tuned for what happens next
week.
So far so good we haven't I
haven't seen anything come up so
we're not gonna break.
So.
