Madam vice chair.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Madam chair we have reached a
quorum.
Great thank you good morning
again everyone we are going to
start with Senate bill two
thirty and Representative Lopez
excuse me Senator Lopez is in
the attendance if you would
raise your hand and also if
there are any experts that are
allowed to speak with you
Senator if we could have them.
Raise your hands.
Good morning.
Good morning.
I'm still working my **** with
me.
I started.
And Rikki Santa is your expert
Serna.
Yes it is I think you should be
here with us this morning right
okay.
And Senator Pinto.
And I believe Senator Pinto.
And may possibly Senator pope
also okay.
Great so go head and began we've
from.
Right over.
If you folks.
Okay I appreciate it I see Mr
stern NEC Senator until good and
also Representative but the sec
I at a time and so a great.
All right okay hello welcome and
again good morning and happy
Saint Patrick's day to everybody
wearing the traditional green
right.
Chair members of the committee
I come in front of you is Senate
bill two thirty and madam chair
this is this is not our first go
through go around with this
legislation this bill has been
introduced to for almost a
decade.
over and over you can go back
and look through the history and
see
on on what the intent of this
bill is and madam chair members
of the committee in fact last
year during our special session
we almost got there but a curse
because of an amendment that was
placed in here the house the
Senate had already adjourned and
we weren't able to of course
deal with that you know of
accepting the amendment etcetera
so here we are again.
essentially madam chair members
of the committee with this bill
is proposing should have passed
of course be signed by the
governor.
Is that state agencies state
governments through our state
personnel office will begin the
process of essentially providing
anti racism training.
cultural sensitivity and am
biased training.
This is something that is as you
know madam chair and it's an
issue that exists has existed
for so many many many years.
I crap in my estimation madam
chair it's many centuries of of
what we have dealt with in many
different facets of life.
And this madam chair again is
talking about what institutional
racism is and the roots of it
madam chair of institutional
racism are hidden in every many
many different parts of our
society so you can find these
routes and create our criminal
justice system our social
systems you know the economic
political systems are schools
banks media the movie industry
music industry housing industry
public and private employment I
mean Madam chair this this list
is great.
you and says she has a
definition does say of what
institutional racism as it's
here and we know that we see it
also within our purview that we
have with state government.
And I know that over the years
we've introduced legislation to
see how we can focus
specifically on how
This legislation that we've
introduced and how it affects
our communities and communities
of color here within our state.
Madam chair there isn't there is
an incident a few years back
where there were some training
happening in southern New Mexico
with regards to teen pregnancy
prevention and I was notified by
by one of the persons who is an
organization that was providing
the training and it was
disturbing food for southern New
Mexico a person that is
Department of Health had stopped
the training that was taking
place near sent that that just a
and as we know is that that that
just many of the families their
their mother tongue is in
Spanish.
The train was stopped because a
department of health employee.
Had told the persons that were
instructing you're providing the
information that the language
had to be in English.
And yet the majority of those
persons present.
Spoke Spanish the families
understood that as their mother
tongue.
And I have still have the email
that was sent out
and and for me madam chair that
that's just part of what we have
within the system that has to
change we have to recognize the
work with our communities of
color and making sure that we
have the proper outreach that
we're we're doing what we're
supposed to do it recognizing
our cultures that we have in our
state.
And I have would just one more
madam chair before I I give the
floor to make my co sponsors is
that we did amend the bill this
year and of course I know Mr Sir
now help to also right the
amendment that's and which is a
little bit different from last
year in that we are entered in
and the amendment that deals
with cultural sensitivity.
It of course with my co sponsor
Senator Pinto she also has
introduced a bill this session
the still sits in a particular
committee in the in the Senate
but we did use some of her
language and cultural
sensitivity and bias training so
that is what the new addition
but I've again works of course
with that the executive branch
and I know that many my co
sponsor senator Pinto convention
and say some are worse about
that too so that madam chair
that's my intro for today.
Thank you Senator Pinto.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Thank you for your your bill
and.
The bill I have introduced kind
of incorporated and much was and
the response to what happened
during this past year we talked
about the violence and what we
signed.
In the on the media.
And I I don't think we could
have waited too much longer to
do something about it the
specially on the state side so
it's much more it was more
Addressing what we could do from
the state as far as state
employees and employees and
producing training in that sense
to all our in state employees
and what I see about it is that
it did it should decrease
liability in that sense of that
direction we're trying to go and
even with when we have a lot of
mobility right now with what's
happening with COVID that even
the employees that are coming to
work for the state of New Mexico
that they be introduced to the
cultural aspects of our state
that are.
You know many of the cultural
aspects but just even touching
on it would be a very good
initiative for our our state
employees to corporate but even
on that aspect too it's not to
create a barrier but for us to
consider in every sense even for
me when I'm in the.
In a.
Attendance of people that don't
understand Navajo that I do make
sure that the you know I tried
not to speak Navajo even though
I'm not that could do it but
really consider that audience in
that said to be sensitive to it
and be empathetic to it of fire.
Was in attendance so that we
don't create exclusion that we
do create inclusion and I know
the Mr chair and and even
secretary Trujillo we're very
supportive of that bill and
seeing that we could expand on
it and take it even further
which is very encouraging when
we talk about what happened this
this past year so thank you
madam chair and thank you
members of the committee.
Yeah stand for questions or
whatever comes back status thank
you.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero do you want to add
anything thank you madam chair
and thank you Senators yes madam
chair and members of the
committee I would just briefly
say that if anyone should
exemplify.
the anti racism institutional
model is government we need to
be the example of understanding
why differences exist amongst
people.
the histories behind them.
Madam chair and we have to
understand the structures that
contributed.
To racism and institutionalized
racism.
Because this is part of reaching
that understanding and being
able to on our differences and
not trying to
undue histories or diminish the
importance of our histories and
how are histories have actually
contributed to making this
country better and I think what
has happened historically madam
chair is that we've ignored the
importance of cultural
differences and the importance
of language differences and how
in late and we've tried to
standardize everything and make
English only attempts and do
other kinds of things that all
contribute to why we have
racist
practices and so madam chair
members of the committee this is
an important part of our
overall.
Education.
In our attempt to I don't think
it's necessarily all about
inclusion that inclusion
honoring those differences and
maintaining those differences as
being principal and all that we
do so madam chair and and
members of the committee I
wholeheartedly have supported
this built throughout the years
and stood strong with the
senator and we hope that this is
our our here thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you so we will began with
a poll of the folks in the
audience if you would like to
raise your hand in support or in
opposition to Senate bill two
thirty we'll keep that open for
ten more seconds.
Okay great we have this six in
support and zero.
Opposition so if you would like
to speak and support please
raise your hand.
Christopher merece you are and
made it.
Good morning madam chair in the
morning committee my name is
Christopher I mean it's I'm the
executive director of together
for brothers calling from
Albuquerque want to well then
one of the things that we do in
working with young men of color
in Albuquerque is understanding
that we see health equity and
the roots of in the in the
problems of health equity as
being based in institutional
racism we really support the the
co sponsors for bringing this
bill to light because when we
see the issues that affect young
men of color and their families
here in New Mexico we see that
addressing institutional racism
will overall benefit the health
of not only in men of color and
their families but also all of
the communities in New Mexico so
support state agencies and
others that are funded by the
state being able to address
institutional racism and to be
able to again make New Mexicans
healthier thank you.
Thank you Alexandria Taylor you
are muted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor I'm the deputy
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs and I've also had the
privilege of serving as the
chair of the governor's Advisory
Council on racial justice we
stand in strong support and
thank Senator Lopez Senator
Pinto and Senate and
representative for about how to
get a for bringing this
important bill we have seen
comments made right here in this
body this session that are
racially charged and this week
as we remember Brianna Taylor
and we grieve the targeted
attacks against Asian and
Pacific islanders in Atlanta
just yesterday we recognize that
we must get to the root of
addressing racism in our society
anti racism training is just to
start to addressing the harmful
and life threatening effects of
white supremacy and does
representative for about how to
get stated the government should
lead and model what this means
for.
Thank you Chris at the necklace
to deliver your and maybe.
Good morning chair members of
the committee and sponsors of
this bill I as a white woman
know that I have privilege I is
a white woman know that I need
to be trained we need to do what
you say because others don't
realize that the problem comes
from themselves is this bill
will bring awareness which is
very important the peaceful.
Equitable trance transition.
To a better world I thought and
asked where do pass.
Thank you for bringing this
forward.
Thank you Tim Davis you are
underrated.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center on Law already we support
this bill.
Great thank you and Mister
Serna.
Morning good morning members of
the committee madam chair happy
St Patrick's day my name is Rick
concern on the acting director
for the state personal office
and.
Here to express full support on
behalf of the executive for this
bill it does it doesn't only
acknowledge that race that
institutional racism this but
even those who don't believe
that it knowledge is the need
for state government to be very
intentional and pressing
Policy artist Representative
with the racial divide and the
state personnel office again
going back to the timeline and
the the history of this bill and
this legislation has already
been working on on on the
development of our program and
curriculum that we really will
address key concepts such as
racial equity instructor leases
on adding to that the context of
New Mexico cultural heritage
we're excited about the
opportunity we're were
additionally excited that at the
bill calls for policy
development to just to ensure
that the training doesn't become
a checkbox Committee for state
employees rather we can really
start with these practices
culture all that we do.
Posting positions develop the
position descriptions.
Recruitment interviewing and of
course how we allow for state
employees to progress you know
where property the government we
we look forward to the
implementation of this of this
bill thank you.
Thank you and no one raised
their hands and opposition but
if you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay committee members.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and senator I had a
couple questions how many state
employees do we have I see that
they need one FTP and I'm
thinking you're gonna need more
than that.
And madam chair if I could ask
Mr stern.
Up to about thank you madam
chair representative the state
of the state of New Mexico
employees now about seventeen
thousand state employees and at
its peak can can reach twenty
five thousand and your point is
well taken about capacity to do
this one of the wonderful things
that we've been spearheading of
the state personnel office is
the organization of a group
called trainer tonight which is
a collaboration of all training
professionals across state
government and all state
agencies what we're moving
towards is a partnership that
creates consistency in state
government training right and
provides for consists in the
platform that we use to deliver
those training which is right
now a module within our share
system that not only provides
that learning management system
but also the tools to capture
when employees complete training
and thank you this into and they
need to be take those training
what's good about that is we can
satisfy the responsibilities of
the bill but also start making
connections between agencies to
complete certain trainings and
and their performance outcomes
relative to anything from greed
and says to successful
performance outcomes how we
could try those trains interim
leadership race and yes races
federal so our plan will be to
develop a program to cross train
other trainers at state agencies
across the state of New Mexico
and use that data to get the.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair and Mr chair of the state
employees what percentage of
them are if you will wipe only.
Great question thank you madam
chair representative let me let
me pull up that data I know that
I know that we provided I
apologize for being on my back
foot there let me up let me just
pull it up and then a I can
share that with you.
So currently Madam chair
representative we're looking for
classified employees we have
thirty percent to identify as
white.
We have fifty eight percent that
identify as Hispanic and those
are the two largest groups
after that would be of course
American Indian and then black
at two percent Asian at one and
then about four percent but
don't I get a.
Okay it is.
Madam chair and senator the
other thing is right in looking
at the analysis
It brings up a question if this
would violate the Human Rights
Act with that.
And maybe Mr sermon needs to
comment I don't know who would
be the best on that.
you Mr Sarna.
Madam chair of Representative I
don't I don't see how that would
be an issue.
Madam chair and
Senator if.
Only.
If if we look at the two big box
that you're talking about that
white only is thirty percent and
Hispanics are fifty eight
percent.
Which group.
in the state government is
racist.
Mr Chairman I mean Madam chair
excuse me Senate Representative
Rehm.
Racism.
Crosses all lines.
It's not just whites it's not
just Hispanics it's not just any
of the other demographics that
Mr Sarna.
shared with us this morning we
talk about anti institutional
racism which is what this bill
is about primarily madam chair
it's against the institution.
When you look is to within our
state government and there's
certain departments you can look
in within currently are
Environment Department if you
look at the population that is
in their of employees of the
majority of those persons in
that department R. white.
You don't have many of the
diversity that we have here
within the state that are within
that particular department.
if you look within the that make
up of our state management
system and I'm not talking
management of computers looking
as to how what we have
demographically within our
system.
You have what I call and an
arbitrary line of where you have
those who are state employees
who are representative of the
diversity of our state did you
get to a certain point in our
government.
Madam chair where there seems to
be a lack of movement through
the system to allow persons of
color again the diversity of our
state of New Mexico where
there's no representation.
You madam chair I mean I'll be
glad to bring over to you or
share with you some of the
information that that we have
done some research on over the
years.
appointments that are made madam
chair with regards to by the
governor's.
Making sure that those are also
representative of the diversity
of our state and I've been chair
Senate rules committee for
almost twenty years madam chair
Senator Representative excuse me
and and sometimes there's a lack
of diversity with even those
appointments I'm so what this
also Madam chair representative
is is hopefully will do is that
it opens our eyes within state
government as to how we promotes
how we work with how we
encourage for the diversity of
our state to be moving up the
ladder those that are making the
important decisions for all of
our communities and madam chair
there we we do have a lot of
work to do because it's not
representative of our diversity
here in New Mexico.
Okay that first can I respond to
Representative.
and madam chair members of the
committee.
One of the things with it it's
not really trying to target a
specific group is trying to
model and said yes instigate
that modeling of state agencies
state leadership that we should
be leading the way and be a
little more proactive in that
sense.
Addressing this what happened
saying you know we do
incorporate this into our
personnel throughout the state
and not really trying to target
a specific entity or say we
really do have a problem with
that we can say we we're
addressing it right now
especially to our constituents
especially where we have control
as a state and the state
legislature that's what we're
saying state agencies thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you madam chair bed you
know I.
I think all the state agencies
that you know I've interacted
with you know for my
constituents many of the heads
that I've been sent to would be
minorities and I think that I
don't have a criticism you know
they've been very responsive to
me and of my constituents.
I'm like you I I wanna see
whoever's the best qualified
would be advance but anyway
thank you madam chair that's all
my questions.
Thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
Madam chair and senator
Couple are concerns.
Yes it looks like from the title
of this bill that that sections
maybe Representative there is.
Institutional racism among our
state agencies.
It is that your impression.
Madam chair
Representative I apologize but I
was having some technical
difficulties this morning with
my band with could you please
restate your question sorry.
Yes based on the title and some
of the language in the bill.
it appears to me that there is
an assumption that there is
institutional racism among our
agencies as am I reading that
correctly.
Madam chair representative
institutional racism exists.
It's here it's within a
structure that we have a
government and what this bill is
attempting to do of course is to
make sure that it's an awareness
that we have in state government
with our state agencies to be
aware of it
that the systems that we have I
mean Madam chair representative
as I mentioned even within our
banking system our schools I
mean all of our systems have
been set up and the way it and
it may not be intentional Madam
chair representative but the way
that the system has and works.
we want to make sure that we
bring awareness to those who are
employees of the state and also
other states you introduce to
make sure that they are aware
that what we do and how we set
up structures for hiring how we
set up structures for promotion
making sure that we're aware of
what we do to promote making
sure that we our eyes are open
for recognizes diversity that we
have within our state.
And madam chair if I may
Representative you know there
are four areas with regard so we
talk about the solution of what
racism looks like.
You know we have that the in the
what we're talking about here
within this bill the institution
the institution of government
but then you also have after
that you have the systemic which
is the societal perspective of
racism and then you go to the
interpersonal as to how we
relate into and with each other
amongst people in any of the
internalized racism so those are
the debt merry many different
facets that we have we talk
about racism but what this bill
Madam chair representative is
looking at the institution.
Making sure that we are
committed to working with our
communities that we are
representative of in our state
agencies for hiring making sure
that we are is that we reflect
the state of New Mexico.
I'm and madam chair I I will
leave and see if I my co sponsor
of would also like to say a few
words thank you.
Eight.
As Adam chair members of the
committee.
It is HM.
Different thing to you know I
don't want to state that we
don't.
I don't want to say we don't
have a problem but we do see
that there is a trend going on
right now in that sense and.
We need to be a bit proactive in
that manner to do something and
say we are doing something about
it and not just being naive to
some of these things to happen
and even being a native American
it even occurs with in that
round to get with native
Americans against native
Americans it is not something
that really goes along the lines
of skin color but that we have
to I think it is our obligation
in that sense in the position we
are in and being a state with
our state employees and state
agencies that we create a
employment atmosphere that kind
of.
I'm not saying we're gonna limit
made it but that we can let them
know that this is not something
we want to tolerate that it
needs and especially when we
talk about mobility within the
US does that come in in that
sense to it's some people do
actually come here and have
never met them their native
American
in that sense
and they're very in it is very
you know happy to to meet see
that we are here but that there
are certain sensitivities with
that culture within our state
that we need to and that our
employees those that we employee
of the state that have to be
aware of so that we're not.
Creating this atmosphere that
becomes conflictive R. negative
that we wanted to say that you
know we get someone that's
really qualified to be here I
hope they can stay here I think
Mexico is a very good place to
be and so that this is one of
those bills that I think will
let them know you know come here
we're addressing it this is
something that we don't want to
become a systemic problem thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
the thank you madam chair and
thank you senator I would I
would agree with your statement
that you know government and
certainly government agencies
should not tolerate
Racism with within their.
Agents say insert weight I think
it's a duty of government.
To treat.
All the all all our citizens
equally and and the same
regardless of how you have a.
Appear out what color their hair
is are or anything else that at
the we ought to be treating
people are the same at and so I
am.
A little concerned because what
we're saying that this
institutional racism exist and
so I I will I want to find out.
The institutional racism exists
within the agency as to its
hiring practices or are you
saying that the institutional
racism is how the HSD is dealing
with.
People outside of the agency
that they come in contact with
members of the public.
I'm Madam chair representative
all the above.
So.
Our hiring practices let what
thanks for that.
We have state agencies your
mention one is this a allegation
leveled across the board that
that all of our state agencies
are
referring.
One raised in their hiring
practices over another and
they're not considering our
qualifications or is it limited
to.
The environment department as
you mentioned orders orders from
other departments.
Madam chair I know Mr certain I
would like to answer
Mr certain if you would please.
Sure thank you and and Madam
chair representative and I
appreciate the discussion and
the questions are very fair and
I can.
But as having having been a
manager for a very long time and
we give you a simple example of
how sometimes these things
emerge unintentionally.
Yes in the lot of it comes down
to just practice right it's not
an intentional practice but
let's take for example a hiring
committee that's going to
interview Madam.
And that hiring committee is
diverse in race in the city
right they they represent
various groups of people what if
that hiring committees all
female.
Right and and they're going to
interview applicants who are
males and and those mails are
going to wonder if their
responses right are going to be
appropriate for the committee.
And take the alternative right
if you have a hiring committee
of three males although they may
be diverse in their composition
by gender ought and if they're
going to interview females for
job
is is there outlook on those
applicants going to be the same
if they didn't split that
committee up with emails so
those are some of the things
that become practice that that
because we were on right in so
many ways don't appear to be
been presented by yes Sir in in
how we do what we do you're
absolutely right the idea is in
school rule the idea that state
government is going to hire
people that are best qualified
that best fit the job is key to
doing good work but when we
arrive at a point where we can
identify that that rural somehow
is not yielding workforce that
is representative of the
communities that we serve been
the need to buy policy begin
conversations with our community
leaders with our post secondary
institutions with our school
districts about what kind of
path rates we need to put in
place to ensure that what ever
it is that they're lacking in
terms of skill games skill sets
closing the gap internship
programs an externship
opportunities but we start to
invest in those resources
because your question about
whether this is an inward facing
or not we're facing issue how do
we best serve the people who
need hello it's by providing
qualified individuals who
understand what it is they go
through every single day the
hardships and what they need in
terms of skills and resources
overcome goats are chipped so I
think it's a little bit of both
if if we can represent the
communities we serve with highly
qualified individuals we can do
a better job of serving New
Mexico and when our best fit and
most qualified practices don't
yield that represent a.
HM it's incumbent upon us to
reach down into the other
institutions and identify with
where we can create happy that
get.
All
chair and yes Mr Sarna
Those are laudable goals
creating pathways but let's
let's take the example that was
given the Environment Department
I don't I don't know who are.
What type of education the
environment department
the requires of its employees
but it would appear to me that
that.
That type of our work that type
of role
may be more attractive to to
certain people and I suspect
Representative.
I suspect that the agency.
When it goes out to your
amendment or wherever to hire.
People are.
They're looking for certain
skill sets.
I I don't know what skill sets
are are necessary there but but
I'm wondering if if we're trying
to find problems where they
don't exist I mean it it it
could only be possible that that
the environment department.
Choirs.
Certainly curriculum and for
whatever reason.
There.
Pool of applicants that have
those that are are.
Individuals are have that
training
I just happened to fit a
particular skill set
and come from a specific race if
you will and it has nothing to
do with institutional racism the
reflection may reflect institute
institutional racism and that
the demographics don't pan out
what maybe we would lie.
But the pool of applicants is
different M. I can't the.
One example that I would have
today it involves gender
operates but.
Fifty seventy years ago there
were very few women that went to
law school and so long will the
practice of law was works at the
law firm for predominantly men
if not exclusively more.
More recently.
The last.
Twenty years there's actually
more females in law school but
males.
And the so the reflection of the
law for my man.
Has changed over over time
because the pool of applicants.
The people that we go out and
hire.
most years right now we're
hiring exclusively females
because those are the applicants
that are coming to us it has
nothing to do with with with.
Any biases or any intentional
our our effort
We're just trying to find people
to to fill jobs that we have
available at right now there are
by a factor of probably three to
one more women than men who are
willing to come to Roswell New
Mexico to practice law and.
It it it has a I shifted
dramatically over over the years
and and so I'm wondering if if
we really dig down and look at
the environment department as to
why it's.
Our our user terms Weitzel
boards white white.
I'm wondering if if we find that
it's not institutional racism
but it's simply a result of.
The pool of people that that
have.
That particular academic
background or whatever I agree
with you Mr Sarna that we ought
to be a part of this study is to
look and see how to create
outwards them them that that's a
worthy goal and show
students with diverse
backgrounds but there's
opportunities in this sector and
here's how you pursue those
opportunities but at the end of
the day.
Every organization whether it's
Environment Department.
Administration department
our corrections department
Or in private industry you deal
with the the pool of applicants
that that present themselves and
if your if your really want take
race out your question.
We should be looking at that
stuff at all and and we ought to
just hire the best people but.
Sometimes I think that this idea
that we have to have.
Our.
Diversity in them it's been
settled the panel but that you
know the the outcome has to
reflect the diversity in New
Mexico well that in and of
itself I think it's very simple
because all of a sudden you're
trying to achieve our goal.
By forcing the hiring of certain
individuals based specifically
on rates not qualifications
rates so that your reflection.
Makes the proper reflection to
to to society
so.
I'm really
I don't mind study and I don't
mind taking a look at this stuff
but I I am.
I am concerned that.
We're really not.
Looking at.
Inherent racism in the agency
itself.
We are trying to
Trying to accomplish so some
some results that that the that
I think in and of themselves
maybe maybe maybe you.
Races start.
My experience with state
agencies and by area.
Is that the state agencies do a
wonderful job treating people.
The court R. I have constituents
that run the gamut of.
Different backgrounds and
whenever our.
I get a call
And try to work with state
agencies may have always treated
our my constituents basically
the.
The site sometimes we don't get
the results we want the.
They're treated with dignity
they are treated with respect
that they try to address their
questions or and so I don't see
it from that angle I don't know
the internal workings of the
agency to to to make similar
statements with respect to their
hiring practices are what have
you but I can tell you that
Senator also when I go see a
state agency.
I see.
Early diverse workforce if not
the our.
Probably over the fifty eight
percent Hispanic workforce in
many of the agency's of Roswell
New Mexico and
so I I think the agencies have
done a pretty good job of.
Opening our and the urging
people from all backgrounds to
to apply to become members of
their their team and and to do
the work and I really hope that
at the end of the day we we we
as a state focus on on people's
qualifications and abilities and
and not based on
what their last name then or
what.
Color they're they're scandens
or what color their eyes are
what color their hair roots how
many yes to say or any anything
else you know we we need to
treat everyone
With where.
Dignity we need to treat
everyone the same World War all
people and we all bring
different to thanks to the table
and we need to respect that the.
I'm I'm concerned about the bill
because I'm wondering if some of
those are.
Actually causes more.
Racism and solves the problem
and
I.
I think girls some aspects of
those are good I think some
aspects are are.
Download the wrong road I guess
my last question.
You madam chair and and senator.
If.
If what you're you're saying is
true this is been going on for
for forever what.
Why has it not gotten better
what why is it still a problem
today
I I mean fifty eight percent of
state agencies are are of
Hispanic background.
Thirty percent white two percent
black one percent Asians I
didn't get the bank of America
or the identified percentages
but
you all.
It looks to me like.
we're not in New Mexico were
not.
Our.
Creating barriers to state
opportunities that exist it
looks to me like.
Of the the breakdown
It is not.
Too much just similar to the
state population as a whole so
any comment in that regard then
I'll be quiet.
Madam chair representative the.
We talk about the breakdown in
in the demographics for state
employees I think what would be
more interesting also is to look
as to whom of those are in
management positions.
That is where we make decisions
about how
Know how policies are
implemented what happens within
our local communities from our
state government right with our
different departments CYFD you
know Human Services Department
all of these other departments
that we have within state
government yes we may have the
majority of our state employees
are people of color right the
deck Representative reflecting
the diversity of our state what
would be I think good is for
also to look as to who is in the
management
you know so we have the workers
and then you have bureau chiefs
you have division directors I
mean yeah within the structure
that we have within government
and that's what the intent also
is to make sure that we have
pathways so that those who are
the workers who have the
experience within the
communities are also able to
move up into management and at
some point B. at that division
director position
and and you can look at this
over time we might reflect it
wonderfully at one point one
snapshot that we get you want to
make sure and this is for me and
saying that we want to make sure
that we have that continuity so
that there is a pathway for one
of our native American brothers
and sisters to be able to move
up the ladder and that's part of
what is an HR function Madam
chair representative that's what
we have to be aware of and
cognisant of and and it's it's
reflective I can talk about what
happens here in Bernalillo
county yes they do do do the
outreach of representation but
when you go actually go back and
look within the structure within
our state government how
reflective is are those middle
management and higher and
management systems while with
those reflective that to Madam
chair representative helps with
I would say with the sensitivity
and reflection of what we have
in our state.
So there maybe snapshots in time
that it may have looked
wonderful but we have to make
sure there's a continuity and
Madam chair representative
that's what I'm hoping that this
if the bill passes and is signed
working with CPO and others you
know within our HR system
especially making sure that
that's reflective it's it's a
system but it's institution and
the institution that we're
working with in in state
government.
and again madam chair it's in
all the other institutions that
you know that we do have argue
over to within government.
Representative are we.
Madam chairman and senator
if you if you look at the
management.
Is it we racist policies that
are getting that result or is it
some other factor senator maybe.
Education.
The degrees the
I suspected management that they
require more academic pursuits
Job that so maybe further down
the line so to speak our.
Are there other factors other
than racist policies within the
institution that are.
Because the that difference in
who makes up the management who
makes up the work force.
M. maybe that's what you're
study wants to do but there are
all right.
I think that that.
The particularly in New Mexico
that the.
Which we we same to
Do a better job here and so it
bothers me that we're saying our
state government and our state
agencies.
Institutional racism and our.
Our.
Treating people differently
yeah and that they're hiring
people based on.
Right so well or or whatever at
and and that's difficult for for
for me to believe there and yet
so.
It it's somewhat disconcerting.
Right.
You guys know me but you don't
know by what my wife would have
a lot more to say about this the
band I would.
Yes she is our.
last name was Salazar so in a
war that so more here there but
it's.
It does.
There's a lot to look at your
and I hope if we if we open the
hood and look at state agencies
I hope we're looking at the
total picture and I hope at the
end of the day we are.
Mr service doing his job well.
And that were you don't have
racist policies that are causing
us to hire only people from this
race over for that racial but
that we're treating all people
we're saying that we're looking
at what does apercent bring to
the table.
What what skill set does
apercent bring that up that
allows them to do that job
better than the other after
cents for that job.
And I hope
I hope for the sake of our state
our nation that that we
We get this.
Issue tackled and I thank you
for your for more to survive as
a society.
We have to get
Get this under our belt we can't
keep perpetuating are racist
attitudes.
We just can't it's it's so.
Doesn't bode well for society
that people going in different
directions.
Obviously the path thank you
madam chair thank you senator.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members Johnson.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I am moving to pass.
Thank you we have a depressed
motion bye bye sure Johnson and
I'll second that we still have
further discussion
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Senator.
I believe in my heart.
This is a very sensitive subject
and sometimes.
we see there are the racism
brought up in places that.
A lot of different people have
different opinions for where was
racism or not qualifications
come up.
In the discussion which I think
is a real good topic.
To talk about.
In in my.
Upbringing.
In education.
It was always about how hard you
work.
And.
How you carry yourself.
And and that involves so much
and respecting other people.
there there's so many issues
across.
The board and when we talk about
institutional racism.
I could see none of us wanted.
And I can see where.
Maybe it is an issue.
But but there's so many factors
that play into it and seems
like.
We can overstep our boundaries.
I'm I'm all in the.
Well in that chart I guess I
would say.
I think it's a very fine line we
should walk.
And look at real careful.
It's a.
I think in today's world we
understand what we're talking
about here about this bill.
And and as we move forward.
I think we can over do that.
That part of the.
Of our understanding with each
other's and are with each other
in our cultures.
And I find this bill a bill
that's that's very hard.
The.
The vote on one way or the
other.
Because I and and in my heart I
believe that we ought to remain
neutral the racism.
Because that way we don't make
it racism.
Just kind of.
Oxymoron it's it's it's hard.
The.
Call it racism are not.
All our cultures are different.
And and we all think different
because of that as far as our
cultures and our raising.
And.
I just I don't really have a
question I just want to throw
that out there I didn't feel
like I could just sit back and
listen to the.
The debate and and not put
something out there that about
how I feel and and how.
A bill like this affects
somebody like me that just puts
out the hard work and and I
don't I'm.
I don't look at racism as much
as some other people do it and I
think that might be the
difference.
And then and wherever but this
bill fourth.
And in those are my comments and
thank you for me let me make a
madam chair and I yield my.
Representative Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair and
I I have the
a few comments to make.
I am.
I believe that the pandemic has
exposed a lot of that do.
Device in our society and I
think the race racism is one of
them I really want to thank all
the sponsors for this spell it
seems like it's finally getting
to a point where it may make it
through and will begin this work
but.
When I realized after.
What we just what we live the
last year and then with the.
Murder of George Floyd and the
protests in the streets I I
realize that
Person of privilege my job is to
listen.
Now I'm not going to be telling
anybody what to do I just want
to make some observations by all
Representative night was talking
about women and a lot it made me
think Senator o'connor was a
family friend of ours because
her husband was in my
grandfather's law firm in
Phoenix.
But when she graduate from law
school shooter has been where
the state law school class and
she couldn't get a job as a
lawyer they wanted her to be a
clerk.
So I mean there there are those
absolutely Representative Nibert
is right about that.
I babysat for her sense when I
was in high school.
But when we were talking about
qualifications I certainly hope
everyone here has seen the movie
hidden figures because why did
that bring it home where we saw
the most qualified women of
color actually saving the space
program literally I mean this
John Landgraf recognized the
talent and and we could rely on
in that case I think the stem
programs we have are aimed at
trying to get the bill more
level than it has been.
But
I I read the autobiography of
Sonia sort of my R. and there
was a story in it and a
statement she made that just
gave me chills he was telling
about when she was in she was.
covered not not hard instead and
yell and she was interviewing
for a summer internship when she
was in law school and the the
gentleman interviewing her was
from a Wall Street firm he kind
of
Eight you know he he intimated
that the reason she was there at
about law school because she
systemic.
And
she pushed back on that.
And in fact they that particular
lot for wasn't allowed to
interview anymore and account
number which she where she went
to law school Princeton L. but
until they they change their
practices but she had never
heard of affirmative action
that's what she said.
The effect was for her is that
it got her to the start of a
race but she did not know was
being run.
That's just astonishing.
I I was a history major and the
chair of this committee and I
have shared some books because
we like
The research experts and she
gave me a book and I haven't
finished it but it's called
there there by Tommy orange is a
young native writer.
And.
In the first chapter I almost
couldn't complete it because.
It's a novel but he hi this
true.
Historical events of what the
white settlers did to various
Indian tribes.
There were literally massacres
and that is not recorded in
history I ever read.
With regard to the hiring and
Cultural sensitivity I was
I was the.
And chief administrative officer
small business and did the
hiring and I remember when we
hired we would have a set of
questions everybody got asked
the same questions that we try
to treat people fairly.
We ended up hiring this young
woman to be kind of the
receptionist and and Jack of all
trades in front of the office
and I thought her name was Laura
and we interviewed her she
didn't correct us.
After she was hired and she felt
more comfortable she told us
that she pronounces her name
Lara.
And I I I wonder if I could have
made her feel comfortable enough
at the interview that she would
have told us that what she
preferred to be called.
As I say I I have.
We've already brought up the
Sanchez it brought up the the
deck the hundreds of years of
banking practices and lending
practices and the red lines in
and out I I as I said I'm ready
to listen and I I'm totally open
to supporting misspelled and I
look forward to the results and
I hope people can communicate
better as a result thank you.
Thank you Representative and
before we go to the vote to I
just I I'm glad Representative
Chasey had a chance to talk and
and I want to also thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
I I know that
there are some individuals that
perhaps don't feel comfortable
working in certain departments
because of.
Them being marginalized and I
think having the agency on board
to be able to participate and do
exactly what your bill is trying
to do will help relieve some of
that because I know that there
are instances where people are
educated they're qualified
they're experienced and they're
ready to go but they don't feel
comfortable.
Because of the situations like
that so so I just want to thank
you for that and bringing this
bill and with that we can call
the roll please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Yes.
Representative night part.
No man's.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am and I'd like to explain
my vote.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative.
Great and Representative Rehm to
explain your vote.
Madam chair when we look at this
and we look at the percentage of
employees that we've pointed out
I don't really see quite the
problem that that has been
described in for that reason
I and obviously none of us
support racism so but that's why
I voted don't thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
The Senators and Representative
with that you have a
do past basics in the
affirmative and three in the
negative thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
excuse me Senator Pinto you're
also on the agenda for Senate
Joint Memorial to what you
please go ahead and stay in
present that what we have you on
thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee Senate
Joint Memorial to request the
federal government to base
federal payments in lieu of
taxes to local governments or
non taxable federal lands within
the boundaries of those
jurisdictions on a full property
tax equivalency basis as
committed to at this section of
the program and at the end of
the year last year the P. I. L.
T. was actually proved to be
fully funded but with our local
governments it can create a
budget issue when it is
fluctuating so this is just
trying to stabilize that and
make sure we can maximize the
revenues are what comes into our
state especially with the amount
of the lands that we have that
fall under the P. I. L. T. and
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
stand for questions great thank
you so we'll open up a poll for
Senate Joint Memorial too if you
would like to raise your hand in
support or in opposition you're
allowed to do so now.
And we'll keep it open for five
seconds longer.
Okay we have to in favor and
zero again.
If you would like to speak in
public comment in favor of
Senate Joint Memorial to please
raise your hand.
Joyous person you are muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person I am the deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
I'm as Representative brought
forth this is a very important
revenue stream for New Mexico's
local governments when the
federal government owns the land
they are averaging about two
dollars an acre and bill
payments and we feel that this
really isn't a justifiable
amount is quite arbitrary we
certainly welcome the sponsor
bringing this forward as a need
and hope that this type of a
study could hold the federal
government more accountable for
paying appropriate revenue to
support roads public services
law enforcement acts that are us
with that we think the sponsor.
Right thank you is there anyone
that would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing none committee
members representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Hi.
It's certainly recognize the
need for.
The federal government in the
western States to
make payments and lower taxes
because the federal lands that
exist within our states are.
Often times a majority of the
lands within the states that we
did not receive any of all.
Warm taxes on those plans and so
this memorial request that the
we'd be paid for property tax
equivalency basis I would just
simply have that's probably
highly unlikely to occur
at because there's a real
struggle with the bills.
the eastern states don't.
Don't receive.
Very much I think it's very
negligible our payment and lower
tax payments
some states don't receive any.
Western states of the
predominant beneficiaries of
that program.
And
I know that we start has gone to
Washington to to directly
discuss this issue with with
several departments and and
specifically the department of
interior
which we we now have a a person
there that might know a little
bit about New Mexico so are we
used to have that but the.
I support the Senate Joint
Memorial R. I just.
Want to make sure that we're not
doing something that that.
It's too much focus on it
because are you the eastern
states see too much focus that
we may get some push back so
it's kind of I line that we walk
are wanting adequate payments
for for payment what tax taxes
but at the same time we don't
want to let the.
Populous states realize that
there are a lot of money is
being sent to the large lab
populated western states are for
this program so
I appreciate the memorial I just
Where we're cautioned that we
don't want to focus too much
attention on it or else the.
but folks might go the other way
it may be.
Because less payments I I might
add that
the last.
Number of years we we are
finally
Last ten years I think the baby
joy is partially cobbled comment
on this better than I but
for a long time we were not
getting our full allotment of
bill payments and they finally
my understanding is a member
years ago that finally started
fully funding the bill paid out
that get up to the full property
tax where once a basis but if
fully funded the program which
have been Babbitt and probably
decades before that so I
appreciate the Senator for
bringing us all supported.
But I would just caution
everybody don't don't to shine
too much light on it we may get
some backlash from the eastern
states thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair and senator.
Can you explain to me.
Is there are other sources of
revenue that these federal lands
bring.
That kind of make up for the
taxes.
Is that clear do you know what
I'm asking.
Revenues well this the two
payments are one of the
main streams for the state of
New Mexico because of the
percentage of public lands well
not just public lands but all
the lands that fall under the
film payment so it is a pretty
highly regarded leveraging.
Monies that a lot of our
counties use depending on where
you're counties located in that
sense and one of the reasons
we're trying to put this farted
stat in technology in the sense
of time and it has been an
upward battle to have this fully
funded which is kind of a state
political issue in that sense
but also there's other
With technology to we're hoping
that they'll cooperate that to
bring us up to a level that's
more in real time as far as
other revenue streams it it
varies depending on the county
you are and you know you're G.
R. T. can very especially during
this time the district I
represent you know we also had
the federal monies that came
into the Navajo Nation in which
they distributed to some of the
members so I think that will
help our particular to county
San Juan McKinley County because
I don't think the much more
people are going to hold on to
that money they're going to
spend it so that can also be a
contributor to those counties as
far as a revenue stream and I'm
hoping that we are not going to
be in this
negative have so much negative
impact in my area even though we
do have a lot of the a lot of
things that could happen during
the COVID as far as the money
closing even the refinery and
many many economic factors that
came into our county so the
there's a lot that enrolled in
that Representative and thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
And madam chair and senator
thank you for answering that and
and I believe there is
other benefits other than the
taxes of the federal lands how
we use and and how they benefit
New Mexico which I think is a
big plus but I I will support
your bill.
Looking forward to see where it
goes from here and how.
How are how it takes effect
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Senator.
Thank you representative
Representative Ortez.
Would you pass the Senate Joint
Memorial to second we have a day
pass by Representative Ortez and
a second by Representative Eli
is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
past motion.
Okay seeing and hearing line you
have a do pass Senator on Senate
Joint Memorial to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee have a
great day great thank you.
And and we're gonna go next I
think Senate bill three forty
five should be fast
Representative Gonzalez.
Excuse me Senator.
Sorry Senator welcome.
Okay good morning good morning
okay good morning and good
morning to the members of the
committee up madam chair with
cell Senate bill three forty
five yes and then the.
All basically what this does is
that and and this is this does
not apply to the legislative per
diem.
Please.
Under current law this is not
being the you know this is so
not being addressed since two
thousand three.
And right now you know it just
doesn't align you know with the
cost of what it costs to travel
per diem and mileage and.
And with that Madam chair of
home.
You know by doing this you know
this spring so the part also but
address this we're doing virtual
which before we never happened
some of under are pretty in part
and just bring it in alignment
with you know what it should be
so what with that I do have a
expert witness our cabinet
secretary miss Debbie Romero and
we do have an amendment madam
chair.
Okay great I'm Mr mail due would
you like to say something are
you here for technical
assistance just this madam chair
members the committee thank you
very much just something really
briefly I think this is the
result of a memorial that was
passed in two thousand nineteen
forty F. A. was tasked with
convening a task force to study
pretty I'm and so the bill is
actually a result of that the
task force that that was
required by are requests by the
legislature and so just you know
rates have not changed since two
thousand and three and and
because our second statute we
can't change them and so this
will just be able this will
provide us the flexibility to
change them rules will be basing
that on the J. state rates that
the federal government uses that
that that's it madam chair.
I'm great thank you I'm Senator
will your amendment change
public comment.
madam chair of I don't believe
so but you know like I can have
all secretary medical through
the amendment very quick okay
let's go ahead and move the
amendment for discussions.
Were you explain the amendment
please.
Thank you so much.
Madam.
We've heard is that and it makes
sense we we got some feedback
from count from counties
municipalities that setting the
rates in July doesn't help them
with their budgets and so we've
grouped amendment moved it up to
may first the rates will be set
may first so that they can build
those breaks into their budgets
that are due in June and then it
also will help with the state
agencies in setting their rates
to help those and their budget
they will be impacted the next
fiscal year so it was just
basically to try to align the
date more closely with when
budgets are due for having to
miss out.
Great thank you so we will now
go to public comment and also.
In the poll if you would like to
raise your hand in support or in
favor of Senate bill three forty
five.
We will keep it open for another
five seconds.
Okay we have one in favor and
zero opposed so Joe deliver
Representative center you are
unmuted.
Thank you madam chair this is Jo
Daley Ross I work in the office
of the secretary at a New Mexico
D. O. T. are we support this
bill we want to thank Senator
Gonzales for regained it
forward and we believe it will
help address the situation we
presently have were some of our
employees to pay to travel and
do their job out of their
pockets because the secretary
Romero noted the price of the
party and has not been rates and
is not kept up with the cost of
us staying in hotels and eating
when you're traveling for work
so thank you we support.
Thank you Lansing Adams you are
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the thank you for providing
me with the opportunity to speak
my name is Lansing Adams of the
tourism development director
with New Mexico tourism
department I'm representing
secretary Shriram Department and
stating our strong support
Senate bill three forty five New
Mexico is not an increase the
state per diem since two
thousand three is been discussed
since that time New Mexico's
average hotel rate has increased
by fifty one percent.
This market increases up and
reflected in New Mexico's
government per diem right
because the state because the
statute includes a flat rate.
This bill next national best
practices an alliance with the
federal model for determining
per diem rates it allows for per
diem rates to be set annually
based on available data putting
room rates typical male rates
and rate incidentals.
Lastly we believe that this
legislation will serve to
support the needed economic
recovery for the tourism
industry for the reasons stated
above.
New Mexico tourism department
stands in support of Senate bill
three forty.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay we are moving to committee
members now on the amendment
committee members discussion.
Nibert no Representative Rehm.
Now okay I'm.
We get a motion to adopt the
amendment madam chair I move
that we adopt the amendment to
Senate bill three forty five
great we have a motion to adopt
the amendment by representative
Nibert and a second by
Representative Rehm is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Okay seeing none we've adopted
that amendment.
And now on to discussion of the
bill Representative Rehm thank
you madam chair and
My older house buddy the smell
of Senator I I I just had a
question and I want to see if
maybe I am missing this but
let's assume that I work in
Santa Fe I'm going to in a two
and a meeting in Los crucis so I
deprived Los crucis stay
overnight the next day it's up
for our meeting wait I repeat
this is I get paid a full day
for driving down there staying
the night but on the since it's
only a for a four hour meeting I
only get four hours of per diem
and I'm driving back in my
reading that incorrectly.
Madam chair representative right
let me do refer to all secretary
Romero.
So madam chair and
representative green that flat
rate applies to boards and
commission members not to
necessarily to state or local or
county employees so that that
rate as is for fourteen
commission members
for state employees with that
something that we're going to
look at is so we what we're
gonna have to evaluate all of it
and and and make determinations
on travel currently there's
restrictions there is there's a
requirement that they have to
there's seven miles that they
have to travel before they're
eligible those are all the
things that will be considered
as we move forward with a new
right up but again they're going
to be based on what GSA does and
their best practices also we
anticipate that it
that's all gonna be taken into
consideration.
Okay.
Red is madam chair and and.
Debbie it appears that what
you're going to do is to that by
rule
madam chair and
Senator the other thing I see on
page one is attendance can be
virtual and.
Thank you for that.
All right the as you may
remember R. Legislative Council.
buses summer that if you do that
it no longer is considered by
the IRS as per diem it's
considered income.
Just a just so that you guys
remember that anyway thank you
madam chair that's all I have.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I thought
the representative from
Bernalillo is been asked my
question when we almost got
there but one
Madam chair and senator
Yes if someone can attend the
meeting while setting up their
Taos in front of their computer
why should they get per diem at
all even though it's at the
reduced rate.
Go ahead.
So madam chair Representative
Nibert.
Again the per diem the flat rate
per diem it's for boards and
commission members that data we
will have that flat rate for
employees that travel that is
definitely something that will
be considered we I agree with
you it doesn't make sense why
the state employee or a public
employee would receive per diem
if they're actually in their
office that they wouldn't in my
opinion so.
It I think we're talking to
different things we're talking
about boards and commission
members the rates were said the
statute we're just in those
rates and then we have the
public employee that travel that
will be based on the GSA right
so those would be more flexible.
So madam chair and senator and
Debbie.
Thank you.
If it's a boarding Commission
why should they receive forty
five dollars for attending a
meeting when they are sending
out there Taos or in their home.
In front of a computer.
And not incurring any.
Expenses for doing so.
Madam chair representative I
think the board and commission
members volunteers and a lot of
the statutes related to boards
and commission members require
allows them to receive per diem
for there for volunteering their
time basically so in that sense
I think this is just a way to
compensate them for giving up
their time for serving in the
state of New Mexico.
What the per diem and mileage
was to not compensate them I
thought it was for to cover
their cost of serving so they're
not having to dig into their
pocket.
For the benefit of the state of
New Mexico and citizens of New
Mexico they they they should not
have to pay for their volunteer
service but if they're not
incurring any expenses they
should be receiving any our
compensation they're not out in
the.
So madam chair representative
you know I think that some would
argue that there are because
they are volunteering their time
they're not able to.
Do the work that they would
normally be working doing yeah I
agree that some maybe retired
and and you'll always have to
deal with those but there are
people that volunteer their time
that in private businesses that
it takes away from that business
and so from that the you know so
that I think that I can't
explain why the legislature or
why thank you they've decided
that that's what they should do
should happen in statute but I
think that the practices you
know they.
Well they should be paid for
their time I think it's a way to
kind of take into consideration
that they're volunteering their
time and taking away from their
livelihoods.
Well what what we answers chair
and senator and and Debbie
Are we currently paying per diem
to an individual who attends a
meeting.
In the same talent in which they
live.
Sh so.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I think I I'd have to
check into that I think there
are some guidelines but I'm not
positive so I'm actually I'm
sure if you don't mind I have
mark Miller hall room financial
control that deals with per diem
and mileage on a regular basis
he may be able to answer that.
Sure welcome.
Good morning thank you chairman
archer one sorry and secretary
Romero yes currently the the way
that it's written in statute for
boards and commissions they have
three options they have the
ninety five dollar per attended
meeting option than they have
for diem rate similar to state
employees or they have actual
rates that are also similar to
employee so even if they are
within their boundaries.
If they attend the meeting
pursuant to the statue where it
says ninety five dollars per
meeting attended they would
still get that ninety five
dollar payment.
So the.
diem and mileage.
Is not just a thought
Compensating the individual for
costs they incur while
traveling.
It actually pays them for their
service.
Our.
And maybe find some stipends I
suspect most people don't break
even on it but the find them
some starter for attending those
meetings
Okay I.
I just.
I have a hard time.
Our.
I guess my thinking was wrong I
had always made the assumption
that people got per diem and
mileage when they actually
traveled to a beating and the
our.
Per diem was to cover their.
Cost if you will there are there
are food there are
parking there whatever at
whatever Spence is a current
travelers and that seems
reasonable but if we're paying
people to walk across the street
or drive down the street
and.
now sit in front of a monitor at
their doubts.
That's how we're going to do it
I guess that's how we'll do it
but
It just the services are paid
for for the for that to happen I
realize people are volunteering
their time but the most people
that volunteer their time to do
so not for the R. numeration
they do so because I believe
that what they're doing as of
impact just like those of us on
this in this committee
So.
I I guess I will worry about
that but it just got off thank
you are madam chair and thank
you senator for bring it and I
will supported to provide do
think we need to update your
rates for state employees who.
Travel I don't think we should
ever have a situation where
state employees are average
they're going to they're all
pocket to.
Hey hotel bills paid for their
food and travel so appreciate
your bring it.
Thank you representative
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair moved it just.
We have a motion by
Representative Zamora.
And a second I can second that
motion.
Is there any further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
pass.
Okay seeing and hearing line you
have a do pass showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative thank you senator
thank you madam chair thank you
members thank you.
So now we are at Senate bill two
forty two.
And we have Senator Kernan and
Representative Matthew.
Welcome.
Good morning good morning madam
chair but I think Representative
Matthews is taking the lead on
this today hi there you go great
good morning good morning.
Madam chair good morning members
of the committee sorry I was
trying to figure out my.
See if I can fix this there we
go
we are here this morning on a
bill that involve CYFD it is to
strengthen the substitute Care
Council.
Which is a agency that's require
is a state agency is required by
the federal child abuse
prevention and treatment act.
and what it does is review just
election of CYFD cases and
provide feedback to the agency
this bill strengthens the
substitute Care Council which
means that there will be
improved evaluation of CYFD
cations which will help improve
the function of the children's
courts.
And will improve the care of
kids in foster care so at it is
an agency bill supported by
CYFD.
With me today is judge Judy
Schneider who is a children's
court judge.
Sherri Booker who is the
executive director of the
substitute Kerr canso and
Secretary Blalock I believe is
also
joined to share I see him
With that I would ask duration
nighter to of find a little bit
more detail and tell you a
little bit more about what's
what we're doing here.
And data if that's okay with the
with the chair.
Later.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I imagine
Scheider I am the chief judge
for the twelfth judicial
district which is comprised of
Lincoln and Otero counties I
preside over adult criminal
juvenile delinquency and child
abuse and neglect cases I also
serve on the children's court
improvement commission the
juvenile justice advisory
commission the children's court
rules committee and I am a
member of the children's court
judges association I'm also a
member of the substitute care
Advisory Council and I serve as
chair for the council.
I am I joined this morning as
Representative Matthew said by
miss I Shelly Booker Shelly is
the director of the council
she's been involved in citizen
review oversight since two
thousand thirteen and has been
with the council since two
thousand sixteen Shelly provides
administrative oversight of the
day to day activities of the
council and the individual case
reviews she's a licensed master
social worker with two degrees
in social work and Human and
agree excuse me and human
development and family studies.
The purpose of the subs you care
review act is to provide a
permanent system for independent
objective monitoring of children
in CYFD custody SB two four two
strengthens the act by ensuring
more oversight transparency and
accountability from CYFD.
As B. two four two updates and
expands the purpose of the Act
to also find in addition to the
monitoring of children in the
department's custody for the
evaluation of the departments
affected just in discharging his
child protection
responsibilities in all areas
and it codifies the federal
child abuse prevention and
treatment act requirements in
our state statute.
It's strange that strengthens
the council's membership to
ensure that the necessary
perspectives and voices are at
the table by adding the
secretary of early childhood
education as an additional
voting member and the secretary
of CYFD as a non voting member
it also modifies the public
member criteria to purposely and
intentionally include members of
the public with child welfare
expertise and for lived
experience in the child
protective system.
It ensures more transparency of
the council's oversight of CYFD
by requiring periodic reports on
the council's work in addition
to the requirement that an
annual pork report be required
she's may be submitted to the
governor and the legislature in
the office administrative office
of the courts and CYFD.
It grants the council staff the
ability to accept and process
grievances related to see why
FTEs discharge of a child
protection responsibilities and
requires CYFD to acknowledge
receipt of their reports and
recommendations related to the
grievances and requires them to
respond.
It also broadens the council
authority to establish criteria
for abuse and neglect case
reviews.
Madam chair members of the
committee I thank you very much
for the opportunity to present
this morning and Shelly and I
will stand for questions.
Madam chair I you Secretary
Blalock may want to address the.
The.
Add to address the committee at
this time or I'm I'm not sure if
he just wants to be available to
answer questions or to actually
make a statement.
Sure Secretary Blalock welcome.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee thanks Representative
Matthews Senator Kernan for
bringing this important bill as
I was created by Dutch natives
this strengthens what this does
to care by your council
currently does in is a good next
up for CYFD in the last three
months of two eight these
develop a comprehensive
grievance processes for our
resource families and for
children as well as creating new
procedures to address claims of
retaliation we think SBHC is
just another step in the in the
right direction to ensure that
accountability due process
exists for for our families and
our children we're going we're
going through this process and
happy so the state or federally
to committee to be available for
questions thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Matthews.
madam chair members of the
committee
I'm not sure Senator Kernan
wanted to say a few words are to
be available to answer
questions.
Madam chair representative I'm
just here to support your work
this morning doing a great job
thank you
madam chair with that we will
stand for questions.
Okay great thank you we will
begin with opening up a pole
and if you would like to raise
your hand in support or in
opposition of Senate bill two
forty two.
The call is now open.
Okay the poll is closed and we
have one person in support and
zero against.
If you would like to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
If you would like to speak in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay so committee members there
was no one that raised their
hand for public comment.
Representative thank us.
Thank you madam chair
Appreciate this bill and I
appreciate
just to the
the hard work I noticed that
this got into this I do have one
question that was pointed out in
our analysis under technical
issues it talks about
qualifications necessary to fill
the positions of council
director and certain members of
staff conflict with the minimum
qualifications under the
existing state qualifier
classification systems that
process positions we is that
something that you all are
dressing at all.
Madam.
Madam chair at Representative
I think there was some
modification of the detail in
that I I'll defer to senator
Senator I'm sorry to Secretary
Blalock because he the issue
CYFD had some strong feelings
about.
Looting in some criteria into
the bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I would just defer
to adjust Snyder and actually
Bucur on that matter I know they
were quite a bit on it.
Thank you Secretary.
I'm gonna go ahead and defer to
to Shelley Bill Clinton because
she said she worked with the
bill drafter on that issue and
has more information about why
the bill director felt that one
when it went into the bill was
was important and I think she's
she can speak more on articulate
a ticket really to that one is
Shelly with New Mexico SEAC.
Yes yes okay great we're gonna
move over to the panelists
Millard.
Shelly.
Hi madam chair and committee
members thank you very much
and I I didn't know how to
change my name on this system so
I of this this is the this in
the count that we use for
meetings yes we did see the CPO
some feedback and so the
substitute Committee bill from
the health and public affairs we
change the wording to clarify
that not all staff would be
required to have the
qualifications because we do
have admin support so we change
the wording for the professional
staff and as well as with the
training to identify that those
people that do K. reviews in
process grievances have certain
annual training requirements the
qualifications are taken
directly from current CPO up
classifications so right now all
the employees are meet that
criteria.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to make sure that you
know this bill goes through that
you all are prepared and ready
to start getting that together
as soon as possible and didn't
want that to to hold you up or
be a snack so appreciated I'm in
support of your bill and look
forward to voting for.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much.
My allergies are bad too
Representative Eli thank you
very much
Madam chair representative and
senator I know we had a
presentation for the courts
corrections and justice
committee this summer and we had
judge Schneider and Shelley
are we spoke to just.
I think that.
I have been kind of confused
okay.
Over the years that I've been
doing the abuse and neglect
cases because it seems that
sometimes we had what was called
the citizens review panel and I
think it has morphed into this
right and I guess I think it
might be helpful if judged under
just
Or or or Shelly the Kerr credit.
Explain what changes were needed
in the former process to come up
with this new model because I
did not find the under model
particularly helpful as either a
guardian Adlai item.
Or respond in a turning it it
just a
A little bit like appearing in
front of a tribunal.
And
For for my clients
I always try to respond because
they put out a report afterwards
and they would say they would.
The report would say these
people were invited to provide
input and these people provided
input and
courses we have no control over
the times where our interview
could ochre and so I was did I
almost always did our written
import so if you could just
maybe spend a couple of minutes
explaining how this is going to
work better or how it does work
better or how it's contemplated
work better than me citizens
right here.
I think it would be worth
hearing.
Madam chair Representative
Chasey thank you for your
question and I I just want to
start by saying that I.
Share the consecutive concerns
that you that you have or had
with the with the way the system
used to function and back in two
thousand sixteen when Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino sponsored budget
legislation to modify the way
the system works I was part of
that and I testified with that a
senior justice my as and voiced
the that that concern and yes
concern for the for the way that
that process worked everything
that you said I agree with this
system in two thousand sixteen
when that legislation passed
changed a lot of things that
that that really I I believe
I made this a better system it
created that the council created
this the framework for the
council to set priorities for
K. reviews it in power the
council to hire the director
that Shelly fills that position
to oversee the work of
did that case reviews it
empowered the council to hire
qualified staff to conduct case
reviews and then allowed the
council to establish the
volunteer eligibility court
requirements to meet that says
citizen review federal
requirement and so it really
change the system in that it's
Shelly staff that meet certain
requirements certain
qualifications do the initial
case reviews and then the
citizen review panels are also
brought in to look at that work
so we're still meeting that
federal requirement but it's not
the citizen volunteers who have
had while you very well
intentioned most of the time I
didn't have the the
qualifications of the expertise
to really look at these cases
and in a meaningful way find
positive you know
useful feedback and and so
hopefully that.
It sheds a light on the changes
that I've made and so I think a
lot of positive things happened
in that two thousand sixteen
legislation and this bill
further enhances that I believe
that makes it even better and
stronger and more useful to the
court but we still have that
citizen
review of the cases it's just
kind of structured a little bit
differently and with that I'm
gonna see if I Shelly has
anything she wishes to add.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Representative
Chasey I appreciate judge
nighters overview of that
because we worked really hard
over since two thousand sixteen
to identify a credible reliable
process the council has
identified the quality services
review which is a natch natch
I'm sorry national model in a
case reviews and we are having
training and certification on
that to assure that the case
reviews do meet consistent
standards and that they provide
relevant information to
everybody to inform on
individual basis as well as that
system forms.
So you don't just.
Cases like they.
Citizens review board used to
do.
Or do you madam chair.
go head you can answer someone
madam chair Representative
Chasey I look like Shelly got
frozen so I'll I'll jump in on
the council's criteria as to
what basis how we identify which
Kate.
I'm sorry.
For a moment.
Judge Snyder junction so I don't
know what we missed.
For me I'm sorry yes yes what we
do is that we select cases based
on the council's criteria they
get guidance as to what is a
priority for example looking at
kids that are of fourteen and
older aging out of the system
because we know nationally that
is troublesome and we also if
somebody contacts us such as
yourself Representative Chasey
to ask us to review as specific
case or any of foster parent or
a by a parent of those cases
will also be reviewed.
Note madam chair I really didn't
realize that I can ask for a
review of the case.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey absolutely.
And I understand to also madam
chair you said there's not a
grievance procedure for
regarding placement of children.
That the this in your
heard you.
Madam chair representative
Chasey judge Snyder did you want
to respond to that.
Madam chair representative chase
yes this SB two for it to set up
that will just not not subject
to the rules of the council will
define how that works but it
affords that the council this
grievance process so that anyone
associated with with that K.
can submit a grievance and the
council will then pursuant to
council rules Shelly staff will
do a case review find a
recommendation
the report and recommendation to
CYFD to the courts to all
parties involved in that case so
if you were counsel on the case
you would get obviously the
report and recommendation as
well and what as B. two four two
does is requires an
acknowledgement of receipt of
that case review and
recommendations by CYFD and then
requires a response and then
obviously of one of the
really important aspects of this
to me as a as a judge who
presided over these cases is
that I would get it as well and
then I can use that in in in
court proceedings to further
inquire in and
just you know on a larger level
better the outcomes for kids it
and who appear before me.
Okay.
Well thank you very much I
really appreciate that
information and with the chair
of this committee
Is carrying the state injured
child welfare Act which may or
may not.
At a hearing on the Senate side
but of course I'm has been.
Working with a lot of tribes in
trying to set up this
This log in New Mexico to be
sure that the federal Eckbach is
always reserves here and I'm
just wondering if there were any
tribal members who contributed
to
the development of this
Legislation.
I tribal representatives I
should say rather than members
madam chair.
Madam chair again Representative
Chasey I'm in the drafting of
the legislation I don't believe
there were two tribal members
that participated in that not to
my knowledge at the I will add
that the one reference in the
bill on page twenty R. and lines
on seven through nine just
references that notice would be
required
pursuant to our federal that
federal court and said that
that's the only reference and so
it's it's codified
you know it's in the legislation
would be quite a codified in the
act that we're required to meet
you know the echo of mandates.
I just want to suggest madam
chair and judges are slider that
in will probably getting your
rules in in the work at hand
that you involve the tribe's
because I'm.
I've had.
A lot of cases and Sandoval
County it will cases where the
case was resolved fairly early
because not family guardianship
and all under it what but
Making sure that the
The support they feel like to
because there really are there
are parties to the cases as well
but that the
We utilized resources of all the
communities and and those
families to keep those kids and
about replacements if at all
possible.
And it's it's been it's been
really helpful that meant the
guardianship this is what that
whole route is one that
particularly the.
Most of the ones that I've been
involved with we're the Navajo
Nation but
that that's really really
helpful to that I did have this
one right K. where I have two
brothers and they were half
brothers and one of them.
The oldest and he was pretty
odd.
What I'm the father who was
eligible for enrollment and then
didn't roll and
No okay.
Hello.
The most amazing thing that
happened was ultimately.
These boys were both adopted by
a member of that problem and
that was just a remarkable
journey
And.
Her husband was not a member of
the Pueblo and the younger child
actually wasn't eligible to be a
member but they were all
welcome.
Well in to participate in and so
forth so I'm not he's had a
really.
And
I really appreciate all your
hard work and
I I like this direction rather
than the the tribunal that used
to.
Scare everyone thank you.
Thank you madam chair and excuse
me.
Ron committee thank you
Representative and
Representative Chasey.
I too am concerned because if if
folks have been working on this
bill since twenty sixteen
has it been discussed in any
interim committees are how has
that process work.
Madam chair members of the
committee I I may not be
following on we did present at
the courts corrections and
justice committee and I believe
I have to ask get refresh
element I believe we presented
it to I'll also say that this is
been an ongoing dialogue with
the with the children's court
judges
I I do have it is really
important to me to message to my
colleagues that this is a tool
that can be used for us to to to
better our work in the court
room and so I've been really
vocal about that
in the in our in those meetings
Shelly and I both also as as
does not Secretary Blalock will
serve on the children's purport
improvement commission and we've
been given a and on a standing
I.
Invoice at those meetings as
well so in terms of insuring
that the judiciary is aware of
this ensuring that the judiciary
has a voice in that
utilization of this process in
our in our court cases I've been
it again very diligent about
that I had to of course seek the
blessing of
yeah Chief Justice Michael E.
Vigil to even appear isn't as a
and and testify on behalf of
this bill and so I've got the
the blessing of the Supreme
Court to be here and the backing
of the judiciary so
I'm certainly those those things
have occurred if I misunderstood
your your question madam chair
please please.
Return redirect Mary focus me.
Thank you judge Snyder I I
appreciate that and so did you
have any discussions with the
consortium of tribal state
judges so I'm asking all these
questions because as
Representative Chasey mentioned
I have the state Indian child
welfare act bill that's
happening and I think folks have
been working on it for years and
years but more importantly I
think that a lot of the intense
work what's happening or at
least a year and with that of
course there was consultation
with the tribe's there was
consultation with the consortium
of tribal state judges and I
know secretary just Secretary
Blalock is familiar so maybe it
secretary of you can't assist in
answering please.
Thank thank you madam chair
members of the committee that
the process the madam chair that
you just described is been a
really powerful process I think
pursue HSD into a learning
opportunity for us on the state
ecobill
this for this particular bill it
related to streaking the SEAC we
did not do tribal consultation
and
we totally transparent with the
community the committee madam
chair we have had some try to
reach out in the last few days
asking about the bill they were
going to try to get a tribal
leadership support to come and
speak with this committee madam
chair but because of how quickly
as we all know how quickly the
session works in the state of
New Mexico they were not able to
do so and so they had sent me
some text messages this morning
but there
I do know that we could do
tribal constitution and the
publication of the rex as
Representative Chasey suggested
as a way to get that input and
move forward Madam chair of the
committee is is comfortable with
that and certainly as we've been
learning more about tribal
consultation and and when we
should be doing it rely heavily
on secretary was secretary to do
an Indian Affairs Department
leaders on that do recognize
that we should have done tribal
consultation with this bill
earlier but we can't do tribal
constitutional obligation of the
rex if that that works.
And madam chair if I could if I
could interrupt just for a
minute I'm in and I take full
responsibility for that I was
not aware and this is the first
time I have carried build that
up probably reached into that
area and I certainly did not
know and so I I I want to make
sure that that that where the
blame lies because I initially
our list the original sponsoring
their Representative Matthews
came on and that discussion I
just overlooked so but the blind
here and that something I've
learned and look forward very
much to understanding how that's
done but just want to make sure
you know just the Sanchez Bill I
I take responsibility for that
and I appreciate that being
raised in this committee thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan
And and secretary les like did
you say then that there is
tribal support for this bill.
Is that what I heard.
Madam chair members of the
committee I can't I can't and
shouldn't speak for the tribes I
can say that they expressed some
concerns about the possible
impact on it where that the that
this street the of the SEC would
do I don't think that that's
something that this bill does
but I do recognize now the
importance of doing that tribal
consultation so that tribal
leadership would have had the
opportunity to I share those
concerns and we could address
them directly.
Thank you Secretary and and so.
Sorry to put you on the spot.
But it but is it your opinion
then that this
so.
One effect all of the hard work
that was done in the state and
Cornell.
I think madam chair members of
the committee I think that's
just something that we've we've
just started to look at as
possible impact it could have on
stated where and I'm not sure
that I completely understand the
concerns enough to be able to
articulate them.
Okay great thank you.
Committee members.
Madam chair I guess I'll move it
to pass on.
Or what.
Our.
We just move a do pass on our
Senate substitute right yeah so
move the right do pass on state
health and public affairs but
the substitute for Senate bill
two forty two.
We have a due pass motion by
Representative Nibert.
Is there a second.
All second okay we have a second
by Representative Eli.
The clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Yes if I make a comment at the
and I'd appreciate it.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night part yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
No.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much I just want
to say that I'm thanks I think
that the
Some secured by accounts are
really needed to get the
Process underway and so the and
the case review and I really
liked the idea I have no idea
that attorney's current
actually appeal to this but I
really hope that and you were
going forward in foster tribes
in that if there are additions
to this legislation that may be
made next year we can get those
done and I'm sure it would be on
on the call it this this is an
agency bill thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Chasey
and I I also just want to say to
that you know I'm supportive of
everything that's being done
here I just don't want to move
forward when we're not
consulting the tribes and work
especially when we're talking
about tribal the children and
the impacts to the Indian child
welfare act so I I do hope that
you will consult with the tribes
especially moving forward with
rags and and everything going
forward the tribal state
a consortium of of judges is
also a really great resource
we've used them and several of
our bills as well as house
memorials regarding such matters
so please do that and with that
you have a do pass and thank you
everyone.
And.
That concludes our agenda for
today and
thanks to the public four tuning
and thanks for committee members
for all the work that you're
doing I'm not sure we're going
forward what's going to happen
with our committee becoming so
late in the session I don't know
what bills are coming forward
but if in case we don't have the
opportunity to meet again I just
really want to say that I love
working with this committee
everyone here is
Such great members so thank you
for your work thank you to
everyone that tuned in during
the term of the session and look
forward to seeing everyone
thanks we're more thank you.
