Representative Herrera.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Here
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio.
Ranking member Zamora.
Madam Ba Joe Keats.
Madam. OK. We're gonna get
started, Senator Sheer, SB 7.
Whenever you're ready.
does is municipal utility
utilities and now stormwater
forward.
It's enabling, that's all.
if they want, if they need to.
that.
What this bill does is remove a
um and allows them to
Good morning, Madam Chair and
honorable Representatives. My
name is David Cipher. I'm public
works director for the city of
Farmington.
I'm a former New Mexico water
quality control acting and
engineering management.
Senate Bill 7 new uh New Mexico
municipal League has had on
their high importance rating.
We're proposing to add the
statement to add stormwater
simply to our states this change
would allow all New Mexico to
join the rest of 47 states and
our New Mexico charter cities
with the ability, just the
ability to.
Uh, create a stormwater utility
if desired, so it doesn't impose
any tax or anything on anybody.
It's simply acknowledges the
logical of having stormwater
classed as a utility as it is
throughout the uh this uh.
Code code cities in New Mexico
are currently relegated to using
scarce and rare street road
funds to address storm water,
uh, which results in some of the
worst street conditions in the
United States of America.
Over a quarter century ago, the
stormwater regulations were
promulgated, uh, and EPO EPA is
soon implementing these
requirements in New Mexico.
The rules include water quality
standards, testings, inspection
permitting at a new level,
erosion, contaminant control,
providing waterways and aquatic
life protection. These are all
included in this unfunded
mandate.
A respectfully request that we
recognize stormwater as a
utility, and as an for New
Mexico coach.
Thank you. We're gonna go to the
audience for public comment, uh,
if you are invited to speak,
keep your hand raised. We hold
the mic, you have one you, Madam
the Stormwater management is
essential.
But municipalities often don't
have the funds they need in many
cases, EPA stormwater
management.
Plans have been an unfunded
mandate, this legislation will
be another storm runoff proment
practices, prioritize morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Scott
Scanlon, registered lobbyist for
the city of Farmington, and this
is our number one priority in
this legislative session other
than capital outlay, um, but,
uh, we've uh been actually
pushing this bill for several
years. It's enabling legislation
only if they don't want to. It's
just so we urge your support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Alex, um, as Mr. Sypher
mentioned, the municipal League
has voted this as one of our
legislative priorities for the
last few years. We know a lot of
our municipal members are
interested in having the option
to establish a stormwater
utility. And of course, we like
that it's an option, but support
on this bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Larcon Macias
and with the Samia Project and
Samia action, I stand before you
today in strong support of
Senate Bill 7, which will
provide municipalities in New
Mexico with the authority to
establish and operate stormwater
utilities.
This legislation mechanism to
address the growing challenges
of stormwater management,
currently municipalities are
responsible for stormwater
management without a dedicated
funding source without proper
stormwater utilities are
affected.
by increased flooding
infrastructure damage and
environmental degradation.
Additionally, this bill follows
National's best practices um.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Uh, hello, good morning, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Aidan Manning. I'm the
rivers and Waters Program
Associate for New Mexico Wild
and a registered lobbyist. We
stand in support of SB 7 because
it enables municipalities to do
this critical work of managing
stormwater. Importantly, when
storm water is left unchecked,
unchecked, it can transport
trash, road salts, and dangerous
pollutants from industrial and
urban areas into our waterways,
were they negatively affect
water quality, wildlife, and
downstream users and effectively
the entire state. Well,
un municipalities are currently
managed to mandate stormwater
that lack of funding and
centralized utility management
limits their ability to
specifically improve, expand,
and adapt to new challenges as
they begin to arise. And by
giving towns and cities the
means and flexibility to manage
stormwater as a utility, SB7
would do a lot to address these
challenges. For those reasons,
as well as the others stated
already, we urge you to issue a
due pass on SB 7. Thank you.
And you're in the room, raise
your hand.
OK, we're
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So my first
it's it.
People, uh, right now the
utilities can be water, sewer.
Service. So a utility is, you
pay for what you get.
uh, so it
It's a fee, not a tax, but
there'll be money involved.
People in the city will have to
and, and, and Madam chair.
And Senator
If, if this is so badly needed.
And, and there wasn't.
How, how have we all this time
and we build all these drainages
and stuff.
Oh
Where has the money been coming
This simply gives you a
To decide whether or not they
engagement through the process,
nearly,
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Samara, my um
My point that I'd like to add
you wanted to know what's
changed now.
And that is what I was referring
up about
EPA stormwater requirements
until now.
Uh, because,
Until now, EPA has not unfunded
mandate that has not yet been
what we're trying to do is be
proactive instead of reactive in
being able to have this tool bag
available to cities, and without
this tool bag there'll be a
crisis and I'm trying uh what
one of my goals are to avert a
crisis as as EPA. So, so, Madam
Chan David were, were shooting
ahead of something that we might
see from EPA. Is that what
you're?
telling me.
So I'm saying one of the
factors.
Is that, and it is coming it's
actually any state that has
primacy has already implemented
it. 47 states have already
implemented it. 3 states are all
that exist that EPA directly
runs that, uh, and now they
have, they have worked and
coordinated letting them all
know that it's coming. It's been
something that has been passed
for over a quarter of a century
that
is now being finally instrument
uh instituted which is about,
uh, at least 15 years behind uh
all other states.
And, and Madam Chairman David.
The state of New Mexico is in
the process of minute.
That bill is, is in the chamber
is in the in this Capitol
building running,
That bill is, is in the chamber
is in the in this Capitol
building right,
That bill is, is in the chamber
is in the in this Capitol
building running,
yes, how, however, that will
just accelerate.
Probably, in my opinion,
accelerate the need, uh, rather
than delay.
And representatives, so.
So when we
If the state of New Mexico gets
primacy, we get this bill
passed.
And, and, and we get our
primacy. So then,
We will set our own rules.
And
Oh, absolutely. OK, madam,
excuse me, uh, uh,
representative, yes, that is
true.
When does
But
When does the stormwater at one
point or other if I may, Madam
Chair, we have.
Uh
For some time there's been a.
Separation between the two and
there's no longer uh probably in
the 40s and 50s, there used to
be what we call combined storm
and sewer, um, flows and those
are throughout the United States
have been largely eliminated.
And the the storm sewer is
water, uh, influenced from, uh,
rainwater.
Whereas sewer comes from, uh,
what, what we really should be
properly when water gets treated
and goes through a tree, then
what is that water? I'm sure.
Madam Chair, um.
Representative Zamora, that
water is treated water that has
to meet certain very strict
standards for contamination and
level of um.
Contaminant it uh actually is
recycled, it's called reuse
water that is reinjected into
the a little bit, Madam Chair,
and in, in the discussion we
could
keep going down that river and
wind up somewhere.
Somewhere in another state.
OK, so, so I'll change my line
of questioning. How much tax
will it be imposed?
In a
On an individual
If
Say the city of Farmington takes
this on.
That's the city closest to the
people. We'll make that not.
And Madam Chair and senator.
And my concerns are
What if, what if the, and I, I
don't know what, uh, Madam Chair
and senator in Farmington.
But
I've been watching the news and
I've turned the thing.
They have a big
Problem.
What if
Of Riodoso
That is, it's just ungodly what
they would have to pay
3 words.
They, they have to take into
consideration
because, well, it's the city,
this is.
The fear, I don't even.
Unless we have the same fear
about Madam Chair and senator.
To me, the, the, what you're,
you're comparing the, the
flushing of a draining water
from a house.
It's pretty much can be
calibrated.
But, but you get a rain like
Riodoso got. Mhm.
here after the, the, the, the
fires.
And we saw that river running
down, gonna have to do with
this.
I think, um, there are, there
are two ways to look at the the.
Flooding issue that's happening.
So if I may give you an example
of how this would be um
calibrated as you said that, um,
one best practice that's known
in the charge this fee based on
the percent of you have a
private residence. And so they
would be charged of impervious
surface, that they, that's how
this fee structure could be
based so that it is right sized
to.
That is being so that you don't
have these um trying to overtax.
This is why we have flood
control districts.
And this bill is meant to work
in Los Lunas, Valencia County of
flood Control District. And so,
In the recent past.
Um
Our flood control districts have
been bearing the burden of all
property tax.
And that burden has, um,
You know, these municipalities
have an obligation to be
contributing to neighborhood
level that has been placed on
our flood control districts. And
so what this does, that removes
the barrier that would allow
these communities to charge a
small just based on.
Whatever the city council comes
up with for this, that and in
collaboration with those flood
control districts.
It sounds to me like.
You know, these communities or
watershed scale.
Issues that they're dealing with
now that issue is separate then.
And
that we're looking at different
issues across the state, Madam
Chair expert witness.
But
We have to worry too. And in the
statement that you made about
the, about the land and how it
But
So, so then in, in, in one of my
analysis, I have, I have a
little statement that says uh.
takes the authority given by
current state statute away from
taxpayer voter.
And property owner and gives the
authority to go. So,
I'm also
In, in, in that statement, we're
concerned about
The property right
of the owners of the property.
Something to think about.
Sure. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you so
much, um, questions. I was
mostly concerned about like just
the process uh if when this fee
gets imposed and, and, um, is
the is the public involved in,
in that process of, uh, because
I would hate for like kind of
like our phone bills, um, we
where they come from, but, but,
uh, but no, just as as far as
the public uh come um process,
but you've already answered
that, um.
My other question is, I mean, I
come from Berlin, uh, if it
rains for 15 minutes, we flood a
huge mess, you know, so, so
those kind of things happen.
Now, what happens if this now
becomes a utility and it's now a
feature. How was it?
Does it change anything as far
as the liability if that system
were to fail representative,
um, they already have that
liability. So, um, this doesn't
just a municipalities already
have, um, either the fee, um,
and include the community in the
development of that or in the
way that there are liable for
the damage that's done by.
stormwater.
Um, it, all that it does is
allow them.
To, it actually gives them more
opportunity to um fund.
The infrastructure that is
needed to manage the things that
are already happening, right?
The, the floodwaters that are
already, it's a, it's very
simple, uh.
Fix and barrier.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
because I, I've had lots of
conversations with my, with my
city council and especially
after every flood couple of
years so, um, but and, and I,
and I understand their
frustrations. So, um, and, and I
have to say I was in the
beginning, I was like, wait, no,
my area because Blin itself uh
would at least be able to
recoup. I mean, we're not, we're
not a rich city, so, uh, so
having that being able to to
have that um.
That ability or that that income
source to be able to do it right
and not just do with what we can
afford.
Um, could be, Madam Chair,
Representative, if I may add.
Um, it also by establishing a
utility, opens up other funding
resources to you. So, um, or
forgiveness, and so there's many
small fund because.
They don't think that they will
get the grant ass ability to
have then.
Generate the revenue funds. It
also opens up.
Federal and other state funding
that's available specific to
utilities that are currently not
available to them because we,
there's a lot of other options
by having this opportunity. So
just by changing that
definition, that because that
makes a lot more sense and then
when it, when it opens up the
door. Thank you.
Thank you. I have a few
questions myself, you actually
answered two of them, uh, in,
um, so,
This change would allow for
access to federal and state
grants.
Right. Um, could some of those
grants include support for
Property owners to.
You know, to change up their,
you know, impermeable surfaces
to some part of, that'll be part
of the um of the potential fee
structure is like what they're
like, do they have, you know,
hardscape question, Madam Chair.
Uh, the best practices in
legislation across the country
and um what I have found is that
oftentimes this can, um,
homeowners to be able to offset
those costs for them to do for
themselves. So, for example,
say at my home in Albuquerque, I
have, um, 1000 square feet of
driveway and I wanted to turn
that into permeable pavement,
um, works. Um, if, if the city
of Albuquerque charged a
stormwater fee.
Of X
cents per gallon that is coming
off of my roof, then I would be
able to get an incentive or a
reduction in that fee by
Diverting so much of that on the
property. So that is the best
practice, and it's a, it again.
Provides additional tools for
communities to um incentivize
warm water that's coming off of
the load, the demand for that
infrastructure. And so you can
use it both as a fee to fund the
individual payment of that fee,
um, to
charge to, sorry, to fund um
work. Great, thank you for that.
That's helpful. Um, back to
Staying on the fees, potential
Last question is, and I just.
Should we do this if we have
primacy?
Permitting bureau for that
purpose. That's correct. So, so
the SB 21 and 22 that are in
play right now, just changes the
way that the municipalities
would um apply for permitting
and who they would report to,
um, but regardless of whether or
not that passes this bill is
still a good idea because the
burden of that storm water
management is still on the
municipality. So regardless of
who those Thank you for that.
Um,
questions from the committee.
Wait for the for the 2nd time.
Thank you. We said that, I think
in your, in your asked me to do
it.
The
address the chair please address
the chair.
Madam Chair, may I please?
Very quickly, please.
Um
Representative, uh, it, it's
just a process.
What, what we commonly see is
there's just just like for you,
there are many, many, many, many
proposals and bills, and as you
work through them, they graduate
from step to step to step.
And, and sometimes it just
realistically takes up quite a
while, quite a number of years
and uh education process and a
step by step process to get it
in, in front of the legislators
and, and to Senator shares
credit his answer is actually
pretty accurate. It never got to
that level until recently.
churn
And Senator, how, how sure are
we that
If we
Pass that we're gonna get
federal money.
The city of Clo was just
finished a big drainage, uh,
project.
I hope they're done with it by
the time I get back.
And, I mean, multi-million
dollarraly from the feds because
part part of it, and then the
other part was, was one of the
main.
Main streets in the city, but I
mean, we have spent water
projects.
And, and this wasn't in place
and we're making it sound like.
We have to have this, and we
shouldn't be using money out of
it.
For me, everything's been
clicked to have this. And, and I
get the point.
That we might be able to bring
more federal money in.
But in, in, in the
And the new presidency and
cleaning up and not funding so
much. It makes me wonder there,
but
That
Yeah, man, I think.
In my mind, the answer is, um.
Those larger drainage projects
that are associated with other
funding and the senator brought
this up. It's like you can tack
on stormwater management onto
Rhodes projects. But what if you
don't have a roads project
that's funded and you still need
to do this stormwater work,
right? Rhodes projects don't pay
for.
Underground pipes or, you know,
uh, water quality benefits to in
rivers, which is our drinking
water.
And so, um, that's why we need
this is those instances when we
can't tack it onto other stuff.
And I agree with you that we
are.
Uh, I think many of us are
concerned about the ability to
continue to get federal funding
for the, um, that is totally up
to me, that means we are gonna
be more reliant on our new
projects that maintain the safe
and uh have to catch.
Capture stormwater.
back in the river, is that, is
that where we're going with
this?
I'm trying to read everything
here you're putting on the
madam,
chair,
representative. No, the current
system as um, as David
suggested, is, is that the storm
sewer system. And what we're
saying, runoff that's coming
from roadways.
Is going directly into our
rivers untreated. We're not
suggesting that run that through
the wastewater treatment plant,
what we're saying is we should
use other tools in our toolbox
like Nature Based Solutions to
naturally filter those
pollutants out.
Before that water gets to our
rivers and that this.
Funding could pay for the in
that infrastructure to and
maintenance is never funded by
uh capital outlay or these large
projects, and I think that's
where the smaller rural
communities really get into
trouble is uh funding the
maintenance of the
infrastructure that gets built.
And so that's, again.
Senator, one last question, I'll
end. I'll quit.
How much
Madam Chan
for coming out.
And Madam Chair and senator, so,
so when you drafted the bill,
you didn't think about that. So,
so that we could go back to our
can't cost you any more than
this. We're, we're gonna go back
and say they're gonna add on a
fee. What is it? That concludes
my questions, madam. Thank you.
We're not gonna take,
we're not gonna take a vote
today, um.
program and it costs.
Um, and it's possible that.
To manage the stormwater runoff
on their own property. So that,
that.
State will be looking at sort
of,
But in unintended the way the
money, the revenue is going to
come into the uh naturally a
nature-based solution for your
at some other point. You will be
back.
This bill will be back.
Good morning.
A member of the committee. I'm
here today to present Senate,
Madam Chair. Morning, um,
members of the committee. I am
Belinix for livestock board, um,
our proposal in this bill is to
increase the cap fees, the
actual process of setting those
fees is determined by our board
that is all set in IAC and we do
go through the 30 day does have
time to call me.
So as Representative Chatfield
stated, um, the increase on
livestock inspection fees can
only be increased 10 cents do
not have a cap on me, but the
livestock board when we have
presented this to them in the
past they they see this as a 20.
So this is not a sudden impact
to our producers increased to
try to help supplement. I will,
I would like for you to know
that we spent the past year
canvassing the state. We've
attended meetings, we've held
meetings, we've talked to
producers from we have about 95%
support across the state on this
bill as you, some of you know,
some of you, it was created by
the producers to protect the
producers, so they, they do feel
that they should have worked
really hard to increase our
general fund. We did.
have some concerns. We listened
very closely to those we've
addressed those in the amendment
that was put on the bill, the
seasonal livestock from
One
Pastor to another pastor that
they own in the spring.
And then in the fall they moved
back.
The seasonal grazing amendment
50% of that. They do have, they
have to have the inspection
allow only a 50% charge on that.
So kind of putting a pencil to
that, what's costing them a
dollar now if we increase our
fees from 50 cents to 60 cents.
It's gonna cost him 60 cents for
seasonal movement instead of
kind of a, a break for those
people, um, I actually have
pastors from one district to,
Um
We
do we really want to have that
conversation.
years
ago I was in high school, I
stand for.
All right, we're gonna go to uh
the uh the public you're in.
Be raised will come to you made
it on behalf of New Mexico
Cowors Association.
The New Mexico Livestock Board
is charged with promoting
greater economy, service, and
efficiency in the administration
of the laws relating to
livestock industry of New
Mexico.
And controlling disease
preventing theft or illegal
movement of livestock with
overseeing the New Mexico meat
inspection as well.
By many accounts from across the
state, the industry's view of
the New Mexico Livestock Board,
they have worked diligently,
responsively, and generally
successfully to fulfill that
charge. The livestock Board has
in many respects a model state
agency for the industry.
The Livestock Board hasn't had a
a fee increase since 2002. Its
services are among the lowest in
the region.
None of us want to pay more, but
we do recognize the livestock
board needs to have the
resources to efficiently
administer the laws regarding
our industry. For these reasons,
we stand in support.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members on Jimber
Lear.
Livestock producer in New Mexico
and I just like to urge you to
support this bill. These people
do a great service for us, like
she said there was created by
producers for producers.
And I feel this not easily
absorbed by the producers today.
Mostly because the value of
livestock, he's talking about
pickups and gas, but the
livestock are too, so.
I've had a couple of bunches of
cattle stolen in Texas and
Oklahoma, and they don't have
similar protection. These people
need to have our support to
protect us from
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kelly Ferjar
on behalf of the New Mexico Farm
Bureau. We are in support of
Senate Bill 101. We believe this
is a pivotal piece of
legislation that seeks to
enhance the vitality and
sustainability of our state
state's livestock industry by
adjusting the fee structure, the
New Mexico Livestock Board aims
to bolster the agency's
financial dependence. Currently,
the board relies on the general
fund for proximately 50% of its
annual budget. The proposed fee
adjustments are projected to
generate an additional funds
reducing the dependency on
general fund revenues.
increased revenue will empower
the board to improve its
services, including livestock
inspections, brand registrations
and disease control measures.
These fee adjustments are
designed for gradual plan with
incremental increases subject to
public comment and approval by
the board. This approach ensures
us and that the changes are
manageable for agricultural
community. We urge the
legislature to pass this on
Zoom.
Hey, we're gonna go to
opposition.
Thank you, Madam for you. So,
We don't have a quorum yet,
right? We need one more. We do
have a quorum. OK,
so this will vote on the bill.
Yes, we will, and we're going to
bring back Senator share as
well.
Oh, you'll bring him back right
back in.
OK. Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and, and Representative.
So
The, the caps are being, is
that, is that the deal or, or
was there still some room in
there?
Madam Chair, that's all my
questions.
Any other
questions, are you ready for a
motion? OK.
I have a do pass mode. OK, and
what's the will of the
committee?
OK, great. You have a due pass
unanimous on Senate Bill 101 as
amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you members take a stand up if
you want.
And then that's your business.
That's your business. OK, look,
I, I'd love.
OK.
Like to entertain emotion.
