Have an.
Number to start with right
Madam vice chair I will going to
be offering an amendment on this
bill so because of that I would
ask if you would share or today.
All right Mr chair I will do so.
It's years.
You.
Okay so we will begin with.
Senator go ahead and begin and
then we'll proceed with the
amendment thank you.
You are muted.
That's the that's the that's the
phrase of our session right you
are muted
thank you madam chair this bill
is a bill that would raise the
minimum wage that is paid to any
employee of state government
and so instead of it is actually
very simple bill it provides
that every state employee every
state employee license and nine
licensed employee of school
districts and state chartered
Charter schools and people were
employed in educational students
are institution including higher
education would receive no less
than fifteen dollars per hour
minimum wage and the reason for
that is to value are essential
workers that have been working
so hard especially during this
pandemic
and over the years it's our
state employees have not gotten
the races that they should have
been it's fallen particularly Mr
on people at the bottom levels
of the pay scale in addition the
state has had a hard time hiring
maybe twenty two percent vacancy
rate and this would make of this
would make it more attractive I
have
Mr Ricky Serna who is the acting
director of the state personnel
office as well as workforce
workforce solutions who is my
expert and they have developed a
plan to not only raise people to
the fifteen dollar minimum wage
but to work on the rate bands
and increase everyone so that
there's not to address the
compaction issue that this would
cost and so with that that is
the bill I I stand for questions
and I understand that
Representative Alcon has an
amendment to my bill which I
will allow let me do that and
then.
Senator and
Representative chair what would
you like to move the amendment
that's kind.
Thank you madam chair I would
like I will make a motion to
move the the amendment and
present that of the amendment
the number on that is two two
two seven eight seven well you
to one.
Well I can't.
Okay all that the amendment has
been moved and seconded and Mr
chair representative.
Representative.
Yes excuse me can I get that
number again please I think you
okay it's two two seven eight
seven point one.
All right.
We get a.
All I see it now thank you for I
found it.
So you're.
And I okay you're okay go ahead
thank you.
It thank you at all make sure
okay okay okay what it does is
on page one on line fifteen
after schools are insert the
words making appropriation.
Okay and then we go to our page
two page three lines and.
Seven and eight revert insert
the following new section.
Okay basically was section two
appropriation five million
dollars appropriated from the
general fund to the department
of finance and administration
for expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty three to provide
sufficient funding to provide an
hourly salary of the these
fifteen dollars to all affected
employees working in agencies
governed by the person at.
At the New Mexico state police
career pay system and the office
of the Attorney General
employees workers compensation
judges and executive except
employees every I'm expended or
unencumbered balance remaining
at the end of fiscal year let me
put the three shall revert to
the general fund.
That is my the my amendment
madam chair.
Okay
madam chair is a friendly
amendment I was about to ask you
thank you.
Thank you so it is a friendly
amendment and
we will go ahead and
Representative.
Yes I have a question on that
amendment doesn't Representative
Alcon have a copy of that
amendment.
We received a copy he received a
copy yes.
It's not the one that
Representative Senator the deal
had instant also.
Yes it is okay yes we worked on
this together okay thank you
yeah we're we're we're good.
Thank you I have so I'm I'm
gonna go head to the audience
and see if there's anyone who
would like to propose the
amendment raise your hand.
Anybody opposing the amendment
all right anyone in the house
speaking in favor of the
amendment please raise your
hand.
And this is on the amendment.
Okay anyone in committee room
three fifteen.
Okay so we will go ahead and
begin with those in support of
the amendment and the first one
on the list again request.
The first one on the list of
banned Seacrest.
One and mute yourself ma'am.
There you go.
Okay thank you can you hear me
now
yeah well thank you thank you
chairman members of the
committee
Basically showing that the the
the conference committee doesn't
resolve this issue what we are
speaking we do in fact support
this amendment shows that are we
do agreement was the state will
be fully funded our.
Hopefully this will not cause
undue delay in the passage of SB
seven thank you.
Thank you.
Next we will have part of Bundy
and then followed by Josh
Anderson.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much it's
quarter Bundy with asked me we
want to thank god Chairman al
cone and of course Senator
Sedillo Lopez for bringing this
this is a critical piece to the
funding and out of the
compensation package and however
it gets done we are grateful to
all of you and and it's
certainly good to have this as a
vehicle to move forward thank
you so much we're or just for
both on the amendment in the
bill.
Go ahead Anderson.
You madam chair members of the
committee Josh Anderson also
with apps me all this Ecker echo
the comments made by Mister
Bundy and want to thank it
chairman al cone and Senator
Sedillo Lopez for bringing this
bill and amendment for and for
both of them are supporting it
thank you madam chair.
Well for next on the list we
have Rick regained Massey.
Thank you madam chair and
senators
we are cell for this bill M. C.
W. A. seventy seventy six region
three vice president.
The unique thing about me though
is I'm retired and stayed on as
you members the study put the
money in my pocket.
But I still love all the people
I work with it's time to pull
him out of poverty.
You are a living wage.
Thank you.
Here and committee.
Thank you.
And next week have marked seven.
Yes thank you madam chair March
rather than Mexico council
university presidents we sent
import supported Senate bill
seven also want to make anywhere
and thank you chairman I'll call
as well that also we're
committed to to the minimum wage
Ross committed with the word
average in the bill the
competition package we will
support and we will make sure
that we provide our lower level
employees and we have plans are
institutions and work closely
with the senator along with the
legislation executives but also
with that we have to Mexicans
the Russian presence which is
the seven four universities in
Mexico we sense part of Senate
bill seven thank you madam chair
thank you sponsors as well
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr are there any
others which.
Court of SB seven.
On the amendment.
Any others.
Okay.
Now we go to the committee.
And I see first Representative
Rubio.
Thank you madam chair I want to
do it I wanted to the promotion
for to pass on the amendment.
All right we will take that
motion at this time the program
is our second.
It was all.
Representative.
You have a motion on the second
so motion to move the amendment
could not the amendment and the
second and so now we'll go to
discussion.
Is there any discussion of the
committee.
All right our.
Are you discussion on the
amendment the motion to move the
amendment.
I just want to ask some
questions on the amendment let
me turn up my mic sound.
Sure.
Madam chair representative my
question is.
First of all are we gonna are we
anticipate on having the funds
to continue this program helps
pull back at one point because I
don't see a fiscal impact
reports.
Representative.
Madam chair I will go to Mr
chair not on this he has the
answers that I don't have thank
you.
Are you there.
I am thank you.
the chair madam chair and
Representative dass thanks for
the question so what what we're
hoping to do here of course is
is close that gap that we've
identified in the already
existing appropriation in house
bill two for the pay increase
this may be aware and so the the
thought is is this would be a
recurring expenditure that would
ultimately
You know what ultimately
Adam to be included in house
bill two moving forward thank
you.
One.
Representative my next question
is.
On average.
The low end of of.
Okay role.
What is the gap that we're
trying because you're gonna have
that compression issue.
Yes I'm assuming that this is
what you're saying is five
million dollars which is fine I
I just I just want to understand
but let me tell you as a as a as
an employer one of my biggest
fears is to give something that
I have to take back so it's not
that I'm against giving a raise
absolutely not I think that
people should be afforded a
raise if we can sure that as a
state I have no problem with
that what I do have a problem
with is giving something and
then having to take it back
because we we couldn't see this
long term.
What is the impact I know it's
in the budget now it's a
reoccurring costs so once we do
this that's it should be
recurring and I would hate to
see us turn around and have to
pull back.
You have any concerns with the.
Madam chair a.
Representative the the last as a
gentleman well the thing is
right now what we're doing with
this five million dollars is
recovering this year.
Okay next year next year's
budget of course will be house
bill two for next year and The
appropriation should be there to
cover the pay raises that we're
giving today.
Representative have I believe
that under federal our our wage
and salary laws wants to
institute a salary you can't
roll back to salary I believe
they're protected under state
and federal wage and salary our
administration laws so.
This is the one instance Mr
chair Representative we're you
cannot roll back legally a
salary.
Madam chair representative if if
you guys are correct up to that
point what happens if there's a
budget shortfall what what I'm
gonna ask you the question I
think I know the answer but what
they had to be if there was a
budget shortfall how they fix it
if the salary cap.
If I may my understanding of the
of the reserves the amount to
put in the reserves is it is
planning for a once in a twenty
year of possibility because all
of those reserves are
I mean there's a huge amount of
reserves I believe it's twenty
eight percent at the moment and
it's my understanding from from
the explanation is that is to
plan for a one in twenty percent
possibility weight when in
twenty possibility that they're
that something would happen
And so we don't expect their
weight you know when I apologize
wanted two hundred I believe and
put possibility that we would
not that we would have a down
fall so dramatic that we
wouldn't be able to cover it and
so that is
that is why they have such a
large reserve because we have a
budget that is I mean over time
that goes up and down so
dramatically and so the reserves
are insurance against any kind
of a possibility through the
through the foreseeable future
and that's how it was explained
to me.
I appreciate your answer madam
chair representative right and
and senator out apologies my
apologies the the I guess my my
I guess my answer for my
question was answered do you
know what the fiscal impact is
hot what is actually this
reoccurring costs what do they
because what we can get an
impact report and I just want to
understand that
that
I think.
One million two million.
One can you please just wait and
make a question and then the
representative was attempting to
answer thank you
madam chair I would like to a I
think what we need to do is
Senator the amendment
Representative asset is woven
into the bill itself I think if
you want to ask about the
amendment we need to take that
taking care of well we have in
the bill then the representative
you can have the floor again to
ask questions on the bill right
now we're going that way we we
have an unsettled the amendment
that is sitting there we need to
take care of that and then after
that is done then the
representative do getting them
well that asking questions about
the whole deal.
Representative.
Yeah absolutely my question then
would be
Madam chair representative.
Hold on a second are you still
on the amendment yes ma'am yes
ma'am so it appropriates here
this on this ammendment it's
it's talking about fifteen
dollars an hour how does that
affect people that are on
contractual they've got
contracts going on throughout
the schools are they required to
follow this fifteen dollar an
hour increase on your amendment.
No madam chair that if that was
an earlier draft of the bill
that would extend to contracts
with the intent of ensuring that
no agency would lay off
employees and then contract out
for those employees however it
was very difficult to draft an
amendment that only did that
without engineering other
contractual employees
particularly that of Medicaid
and Medicare that would cause
problems with the budget so that
was amended out of the bills
that provision of covering
contracted with amended out.
Read in here you have exempt
employees who would those be
madam chair representative
Senator.
Are we on the amendment on the
bill I'm reading the exit at I'm
reading it on the on the
amendment this is.
Hi is introducing the amendments
let's keep on track with the
amendment right.
I'm reading it madam chair right
off the amendment is says
executive in I'm I'm reading it
right out of the the I'm still
on just that I I just want to
understand who's exempt madam
madam madam chair that I will
defer to Ricky Serna because I'm
not aware of exempt employees
that make this little but Mr
Cerna I'm sure I can answer this
question all yes thank you
Representative would you like
share with you what was your
staff answer that question.
Please all right what happens.
Thank you Madam chair
representative process so you'll
recognize that that language
tracks with the house bill
language what we're essentially
doing is sweeping in what we
refer to as the various salary
plans that cover state employees
in in the state and state
government and so executive
exempt employees are those that
are appointed by the governor
and their cell plan is executive
exam so the the language in the
amendment is consistent with the
language in house bill two that
that aims to pin and include the
Beria cell plants for our state
government to ensure that
somewhere down the line if there
is a governor appointment I'm in
a position right that leads
itself to the lower rate a rate
that that individual to what's
covered by this requirement.
Madam chair representative
officiated and Senator.
Referral madam chair we have do
we we we have a motion on on the
amendment that.
You madam chair you're on mute.
I just wanted to make sure
Representative us and and that
now that he has seen no whether
Debate from the committee is
there any opposition to the
amendment.
Any opposition to the amendment.
I see no opposition to the
amendment so the amendment
passed this is about that.
And back on the on the bill.
And I have Representative I see
representative of the of the
with the hand that.
Thank you madam chair.
I I just wanted to thank the
sponsor for bringing the
legislation forward I know that
over the course of the last few
weeks there has been a number of
pieces of legislation that have
been brought forth to address
issues like double dipping and
all of that which I have adopted
personally opposed and I oppose
it because I believe that we
should be paying a living wage
to our employees and so I
strongly support this
legislation I feel that it it
really does address a lot of the
issues that have been brought
forth
in previous committee hearings
and so whenever appropriate I
would like to move for do pass.
And I thank you Representative
and I do apologize we're back on
the bill and I did not
acknowledge public comment on
the bill itself so I will now go
I see the other hand through the
committee members I made note of
those are and I will now go to
the public and I'm will ask if
there's any opposition to the
bill itself any opposition to
the bill itself as a mental.
I'm anyone wishing to speak in
favor of the bill we raise your
hand.
All right so we will go to those
in favor of the bill on the
first one on the list as a John
Mitchell.
John make sure.
Now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair members of Canadian
journalists youth with The New
Mexico federation of labor we
very much think that the sponsor
Senator Sedillo Lopez for
bringing this measure forward
obviously we we are firm
believers in raising wages for
all workers involved that the
fifteen dollars an hour might
not be necessarily at a living
wage it's certainly a very
positive step in the right
direction we do understand that
that the the cost for this
increase in wages has been
budgeted already in each B. two
but we are firm believers think
in codifying this res in law you
know there's there could always
be changes in financial
situations we can have new
administrations having this
codified in law is the central
moving forward so that R. for
ever all this will be a base for
how we can treat our public
employees without a basic level
of dignity and respect so for
those reasons we strongly
support this bill and urged
committee to do so as well thank
you.
Thank you all and next we have
John.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John birch with
American federation of teachers
New Mexico we are here in strong
support for Senate bill seven we
wanted to really highlight the
Sanchez thoughtful inclusion of
the language around K. twelve
educators and just to kind of
contextualize the impact that
this that this bill could have
on some of our lower wage hourly
workers in our K. twelve schools
this representative at a
potential thirty percent
increase in their hourly rate of
pay for some educators in our
school districts so this year
the legislature has done a
really good job in making sure
that they are playing catch up a
little bit with some of the
raises that that perhaps we wish
we could have given in prior
years this year it's great to
see the work being done to
acknowledge the work that
educators have have done
throughout this pandemic and
throughout their career so we do
stand in strong support urged
the committee to follow suit
thank you.
Okay and next we have quarter
Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter graduated with
actually I don't think I could
have said it better than
Representative Rubio did and I
really want to highlight the
fact that members of both
parties really have tried to do
things to address our
understaffing and we are
grateful to that even though we
didn't agree with all the bills
and the specific tactics were
grateful for that we think this
bill combined with what you have
done in each B. two really are
going to start to make an impact
in the understaffing of so many
critical agencies not just
public safety but of course
including public safety but so
many of the necessity is that
really make a civilization from
waste water and solid waste to
our CYFD employees so we can't
thank you enough for your
support of this members of both
parties thank you for paying
attention to the short staffing
issues we have and we're Jr
support for the bill thank you.
Thank you and I I noticed that
there was someone on the panel
may not vote via I'm not sure if
I may not have the up you
speaking here to speak in favor
of the bill.
Yes madam chair okay okay
recognizing now.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm here on behalf
of nearly sixteen hundred public
workers represented by the
communications workers of
America currently on a poverty
wage while serving our state
workers like Philip and the
south public order of twenty
five years of service to the
university New Mexico West
Orange just eleven fifty an
hour.
Thank you can't be here to speak
on his own behalf because he's
making sure that the students
anyone and have a clean and
disinfected space to learn this
bill would send a very clear
message The New Mexico values
its public servants and a living
wage which is a lives of
thousands of New Mexicans we
truly deserve it we strongly
support this bill and urged the
committee to do the same thank
you.
Thank you.
And
next week I have been impressed.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm dancing Chris
I'm the president of local SDWA
local seven zero seven six.
Those sixteen hundred workers
that Allegra just mentioned are
are are my co workers
we have been working very hard
for a long time now to try to
end poverty wages for our lowest
rate public employees many of
whom are essential workers are
if there is you know as has been
said there is widespread
staffing shortages are inability
to fill vacancies and
difficulty in retaining.
Workers in many cases
due to you know basically the
last decade or so of fiscal
austerity
We see this as a very very
powerful step in the right
direction and we six sponsors
and
And everyone who worked on this
in helping bring this to this
point
We strongly urge support of the
bill thank you.
Are there any others that wish
to speak in support of the bill.
Okay and saying that I'll go
back to the committee and on the
list I have Representative me
again at the end.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you sponsored.
Good seeing you and another of
our committees are.
New York quite a presenter there
in our energy committee.
With their high caliber
legislation that you are
bringing forth
no question that I do have
You know twenty nineteen we kind
of changed state minimum wage.
From seven fifty to twelve
dollars incrementally.
And we're at that the third
instrument in terms of the seven
dollars and fifty cents.
that kicked in on January first.
Madam chair and that's the last
improvement will be on January
first of twenty twenty three at
twelve dollars and
You know when we were running
that legislation twenty nineteen
are there was a contending bill
it was Representative Roybal
Caballero scripting dollars.
And
so we're kind of a.
I know but at that point you
know we're we're
things are just changed
dramatically.
As a COVID
in terms of really a addressing
that the shortfall that we have
for cleanup and.
in our state in terms of
providing a fairly decent wage
to our working families and
So this is a welcoming sight I
think.
In terms of our country is
really moving forward to raise
wages at the same time improve
quality of work and quality of
production in the process of
doing exactly that by increasing
wages so it it's just not a
matter of Greece in wages
there's no domino effect
whatever we increase wages that
has an impact both on the
businesses the entities working
that and the economy overall.
but I do have a question
When running that that minimum
wage bill twenty nineteen
We we have specific data Madam
chair on
On state employees that were
basically at minimum wage.
And I know that the analysis
madam chair
states that sixteen hundred and
seventy workers state employees
will benefit from the pump to
to fifteen dollars an hour my
question to you Representative
Sedillo Lopez and maybe a year.
This Secretary Sir not going to
answer this is.
Where are we right now.
In terms of state employees at
age eleven dollars and fifty
cents what is that number if you
have the.
Thank you and it's good to see
you representative and and thank
you for all of your work on the
minimum wage bill that you work
so hard on that was my first
session and I was impressed
I I will turn it over but I I
want to say it is we're actually
very disturbing to know that
somebody's been working at UNM
as we heard the testimony for
twenty years and now making
eleven fifty which is barely
minimum wage and so that's why
this bill is so important but I
will turn it over to
Representative at two of Mr
Senate to answer your question
specifically.
Thank you madam chair.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative for your question
good good to see you right now
I'm I'm doing the calculations
which we speak it'll take just
about ten seconds I will share
our while I'm while I'm doing
the number is we have currently
in the classified service those
are employees within state
government working in one of the
sixty plus executive agencies
one thousand one hundred and
eleven workers that are making
less than fifteen dollars an
hour okay and currently we have
two hundred and twenty three.
That we have making exactly that
eleven fifty minimum pay rate.
Thank you for that Madam
chairman Senator and
And and Mr secretary
you Mr secretary you I was a
constant done.
Kind of
that gun on you a for a while
there New Mexico was going
strong in a lot of our employees
are kind of a unemployment that
benefit them the you were real
helpful in terms of navigating
some of my constituents into
our.
Into calm waters.
It in terms of the tsunamis that
they found themselves in this so
you are you a big addition I
think.
Big improvement in terms of
the facilitation of our.
Workforce solutions
in terms of moving in the
direction of our of putting the
client first.
And so I really want to
compliment you for that Madam
chairman Senator Sedillo Lopez
that was my only question.
I look forward to.
Giving a yes vote on this
legislation.
Thank you Representative and I
do have on in the order that I I
again Representative table for.
Next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to the sponsor of this
legislation really happy to see
a I don't need it believer
everything that other folks have
said about this because they
spoke about it so eloquently but
I remember meeting with folks
across different state agencies
before session started in just
hearing about the hardships of
you know that the question cool
of wanting to make state
departments in state agencies
all while really being able to
do that because you can't
attract the workers to do that
as well as losing folks through
retention and education has as
for example the way to the
private sector because they can
be exponentially so much better
I remember at when I was in
charge of hiring and staffing
and insure that our agency was
running smoothly when we were
thinking about signing up what
is the minimum that that should
be paid through our agency it
was really about wow like the
people who are making minimum
are the people who are the doers
of the word they're the ones who
are getting the things done and
without them and without them
being able to live a life where
they could feel at financially
stable you really had nothing
within your agency and I think
that honoring of people and the
work and their expertise and
experiences so critically needed
so I really am at this this type
of work and happy to support us
you.
Okay.
I have Representative Baca.
Thank you madam chair
I really just have three
questions but I'm sorry the
statement
I do really like the fact about
some of the people being a
school person myself Madam
myself some of the hardest
working people are those who are
not it's not reflecting their
salary and I'm talking about the
bus drivers I'm talking about
the across from assistance those
one on one assistance cafeteria
workers custodians so pleased
you know please understand that
I I definitely understand that
these people are the backbone of
the schools you know we cannot
teach without these other groups
that support we know we we
definitely call the support
staff what a but I do have a
couple of questions about it
just so I can understand the
numbers of it so right now with
the numbers you're talking about
of madam chair and Mr Senator
had said.
On the state side alone
somewhere around thirteen
hundred people that were around
that eleven fifty minimum wage
okay.
But we have any ideas about how
many people in the public school
sector.
Would also need to be brought up
to speed with to that fifteen
dollars a minimum minimum per
hour because I can tell you that
alone in my district.
Based upon their job seller
schedules that's a large number
in my district alone so do we
have any impact.
To how many that would be your
any falls from the schools of
what that number may be like.
Madam chair Representative block
of it is a great question the
the information that I have from
the F. I. R. is it is going to
take five point five million
dollars to race the school
employees so I guess you could
work backwards from that to try
to figure the number but that
was the analysis from the LFC.
And for higher education it it
institutions that would be
approximately eight point three
million.
thank you madam chair thank you
Miss Lopez and that's kind of
what I I think that the you know
when we were talking about the
amendment and I think
Representative also spot up
there was the gap there for
talking about five million.
For no school and I consider
state as well state agencies
well but then I look at higher
ed another eight minutes
thirteen million dollars already
now we're starting to see that
there's a.
Gonna be a gap that's going to
have to be you know thirteen
million dollars a year re career
current as we says as a.
Madam chair Caballero said as
far as with the salary is
guaranteed Paparizou's unless we
have a you know what was are
having been to thousand nine and
ten how they had to furlough
days and all those are the types
of things I mean those so that
that is one point that I
I am a little bit concerned
about the.
No.
Thank you so we do we don't have
an idea about how many total
people that may be as far as
with the school employees.
You said five million dollars
you say two million dollars for
the hi read.
I do not I'm sorry I'm sorry
injured eight point three
million chance.
I'm.
Thank you madam chair
No the other question that I
have Madam chairman and the
committee is and again it's been
it seems like it's been a lot of
times we sat down we heard house
bill two right that we have
those debates.
But I I cut a record right you
know all kind of have a
recollection that wasn't at
fifteen fifty in house bill two
that was kind of was a
recommendation are what is that
number change between.
Between now and then as far as
that we're now you're down to
the fifteen dollars for our.
It's.
Madam chair I was not in on the
debates in the house on H. B.
two
when we debated in the Senate
was at fifteen dollars but what
you may be thinking of and that
is.
The
the the state personnel office
and secretary Serna have
developed it through the
executive compensation
recommendation they have
developed a very detailed an
elaborate plan to address with
the come the the compact that
compaction issues that this bill
would cause and so that may have
been something in the discussion
is the compaction because at
least my expectation and hope is
that the individuals who are
been working for the state for a
long time we'll get there raises
to fifteen dollars an hour
before applying additional races
and perhaps that would take him
up to fifteen fifty so that new
people coming in at fifteen
dollars an hour would come in
behind people been working for
quite awhile but that is
Or that it would be
micromanaging the state
personnel office and higher
education and of course public
education so what is it HB to is
is money sufficient to cover it
and the reason we needed to have
the amendment to date is it
appears.
But it's not quite confirmed at
least in my mind because there
was a.
Conflict back and forth about it
that there may be a gap in being
able to implement the compaction
bland.
And so that is why it was
necessary to bring in an
additional five million my
understanding is that they are
trying to work it out in the
conference committee now on H.
B. to that this this is one of
the agenda items to identify if
there is a shortage and what
that shortage should be should
that happen this this
appropriation would be stripped
out of the bill on the house
floor should be addressed in
conference committee.
Thank you madam chairman because
that that is the issue that is
in a state now because right now
and again I I I want to
communicate this that I do
support paying people recognize
them I don't like to see you
know those people struggle there
but so we may be funding the gap
to get to the fifteen dollars an
hour but as you know I'm a
person I've been working the
same company for seventeen
years.
I'm well out here and to
basically you know for these so
to say that this person who's
newly starting out there is
going to be making where I am so
again that's going to take
additional money in adjustments
to to to to have that gap is
forced to recognize years of
service other types of things is
so the impact of this in my
opinion from having taken a look
at this working with sellers
schedule for district is
actually to cost more than five
million dollars to address these
are the types of issues and I
think that's that's kind of the
question that we have is what is
the true impact of this because
right now we're talking about
thirty million dollars between
K. twelve and higher at but when
we talk about how we bump
everyone else up and we have
those different steps years of
service I mean I think by by
also has to be like one year
difference between you know you
know I know for the schools
that's it or like a dollar but I
just don't know where this
money's going to come through
for these other agencies and
school districts to address
these other folks and was by my
fears the impact would be.
In the tens of millions
as we increase us and I think
that's it especially if we
commit to that on a recurring
basis of for those other folks
we're talking about a lot more
money than just the the the five
million for the thirteen million
so I have to express my.
My concern with that about
really not having some some good
numbers to go on because what I
don't want to do is I don't want
to be in a situation where
things go down there and we are
when the when the bottom falls
out like it did in two thousand
nine and ten we had furlough
days people's hours are cut back
and all those types of things so
thank you madam chairman thank
you of for my questions
I have no further questions.
Representative and next we have
on the list Representative good
lesson.
Okay madam chairs
Representative and dust etcetera
that I think that were you kind
of get the.
Where I'm coming from and I I I
guess the other Representative
boxes coming we can share the
same concerns but so I'm gonna
go back to my question that I
had left off on what would
happen if we were unable as a
body to financially handle that
let's just say that one either
as you said two hundred I don't
think it'll be one of two
hundred thirty one of two
hundred years but I'd say
whatever it is.
What would happen if we did have
a shortfall what would be our
recourse to handle this if we
can't lower their wages.
Madam chair representative us us
my understanding is that is the
point of having reserve.
and that's what I'm trying to
remember if we had a whole
presentation on this but it was
a while back about the need for
reserve and that and the amount
because we had a discussion of
does reserve need to be so I
and it was explained to us that
we do not want to have another
two thousand eight two thousand
nine two thousand ten situation
in which the reserves were
inadequate and so that is the
reason for having such a fact
reserve
and to be honest with you it was
a while back so to remember all
the details but it did impressed
me that we're planning for that
eventuality by having such a big
reserve.
Madam chair representative on
and the center I agree with that
I mean I I run my business so we
have to reserve to
help you with those shortfalls
because I don't care what
business you're in you are going
to have there there is a roller
coaster effect it's just part of
it that's just the way it is
but.
It's inevitable it will happen
and what we don't want to do is
sometimes if you take a too big
of a by.
in in saying Hey you know what
I'm gonna raise everybody so the
the see I never got the answer
of what's the mid mid what's the
on the bottom where what's that
number what are people being
paid ten dollars an hour a
minute of the sticking with what
the so are we talking about
eleven dollars an hour twelve
dollars or where are is the mean
for the for the state because
the state from my understanding
was exempt.
At one point so what is the
meaning I mean are we moving
these people from ten dollars an
hour to fifteen or we moving
from twelve to fifteen what what
what is that number well I'm
Madam chair representative us as
my understanding is that no one
within the state is getting less
than the state mandated minimum
wage which is eleven fifty but I
would be happy to turn it over
to secretary Serna who could
probably answer that with a lot
more than forty.
Thank you go Representative.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so I'm
calculating that are right this
very second again probably about
ten seconds so as Senator
Sedillo Lopez shared right now
the state is required to pay the
minimum wage of eleven fifty an
hour for all those workers
presently making less than
fifteen dollars an hour the
average rate for them is
thirteen dollars and nine cents
okay so that means on average
they're making thirteen oh nine
which means that on average the
increase is a dollar ninety one.
is what you're looking at in
terms of an average increase.
Thank you madam chair
Representative and sectarians
Senator that that to me
calculates out to approximately
four thousand it's about a forty
one hundred dollar roughly forty
one forty two hundred dollar
range for the year
and pro for person okay and so
my my question is that's fine
but that's on the bottom tear
right so then what happens but
the and I'm not against it it's
just I'm just trying to make
sure what we're making that
we're the decision we're making
we don't come back and goes
those are the guys that what
we're paid us and that would not
over budget but paid us and then
we had to pull it back or or
it's not that they're gonna pull
it back what they'll do is
they'll start they'll start
cutting back hours.
We'll start laying off people
sure they will be able to fill
in those positions because they
can't afford and so what happens
is when you move up a person I
think Representative block it
brought it up he's been there
however many years I understand
and then you get somebody coming
in at fifteen dollars an hour
there's a compression problem
and so that would and they come
in and they have no experience
or anything other command is
beginning
lower beginning out entry level
positions.
And the guy that's that's
managing goals with a minute.
Is that fifteen he doesn't have
near the responsibility I have
I've been here so many years and
I want to the White I need a
raise to compensate me for my
issue of of of that or I'm going
to what what what I want all
this responsibility I'd rather
just be the guy that does.
As for the for whatever it is
and not have all the stress and
that's that's what happens and
it we've seen it in and in the
private sector and that's why
it's important to that you not
judge of the bottom but the
entire everything needs to come
up together and and so that's
really my concern because I
don't know the full fiscal
impact it scares me a little bit
The last thing I was gonna
statements you house might loss
which I thought tell you the
truth of what I'm doing I'm
trying to look at my daughter
play basketball in a basketball
game she's.
To my fourteen year old use I
would I almost five eleven and
I'm watching the basketball game
my wife's there I don't try to
debate at the same time so I
lost my to the thought for a
minute
That just is is my thing is that
shifting and and that worries me
is this gonna affect any of the
like the bus contracts or any of
that and maybe that's my next
question I think you answer but
can you please answer that for
me again and of course of course
madam chair Representative asset
Eight if we took that piece I I
included it in the first draft
of the bill but that bill was
amended out in Senate find that
piece of it was amended out and
Senate finance and I would like
to give secretary stand a chance
to talk about
we had a big discussion about
this and finance and my
understanding except for this
little five million dollar gap
is it was budgeted to include of
a plan to move all the employees
up to address a compaction issue
but I will turn it over to
secretary Serna so he can talk a
little bit about that plan and
the cost was discussed in Senate
finance and my understanding
again except for this little
five million dollar gap is it
was cold fully covered in H. B.
two
may I turn it over madam chair
to secretaries are not.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair Senator
that that's up to the correct so
your free throwing Mandy.
Those muted I apologize sorry
sorry not a problem
so madam chair senator thank you
for that that's correct so when
you look at the appropriation in
this house bill two with this
five million dollars that gives
us what we need Representative
to address the compaction yes
that you're talking about that
stems from
from printing the brought up to
the top so our strategy is we
need to we need to essentially
addressed at all in one fell
swoop so when the executive
director plan we're addressing
compaction and that moved to
fifteen all at once.
Apologize I thought I was muted
I was just telling my wife
Senator babies it's it's hard
for us it thank you it's a
second allow us she has I've
missed a lot of our games of
this last month and so I'm
trying to do my part as a data
so the the I'll leave that alone
I I think you get the the the
group that I'm that that I'm
concerned more about you make a
promise and then you have to get
you know to get back it's not
just that they get once you get
I mean figures I've been an
employee of oil in place before
and was for many years and.
Representative you're breaking
right.
For.
It is that but is that better
madam chair.
Yes.
Is this a little bit better your
call is a little better okay.
What what okay what happens
managers Representative is what
we get a raise we then turn
around and and expand that raise
as an employee all I can buy a
better car I can maybe more to
better house maybe I can do
whatever go on a trip to Disney
on whatever it is that they do
and and what ends up happening
is that there's a poll back and
you have these fixed costs all
of a sudden you got a bigger
house car whatever it's a killer
I mean to get you know you're
your your your hours cut back
and that's why I'm so serious
about it because I think that is
such a it's such an important
thing it's not just that you're
taking it back you're putting
that person the jeopardy of of
defaulting on possibly a loan or
other things and that's that's
really what we're going to the
last question that I was gonna
say or ask is the.
That I saw that all those are.
Stood in place are exempt.
As as a as a former.
I want to three colleges and I
know how it what it is to start
in college Madam chair
representative I remember going
to my through my card that I got
and graduation rate that I'd
missed one and I found five
dollars and I just remember that
that's always stuck with me
knowing that I didn't have any
money and that's five dollars
how I hate that for the next two
days and so
What are we doing for them if
we're gonna do this then what
are we doing for them.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam madam chair and
representative that I'm with you
on that I was a work study
student at UNM and I've had
similar experiences but work
study at UNM was state minimum
wage background
and my understanding is that
that was.
It amended over my bill my
regional bill took care of them
and gave them the fifteen
dollars an hour but my
understanding is that at the
request of
higher education that the
commitment ways to keep them and
state mandated minimum wage
because of the budgetary impact
and so unfortunately they will
be at eleven fifty which thanks
to Representative Miguel Garcia
is better than seven fifty
so but that's what they will be
at.
Unfortunate thing but it's
and you can see that the
difference between seventy to
working for the university of
fifteen years and a student
employee and so I have.
I consented to have that
stripped out.
Only other concern that I have
is if the school district is
unable to sustain this they just
compensate by Laurie hours I
mean it's just if they have to
you have only so many dollars
you can expand and and to me in
all knowing I've done this for
many many years is you know you
have a budget and you go oh man
I don't have enough to handle
this so what what ends up
happening is we they start
pulling back hours no overtime
they start trying to find where
can I get money to sustain this
and the the scary part about
this is is that does that they
are the needed people that they
need that are over worked and
and and and.
Can't effectively do their jobs
with because of their lack of
help so that those are my
concerns just because I've done
this for so many years thank you
madam chair representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Baca were you
going to you have to have that
was that still from previous
question no matter try to have
just two very direct and and
pointed of all questions if I
may madam chair
yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and representative of
the question I have and doesn't
represent us for up there was
about the exempt employees who
in fact are these exempt
employees that and what how do
they or or or how are the
impacted in this proposal okay
that's my first question I'll
let you guys address that
knowledge from a sector as my
second.
Madam chair representative Baca
I'm not aware of any exempt
employees that make less than
fifteen dollars an hour so but I
will turn it over to Mister
Santa my understanding is is if
that were to happen if somehow
there was an appointment that
they would get the minimum they
would get at least a minimum
wage but I will turn it over to
secretary St.
Thank you madam chair if I can
look this up again ten seconds.
presently there is one employee
that I see it on on this data
sheet that I have that includes
what by a worker that is
currently below fifteen dollars
an hour so Representative again
it it's a good measure to ensure
right we don't have one or or a
small group of of employees
hanging out there that they
don't have this language they
can hold on to as a as a minimum
pay rate for them thank you
madam chair thank you Senator
thank you Representative thank
you Mr Sarna so I I guess
adjusting for the job because
but it's not part is not a huge
number I'm not worried I mean
for Douglas small number the my
last and final question our
promise is.
When we sent over house bill
twelve we were looking at about
a seven percent raise that was
part of this with is looking up
for schools and for state
workers as well am I correct
Madam chair of Senator yes okay
so I guess that the question is
in which orders are going to be
applied okay so in other words
are we going to apply the seven
percent raise first and then use
the money to to get that bridge
the gap between the fifteen are
we gonna take about the fifteen
dollars an hour and then apply
the seven percent on top of that
because that again depending
upon the order will be a huge
impact you'll just be more money
can now Madam chair of Senator
can you address that please
madam chair it's funny you
mention that because I
My previous bill the previous
version of the bill actually had
answer that question very
specifically that you would
apply to fifteen dollars first
and then it said that any other
race that would be passed during
this session would be applied
after the fifteen dollars
because my intention was to
address a compaction issue in
that way however I was persuaded
by secretary Serna the council
university presidents and and
education and that
That to not micro manage how
they dealt with the compaction
issue that they had a plan for
dealing with the compaction is
to and that
It that that's how it would be
addressed and so that piece of
the bill was amended out and so
each of the agent well it's the
state personnel office as I said
has an executive comp
compensation plan
recommendation and has with
where do you see
Well the if you could see it or
I certainly can turn it over to
secretary Sir not
The plan is to pull everyone up
just a little bit and and and
and the address a compaction
issue that wage instead of with
the rest of apply this first and
then and then raises and and
that's like I said I was
persuaded to do that and that
part of the of the bill was
amended out and I will turn it
over to secretary Senate to
describe house how the state
person of the state plans to do
this.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it's a great
question so over the course of
the summer are we work with the
compensation group which
included is our colleagues in
labor C. WA and asked me
representatives in DFA
comparison of that I use to
describe what's going on in the
pageant are aligned.
That marks fifty dollars an hour
and then everybody standing
behind it holding on to the role
our goal is to pull everybody
forward at the end of that role
for those employees at eleven
fifty so as part of dealing with
compaction we're bringing
everyone up and so we've devised
a comp of compaction strategy
that multiplies folks based on
where they're at until that
brought group gets up for the
need to be and then we leave
everybody else there so from a
percentage standpoint that lower
and get a higher percentage than
those that were closer or
already above that fifteen
dollars an hour so that's a
question in short we're not
moving everyone up to fifteen in
dealing with compaction we're
bringing everyone up and
stopping when that low and gets
to fifteen.
Thank you madam chair thank you
of Senator and Mr because again
if you did that if you apply if
your brother wanted to fifteen
and then again the seventeen or
seven percent on top of that
nobody making fifteen dollars an
hour that actually make it
something you know fifteen forty
five in our fifteen you know
whatever so I just need to be
clear because you know that the
because the how they applied it
it would actually increase the
amount of money that was caused
because people state agencies
schools get the money for the
state rights which means that
the probation that would be need
to be to start out would be much
higher than the five million
dollars that was laid out as far
as in the Representative all
calls amendment.
Thank you Representative has
that is that.
Thank you madam chair I am Dr
Jennifer questions thank you and
So I want to go to as it has
been our practice in this
committee don't to Mr chair for
any comments before I make money
and then well educated well take
that motion.
The motion I can't hear you.
Thank you madam chair all right
so I I do want to say a few
things only
In response to and to think what
Representative Meghan that the
upright knowledge and
the efforts that intellect that
I've been introducing the
fifteen dollar an hour that's
almost ten years now and I'm
known in that my reputation is
the fifteen dollar an hour
Representative and so I'm real
proud of that reputation however
I want to remind the committee
that fifteen dollars an hour is
no longer even a living wage so
what we're doing is our best as
one of the poorest state in the
nation our to dignify and value
on the efforts of our workforce
across the board in the public
sector and I think you know when
that we're getting closer and
closer
in New Mexico it was several
reports a few years back
Committee what indicated that
that we should have been
actually two years back
at least that seventeen ninety
one and now in order for a
family of four to four a two
bedroom home ranking so we're
far behind this is a giant leap
for public employees but I do
want to say a couple of other
things and that is that you know
and representative Garcia
brought it up hi we are have the
foresight.
Two years ago to begin to
look at.
Now from twenty twenty three
taking it forward and bringing a
jump from twelve dollars to
fifteen dollars and twenty
twenty three and then factoring
in the cost of living for all
employees across the board are
in the state and that that
should still be our goal and and
I I will continue to
bring up that that legislation
and so I'm fully supportive of
this and finally I do want to
speak to specifically to
the work study and the UNM
situation and and and as it is
across the board with the
university public schools higher
education department which I
think is really important and
that is that we have employees
at all levels in these
institutions as we do in our
public sector
that range as Representative
Baca mentioned are janitorial
staff for maintenance staff for
bus drivers to all employees in
all of our public sector that
that are working right now at
sub minimum wage our wages and
so I don't view
bringing everyone up so fifteen
dollars an hour necessarily as a
on.
Compaction issue or a major
concern I think that we're and
for future concern because we
have a situation now that is
dire and that is that we have
employees working two and three
jobs still even those that are
working in the public sector are
working from one on one or more
jobs and so we we really need to
send a strong statement that we
value and dignified all work for
all employees at all levels and
this is just one small step in
getting us to that point and so
I want to thank all the Senator
letter no and others and
Representative that's the other
I intend to continue.
All right now are wage bill at
that across the board with all
state employees and I want our
audience to know that as well
because and and I'm happy that
we have this bill in front of us
because of this that will
demonstrate strong will all
forward and at this point I will
take the
Representative Rubio was motion
Representative like to restate
that motion.
Yes chair I for the past.
And do I hear a second.
Representative I wasn't sure if
that was represented will go out
for Representative bash.
Okay I do passed motion
Representative Rubio made a
motion seconded.
Representative bash
Okay will you take
The provoked count please.
Chairman.
Thank you yes I just to be sure
that we it's a motion as.
Seven is amended well I I I was.
Yes so we're on a motion to move
Senate bill seven as amended.
The motion okay second all
right.
To pass as amended right yes do
passed.
All right.
Representative Baca L..
Representative bash yes
Representative black.
Now.
Representative both.
Yes Representative dela Cruz
yes.
Representative Miguel Garcia
yes.
Center Rubio yes.
Representative.
Yes.
I'm sorry what was your right no
no ma'am thank you no ma'am and
I'd like to explain again.
Representative robot combat a
vice chair.
Yes.
I'll come chair Representative
Alcon chair.
Yes that committed to explain my
vote okay the vote is seventy
rigs and to pass.
Thank you so we have on a deep
pass on on Senate bill seven as
amended and we have
Representative access to explain
his boat.
Madam chair I just I want to see
that it really wanted to see the
of the the.
Students get a little something
but I am worried that about the
fiscal impact and for us to
sustain it that's really nice
the the thing that scares me the
most and I think I would just.
Thirteen something a little bit
smaller and keep moving forward
each each year so we could
possibly know that we're gonna
be able to sustain that because
I think we can do just as much
harm in trying to do good if we
overstate and then we have to
pull back their hours to do the
only with there's other ways
they can lose their money it's
not just by the dollar an hour
you pull back a few hours and
you you basically did the same
thing to the thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative wax Mr
chair when.
Thank you madam chair just
simply would want to say that I
was.
Really surprised to know that
there was as many people that
work for the state of New Mexico
that get that little bit money I
mean that make that much with
very little money meanwhile the
majority of the big ones are
getting fat the ones that are on
the inside a really on the
inside and I think that's quite
a bit at eight we're delighted
to say that somebody doesn't the
server race like this I think
it's kind of sad that's all I
can say thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
you have to pass on Senate bill
seven thank you very much for
your diligence and hard work and
dedication to this bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you for okay then just
like you'd go ahead and take
over night if you want me to
think whatever you'd like I
enjoyed sitting back to those
and you handle.
But.
I guess I can handle that now
look at.
And I said if you're but.
Okay I believe that is a
Representative on.
Here are a committee
representative green.
Either one of them in that.
The attendees Representative.
All.
You know one and I.
You know one of them now I think
the man is shows are Mongolia.
Are they are within our sole.
Making sure that I got the right
I will go yeah.
In the I don't see either one of
them.
That's correct yeah I don't see
I know one I will.
The committee if you give me a
minute let me see if I can get a
hold of Representative remains
the only one that I have a phone
number for our and see what's
happening okay.
You Mr chair.
Okay Representative remains as
would roll over to bill so we're
done J. thank you everybody for
your patience with me I know
it's not easy to put up with me
and asked me my my wife and kids
so.
I we had a good session I don't
know if you'll be get the bills
to be more hopefully I opened up
that we will okay so thank you
everybody.
C. ng thank you everybody thank
you for all your hard work.
You all thank you all thank you
thank you.
What.
Very.
I think.
The.
I don't know what's sad by.
