This.
Do I still have for people.
For members of the committee.
Yes Sir including yourself.
Okay mother secretary will do is
we'll go ahead and call the
roll.
And then we'll proceed do not
explain to a representative will
be able my thoughts are what we
discussed was he was done.
And and let's see who will go.
Thank you did you do okay
Representative.
Zero you'll.
When public comment so I am I am
I got my devices here.
During that it.
Thanks so you able to hear what
I was talking about them.
I come of it yeah.
Okay.
What I'm going to do now is
restraint as some committee.
And the courses will work
perfectly with the plans that we
have at this time.
And we have a house bill twenty
and house bill thirty seven
Representative Jennifer used to
heal I am here.
Okay Representative Chandler.
Present the Rubio are you going
to let the two of you decide who
wants to go first to the
president.
Meals.
I'm okay with going in order of
the agenda so that it Chandler
go ahead great thank you happy
interrupt yes Mr chair would you
like me to take rules
I'm sorry yes please go ahead.
My last year.
I was clicking on
that was faster to get on so
we'll call the meeting to order
and then take pro thank you Mr
chair.
Okay Representative bash.
Representative Black.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
As.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Mr chair.
Okay.
I think I lost you there Mr
chair did you call on me
Representative sees yours very
good thank you so much Sir and
again Happy Birthday very very
good to see you I'm sorry of to
work on your birthday thank you
Mr chair for the opportunity to
present on house bill twenty and
it's great to see my colleagues
on the committee and my
colleague Representative Rubio
I'm pleased to be talking about
our bill
are built up with me today just
before I get into the substance
of bill I want to introduce
Steven Curtis I think he's in
the participants
Category Stephen is a labor
lawyer with use and Valdez sees
a very experienced in matters
such as these and he help draft
the legislation that we are
presenting today and you'll be
available to answer detailed
questions if should they come up
so again thank you very much for
having me
we very much appreciate the
opportunity to present the built
a healthy workplaces Act the act
recognizes and supports the
fundamental principle.
That employees who are shocked
six it should not be at work.
It also supports families by
ensuring works workers time off
to care for a relative or a
loved one as well as supporting
victims of sexual assault or
domestic violence.
The.
Visions are of the bill are
pretty straight forward the bill
allows employees to earn sick
leave at a rate of one hour for
every thirty hours worked.
It allowed it it differentiates
between small employers and
larger employers smaller
employers must offer employees
up to forty hours a year of sick
leave larger employers greater
than ten most offer sixty four
hours of sick leave per year.
Employees may use a sick leave
that they've earned to care for
themselves family members and to
address address issues
associated with being a victim
of domestic violence or sexual
assault.
The bill protects employees from
retaliation it protects
existing.
Collective bargaining agreements
an existing leave programs it
provides an enforcement
mechanism through the department
of workforce solutions and
offers penalty and requires
penalties to be levied against
employers who failure who fail
to comply so that's pretty much
the bill in the not so there's a
lot of detail in there but I
wanted to just provide a general
overview and the available offer
questions and just in closing I
wanted to share a perspective
with the committee.
We view this bill not just as an
employee benefits bill it's that
of course because employees
definitely are entitled to this
kind of support in the
workplace.
But I think we need to emphasize
the fact that it also supports
worker health and safety public
health and safety and it all of
that in order is to the benefit
of not just the employee but
employers as well I think one
thing that we've learned from
the pandemic and we've learned
so many things about inequities
and unfairness and
the differential between the
rich and the poor one thing
though we have learned about the
pandemic in the workplace is we
do not want workers coming in to
work sick.
We don't want to be there for
many reasons one they're not as
productive there likely to be
get more sick before they get
better they are likely to in
fact other employees and their
and to the extent they work with
the public they're likely to in
fact the input public that is
not good for society it's not
good for the employer who loses
productive work hours when all
of those things happened and so
I hope we can all come to
agreement all sides all parties
that sick leave is critical now
more than ever it's been
highlighted and I very much
request the support of this the
committee for our bill thank you
very much Mr chair.
This this Mr Kirk is one and two
we are a.
Thank.
A chair current members of the
committee I could like miss
Representative Chandler said my
name is Steven Curtis I'm a
labor lawyer in Albuquerque.
I don't have a lot to add I
think the fundamental policy
of this bill this is as
Representative Chandler said is
to make sure that employees are
not
Choosing to go to work
ill
this is particularly
in.
Important in the hospitality and
the food service industries
where such things not only
affect them stay employ
themselves in their co workers
but also the public I don't have
any further comments I would be
happy to answer any specific
questions that any member of the
committee has regarding the
bill.
Thank you
at this.
I guess we need to go to the
audience and see who is in favor
of this bill was opposed.
Would you handle that product
for us.
Yes and decide they can use the
raise hand function to go to the
very top then we can.
This call your unmuted.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Nicole a lot of it
and I'm survivor of domestic
violence and a disabled veteran
this is staying impacting
injuries in Iraq in two thousand
four I currently in and eligible
for VA benefits because I'm a
hundred percent disabled my
story was not always like this I
was in the New Mexico Air
National Guard in my health care
coverage was jokingly the same
as my service one week in a
month two weeks a year or while
in combat zones thus the other
eighty percent of the year I was
at the mercy of the public
health care as a service worker
I was forced to work through
strep throat throat which I get
four times a year the flu and
the common cold I was faced with
the choice handle your food get
fired or worse lose my housing
because I could not afford to
pay my rent House Bill twenty in
house bill thirty seven.
Not to you by and house bill
thirty seven is brought to you
by my district legislator the
honorable vice chair one giving
paid sick leave for three days
without the demand of a doctor's
note would have been a piece of
legislation that could have
stopped me from spending
infectious illness my military
readiness has taught me as we
battle climate change we must
prepare for more pandemics to
come this means giving a small
safety net to folks who just
like me want to pay their bills
without affecting those that
they serve now as a disable
human any kind of illness like
COVID could possibly kill me I
did not come back from Iraq to
die from a preventable illness
therefore these two bills are
potential life saving bills to
me it offers protection for
essential workers that I come
into contact with and as a
veteran who served my state and
my country I humbly request that
you vote yes on both house bill
thirty seven and house bill
twenty.
Let me just stop for one second
I hope that we can keep it
everybody's comments down to at
least three minutes because we
do have a long list.
Maria you're unmuted.
Maria you're unmuted.
Go ahead.
And all of the agency which.
I don't see okay okay.
Yes yes what is contentment well
I mean number is money and I but
I think so I'm a little bit late
is the Indian though is them in
second but I'll up with that
actually I think they see it the
and if the looking at the to I
mean the president on media
that's the attitude that coupled
with it need to know that in the
Lopez the state does the.
You know.
Good portion of the thirtieth so
in thinking also those are the
most vulnerable can you check
and then I'll get it or not with
that one million that it.
Open that I don't know what you
but it could on a reduced.
One seven not those the name was
when I want to add on that would
be a when the bottom of that and
that will do little Socorro
the needle.
I think they see it there.
No no we don't know six west
though.
I want to help we had almost
been you'll see on that
investment but I beat that must
going thank you.
You know in the middle then when
the other guy who.
Let's be those couple you.
Are requests that activating
thanks very in this particular
to to in order to collect people
if you put something but I left
my media for Alexa less than
Mexico yes yes.
We need your unmuted.
This.
Director unmuted.
Mr chair.
Committee members can you hear
me.
We can hear you thank you my
name is Greg Frazier I'm
president of the U. S. C. W. New
Mexico I have the proud honor of
assisting and representing over
forty two hundred grocery
workers here in New Mexico
grocery and other essential
frontline workers continue to
face the COVID nineteen bars had
on.
Well COVID is highlighted the
dangers of risk of contagion the
need for earned sick pay
predates COVID nineteen.
Less extremely ill most workers
will not stand or burn paid time
off because PTO was for the good
times the traps or other
excitement.
These workers prepare your food
in the deli bag your groceries
make and decorate your cakes cut
and prepare your fresh meat
seafood produce they visit with
you is a ring you up in your
items is a carry them to the car
the same workers at times must
make a choice between going to
work sick or having enough to
pay the rent buy food or meet
their families needs or to stay
home and give up something with
a worker cannot a full four to
get better if would you me and
the entire community at risk H.
B. twenty is good for everyone
it will result in a healthier
community health your classrooms
and so much more it is not free
and requires working and it will
likely result in less expenses
on the cost to train a new
worker due to longer employment
it must be earned in one hour
for every thirty hours does not
come very fast the bill forbids
payouts upon termination.
They'll be workplace Act and
wrapping up is good for parents
good for you good for kids good
for all workers good for
employers in good for reducing
the spread of virus cold and so
much more this bill is good for
New Mexico I now ask you to pass
the healthy workplace Act.
Thank you.
Janet your next.
Please yourself.
Hi my name is Janet and several
on secretary of UFCW local
fifteen sixty four and I'd like
to put a little different spin
on this I worked in the grocery
stores for twenty four years
before coming to the local I
have stories of because I was a
single parent of having the
choice to either stay at home
and take care of my child to go
to work all I can remember when
you're specially when I my
daughter have what we call
funding hospitalized for a few
days before thanksgiving and
knowing that I would get paid
for thanksgiving I had to leave
my child have my mom stayed with
her at the hospital and then and
then go back for thanksgiving
day and the day after one eighty
eight for so
there's so many there's so many
other stores out there but but I
can tell you as a worker and a
single mom this is a this is a
HB twenty is is something that
needs to be passed it is for the
are there for the larger
companies that can take care of
it and handle it the small
businesses have been so
decimated from this COVID
nineteen that there's hardly any
anymore it's going to create a
bigger bird so
we need to get the twenty both
are crucial time thank you.
Views and having to come because
they have to pay their bills I
had a situation myself for my
husband had COVID and myself had
COVID I'm very fortunate that.
That my company did pay for me
to be home but I was for my
husband he was sick for almost a
month and he had no sick pay
we were very fortunate and
blessed that he had some some
vacation and he also had aflac
but there's very very few people
that have that so we were very
fortunate
Also I'm I I just think it's
about time that New Mexico
owners they're workers we are
behind the times when it comes
to this type of thing and
you know it it's hard we have a
lot of people that are that
are making poverty wages in our
state and this bill will benefit
all of us I know that that many
of us are very dedicated workers
to our jobs so when we are
really sick we are really sick
of course you're gonna have a
few that are not that take
advantage of that but most
people go to work every day and
we need to honor we need on our
people here in the state we need
to to take care of us and in
that that.
Thank you so much.
Josh please and get yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen just
want to think of both of the
Sanchez today for bringing this
issue forward we are very
supportive and urge this body to
please support of of paid sick
leave thank you Mr chairman.
Jose your next please on mute
yourself.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee hi my name is
our accounts with the.
I've been working for forty six
years in that in the retail
business thus the grocery
business.
I'm going to.
Because I couldn't I've been
working for six years and I've
been working should because I
couldn't come to work sick
because I could afford to.
I can afford to be sick.
So I had to come to work because
I was a single parent I have to
raise two children and so I
hated going to work six toward
offending people also copying
sneezing
Can I can do the job I couldn't
I just couldn't I have to say
working I do support to children
and and my biggest fear was to
respond to journal so I do
support the H. B. health
workplace Act and thank you for
your time.
Carl your next please and get
yourself.
Good afternoon my name is Carl
Trujillo I worked at SMI's for
sixty one I am a meat cutter as
a meat cutter I handle raw meat
every day I I talk to the
customer directly I can not be
sick at work if I'm sick at work
I will be putting my customers
my coworkers in jeopardy working
as agency they have me on a on a
skeleton crew most of the time
so they put tremendous pressure
on us to go in especially as a
meat cutter.
This in turn House me always
thinking am I sick enough my
well enough to go and work I
should not have to think this.
If I'm not feeling well I should
not have to deal with the public
with corona virus specially the
changing variants it's going to
be with us for a long long time
this is something we have to
address right now I thank you
guys and I hope that house bill
twenty in house bill thirty
seven gets passed because we
really do need it thank you very
much for listening to me.
You're up next lease on mute
yourself.
Hello.
Your muted okay thank you I
apologize good afternoon.
Mr chair and Happy Birthday
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is Vince
Alvarado I am the president of
the New Mexico federation of
labor and I'm also the business
manager for smart local union
forty nine.
No I stand here in full support
of H. B. twenty you know this
for the reasons that have
already been stated you know
this bill.
Been long overdue so I thank you
and I appreciate your
consideration and in passing
this bill thank you for your
time.
Jeanie you're on mute and.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee thank you for
allowing me to speak my name is
Jean Hamrick I am a volunteer at
the get with a a RP New Mexico
A. A. R. P. New Mexico is in
support of H. B. twenty and HB
thirty seven we are to do in
past thank you.
Rob you're up next.
Good afternoon can you hear me.
Yes wonderful thank you my name
is rob black in the president
and CEO of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you today I know that
Terry Cole is also planning to
speaking in regards to
communications are sent to the
committee earlier regarding
constant joint concerns that
various business associations
have with both twenty and thirty
seven I guess my my main point I
want to bring forward is is we
would like to be included in the
conversation as employers as
those who have been asked to
carry the costs of this health
pandemic through health care
restrictions and closures we
believe that it's really
essential that the business
community included in and the
discussions around something
that is so integral to our
workplace we don't feel like
we've been part of those
conversations and asked to be
included in that so as the bill
Sanchez work to align the two
bills we would ask that they
include the business community
in those conversations
I had the opportunity work to
work with former commissioner
Maggie Hart Stebbins on the
Bernalillo county measure we
spent a lot of time working
together to improve the bill
that was passed there well in
the end of the day we it wasn't
something that we ultimately
supported going forward.
The fact that she engaged with a
the business community in a
meaningful way maybe that bill a
much better Neville both for
workers and employers so I would
encourage the bill's sponsors to
engage with the business
community allow us to engage
with you very difficult to do in
these difficult times we want to
do that in a safe productive way
but we need the opportunity to
have the conversation around
something set is so important to
our businesses to our employer
employees and any time when
we're under incredibly difficult
economic situations thank you
for the opportunity to speak to.
Marshall Martinez you are
allowed to speak.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Marshall Martinez
I'm the executive director of
equality New Mexico paid sick
leave is an L. G. B. T. Q. issue
worker justice is queer and
trans justice I want to applaud
and thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward I
want to note that I sent an
email to the sponsor just want
to make a call point out some
technical language this bill we
appreciate your attempts and
work to include members of the
LGBTQ community there is some
outdated language in this bill
it refers to civil union
partners which do not exist in
New Mexico and we respectfully
ask that the sponsoring
committee consider changing that
language to domestic partner and
again we're proud to support
this thank you.
Anna Maria you're up.
Good afternoon as a survivor of
domestic violence I can say that
simply leading ones abuser is
not the end of the road it is
only the beginning in a very
long journey to healing as an
individual who needs ongoing
physical treatments for my neck
and back injuries inflicted by
my ex husband I can honestly say
that I have had to skip
countless treatments as a result
of having no paid sick leave
protections and not being
allowed to my employers to
obtain such treatment as a
result I'm in pain daily and
have been since my ex husband
strangled me unconscious over
ten years ago.
As a single parent such as
myself we're often faced with
the choice of going to work or
not getting paid to stay home
with our children should they
become sick there have been
times in the past image I've
gotten written about work
because I chose put my son first
and remain home with him when he
was sick as a past employer of
mine refused to allow even
unpaid days off.
Essential workers who face
repeated exposure to COVID
nineteen have a very high chance
of contracting the illness as we
have seen around the world
should they have an autoimmune
disease like I do they're having
to weigh their life for death
options before every single
shift accordingly many of us
myself included have had to
leave careers with benefits and
pensions to find something that
is a better fit due to being
without paid sick leave
protections inflexible employers
and federal emergency leave
loopholes COVID nineteen did not
create these issues and simply
amplified them I know many of
you have seen the long wait
lines on the news to chain COVID
vaccines there are New Mexicans
who are faced with the option of
not paying a bill or receiving
their vaccines as such the end
of the individual is the one who
needs to be considered first as
we are the only ones left
without protection left without
grants worse or loans from the
state or city vote yes to house
bill thirty seven thank you.
I think you're up next.
This thank you Purcell Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Is is empty
I'm with the Representative I'm
a union representative for the
sheet metal workers local forty
nine this type of legislation
are helpful workers.
And it also takes collective
bargaining agreements into
consideration.
This is been a long time coming
and it's sad to say that we had
to go to a pandemic to work for
this type of legislation to come
up.
I'm in strong support of this
bill we represent over nine
hundred sheet metal workers in
the state of New Mexico and
they're all on board with
supporting this type of
legislation.
Thank you.
You're up next.
James.
Mr chair members the committee
Jason Weaks registered lobbyists
for the Albuquerque Hispanic
chamber of commerce New Mexico
hospitality association and the
brewers and distillers guild of
New Mexico we very much
appreciate the motivation behind
this legislation just would
point out you know they are
relativist the specially
hospitality
and the Stiller's local craft
beverage industry has been
extremely impacted by the COVID
crisis we are struggling as an
industry to keep our our doors
open we're all New Mexico on
businesses for small businesses
as a general rule and what we
appreciate the intent behind
this legislation we ask for an
audience to continue to
negotiate some changes because
if we can negotiate some changes
that allow us to implement some
of these changes in a way that
law actually just because these
businesses to go under then
everybody wins employees want to
have an employer the cares about
them and and our member
businesses do and obviously we
work in industries that have a
lot of public out interface with
the general public
that being said.
Intelligent in a and thoughtful
reform is gonna require
implementation that does not
because these businesses that
are literally facing a day to
day financial crisis just to
keep their doors open doesn't
come to to go under so that
being said I don't want the
labor the points that have been
made by others but is the as
currently drafted we do oppose
the legislation and want to see
some changes that particularly
look to allow small businesses
to implement these changes
effective and thoughtful ways
thank you.
Allison your next.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith and I am the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association we
stand today in opposition of
house bills twenty and thirty
seven we know the COVID nineteen
is impacted all of us not just
our bottom lines but our friends
families and our employees we've
heard we're all in this together
and if that is indeed the case
now is not the time for
additional mandates on
struggling local restaurants on
behalf of restaurants across the
state that are impacted by
recent closures we ask you to
please focus on initiatives that
will help create a path to
economic recovery until the
small businesses can reopen and
recover from the devastating
effects of shutdowns caused by
the pandemic they cannot afford
additional payroll burdens with
businesses having to take the
painful step of laying off
employees many who have been
with these restaurants for many
years we asked the Legislature
to please reconsider the timing
of these bills it will be very
difficult for businesses to re
open when they are allowed to
and very hard to hire back all
of their employees with any
additional mandates placed on
their payroll as we've heard
also from other members of the
business community we do also
wish to keep the lines of
communication open and wish to
be part of the discussion but as
these bills stand currently we
do stand opposed thank you for
your time.
Cindy you're up next.
Hi my name is Cindy federal I
work with Market Street I think
the H. B. O. H. B. two oh will
benefit everyone in the
community I know H. P. two H. B.
two will result in better house
New Mexico workers have no
choice but to work sick because
they need to support their
families my experience coming to
work ill resulted in other co
workers getting L. as well.
Families that have children and
elderly parents taking care of
them they take care of will
benefit from the H. B. twenty as
well.
H. B. twenty will allow those
who handle your food and money
to stay home and recover
quicker.
This bill will encourage
employees to stay with the same
employer this will result in
less turnover.
I know companies care about
their employees and want what's
best for them for their workers
I pray House Bill twenty and
thirty seven gets passed because
we really do need it.
Thank you very much.
David you're up next.
David are you there.
All right.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David
Kellman I support the healthy
workplace Act.
I'm a member of the United food
and commercial workers union
fifteen sixty four.
As we all know from COVID
nineteen the contagious disease
impacts not only the workers who
get sick.
But also a whole economy.
In multiple ways including
employers.
Such as those who proposed bill.
We just heard one of the
representatives of those
employers talking about how
they're suffering the
consequences of this the Texas
disease COVID nineteen.
This economic impact happens to
some degree even when the
disease does not reach the level
of the pandemic.
You've heard yes the.
So the total cost of COVID
nineteen toward Kearney it every
contagious disease.
This as a similar cost.
The total economic price we all
pay.
As a community we're not paying
for sick leave.
Exceeds by for the total cost
that we would pay.
By giving workers sick pay
therefore thank all of those who
have worked so hard to bring
this bill before this committee
today and I request the support
of the committee.
Healthy workplace.
Richard you're up.
Yes.
Chair members the committee my
name is sergeant Mason chair of
the action committee the league
of women voters of New Mexico in
and now twenty seventeen million
Jordan with over three hundred
and forty other organizations
across forty states to support
inclusive paid family medical
and medical leave and to reject
alternatives that leave people
behind so FOR that reason labor
loves New Mexico supports both
the to HB twenty and HB thirty
seven it's time for New Mexico
to and the United States to join
the rest of the industrialized
world thank allows pay for a
second families leave thank you.
Still in Europe.
John are you there.
This.
Caring.
Hello.
You can yes we can hear you okay
sorry hi my name's don Hoffman I
work at Smith's food and drug
I'm in support of this bill on
you know I could have a talk
about my family and how it would
benefit me in my family or you
know talk about coming to work
every day being sick you know I
handle food every day I can get
your family sick I can get other
people's family sick but this
goes all back in perspective
over you know how this pandemic
is started how it's ending in
the weight start.
You know I handle your food
every day and so many other
union workers like myself that
work every day that handle your
food handle your groceries.
You know I know that there's a
lot of workers or employers are
concerned about.
You know the cost of it you know
maybe you know I don't know what
to tell them you know we we need
to think about what is going to
be in the future so we don't
have a pandemic like this happen
again where it will be like how
it is now we need to think about
the future and the future of our
children and the families going
into the future.
So like I said I I completely.
Support this bill and I really
hope that you guys vote yes for
this bill and again thank you
for letting me speak today and
you guys have a good rest your.
You're at.
Myrna year at.
Carl Europe.
Hello.
my name is Carl Campbell I work
at store for on line for Smith's
food and drug
I've been here twelve years and
that twelve years I've been here
whenever people come in sick
most the time you other
responses I can't afford to miss
any sort of work I can't afford
to miss any sort of ours.
in the past that was with
influenza and other sicknesses
nothing really major I guess.
No people get sick but now with
COVID nineteen since we're in
the four corners area San Juan
County we don't exactly have a
cost report card it beating the
curse.
HB twenty would help us beat
that curves now as well as in
the future.
comment.
Is probably not going to going
to go away anytime soon so this
would be essential for us in
this particular area it would
help a lot even in the past few
weeks we've had people come in
they say you know my throat
hurts or not feeling too well
with HB twenty in place they
wouldn't need to make a bad
decision they wouldn't have to
be forced into a position to say
well I got to commend anyways
because they can't afford it
with HB twenty they wouldn't
even have to think twice about
that they could saying okay use
my sick bank stay home not put
anybody in danger not for
customers a danger any of those
things so.
Please consider this legislation
we really need it it would be
awesome to have
Be safe everyone and thank you
for letting me speak.
Ashley you're at Ashley.
Hello thank you yes.
My name is Ashley below small
business owner and employer
myself we for from a few.
Business associations but as an
employer
like that from my perspective.
Well this.
Well my position always afford
me the privilege of taking time
to testify on matters that
impact me and my family many of
my friends and family to not
have the privilege because H.
and I paid sick leave.
Ashley are you there.
So he's mute it.
Ashley.
Actually we've still got you on
me you.
If it's not working we might
move on to the next okay and so
sorry about that thank you in my
role I'm often referred to as a
job creator and live Jack to
much that I do wholeheartedly
embrace the responsibilities
that come with being an employer
and that includes recognizing my
employees exist outside of their
employment with me.
they have stresses
responsibilities and commitments
outside of those that we share
together and as an employer it's
my responsibility to ensure I
build a safe healthy and
comfortable livelihood that
provides for them their family
and just as I took a risk
starting my businesses my
workers sharing at risk by tying
their livelihoods to money.
Paid sick leave is a matter of
freedom is the freedom to care
for yourself your family and not
have to worry about whether
you're going to be short on rent
or.
Given the Neil because he had to
call out on it shifts.
because what health may come and
go the bills do not stop.
No one major consideration I
make when I started businesses
when and whether I'm even ready
for employees.
And I have no doubt you'll hear
from employers like we did today
that they can't afford to offer
paid sick leave and so I want to
make two quick points about that
first if you can't afford to
provide healthy workplace for
employees you are ready for the
responsibility to have employees
period and second offering paid
sick leave amounts to less than
one percent of the businesses
operating expenses so in spite
of claims from businesses adopt
shut the doors of the force to
provide paid sick leave I think
the fact is the fundamentals of
the business would not weren't
strong enough.
For them to make in the
competitive market so instead
they shifted that burden on
fairly to their employees so I
speak as a small business owner
and employer and I urge you to
please accept the freedom to
live a safe and healthy life to
all workers
that I have for myself thank you
for your time.
Charlotte Europe.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and council members my name is
sure that mother when you I work
with Juliana cook and MCSA PA is
in support of this bill because
we believe sexual abuse and
assault is a public health
crisis providing protections for
New Mexico's working families
not only serve survivors but
also provides protective factors
to stop violence to begin with
we are asking you to vote yes on
page B. twenty thank you.
Thanks in Europe.
Chair members of the committee
thanks for the opportunity to
speak today my name's Jason
Espinoza I am the New Mexico
state director with the national
federation of independent
business although we appreciate
the Representative bringing this
forward we do respectfully stand
in opposition to both H. could
be twenty and it house bill
thirty seven.
Since early March and a baby has
been conducting bi weekly COVID
nineteen surveys assessing the
effect of the public health
crisis on small businesses one
of the most concerning findings
is that one in for small
businesses so that's twenty five
percent say they will have to
permanently close if the current
economic conditions do not
improve over the next six months
that really signifies the
financials.
Rates that are small businesses
are it and the legislature on a
commend you last year really
stood up to the plate and pass
the small business cares relief
drugs one of things that was
interesting out of the six
thousand seven hundred and fifty
six grants that were awarded the
average grant size was fifteen
thousand dollars.
And that shows that really every
dollar matters to the small
businesses what we're concerned
about is that this legislation
would mandate and impose a
increase the cost for small
businesses across the state for
small businesses with fifty
employees making minimum wage it
would cost a small business
around thirty thousand dollars a
year to cover the cost of paid
sick leave even if the basically
wasn't used in Paul is going to
have to live as a liability on
their balance sheets
that thirty thousand dollars
would more than wipe out
completely wiped out the
financial assistance received by
the state last year in the form
of grants additionally when
Congress passed the family first
Corona virus response act they
did recognize the impact of the
cost and small business so the
offset the burden they also
included a refundable tax credit
that would reimburse them dollar
for dollar for the cost of
providing paid sick.
Leave wages to their employees
given the financial and economic
crisis that we are in today you
know we do have to oppose the
bill that's right and we would
urge the sponsors to consider
Marian the federal FCRA which
provided that refundable tax
credit to offset the cost of
small businesses you know given
COVID nineteen I think that is a
better path forward providing an
alternative that would be
support of a small businesses
and allow them the financial
means to provide paid sick leave
to their employees and would
really demonstrate that we are
all in this together thank you
chairman.
Pager at.
And my unmuted.
We can hear you okay hi I'm page
I am a grocery store worker at
Smyths store number four twenty
seven.
I just want to say I am in full
support of schools H. B. twenty
and H. B. thirty seven.
And I really appreciate are you
guys giving us a chance to speak
and are trying to pass this bill
because I think it's really
important for a lot of the
community.
And these are for keeping.
Everyone safe.
Thank you.
The next person on a galaxy
phone is ready to speak.
Hello thank you chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Marie Silva I worked for
United Market Street in that
Santa Fe nine twenty seven.
In December of two thousand
seventeen my employer Jeremy
Miller wrote me up because I
have called in sick during the
week before Christmas but about
and you to have I keep getting
sick for about five or ten
minutes and I had to call a
manager to get me out at the
register in June of two thousand
eighteen.
I lost a lot of blood in the
bathroom at work so I told that
loading of us to go to the
emergency room I went to
Presbyterian and they diagnosed
me with stage four colon cancer
but that should have been a red
flag for chairman Miller that I
was getting sick for some moment
so please help us to pass the H.
B. twenty it doesn't matter if
it's whatever holiday we get
sick so thank you for listening
to me.
Gabriel you're up.
Gabriel are you there.
Michael you're up.
Michael are you there.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
Hello I work for four fifty nine
smis and I just want to let you
know I've been in the business
since nineteen fourteen I'm
sorry miss so I've been in
business for fifty years and
many times I've been sick and
going to work and knowing that I
should have been there I do
support this bill and also
support abuse bill thanks for
listening to me have a great
day.
Shake up your at.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee would like to
thank the sponsors for bring
this bill my name's Jacob Vigil
I'm with New Mexico voices for
children are thanking the
sponsors for bringing up this
issue we had New Mexico voices
for children have long brought
attention to the widespread lack
of paid sick leave as a as a
major problem that needs to be
addressed and we know that the
impact of the pandemic in terms
of public health and economic
security has been a considerable
on our New Mexico children with
income lost and in security that
comes with that and a strong
paid sick leave policy is the
protects workers their families
and the public is a key part of
New Mexicos recovery and
ensuring that our kids are not
left behind so for that reason
New Mexico voices for children
stands import in support of of
that policy thank you.
For the opportunity to speak
today.
Gabriel are you still there.
Yeah can you hear me now.
We can hear you are you able to
your yep okay perfect.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Gabriel
Stallis and well my current
career provide sick time I was
in the restaurant industry for
over a decade in the state and
saw firsthand the negative
effects of a lack of sickly it
hurts the health of the workers
who gets.
Sick workers must work around
them and by the public they
interact with is a public health
issue it's the least we can do
to care for ourselves as well as
the many member many of our
communities most vulnerable
members who only have leaned on
more than ever during this
pandemic ask you to support and
passed paid sick leave thank you
for your time.
Secretary mccamley you're at.
Thank you Mr chair Happy
Birthday into the members of the
committee appreciate you hear me
now my name is bill mccamley I'm
the secretary The New Mexico
workforce solutions department
we are the agency that both
house bill twenty in house bill
thirty seven.
Requires to enforce the
provisions of each bill however
there is no appropriation
attached to either bill that
would give us the resources to
be able to enforce those
provisions and let me tell you
why this is very concerning.
The minimum wage is a
requirement in the state of New
Mexico and for a lot of the same
reasons that I'm hearing for the
folks supporting this bill
wanting paid sick leave you want
people who are working in
certain conditions to at least
have a certain amount of money
so that they can live.
And our agency is tasked with
enforcing that rule we have
about eight investigators we
have one lawyer who is
responsible for doing all the
legal action in terms of taking
people to court we can when
they're not paying the minimum
wage we have a couple of support
staff so we've got about ten or
twelve people that are doing
that and that alone we've worked
really really hard over the last
two years to bring down the
backlog of cases that people
report to us when they're not
getting paid the minimum wage we
felt we've been pretty
successful that was almost two
thousand last year were down
under about nine hundred right
now.
But the problem with each of
these bills if they are passed.
We are not given the resources
to enforce them what's going to
happen we have the same amount
of staff.
And let's say at the very very
least we get the same amount of
complaints coming in for people
who businesses you wouldn't be
paying sick leave that we get
for the minimum wage so in
August of this last year twenty
twenty we feel that three
thousand four hundred ninety
four telephone calls for people
that wanted to either file a
claim or check on a claim we
feel about three thousand four
hundred eighty five calls just
in September two thousand three
hundred thirty five calls in
October in almost two thousand
calls in November.
If our workload was doubled and
we were not given the staff to
enforce these rules what would
happen.
Both parts of our
responsibilities we get done
poorly.
We wouldn't be able to have the
staff to continue to enforce the
minimum wage our backlog would
go up again in people with valid
claims would not get paid on the
flip side.
If people file claims with us
that they weren't getting paid
sick leave we would have minimal
resources to be able to
investigate and enforce those
claims as well.
Furthermore there's not the
legal resources to prosecute
folks who are being bad actors
in this so I believe and I could
be wrong I might be flipping
these but in house bill twenty
it requires district attorneys
to work with our office to help
prosecute these things but
there's no funding mechanism
attach that for district
attorneys and so Dave generally
been wanting to enforce laws on
murder and rape and an assault
and that sort of thing and it's
been it's been difficult working
with some do say is office on
these weights that claims we had
some success working with city
attorneys offices and help us
prosecute the specifically the
City of Albuquerque
but it's been tough because DA's
are over worked as well I
believe house bill thirty seven
requires us to take any of these
cases to court we we just don't
have the legal staff to do that
and so Mr chair members of the
committee and especially to the
to Sanchez I'm imploring you
that if these bills are passed.
to make sure that we have the
resources not taking any any
stances on on macro or negative
the bill itself but if you pass
these bills I don't want to have
to have minimum wage.
Claimants people with with
complaints competing with folks
who may or may not be getting
sick leave in terms of how we're
enforcing those bills and I'm
really very very concerned that
these bills are passed without
these considerations you all may
not get what you want because
we're not gonna be able to
enforce any of these provisions
I thank you for your time and
I'll be hanging out if you'll
have any specific technical
questions on how the enforcement
procedures for these things work
thank you very much Mr chair
hope you have a good rest your
meeting.
Tammy you're up.
Family Robinson.
Melissa Europe.
Good afternoon my name is let's
I'm a meat market manager at
Albertsons
today I'm just trying to
Representative for my team many
of whom have over thirty years
of experience and like the guy
said our to administer is we're
running on a skeleton crew many
of my team of already gotten
COVID
we're really struggling right
now and at this we're just
trying that this bill can pass
I know it helped a lot of us
sorry even right now I'm at work
trying to do this but I'm I'm
just asking for supporting this
and this as well as all the rest
of my team here at apercent
thank you.
Your app.
Well you're at.
Hi good afternoon all my name is
Camille king Donna and I'm in
favor of house bill twenty I
think this is long overdue for
New Mexico and three central
workers as you can hear.
Most of us live paycheck to
paycheck we can't even afford to
call in sick.
I know it's you've heard it over
and over.
This means paying your house
payment.
Or buying groceries you know.
I understand.
That many people come to work
sick and that's not OK.
The time is right New Mexico
needs House Bill twenty thank
you very much for your time.
Are you there.
Can you hear me.
You can hear me now okay my
name's Tammy Robinson I also
work for Smith's as a supervisor
I have sent home on more than
one occasion employees who have
come to work sick and make you
send them home because they
can't afford to lose the pay a
lot of them single parents I can
empathize and I and I understand
this bill however the reason I'm
working it's Mrs because I'm
also a small business owner and
I early in COVID I am qualified
for not even a loan I couldn't
even get a loan to help with the
COVID shut downs I still have
multiple business relationships
with companies who are still
closed to this day so I've lost
significant amount income I want
I went and got a job it's agency
so that I can continue to pay my
employees to keep them without
having to lay them off so my
Smith's income pays my employees
finally in the last month or so
I got some of the COVID of the
COVID requests and they caught
all of my taxes up I was behind
on every single tax my employee
taxes and insurance are bigger
than my payroll and I caught
every single one out but you add
that to it and there's no way
there's no way as a small
business I'm struggling now I
will take food out of my
children's mails to give to my
employees if they have a crisis
but to mandate it and to make
that an added expense
I I cannot personally afford it
and I hope that you will
consider that in all of us
really small businesses that are
struggling to survive this COVID
shut down thank you.
What you're up one that.
What are you with us.
While you're at.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name's Paul
guessing on president of the Rio
Grande foundation we're economic
policy research institute based
in Albuquerque and we deal with
New Mexico state local policy
issues.
Really briefly while we all
want.
Paid sick leave as a benefit it
is definitely not free and it
will have negative impacts on
small businesses many of whom
have been shut down for nearly a
year at this point.
Currently New Mexico has the
sixth highest unemployment rate
in the entire country and that
is a serious issue that must be
considered as well while we all
want a benefit some people are
going to not find jobs as a
result of businesses being
shuttered was simply unable to
hire new people.
I would urge you the committee
to consider.
Using a twenty nineteen bill H.
B. fifty five thirty one which
was introduced by Rebecca Dow
ends Representative would low
above at the time to offer
incentives tax incentives for
businesses especially small ones
who offer these kinds of family
friendly policies.
I know the legislature's
considering many similar
proposals are in various tax
incentives to help businesses
recover from the pandemic rather
than using the staff I would
encourage you to use the carrot
thank you.
Randy you're at.
Randy and meet yourself.
United now.
Your.
Yes we can hear you start my
name is Randy trainer on the
registered lobbyists for in a I.
O. P. the commercial real estate
development association
listen dollars testimony to this
point I think I could make this
real short is I just want to as
these bills move forward I would
like to urge the Sanchez to work
with the business community I
think there's a real opportunity
here to get something passed
that will work for everyone
thank you very much.
While you're at Kyle.
It's been and you can hear right
now I'm where I work placements
for for.
Five years four ninety four so I
pretty much.
Over Smith and I usually get
sick once a good year and.
The all the commentaries between
both sides from.
From the grocery side and I've
been to the union contracts and
all the coaches and I understand
how businesses want to save
money.
Over sick pay.
A lot.
And it's so hard to hear from
both sides.
Mostly on the other side that
businesses will recover because.
We are fine and dandy but.
I support this bill.
Because of that now right now
and I cannot for a day off.
Because I'm working less than
thirty hours a week that's not
enough to support myself or my
family.
This pandemic and things like
that.
We are working through a stab in
creating less hours.
And it's scary it's scary that.
If I do think how am I going to
pay.
I'm forced to go back home.
And that's really sad because it
effective my home in Arizona a
lot you're a pandemic.
But I.
I agree on this whole.
Bill and everything but thank
you for all you guys for
listening.
And yes I'll have a good day
thank you.
Lucilla.
Was.
When I start with this million.
C..
Is that what this mean the
little sea level so yeah you so
you're not that are how old are.
This is a little batch.
We know the Ninos in mother that
they see our sewing in but other
central the one value that
actual.
Lab on the mu I'm the only trust
from yes so how of the whole to
full screen mode let me ask.
Is this young man thank it was
the only the subtlety of seventy
that Financiera let's see
implement they will would open
the what we do a scan I wouldn't
that I hold the levers Western
Union hello Act no for the most
CENIC whether going you and low
am I ask us we'll still see
people's.
This is the imposed MPO order
nope got proportional of the
established but improvement
after the that lease I see no
monthly fees seeing that the C.
C. Harper so that was the
federal people that only meant
that under stress from media.
Being the CV no word that are
awful The Dallas Morning the
place is absolutely going back
you yeah the mass what can we
look to order this is the
thalamus in New Mexico yeah but
up very suddenly settle that
locust I understand little
jungle contract settled last
concert also.
Meanwhile media locally fecal
oral so you'll see none
Seattle's they simply there will
need also those program of the
are you asking move just from
me the explosion will be sacked
no in the rear.
I yep also put the imposed on
extending most finance yet I'm
in fiscal my stay on you.
Look for the most total.
Is that people.
A sort really settling for funds
yeah they they they just come by
seacoast mental school my Lexus
I yes but does put impediment
Act.
In this is how do you get what
they see.
Inactivating thank CFP this is
the most Lucille honestly Alice
but up remotely I list and we
will make you laugh you.
We're facing an impossible
choice between paying their
bills and attending to their
care giving and health needs
this is particularly true for
communities of color low low
wage earners and women who tend
to bear the burdens of
caregiving for both children and
elders.
At the end of the pandemic the
federal government acted quickly
to provide limited paid sick
leave and paid family medical
leave protections to individuals
who were diagnosed with COVID or
who or quarantine due to
exposure or who needed to care
for a child due to the COVID
related school closures however
these provisions were limited in
scope and reach and many New
Mexico workers were unable to
access leave through these
provisions.
These provisions also expired at
the end of twenty twenty.
The Southwes women's Law Center
supports the passage of a paid
sick leave policy for all New
Mexicans yes the committee to
vote for paid sick leave.
Thank you.
Joseph Europe now.
Do we have just.
Carleigh Europe.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm car
less contact the president of
the New Mexico business
coalition we represent hundreds
of businesses in thousands of
individuals throughout the state
we understand why people want
this bill.
But regarding house bill twenty
and house bill thirty seven we
respectfully oppose the bills as
written.
There's some technical issues
secretary mccamley spoke about
the lack of funding for the
bill.
These bills require ten new full
time employees and almost a
hundred thousand dollars for
technology.
In order for them to be able to
work within the parameters of
the new law and that's not been
addressed that's one concern
there's also a concern over the
jurisdictional issues between
the district attorneys who
normally do these kind of issues
or handle them in court and the
Attorney General that the bill
calls for who doesn't.
There's a couple of other issues
that we are really concerned
about and that is for an
advocacy group.
That has no standing in this
issue to
filed a complaint about an
employer that really needs to
stay between the employee and
the employer and if there's a
violation then of course it has
to go to the proper channels but
to have a third party to be
involved in filing complaints
really puts the business at a
disadvantage.
Right now you've heard from
others about the financial
burden that we're placing on
businesses we as I said at the
beginning we understand the
need.
We would be willing to work with
the Sanchez on this but we
weren't contacted and right now
coming out of this pandemic yes
in fact we are coming out of it
because we're still with many
businesses significantly
lockdown and unable to operate.
It does create an untenable
financial burden on them so I
hope that the committee members
will take that into
consideration and I urge you to
vote no on these bills right now
as they stand thank you for your
time and your consideration.
John B. you're at John B..
We can hear you.
Right.
Members of the committee thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak today my name is John
camera and I'm an employee as
small Mr for sixty one.
Changing with the pandemic and
with times changing we must as
well.
Those of us working retail are
out on the front lines every day
we work.
And we work hard.
That we take and not just to us
as individuals at risk to our co
workers our customers and the
community at large.
Workers come to me afraid to
tell management that they don't
feel well simply because they
are afraid of being sent home
and told not to come back
without proof that they don't
have COVID not being able to be
compensated for the
circumstances that are beyond
their control.
It is important to remember that
this bill is not offering free
money to those employees that
are L. rather it is and by us
one hour at a time through
thirty hours of hard work and
commitment to our employers we
desperately need a line of
defense to keep us safe
especially in times as uncertain
as these.
And it is for these reasons that
I urge you to all to raise in
support of HB twenty thank you
for your time.
Santana your up Santana.
Good afternoon my name is
Santana and I support this bill.
I do have a lot of.
friends and.
The co workers that have that
are single parents and have
children they get sick I myself
have a child who.
has gotten sick and has not
wanted me to leave to work
because.
They want me to stay home and
take care of them.
But I have to choose between
that.
And my rent and.
I think that's about all I have
to say I do support H. B. twenty
and the girl thirty seven.
Thank you for your time.
Thanks John Fairchild we have
the up next if you want a need
for self.
John are you there okay can you
hear me.
Yes.
Yes my name is John for child
and I work at smis at four sixty
one you're in Santa Fe and I've
been in the gross retail now for
a.
Almost forty years when I did
work with first to awhile back
in the eighties and I'm just
calling in so asking you to
support this bill because it's
kind of hard for a us to take
any time off because if we they
have we we have to take time off
then we have to use our vacation
time and then we lose the cation
because we can't afford to be
off and it's got to come from
somewhere so all you know it's
it's just that if you've got a
family which I do and if I get
sick and I got to take out of my
vacation time then there goes my
vacation with my family so I
just ask that use of support you
so support is bill and and that
just think about us as
individuals and that has family
people that the you know this
this is a positive thing and
once again like it was said it's
not free money and that we do
are now we work forty hours a
week and it's in our for for
forty hours and we do work hard
and I just asked you please
support this bill thank you.
We have is
Eric.
Eric are you're at.
Hello my name is Eric Rivera
chairman and members
I'm a community health worker.
also community organizer and I
poll of.
Suits and various committees
that serve the community family
and you
I'm also employed by the
university of New Mexico so I
work with families day in and
day out meeting their needs as
far as Education behavioral
health medical health.
And I just want to kind of frame
that this pandemic has shown to
light.
Our many of the things that a
lot of our families and our
communities around the state
are.
going without and.
Even though COVID has put
urgency of the need for of a
bill lake House Bill thirty
seven I think that
It's it's a need that surpasses
this pandemic
I also.
want to make sure that you know
as it goes forward and if these
are blended together
that the language.
for family member is also taken
into account because you know it
I believe that a lot of people
have taken on responsibility for
other family members and loved
ones
and are taking care of a lot so
it's not just a.
The the.
Traditional nuclear family more
more
household and New Mexico is is
one that is a collaboration of
people trying to
of make it day in and day out
thank you for your time.
I need a year at.
I need a year at.
Are you with us and ADA.
Darlene here at Darlene.
Hi can you hear me.
We can hear you.
I thank you for hearing me today
my name's starting Tom
attached agency food and drug
for sixty three I am I am for H.
B. twenty I just want to know
that you know we work very hard
and you've heard all the stories
we've been there you know since
day one Senators home pandemic
you know you know the start with
we're still there we're still
working hard and you know when
you're when you're.
Feeling sick and you know not
you know I'm a hard worker and
and having to think you know
sure am I able to even work
today because I'm so exhausted
I'm feeling sick you know I
don't have the trace I have to
work you know I have to pay my
bills I have to be able to pay
my rent and pay my car payment
my insurance you know we don't
have a Tracy now even though we
know that will point and say we
might you know make some amounts
electors you know we don't have
a choice and so I just wanna let
you know that I am for H. B.
twenty thank you for listening
and have a good day.
T. call Europe T. call.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee please
join us on your behalf of the
employer Representative.
You're obligating the chamber of
commerce New Mexico chamber of
commerce Albuquerque Hispano
chamber of commerce in Los
crucis student performance this
these New Mexico continue to
rely on the facts of COVID
nineteen pandemic and this is a
public health orders.
Activity restrictions recovery
will not be using our school
specially for small businesses
in our state.
That being said we are supposed
to a patchwork of different Hey
on the sick leave ordinances and
sadly for her legislature passes
statewide we all that is
reasonable and accommodating
price fourteen features.
Delayed and staff will
mitigation providing businesses
and ample opportunity to prepare
the exemption very small
businesses of a particular size
or less from the lead policy and
practice for all other affected
small businesses in the
recognition of existing generous
leave policies that a company
may have.
Substitute for mandatory sick
leave when we do a fair
processes for resolving the
disputes after a statewide
preemption of local right now
all legislation.
Mines are mandatory
requirements.
Are to be operation of small
business.
One.
All the potential impacted
several market sectors and for
many of our struggling job
creators would be devastating we
are hopeful that a bipartisan
bicameral solution can be
developed and we are eager to
recall or thank you very much.
And like I was a single mom and
I had to go to work all this
time.
You know to support my kids
because of you know I was the a
single mom I never got child
support or anything so I had to
do what I had to do for my kids
I always went to work second I
always wished that.
I would get paid sick leave all
these times for thirty some
years.
And now I'm sixty today.
And I would appreciate it if you
guys passed both bills.
You know because you know would
be retiring in about four years
to help all single moms or
single dads in New Mexico.
Thank you for hearing me today.
Rachel Here at Rachel.
Hello.
Hello we can hear you go on okay
hi my name is Rachel and I'm an
employee at Smith road and Drug
over here on in store for ninety
six.
I can relate to all of the
situations that people have
called in and of all those also
witnessed some of the situations
as far as some of my single
working co worker parents to.
Really do struggle every day and
and a kid getting sick or
they're not feeling well really
takes a toll on their their
livelihood and it's really.
It touches my heart really bad I
mean I've had to make that
decision before you know because
I it wasn't affordable to be
sick that day which is nonsense
you know you don't plan when
you're going to be sick and to
balance the budget on what the
year you'll have to go to work
or not is it's just not it's
just not right I don't see it as
being right so I have.
That I fully support the W. B.
twenty bill and thirty seven
full heartedly aiming we really
need to catch up with all this
stuff now with this pandemic
going on and.
You know people just being
displaced everywhere you know
time.
Having sick leave.
Shouldn't be an issue you know
going to work sick and infecting
other employees co workers I
mean just infecting others in
your community it is an option
you know you don't have to go to
work sick because you can't
afford it and so I just wanted
to show my support for the bill
at twenty and thirty seven.
Thank you and have a happy
birthdays chair.
One that you're up Wonda.
One that you're at.
Angela Europe.
Daisy your update CV.
Easy are you able to you.
Thank you you Ortiz September
balance of Veronica
that's the that's the next.
Hello can you hear me we.
Yes I'm for the bill
or the bill of.
For twenty I work for Smith also
and I think it's a good idea to
keep other employees and
customers safe.
Knowing that everybody does get
sick from time to time and thank
you for hearing me.
Carla your car left.
Yes thank you can you hear me.
We.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Carla
Kugler I am the president of
associated builders and
contractors we stand in
opposition of this bill while we
agree that sick leave is
important mandating and imposing
penalties at this time it will
really only heard further hurt
small businesses we urge the
sponsors and the state trying to
figure out a way to incentivize
small businesses to be able to
provide this necessity thank you
very much.
Joseph you're up Joseph.
Yes yes we can hear you hi yes
my name is Joseph realness and
in favor of bill H. B. twenty
because yeah and I'm like a a
lot of us to work hard a lot of
us do need the money
A lot of us really Candie
Gardner because we can't afford
that and I even have a kid in
you know I I know the struggle
of needing that.
And it would be awesome if you
all could approve it so that way
if we do have to stay home and
take care of family we're not
gonna be missed out on tax we're
not gonna object okay well in
order not to give up on this
make sure you we don't spend
this much on this food in.
In on turn make life less of a
struggle but of thank you guys
very nice out and and please do
approve these bills that we do
need I think you guys have a
good one stay safe stay healthy
and to the German dude happy
birthday thank you.
Linda you're up Linda.
Hi.
Hi my name is Linda guy a ghosts
I work for Albertsons nine zero
five.
And I am also a member of the U.
UFCW nineteen six fifteen sixty
four.
I would like you to pass this
bill I've been in the grocery
business since nineteen eighty
three and we have never had sick
pay so anytime I was sick I
would still have to get up and
go to work I have bills to pay
need to get them paid so
I can't afford to be calling in
sick and as a supervisor for
Albertsons I've got not a lot of
employees show up sick they also
say they can't afford it either
however you know with this COVID
nineteen going on.
We need to send them home I
don't want them of handling the
customer's groceries six and I'm
sure the customers don't
appreciate that either so we
need this bill we need to be
able to
provide for our families and pay
our bills thank you very much.
Darlene your app Darlene.
Are you there Darlene.
Ashley you're at.
Early in are you with us.
Dr Barnes you're at.
Okay good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Asha.
Irons and and a primary care
physician New Mexico I would
like to speak in support of
house bill thirty eight thirty
seven and not consolidating it
with still twenty.
It's sick leave is essential for
my patients and significantly
improves my ability to care for
them.
House bill thirty seven was
specifically written by the
community to meet needs of
workers it is smart for New
Mexico employers as it improves
the health and well being of
their workers paid sick leave
allows for people to use their
basic human right to care for
themselves.
Our family when needed and to
provide exposure to others and
possible worsening of disease it
has always been important issue
for me but has become much more
obvious for the general
population with the current
COVID situation I've had many
conversations in the last couple
months with patients called
revisions called with COVID
symptoms only after having been
at work that day they have
potentially exposed other
workers and they themselves
understand the gravity of that
that.
But we had no choice because
they couldn't risk not being
paid.
I often spend time negotiating
with patients whether they
should take care of medical
issues or work they should not
be a debate they should be able
to do both please give them a
choice to protect themselves and
others and realize that a
healthy workforce allows for
more productivity efficiency and
better service in the future
please passed house bill thirty
seven which allows for
sufficient paid sick leave for
all New Mexicans.
Zoom user you're up.
If you could just out let us
know who you are when you speak
as well.
You're up.
Brought up
Sorry about that.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee I work for Spence
grocery stores as an employee
most of us take advantage of the
preventive health care that is
offered to us every year and
with that the doctors give us
advice on how to live a better
lifestyle you to better diet and
exercise and I appreciate that
so much because I know where I'm
at right now and as as an
employee I am doing my part to
stay healthy so I know sometimes
we will get sick and we should
not have to worry about losing
pay we should not so with that I
support house bill twenty thank
you.
Shannon you're up Shannon.
Thank you very much.
She enrolled in the.
A lot of time in industry before
coming to New Mexico in large
companies deal with this issue
trouble years ago decades ago
actually and they recognize that
their health employees.
Are actually more the most
valuable insights asset they
have in healthy workers have
less absence and are much more
productive.
And in order to raise the
standard of living for all New
Mexico in creating jobs so we
can be competitive in a world
environment.
Global environment this is the
kind of bills that we need to
pass.
Secondly everyone hear everyone
say that they want that we want
our children to stay without
adequate health care and leave
of absence and work environment
they have no choice but to go
someplace else so I support both
these bills thank you.
Merry and your app Marian.
Hi can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Thank you
Mr chairman and all members of
the committee my name's Merriam
and our I worked in the grocery
industry for approximately
thirty seven I've worked in the
restaurant industry or
approximately thirty seven years
I work for the grocery stores
are in the meeting apartment and
I am in favor of HB twenty six
K. because I raise my children
alone due to the to a divorce
and I agree with the survivor of
domestic violence having said
this when my children were sick
or if I was sick I couldn't
afford to take off from work
However going to work sick but
customers and other employees in
jeopardy of getting sick because
I was working sectors like look
for to take off are to put food
on my take on my children's
table arms having to raise some
loan and or pay the rent so it
was very difficult
Now I am working.
I'm still working in the grocery
stores but I am an employee at
the cat and I see so many
employees in the same situation
I was in back when I was the the
actual grocery store employee.
I urge you to please up vote yes
for H. B. twenty six Hey this is
something that essential workers
and all workers in New Mexico we
need our.
It would be such a good thing
for them the with that have to
worry about you know you Mr a
day or two of work and
They would have to worry about
that getting a paycheck for the
one day one day can make such a
big difference are and are
single parents out wages or in
any way just so I ate thank you
for listening to me and and I
urge you to please vote yes for
H. P. twenty six thank thank
you.
Daisy your update see.
Hi my name is daisy gonna be
there I've worked for Smith
seventeen years I work like many
other people paycheck to
paycheck and no matter how sick
I am or my children I can't
afford to miss work also behind
on my bills I support H. B.
twenty thank you.
Melanie you're up Melanie.
Hi I'm the only one and I'm a
member of the New Mexico working
family party I am lease party
I'm here in support of their HB
thirty seconds civically because
I think it's stronger well I'm
I'm disabled I've been bedridden
for the last three years and I
March for teen the two thousand
nineteen I had a stroke I was
transferred to el Paso from Las
crucis I'm.
My husband wasn't allowed to
come see me at all you start
he's this works in the
restaurant business so I have to
disagree with the earlier.
Restaurants here about how they
take care that workers is co
workers had to band together in
order to have enough cash to
come see me because it was a
server and therefore didn't get
paid like a paycheck he was
mostly tips I'm they started a
cash fund to get him to be able
to see me they cover he shifts
for.
So he didn't lose his job.
I was only able to see my
children once during that time.
And in may of two thousand
nineteen it got worse actually
was in the hospital for a week
due to my gall bladder mark
would come down and see need
when he was offered the ships
there was no time off and and I
developed sepsis
I was in the ICU for a week and
I only had a forty percent
chance of survival.
Yet he wasn't able to take off
time from work to come say
goodbye or spend what little
time he had with me
Thank you bye now and how
terrifying that moment was.
He didn't wasn't able to take
off work because we still needed
to provide a home for children.
And.
I got to see my children once
during that hospitalization
thankfully I got better.
But mark is my full time care.
And.
We're actually scheduling back
surgeries to get me out of my
bed around Corona virus.
I'm closing out of state
because this is the only time
he's actually been able to take
enough time off to do it.
And.
With the passage of HB thirty
seven.
No other family has to
experience the terror that
through and I I urge you to
please just.
I understand that other family
should feel.
Thank you.
Councilwoman land Santa Fe
councilwoman land Senate.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name of
lands that are from Albuquerque
many of you know me as a city
councilor who has championed
sick leave at the city level
Menino you me as a health care
advocate some million survivor
of sexual abuse others know me
as a cancer survivor which is
the capacity that I'm sharing
today.
I have been battling stage four
Hodgkin's lymphoma a type of
blood cancer for the past ten
years.
No receiving treatment where I
go in for chemotherapy every
four weeks for the last four
years.
Because that routine you see
some of the same patients and
their families every time come
and.
Oftentimes I see patients by
themselves and I try to come for
that I know now how difficult it
can be the most common issue of
them being alone was due to lack
of paid sick leave.
Cancer the lack of paid sick
leave did not discriminate
cancer patients old and young
settle because many of their
loved ones did not have access
to simply in during treatment
alone or having to hear that
your cancer has progressed got
mentioning themselves but
knowing that even children with
cancer having also navigate
alone because their mother
father or grandparent couldn't
be with them since they didn't
have access to paid do you have
your heart wonderstruck.
Is the reality of many children
with cancer and the reality of
their caregivers parents would
tell me that why inside their
cars for lunch knowing that
their child is going through
chemotherapy without their
mother or their father I your
site I hope no family would have
to endure cancer or expanding
your yes chronic illness however
the reality eleven is one of
cancer lupus diabetes now COVID
nineteen.
Just a few exactly just received
or recover from sexual stillness
is critical in keeping our
families healthy and our
community thriving and ascential
worker that is keeping our city
and state running should not
have to choose between their
paycheck going to work sick or
their next meal children with
cancer should not have to tell
their mothers to sell their
Christmas presents to before
their next prescription with
that urges the border of passing
get sick leave I lean in support
of house bill thirty seven
discussions progress on hospital
twenty and thirty seven I hope
legislators look at the
provisions that support all
working families thank you and
have a great thing Mr chairman.
Myrna.
You're at.
C..
He.
I'm.
One is that your business and
they immune but thank so you
need not a scandal my limited
and that the C. cast members
center there was a that it just.
It has already left.
C. nexus of the test by those
border image that.
What was done in the central Mr
also is a lonely because we'll
stand in respect for media.
Agency for some of the at the
New York and into rescue to
Seattle's.
Eight million women thing for
rural Olympios.
Well in the other words C. and
was there another.
See is that was they would.
Insing Rundle.
Is that Katie are are at.
Your this place and this summer
says increasing demise of COVID
the Islamic.
But we the scenery in fact go at
the FM media.
But John they missed also noted
in the system at the S. by those
for Infinera it was one granting
back to finance you.
You investors sentiment that.
Yes in a most decisions ET let's
get by that.
It was a sense yet but also with
the is this element that product
at yes I need SKB did they check
SJK.
Yes I will you know what I mean
but so.
Given the media must own a state
level is.
Is this the last time the last
in all receiving mostly your
claim and schedule your first
program is there for you.
Do it on the up and then yeah
what acid to questions yet.
I think that should be enough
for me yes more and more.
In this is a look at the list of
a hundred percent directing me
go thank god nexus for the S. by
those.
What impressed me that.
Yes funding as a host with the
most make taking taking emotions
basically.
When the most and is just a
little less already BB.
Both in C. initiative it's
investigating but I get the
house a little but you'll see
that a high lotus.
At eleven on the school day
the nexus yes yes.
Peter you're up next Peter.
Are you with us Peter.
Anna.
We are now beginning.
Okay my name is Peter Jarvis
because one ninety one in Santa
Fe eight which agency we want to
just want to let you know that
I'm in favor HB twenty eight
additional benefit a lot of
people
And at workers at the store and
within the company's.
Thank you that's it.
You're up next Bernie.
Hello.
We can hear you okay good I just
making sure hi my name is Bernie
Romero I work first agency for
twenty seven Albuquerque New
Mexico and I am in full support
of both of these bills because
they will benefit all of us are
working people thank you.
Surely you're up surely.
We can hear you hi my name is
Gerry Ortiz I've been working in
the grocery business for over
thirty years I.
I am a supervisor now and I see
I hear a lot of employee is that
are just always are so thick but
afraid to go home because they
just can't afford it so I'm in
favor of this HB twenty bill I
think it would benefit a lot of
people and
People that are sick can
actually stay home and not come
up come to work and make other
six is just as a is in a
constant thing going on so I'm
in favor of that thank you.
Ramona you're at Ramona.
Yeah new manager molecules very
I'm from start for twenty three
I work for smis I'm also in
favor for the HB twenty HB
thirty seven
I feel like any employee that is
sick should not have to fear to
call in because of precautions
the next day and I think that
this would be a benefit to all
of us who do work from paycheck
to paycheck because even one day
of missing of work is very
noticeable especially when you
have do you know our children to
take care of which I myself.
Is responsible for my
grandchildren and you know one
day of work of missing is again
noticeable and also for other
employees who have other
illnesses such as maybe seizures
or something they should have to
fear to call in or have to come
back to work the next day
because I also have experience I
have a daughter who has
experience with seizures and it
does take up to up to three days
for them just to even be able to
come back and be themselves
again but because they can't
afford to miss one day or two
days and I'm afraid of what
might happen the next day when
you come back.
It shouldn't be that way we
should be able to be okay and I
think that this would be a very.
Beneficial way of having to not
worry about how we're going to
pay our bills are paid our
mortgages or rate you know buy
food or rate in our live gassed
and I just wanted to say thank
you for listening and on.
I'm I appreciate this and if you
good passes it would be a great
thing for a lot of people
especially in today's time thank
you.
Jessica your app Jessica.
Hi.
My name is Jessica mills and I'm
speaking in support of house
bill thirty seven.
I lived in New Mexico since two
thousand seven and nine full
time faculty at C. N. M. where I
do earn adequate paid sick leave
so that I don't have to teach
while I'm sick and so that I can
take leave when one of my
children is sick or when my
husband needed to go to chemo or
when I need to take one of my
family members to another
medical appointment.
All workers deserve paid sick
leave and it's time to view it
as a right not a budget.
Into New Mexico business
coalition leadership this bill
is bad timing which of course
could not be more ironic workers
winning paid sick leave during
the pandemic would put this
legislature on the right side of
history the New Mexico business
coalition president Carlos on
togs as businesses are suffering
and that requiring sick pay
would be a burden on them but a
for profit private entity is not
a person I'm appealing to the
New Mexico elected officials who
represent the people of New
Mexico because government exist
solely to help people its
function is not to prioritize
profits over people the very
people who as employees of this
businesses help generate wealth
for these businesses if they
can't afford to treat their
employees with dignity instead
of as a bottom line dollar sign
then chances are they shouldn't
be in business compare how many
New Mexican lives have been lost
a COVID nineteen which is
approximately three thousand two
hundred so far to how many
businesses have been lost which
is in the few hundreds
businesses can be replaced which
is part of the free market
economic game lives however
can't be replaced acting with
morality compassion and ethics
is not challenging and in
addition to a recent increase in
the minimum wage awarding earned
sick pay is a great start
towards equity businesses
already not successful if it
can't help take care of their
lowest paid employees please
take into consideration the fact
that those who oppose this bill
namely The New Mexico restaurant
association New Mexico business
coalition and coalition and
others who we've heard from this
afternoon there's also ported by
dues paying businesses who are
able to afford paying lobbyists
to speak out against this bill
but they claim they can't afford
paid sick leave for their
employees I urge you to consider
that fact along side of the
hundreds of workers who have
spoken on rate on their own time
in support of.
Their and their family's needs
specifically paid sick leave
please vote yes on house bill
thirty seven paid sick leave act
out right and do not merge it
with house bill twenty thank you
for your time.
One go ahead one that.
One day you just need to meet
yourself.
When we see that you're on mute
and we're not getting any idea
your travel more time and if not
you could you for your comment
in the queue and I.
I'm gonna move on to.
Lot and that.
What I know you're at.
Cool.
Hello.
We can hear you.
Okay.
What does that are the Senate
president the members that will
meet the.
All of the number is still on
that already is don't think one
is already a similar.
Yes that is the only and will
make you go less than rules we.
Maybe.
Okay and then we'll sign media
act do you make will stop all.
But I give me an estimate of us
this year it problem is that
runs local CNN so you me and
will this almost strategies in a
report okay this almost Aksyon.
I've ideas that most locals that
roles with groceries we have an
old one million Ghanaians alone
yes the level made the point
that they get you'll thank me
other additional that alone.
Cool that is about a whole these
two of them those are the ones
made.
All of the annual thing will is
so that it shows the land is
funding
and then there was the L.
committee you'll pass the test.
You know I don't I that is that
awful.
What will the end.
All the NMED's need a seat all
asking me go back and play on
the old agency I lease yes.
The fund balance.
Of course not then the and then
it other I and we stopped last
eat for the for the epidemic
out.
See for the address all model is
that the in home medical the MFR
item must be in the thick guilt
Law School side you know that
that awful Senator mask.
You'll get your also as long as
that New Mexico CNN reporting
that people Yankee by them the
missiles this all up
what was that estimate that in
place yet they is that what was
elected so you idea of the
awesome yells the style but but
at that point get informasi.
Is that a single moment.
We'll just ask yes.
Okay Darlene you're up early in
are you with us.
Your unmuted Darlene but we
cannot hear you.
Moving on.
Is about you're at.
Isabel are you with us.
April you're up.
Joanne you're at.
Hello yes can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Yes total support of H. B.
twenty I've been with I work
at SMI's for fifty nine here in
Albuquerque.
I've been in business for over
thirty years and never had paid
sick leave.
I've had a lot of health issues
in the past and still I am a
cancer survivor.
I have an elderly mom that I
have to take care of.
And.
Whenever
my mom said I still have to go
to work and have to rely on.
My youngest daughter.
To step in and help take care of
her.
Thank you for listening I hope
you pass this bill we really
needed we work hard.
And will continue working hard
thank you.
All my you're up on.
Hello can you hear me we can
hear you okay hi my name is her
non this I improvement agency
goddess maam he's straight about
his history but he went to work
thirty minutes ago.
So my name is robin McConnell I
am a member of so most action.
I was born and raised in
Farmington.
When I worked as a server in a
local restaurant.
In this of gymnastic coach in
the children's team.
The team has how to close twice
so far because it is students.
Thank you has to close by so far
because it is students or
workers this to positive.
The.
So I have to take the test in
weight.
In wait for results and current
time.
Without pay for thirty days
already.
At the same time.
I have also had to stop working.
In the restaurant.
Leaving me with no income from
either well my chops.
Hi use up all my savings.
And I have to get a loan.
From my parents.
Rent and other expenses.
I support HB thirty seven.
Because the the chair settle
workers.
Especially is exceptional
workers.
In New Mexico though needed to
get in.
Don't get in there why the
weight or part two but they
order from the virus.
Please vote in favor of this
bill.
Thank you.
Sandra you're up Sandra.
C..
Okay.
What.
Thank you for all the.
The number you must be.
Yes every when I know it's going
to be the sequel sixteen when
you folks in the school so.
So this almost acts you on one
level so picking.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello this.
If you don't mind them yeah so
look what is your shortest or
semi.
So do I need the money that.
Yeah IBM which up what is.
Your you'll be able to access.
You're not.
Yes one in my fiscal.
Thank
you know that Beatles me from
the so.
In fact
thank the.
Me gusta.
I will.
These will be.
Is that a low eleven we are
media.
Thank you.
resettlement thank.
Media thank goodness that energy
and that you need.
By a lopsided.
That is your main battle
struggles of product.
Yes yes hello yes are you on
this.
The.
Economy.
Thank you
hello yes.
Yeah what I must.
And this is the most yes
impairments.
With that a lady I should think
that skipping.
Thank you that.
Thank you see then federal what
if we let me settle where that
writing thing if we allow.
The the appropriate I'm.
Miss Vigil what you think they
say.
The agency so.
Your yes.
Go ahead and and you yourself.
There isn't a name.
I.
We started still I worked for
Safeway of fourteen thirty eight
in Aztec New Mexico for twenty
five years I support the bill HB
twenty.
And
Most of our employees are part
time and we don't qualify for
six sick pay and I have co
workers.
I have co workers that work
well we're well they're sick and
comment COVID nineteen has
affected her fellow employees
and their families and they
don't have a choice but to stay
home and without pay or use
their vacation days and I I do
support.
And and I benefit from HB twenty
thank you have a nice day.
We have another no name go ahead
and do it yourself.
I'm gonna move on to the next
person it's an algae escape
from.
Hi.
My name is Stephanie Chavez
director number
Rio Rancho Albuquerque grant
area I would work Smith or on
twenty years now and as well as
my dad our I yes please to all
the bill as it will be helpful
during the pandemic it'll
definitely be looking for all
the employees who have put in a
lot of dedication time and buy
into this company
not only for our children or
Your employee
And please yes just both there's
a lot of hard workers out here
in New Mexico.
This
time without having to worry
about the.
And you're working about are
getting workers employers going
to be mass
Thank you.
Have a good one.
Go ahead and do it yourself
seventy cafe.
Hello can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Okay.
Hello my name is sandy and I'm a
leader with cafe New Mexico
axiom.
And I stand here in support of
the H. B. thirty seven.
I was
single mother working in the
restaurant industry and as
stated before there's no
protection for workers if they
get sick there is no they don't
get paid for the day and then
there's bills that piled up.
I think it's especially now in
the context of the pandemic very
important to pass this bill to
protect people and especially in
industries where it's a high
contact place you know we don't
want to read.
Any more than it needs to be so
yes I hope everybody thank you
for your time to listen to us
and I hope we can pass this bill
it'll help a lot of people in a
lot of communities thank you.
Darlene are you with us Darlene.
I'm gonna go to the zoom user.
Okay Chris more and I've.
We can hear you now.
yes my name is Christopher and I
and then a teamster with the I.
D. to local four nine two about
an employee at United parcel
service for five and a half
years of this job is allowed me
to join the union it's giving me
a budget of changed my life such
as paid sick leave and Health
Care I sold my cover just so
good that when I go to the
dentist office you know they
asked me if my parents are
legislature because they say
that's the only way I could have
insurance that good.
I just because I have benefits
are good does not mean that
everybody else has access to
them I set up the job of the
best benefits because I'd spent
twenty years working in the food
industry an industry that is
notorious for its failure to
provide employees with the wages
and benefits to offset the
increased cost every living
where every American is facing
right now.
in the food industry at every
restaurant I worked at at some
point I was told that I would
have to work with the
potentially contagious illness
such as strep throat or
influenza I think the current
situation we're in the COVID
should make it clear to any
rational minded person the
workers are in more need of sick
leave than ever before the
situations that we face
defective for demographics in
different ways most of the jobs
have been lost the COVID
authority have been women these
numbers are even worse when
there are women of color I want
to a demographic that doesn't
necessarily get associated with
the our party of progress
I am a a white cisgender legal
gun owning mail and I'm fairly
where there's a very large
population was not afforded the
same chancellor job benefits
like mine.
These women mothers and primary
care workers who make up a large
portion of the essential
workforce we're not eligible for
paid sick days the days of men
like me sitting back and
standing idly by an absence of
truth in policy.
I want to see a workforce that
is driven to fight contagious
illness and six.
Rather than fear losing their
jobs and silently spreading
their germs especially in times
like this.
I've so far today I think we
most of more than that with all
the done the community speaking
for this bill.
And so far we've put a lot of
this on the other side but we
haven't actually heard from
business owners not many at
least most business owners would
do something is shameful the
speaking out against paid sick
leave but the willing to pay the
lobbyist to go do their dirty
work for them I think that's
time for treats that it's time
for that to change they can pay
these lobbyist the computer
employees and that's what I'm
asking you to vote yes on house
bill thirty seven because it
goes further to protect our
workers the house bill twenty
thank you.
You're up to be on a.
The number is we cannot senior
last so do that upon cafe axion
thing going the waterline see so
you come to your this face you
so recipe and then after.
Wanting to spread us out on this
he brought it back to me so I'm
gonna map Argyle what you may
think they see it they is we put
on there will get you that from
yes Colombia it but then is the
most unlike last data analyst at
for south of COVID in that nice
to us a little even the other
bottle.
Let my business we must for
satellite up our car
Representative a care will not a
state and federal but again a
weapon they don't get it by will
focusing on is still using the
feedback one of the Russell
about was a loose that what OS
is the schools us so must seek
inocentes dollars yes.
Calmly how are your you're doing
a study that are hardly holding
your neck up we are me from
Mediacom goes to the like us on
yes A. K. A. stay home when
federal entity that has given us
one yeah I move just again on
the vehicle it is important that
we had a whole organised on the
in and I lucha Medicine muscle
up oil but I'm also throws apple
yeah most as funding us the
stems and fittings.
It's been okay permanent when
families this morning evil
enough our they activate thank
they see if the process.
All right Christina Estrada.
And in.
Strata and I'm a resident of
Grant County I am working with
an organization called cafe X.
on the passing of bill H. P.
thirty seven related to paid
sick leave for school employees.
I have had many instances of
illness circumstances and paid
sick leave what made life much
less stressful for me.
Although I have base common
illnesses such as the flu and
common cold would have cost me
to be absent from work I have
also been toward mental health
issues throughout my entire
life.
Symptoms related to depression
anxiety and bipolar disorder are
at times too overwhelming for me
to be able to perform even the
most simple tasks or interact
with others.
It has been difficult to
reconcile this with employment
the seeming impossibility of not
only the inability to request
days off from my conditions also
discussed having to choose
between paying the bills
necessary to survive for taking
the time I need in order to care
from health and having to choose
to take care of my personal
health cause me to miss work
without paid sick leave the
stress of worrying about how I
will pay my bills after losing
hours has extended the intensity
and duration of sickness or
mental health episodes and just
exact.
Looks like we might have lost
yourself Darlene we'll go to you
the federal once or twice I
think if you're on your doesn't
work could you put your public
comment that you and I let's try
it during.
Early unfortunately we're not
getting any audio out of your
screen so I think we're going
for a last public comment here
from Jenny Hines.
Hello yes I'm also estimates
simply I have worked sick myself
I have had to leave my child
with my mom when you subject
through in a broken foot because
I can't afford to.
From Christine and.
People.
Okay.
Okay hello.
Oh yes because I can't afford to
take off work
I think as consumers so if you
guys think of it from your
perspective going shopping at
the grocery store going to these
places where people you know
touch your food and that are in
contact with.
you know close contact with your
produce and everything they're
going to work sick Avenue is we
have to use vacation days just
to if we really need to day off
and that happens often if we
even get just one date that's
paid sick leave to rest and
recuperate that gives us a
faster recovery time we feel
supported by our employers and
more of the oil and bill which
in turn will you know help with
the bottom line which is what
the main concern of
a lot of employers is our.
Especially like with the
restaurant business and
everything so I think if they
think of.
This like in the long term it
will definitely benefit the more
by supporting their employees.
Thank you I appreciate your time
thank you.
Carissa your up Chris that.
I'm gonna try to do this as
quickly as possible I'm at work
right now
but thank you for the time and.
my name is Chris and I've been
I'm here with cafe axion today
and I've been in the service
industry for seventeen years I
worked mostly front of house
from coverages server major G.
lounge management my current
position right now is part of
management at the hacienda
DataCo team here Dona Ana can
you hear me OK.
We can hear you okay great just
making sure so I think in the
restaurant industry a lot of
what I'm hearing I'm gonna go
ahead and repeat that we often
have to choose to work over
getting the care that we need in
December of two thousand
nineteen I watched viral
bronchial infection spread among
servers you couldn't miss worker
pay for care we ended up all
getting the infection it took
about two weeks for all the
staff to get it and
I ended up with a hundred into
fever could hardly move the only
reason that I was able to rest
with because I already had a
scheduled day off
and I think that that's the
general atmosphere when you're
in a restaurant you are supposed
to work through the illness or
tend to get it covered
before taking a sick day and of
course because it's an paid it
makes it really hard to take the
time away if your tape server
you're not going to be getting a
check in the future I'm.
And most of these workers are
working paycheck to paycheck so
having to work through it in
that spreading the honest other
staff members and also the other
guests
I also wanted to touch base I
had a server last year who broke
her ankle she had health
insurance and was able to get
the surgery but wasn't able to
work because she's a server
right so we gave our overnight.
cleaning duties to help her out
so that she can pay her bills
but she's one of my best servers
she's great at sales she knows
the product I love having on the
floor I wanted to bring her back
it was actually a wonderful
service to like be able to keep
her but if she had that you're
working Paypen hours then that
would pay to rent and she would
have had to take off of school
for a semester so I can see how
that would easily impact even
young students right and then
lastly
I think that the mental health
additional the addiction
treatment questions me is one of
most exciting parts of all of
this
I struggle with depression one
hour of care with my therapist
is absolutely right changing and
on my work states absolutely I
stating and so I just wanted to
ask you guys to please support
this bill.
Thank you for your time.
Christine.
Christina you're up.
Okay.
Okay my name is Christina Romero
and employed with Smith for four
three here have a creaky for
continued like to wish chair
happy seventeenth birthday
committed to and what to voice
in favor of HB twenty for my
coworkers myself and those who
strive data the to survive first
and foremost I do understand and
sympathize with small business
owners and the struggles that
they face however for those who
are less fortunate and depend on
a week to week paycheck it can
be extremely difficult to
maintain all of our
responsibilities.
I myself contracted COVID
nineteen and while I was at home
suffering from the effects of
the virus I was also worried
about how I was going to pay my
bills.
It was difficult to recover from
the effects when you're are
worried and even losing sleep
due to the feeling of insecurity
thank you for your time and have
a good rest of your day.
Christina Europe.
Some at the governor left off I
have oftentimes has neglect my
will being in treatment in favor
of attending work because they
could not afford to lose powers
from my paycheck some simply
cannot afford to miss a hours of
work and have to make the choice
to go to work sick spreading
illness to others who face the
same trouble and creating more
stress for everyone involved
this perpetuates a cycle of
illness absence from work and
financial insecurity and puts a
lot of stress on the communities
in which we live and work it is
scientifically proven that
stress negatively affects our
health and we are already seeing
health problems or situations
which require time away from
work it is necessary to
alleviate some of the stress
this and uses it is necessary to
require sick leave not only for
for employees or those with good
jobs and fits two employees but
for all New Mexican workers bill
H. B. thirty seven must be
passed for the wellness and
functionality of New Mexican
communities thank you.
Okay.
This.
There was.
Comes back in like and.
Say again.
Okay now Representative Rubio
are you still around.
I am the answer.
To ask you and we're not going
to go to the audience on the
house bill thirty seven because.
Any commented on either or or
both.
Land or both so I will go ahead
and to present to you have a
expert with you that you want to
bring in yeah let me go ahead
and we have Stephanie Welch I
think she might be here.
Yes you're right now.
Is ready right so no one are we
ready.
I'm so good evening everyone my
name is gonna be all and I
represent district thirty five
here in Los crucis and I'm here
tonight to discuss house bill
thirty seven which is the
statewide paid sick leave I also
have here as I mentioned
Stephanie Welch who's with the
center for long poverty will
assist me with as my expert of
the paid sick leave bill is
pretty straightforward with four
main components its coverage of
cruel usage and enforcement all
employers shall provide paid
sick leave to all workers who
work at least fifty six hours in
a year including part time
seasonal or temporary workers
earn one hour of sick time for
every thirty hours they work and
workers can accrue and use fifty
six hours per year finally the
state investigates complaints
and enforces the ordinance.
I'm not alone in saying that we
have heard from a number in our
community neighbors and family
during these times and how their
lives have been impacted and
while businesses counter these
policies their workers much like
what you heard today are
secretly calling me to tell me
to fight harder for them
inequities in the workplace
disproportionately impact low
income black indigenous in
communities of color and this is
consistently been the status quo
for many of our families and
neighbors for generations and
that must change the momentum
that we have seen over the
course of the year to address
the needs of essential workers
should not take place only
during the pandemic but be
transformative enough to provide
what is essential to our
communities far beyond this
moment.
While there are slight
differences between house bill
thirty seven and house bill
twenty and I think
Representative Chandler for her
willingness to work this all out
the bottom line is that when you
earn sick pay when you earn sick
leave you're entitled to use it
no one should have to choose
between their paycheck and their
life.
Finally I've heard plenty from
the business community on their
opposition to these two pieces
of legislation and they have
also shared that COVID nineteen
devastating impacts should be
the reason we do not pass this I
will tell you tonight that it
wasn't COVID nineteen it would
be another excuse to deny
workers their rights.
Again no New Mexicans should
have to choose between a
paycheck in our life and so I
urge house bill thirty seven and
house bill twenty to move
forward tonight and make make
earn paid sick leave a reality
for communities I'll pass it
over to this Welch to cover any
gaps I missed and then we'll
open it up for questions.
Mr chair members of the
committee as Representative
Rubio said I am Stephanie Welch
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and with the Center were to
advance economic and social
justice through public education
advocacy litigation and
supporting community led
campaigns house bill thirty
seven is supported by workers
centers and community community
organizations from across the
state.
I'm gonna try to be brief the to
cover some.
Of the provisions in the bill
that Representative Rubio
mentioned but are worth going
into in more detail because
they're informed by the
experiences of low wage workers
who've been struggling to keep
themselves and their families
healthy while also keeping a
ripple of roof over their heads
and food on the table.
House bill thirty seven sets the
standard amount of leave that
applies to all employers and it
does that because that's easy to
enforce.
It avoids incentivizing
employers to try to keep their
workforce below a threshold to
avoid higher costs.
Is transparent and easy to
understand for workers so they
know what they're entitled to
and for employers to know what
they need to provide.
And it expresses the goal of
this bill which is to create a
basic standards to ensure that
all employees get at least a
fair amount of paid leave for
these crucial needs if we're
sending something is a basic
standard for fair treatment of
people than its fair treatment
for all people.
HB thirty seven also provides
supplemental.
Paid leave in times of public
health emergency so in a public
health emergency employers of
the supplement any accrued paid
sick leave to bring the total
amount of to two weeks of leave
and employees can take this
leave starting when the law goes
into effect the federal
government required this last
year but that law expired at the
end of last year during the
current public health emergency
several states and localities
have added this obligation on to
employers both the fill the gaps
in the federal law and to
continue the coverage passed the
ending of the federal law and
that is what New Mexico should
do
our provision providing this
public health emergency
additional leave is the exact
same as what Colorado passed
last year in recognition of this
pandemic and urgent needs people
have and and to prepare for
future pandemics.
It's three thirty seven.
Doesn't impact paid time off or
other types of leave that
employers already have as long
as they're Lee is at least as
generous as what's required by
HB thirty seven.
So employers can count general
paid time off as meeting the
requirements of the law and the
reason it does that is to avoid
the unintended consequence of
employers converting PTO
policies physically policies.
We know in Albuquerque.
More employees who have some
kind of paid leave already have
it as PTO rather than is paid
sick leave and many workers
prefer paid time off because it
provides more flexibility and
better protect their privacy and
again the goal of HB thirty
seven is to raise the floor to
bring all workers up to a basic
level of decent treatment and
that goal doesn't require that
the leave the call paid sick
leave or PTO as long as people
all have a right to assert
leave.
It's been thirty seven has
strong enforcement provisions.
Employers who violate the
ordinance of sorry violate the
law must pay owed wages and an
additional amount of either
actual damages or a set amount
of liquidated damages.
This is the provide a meaningful
incentive for employers to
comply with the law otherwise it
be more cost effective to
violate the law and just wait to
get caught in the liquidated
damages provision is similar to
what's done in minimum wage laws
to try to ensure that workers
get compensated and not that the
even if employer gets caught it
functions as just a no interest
loan that they eventually pay
the wages to the worker there
needs to be additional damages
that employers pay it also
provides workers the option of
either going.
To workforce solutions or going
to court and that's important
because as secretary mccamley
mentions
it can be a burden on the state
agencies to enforce these rights
and it lessens that burns of
workers also have the option to
go to court but they need public
enforcement as well because most
workers don't have access to to
private representation to file
an action in court.
When we know that employees
especially those working for low
wages need strong public
enforcement in order for the law
to be effective.
A study by researchers with U.
and M. working with some awesome
Pueblo need no found many
employers especially of low wage
workers did not take workers
rights laws seriously unless
they're strong enforcement this
is especially a problem for
workers in rural parts of the
state another study done by the
McKinley worker justice
coalition found that in McKinley
county enforcement is necessary
to make worker protections
actually protect workers
especially Latino immigrants and
native American workers the
legislature to pass the best
guarantee of paid sick leave but
it won't actually protect
workers and less includes strong
enforcement.
To address the concerns raised
by secretary mccamley about the
fiscal impacts and how much it
would cost the state and the
department.
The fiscal impacts on the cost
of enforcing this bill should be
estimated based on current.
Similar enforcement activities.
Workforce solutions and forces
the caregiver leave act which
guarantees that employees of
private employers who have sick
leave can use that leave to take
care of family members that act
went into effect in two thousand
nineteen.
And the departments experiencing
experience enforcing that act
should inform estimates of how
many complaints that were
received and what resources will
be required per complaint.
The department staffing levels.
To enforce state wage laws are
not the appropriate basis for
evaluating the staffing needs
for this bill for several
reasons.
Those levels and forcing the
wage laws are necessary to
address not just new wage claims
but also to resolve the backlog.
As of last month of sixteen
hundred wage claims.
In addition the department
accepts wage claims for
violations going back three
years so at any moment is
enforcing three years worth of
violations rights under house
bill thirty seven would only
just are to apply to employees
this year.
Where we can look for a.
Example of how to estimate the
staffing needs and how to have
strong enforcement and what that
actually impose on the state is
to look at a similar law.
We can looking Colorado Colorado
recently passed the paid sick
leave law that has a more
rigorous enforcement scheme and
applies to many more people in
Colorado estimated that they
needed to be a new full time
employees.
There's a tuition and ours are
similar but different in two
respects one differences of the
Colorado law requires that more
complaints being made to its
labor department front Forsman.
All employees wanting to enforce
their rights must either
complaint into this.
House bill thirty seven doesn't
require employees to complain to
the state in order to enforce
their rights so the Colorado law
requires more complaints to go
to their state agency.
The second difference is that
the Colorado law applies to many
more individuals than house bill
thirty seven would Colorado had
approximately ninety five nine
hundred fifty thousand private
sector employees who were newly
guaranteed paid sick leave when
their law passed house bill
thirty seven would provide paid
sick leave to three hundred
thousand employees in New Mexico
based on estimates of how many
people don't already currently
have paid sick leave.
So Colorado estimated its law
would require about three new
full time employee positions
based that estimate on data from
its labor department that they
were receiving about twenty
complaints under other rules and
that the US law would apply to
more people so they double that
and then they said it takes them
about forty hours on average to
handle the typical complaint.
Seems like all those principles
would also apply to New Mexico
and considering that our law
would only apply to about a
third of the population one full
time employee seems a reasonable
estimate of what it's would be
required by our bill.
One last point I wanted to make
it is because it's come up about
the cost of business
Mr Espinoza referred to grants
this that that the small
businesses that the legislature
has already made and then
averaged about fifteen thousand
per business and several other
pieces of legislation are being
considered this session to
provide assistance to small
business.
For small business concerns.
Those other pieces of
legislation are the vehicles to
address them the answer is not
watering down basic worker
protections I appreciate your
time and I am here to answer any
questions about the bill thank
you.
And Mr chair.
Questions thank you.
Senator Rubio the.
We're still years.
Where we're ready for questions
whenever you're ready Sir okay
at this stage I think for those
of you who are here for the
money repeat this for those that
were not here when we first came
in I am going to go to explain
what my thoughts are what what
my plans are on this bill.
My plan is that I'm gonna send
both in the U. Representative
general vicinity Rubio.
I will send you back outside go
to work.
We need to be able.
C. will six believe that sync
with the the the bill we need
one no if ands or buts over and
over again like I said earlier
for those especially for those
who were not here when we first
started I heard we want to work
this out and then get ready have
something worked out but that we
get to Judiciary.
Well.
Yes I listen especially
throughout the session and we're
hearing of bills being
introduced in just your reason
getting slammed.
So we want to a meal to get
Judiciary we have to have it
ready for them.
Or I see you as a for us to be
able to hear it does it will
issue area with a sick leave
bill but is not prepared.
This isn't getting them through
there with all the bills are
willing to Judiciary are slim to
none.
So what I'm doing is I'm gonna
send you to our
willing to do.
I am going to the.
Are fired to I am going to
assign my vice chair to be
available to you J.
Representative Roybal Caballero
are you listening to me.
Yes.
Share I want you to be on the
on the part of the Democrats
to represent the people on this
one is a group and then I need
somebody of all interior from
one of the members of the
Republican parties representing
black you are my senior member
on the committee do you have any
recommendations for me.
You Mr chairman.
Hi I'm having thank you.
I
got all right.
representative.
Yes a good.
The business owner and and well
versed in this might be the one
utilized.
us to stimulate the
doses we handed over to you are
you.
Yes us Mr chair of course okay
sure I I I you know I'd be glad
to work with.
The representatives on this
thank you thank you Sir I really
appreciate that so with that in
mind.
I am going to roll these wheels
over.
I want to know as soon as
possible and we have something
worked out like I said before I
see good in both of them I see
some problems and in those with
both mills I mean number one is
I'm looking just coming from the
judiciary a long house bill
twenty they want to take a
misdemeanor in District Court.
I don't think that's was going
to happen.
J..
Mr Mr chairman yes
I had to leave and go meet with
the speaker what I have a
question for you
are you going to direct them to
meet with the business community
to come up with a plan
one eight one thing to do
because I think there's a lot
more than just the.
Then just a members of the
legislature ending to me so they
need to bring in all these other
entities also.
So with that in mind the
Representative generation to
Rubio
you know up to like directors
and like correct.
Yeah I guess a little bit
confused then because we know
that Representative Chandler
and I came into this committee
meeting with the expectation
that we would be able to work
out the legislation moving on
from this committee based on the
responses that we received and
and then be able to work on
those issues offline leading
into Judiciary I don't really
see.
What I mean we're just I guess
it's just creating more of a
delay in moving legislation that
I feel has momentum and this is.
This I think is.
I find it problematic in that
we're having to roll it over
considering that there's other
let pieces of legislation that
are going to eventually.
Start clogging up the the
pipeline of legislation.
Well I I guess.
Representative Rubio and asked
for my problem this is that we
are going to if we we will if we
want to do this and you Alan and
then you try to work something
out for you get to do this to a
every your chances of getting
her into discretion do not
that's what I'm telling you okay
I just want to know that.
So.
We have to work it out to work
but then you get to Judiciary
once a school is that a meal put
together that works it does not
take that long for us to get it
through this committee.
Yeah.
Hello.
It's okay that speaks to this
but I also I I guess I just in
in my time in the legislature
I've actually never really seen
this happen and so especially
having other legislators help us
with our legislation
so I I I'm confused about that
as well.
The only reason that there there
is thinking that a new on both
sides.
Mr chair with respect.
We come back with you with an
agreed upon bill is that going
to present a problem with you if
it's it has been worked out
between Representative Rubio and
Ohio and perhaps vice chair
Roybal Caballero since she is a
co sponsor on the bill I guess I
I am struggling to understand
why that would be in and of
junctional approach with
resulting on what frankly are
relatively minor distinguishing
features and is it it's really
not that big big big big deal is
that I mean the only thing is
that basically what you're doing
this and we need a new to get
back to me to get back and get
this schedule as fast as
possible.
So there's two issues here that
I want to address one is a
question that Representative
leader Stapleton just asked I
think it's really critical and
then the other I want to clarify
I I agree that
the sponsors of the the lead
sponsors on the bill
have.
I'm can
reach it what I say stated at
the very beginning
establish common common ground
and what they just stated
there's probably it's reduced to
several
minimal of of certain points
that they can come and agree to
but I think it's something that
they need to work on and and
lead in that discussion and I
don't mind helping facilitate
that if that's what you had in
mind so
when you go to be listening
hoping that the.
The question is basically what
you're doing is you're
representing me as part of the
group here.
The old back to to us.
What.
Representative de Los us.
To make clear is that from what
I understand
in because of the involvement of
all of these bills and how they
provide full that is that they
each Sanchez has gone to
incredible links to be as
inclusive as possible as far as
Involving.
The best communities that needed
to be involved in order to
introduce what I believe is a
paid sick leave which represents
employees the work force
in in in that that's what I
believe is the impetus of this
bill and we wouldn't be coming
forward with a bill if it
weren't representative of the
employees that absolutely must
have this coverage and I
understand what a common ground
so where I'm having an issue
with that I think would set back
the entire process would be in
addressing what Representative
Sheryl Stapleton brought up and
that is if we have to bring in
an expanded this process at that
they just unfolded over months
and months to get to this point
by having to include a sector
that I'm sure that that I don't
that I don't believe that I
believe has had their ability
you know that has made their
statement today I'm not quite
sure how effective that would be
and that's the only question I
have and I'm not sure of the
Sanchez agree with me on that
point or not but it it seems to
me that it would just roll back
months and months and months of
effort that has transpired in
bringing this forward I do see
you know I I I do see how we can
facilitate this and be able to
arrive and and and and just
which I guess be part of that
discussion.
and I don't you know I think if
if both from Sanchez our lead
sponsors are amenable that's
fine but to to have to delay
this even further I mean there
is an emergency appointment at
hand right now and then to as a
secretary that's what I have
problems with the sectors but to
listening to me is and the lady
is going to happen is if we
don't have a bill both together
that is ready for judicial where
we there is for your delay is
going to be as the chair in does
not have the time to work with
us on everything that we need to
work with so we need to have
something ready to slam dunk
sentiment through them what's
the so to the chairman Chasey
says you can just schedule it
and go with the.
That's what I'm saying today's
the twenty eighth okay I am
saying that use folks should be
ready to be heard to get on the
floor and passed out a few and
moved on and the.
You open the doors to businesses
if you want to who they want to
come in and give you their
points and you find something
that's workable there shouldn't
be any problem with something
that's workable however they
have a limited to get there.
Yet chair.
This.
I know.
This.
Bring back the whole point of
the discussion on my first point
and that is that this is a paid
sick leave paid sickly for on
that involves workforce so I
just wanted to emphasize that I
think there's some other hands
available up and I'll
Representative Robert I'm sorry
go ahead thank you.
Sorry I'm sorry.
Just to clarify.
Representative Chandler and I
have been talking for several
weeks now on both our bills we
know specifically where we
differentiate and there's four
main pieces we already know what
those pieces are we've already
are the coalition that I've been
working with the folks that
she's been working within labour
we already know where the
differences are and so the
intention was and and these were
conversations that we've had is
that if we can have a fair
hearing today about both built
with the intention that those
four different issues that we
had would be figured out before
a hit Judiciary and have and and
be ready for the time there so
we're already we already know
what those differences are on
are in between Representative
Chandler nine so I I don't know
what other things we would need
to work out with just to amplify
what are the vice chair has
mentioned
I personally don't believe that
the business community will have
I mean they don't want paid sick
leave I'm just going to say
right now they don't want it and
and so I think what we're trying
to do is work towards what is
best for workers and and they
need.
We're their lobbyists is what
I'm saying right now I'm so
we're trying to figure out the
best issue the best way to
figure this out and
Representative Chandler and I
have those differences already
figured out we just had we just
needed to hear from the public
here from our committee and get
sort of an idea of where those
differences were can become more
aligned and so that was the
that's where we were thinking
about moving out of this
committee.
Thank you.
I mean as I said Representative
Garcia view you had your hand on
your hand up.
Yes.
Mr chair
Thank you.
You know Mr chair I think that
you made a call.
And I think it's the proper
call.
you know this is the labor
committee.
I think it's our task to really
have a very
solidified.
paid sick leave in the bill Lee
are committee one bill.
And
So I think your call is the
right call Mr chair.
and the the the only thing that
kind of concerns me is I think
you do also need to seek some
input from the members in terms
of what we feel.
Are some of the points that are
significant to us and I had just
one.
You know but I think you might
want to kind of open up
that to to all of our members
and
And and and also and all put
that out there Mr chair.
Your the concern that I have
with these pieces of
legislation.
When we come out of.
When we when we get to the point
of consolidating of Bill it
definitely needs to have.
Enforcement.
Elements.
And I know that for a fact
because in two thousand nine
thank you very.
The milestone.
Wage theft Bill.
It was.
The most
thoughtful piece of legislation
that ever occurred in any state.
Our state became number one in
terms of a solidified wakes that
piece of legislation that bill
was bipartisan.
It to show you the extent of
what the legislature fell.
Was significant in terms that
the and then for your has no
right to detain we just of a
worker.
That have been worked.
But in select.
So I think that element to me is
one thing that needs to
definitely be identified.
And consolidated in any kind of
bill at least this committee but
Mr chair you are making the
right decision.
And I feel we should abide by
that and move forward.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
I'm always happy that you're
around because sometimes you new
cats we not messing up so.
I think I'm in good shape now I
was included Representative.
This year and released thank you
Mr chairman and up
representatives look
I'm a business owner.
And and I appreciate that you I
I really feel that it's on.
To work with the business
community and work with other
agencies that are going to be
affected.
You know I kind of took a little
bit of offense when the one of
the representatives.
Well the statement was made this
is don't care about their
employees and they don't want
this I offer this to my boys I
think you're my employs I I've
had I've been a bit I've been in
business for twenty years twenty
one years are and.
But the rest of the balance has
to be built.
We cannot just what we say we're
just going to ask you know what
all these mandates or or or
these this legislation that is
having to either side.
It has to be balanced.
Look let me explain what I mean.
For people so this is why it's
so important that all of us know
where we all come from.
I was an employee I have
nothing.
Start with nothing and at one
time.
What I was I had a child that is
spoke about yesterday
Committee was what was
contestants also respond.
I've been in this situation I
have to go up to two Albuquerque
and had a Neil Neil situation
when my child was premature I
mean it's got such as body and
my employer.
Hi offered of some of that time.
Of course sometimes some worst
impoverished sometimes a cat I
have kind of a balance in the
middle and so but I know the
struggles that works to to leave
that have to do that.
So as a businessman myself I
take those experiences back to
business and there are a lot of
good business people there are a
lot of good ones and there are
sometimes just a couple both
sides some employers sometimes
abuse.
Sometimes the employees abuse
again I just I've been in this
business for many many avoid
business for many many years.
And I started with washing cars
out of a bucket.
So your work sometimes people
really think that every business
man starts.
Is your business you're just
going to become wealthy.
At the same time I know many
business businesses small
businesses that's struggle to
pay their bills.
And sometimes it's our fault and
sometimes it's not.
The pandemic to date Mr chairman
that's because a lot of pain and
hardship not only for for
employees for employers.
I know I know restaurants I just
looked at a just look at the UNM
deal on cable TV cable TV.
And I notice it all know it was
only a couple hundred
restaurants well in in July.
People are welcome to look it up
for themselves almost seven
hundred restaurants as assistant
restaurant well it businesses
were closed okay.
And and and.
Three hundred fifty five of
those we're not going to come
back programs.
What I'm trying to say is this
if we work together if we don't
come together both sides to find
a balance.
It's we're gonna lose our part
of the of the whole intent.
And I even though.
We look I understand that the
representatives are trying to
create good lesson legislation
and they say they're trying to
protect the worker I protect my
all time whenever they have they
were close to it I tumble give
yourself checked I paid my my
people.
I retain my people because I
take care of them.
And smart businessman take care
of their employees because if we
don't if I don't take your
our plans someone else may so I
take care of my employees.
Many of my employees have been
with me since the day I open my
business some since so when my
it was just me and my wife and
my wife.
Was going to have her have her
baby our our one of our babies I
hired my secretaries to the
stations to work from Mr
chairman I have many of my
employees that from the day I
open my business are still
working and I will a number of
businesses and and so my
employees have actually I've had
more employees passed away.
During their during their time
working for me and that this is
an all about me.
What I am saying is there is a
lot of there's a wonderful
business community out there it
does care about their employees
and there's some employers that
are already providing some of
some of our the the certainly
that is being asked of us.
What we need to do is and I
appreciate you allowing us to
try to come together I know that
sometimes we see all those guys
Republican this because
Democrats understand shins.
I this is the first time I come
to legislation I'm new.
I'm extending my hands out I'm
willing to work.
What has to be fair because I
will tell you honestly when I
first started washing cars and I
just hired my first few people.
I can tell you that I only had a
few like two thousand dollars
fifteen hundred dollars in my
account five hundred dollars in
my account I always pay my
invoice first what I had to pay
my bills and there comes a time
where there's balanced the whole
thing is balance.
In my community where I live I
live in a I have businesses and
communities are impoverished.
If I charge too much we can
afford it.
At the same time costs are
rising.
We have to this is where I need
we must find balance.
I agree with with the
representatives there are some
businesses that are using their
employees.
And I to truly are are want to
work on both sides of the aisle
it would be beautiful Senator
bipartisan bill but that was
fair to the business community
and was fair to the employees
and it's somewhere in the
middle.
And so I appreciate you reaching
out I have my concerns we've all
been here for a long time and I
and I I think we can do this our
after this because a lot of
people are tired Mr chair
representative I appreciate that
that we can come together and
find it's good solution for for
our state with balance.
Address you Mr chair.
Mr chair.
I hear a voice but I do it's
Representative Chandler Mr
chair.
May I ask Representative cut us
a question.
Representative Ted also do you
accept the on premise that
the state and and and should
require some baseline level of
paid sick leave.
I'm again Representative we sure
works yes ma'am there some
things that in order for us to
help in order for us to help
Representative
some of these people what we
have to find balance there are
some businesses that that on the
we got to be careful this is
what I don't have every answer
for every business.
and and so this is why it's
important to include them in the
conversation so even as even
though I'm a businessman and I
understand I have I've had a
number of going to the number of
businesses there is a need I've
I've provide that need for my
for my employees what.
Should the German Center be
balance Representative jabber.
I'm yes Mr chair if I may answer
that yes but I still I'm not
clear do you agree that the
state should require some
baseline level of paid sick
leave I didn't hear an answer to
that question marks my answer to
that was there should be some so
there should be balance in there
yes ma'am so that means I think
we should have something yes
ma'am what what is that number I
don't know you can have a
discussion yes ma'am this is
what we're trying to come
together yes ma'am I think you
look.
This all be honest here Mr chair
representative traveler.
What number okay I'm a member to
as as as a it in this
this committee.
You all hold all proceeds to do
whatever you want.
You don't even.
I'm just trying to speak to both
sides because I've been on both
sides of that one and I
understand that there is an.
We also need to be careful I
heard comments earlier Mr
chairman Representative Chandler
that there are we got to be
honest if there's no business
and there's a business goes out
of business.
There's not gonna be any
strictly for those employees
either.
If we forced to watch pressure.
That's what will happen so I'm
I'm I'm willing to work with you
again everyone's tired and so
I'm I'm reaching out to you and
the the hope we can work
together thank.
Mr chair.
Yes
yes thank you Mr chair I want to
make I want to make sure we're
really clear on what we doing
here
I understood from the chair and
and he can clarify it further
for a need to but I think I got
my marching orders pretty clear
I think that the purpose of
having Representative dot asos
representing the minority and
then myself being representative
of the dis on behalf of the
representative was not to rehash
the merits of the bill.
Not to include or expand or
anything of that nature but to
facilitate and ensure that both
sides were listening to the
facilitation of how we can
arrive at the agreements not us
the two Sanchez simply sponsors
on these bills who have already
articulated that they have
arrived at some key points of
unity right now that just needs
to be further that dialogue it's
not I I would it would be
totally disrespectful in my my
eyes Mr chair if we were to
impose and and on either of the
eight Sanchez a reinvention of
the will of the wheels here it
was not and I might be you meant
to have Representative us us I'm
representing because he
represents the business
community and we're going to
open it up to the business
community that is yes
perspective but I think it's the
it was afforded to give it
balance so that we can come back
as a committee and make sure
that Representative Russ is
representing the minority and
myself could come back to the
committee and say.
This is the singular bill it's
been worked out we it's you know
we we observe whatever that
process is we concur with the
agreement has been reached by
the eight Sanchez and that's it
so I wanted to make sure that
we're not being charged on and
and I would never take that
charge for the record I want to
make sure everybody understands
I would never take charge of
trying to reinvent or in impose
or asked either lead sponsor to
open this whole process up to a
community you know again they've
arrived at this point both of
them have worked meritoriously
on these bills on along with all
of their
Bodies that they've been working
with throughout this time period
Representative Russ is the night
are there merely to represent
both sides of the aisle so that
when we come back to the
committee we can report back on
on you know that we met the
charge that the that the chair
again so I just wanna make sure
that we're clear on that I don't
think Representative the process
Mr chair that we are
entertaining on pulling in a
whole other sector into this
discussion this is a donor built
their bills are labor bills and
I think that's the question that
Representative Chandler asked so
I just wanted to make sure we're
clear in our charge so that we
don't have a conflict in
carrying out our charge were
there just to represent the
interests of each party on this
committee and then just make
sure that we arrive at what the
chair has charged us to do thank
you Mr chair.
Here's what I have here in front
of me in Alice's world built.
So what I want to do is go out
there find a way to make those
work where I have just one bill
okay.
Yes this does.
You have a whole weekend
tomorrow's Friday Saturday
Sunday if you can let me know by
Sunday evening I could probably
these of the photo on the agenda
for Tuesday evening.
Mr chair I'm not going to do
anything else anymore on this
explained that twenty times
already as of the these are the
analysis both deals I want to
both Google out there.
One.
The robot by it'll tell you I
just basically going to be at
the referees are all of this
for.
Okay with that in mind let's
move forward
Forward for this field thank you
thank you Mr chair.
We're waiting to hear from you.
Judge has to go not in the.
Okay with that we're going to
the the easy part that would
sell it is we'll move on to
The third item on the agenda
which is house joint resolution
three Representative Roybal
Caballero you uninsured persons
this bill.
Right.
Sir Mr.
Yes we have H. J. R. two okay
and that are three that's okay
Sir I just want to
Representative you call it.
One more question should I take
role or we're getting.
The.
Yes yes usual.
I.
Committee.
So we started the committee but
if you wanted to go ahead and do
that.
Yes Sir.
Representative bash.
Representative Black.
Representative Garcia so that.
Representative Hernandez here.
Representative Rubio here
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
Yeah we're.
do you yes ma'am thank you.
Madam chair Roybal Caballero.
Mr chair
I'm here okay.
I am going to okay go ahead
madam chair.
So we have then roll call and
I'm assuming are some of that we
have a quorum and we're good to
go and at this point
Mr chair for H. J. R. two your
you've got the the Mike.
I see thank you madam chair of
the house utility solution to
this is I believe chair Garcia's
or internal meals when that
happened a long long time ago.
Allows.
And proposes an amendment.
To extend the current property
tax exemption for a hundred
percent disabled veterans and
their widows and widowers
renter insurance less than a
hundred percent disability.
Mason the amount of the
exception of the matter is
federal disability rating.
Okay and I'm gonna use myself as
an example in this case madam
chair I am a hundred percent
disabled veteran.
I do not pay property tax on my
house.
But when I was a sixty percent.
Able.
I see the screen.
Pretty dances on my house so
this bill is due is proposing
that we do an exception.
Does this able veteran based on
the level of their disability so
then the a.
madam chair I will stand for
questions.
Thank you.
At this time anyone that is in
the audience that wishes to
speak in opposition do we have
anyone were selling the
attendees.
For this.
Yes ma'am we have Dorothy C. in
I'm gonna allow her to talk now
thank you.
Are you with the story.
Just on the north.
Okay am I connected yes your we
can hear you gone.
Okay good madam chair I'm not
speaking in opposition I'm
speaking are.
For the bill so let me enter
keeping kick me out and tell
you're ready for that.
I guess we don't have a listing
of who's in the opposite.
Want to go ahead and go ahead my
seat and and and proceed.
Go ahead and proceed agency yes
now I can hear you
I'm speaking for the US I am a
retired that earned I am not
disabled.
However I work for a lot of
veterans organizations.
And I see.
The the need for this bill in
that someone who is a hundred
percent disabled gets a benefit
that someone's maybe ninety
percent or eighty percent.
Doesn't get any benefit however
that doesn't make them
completely whole and healthy and
able to pay their full way on
the property tax so I believe
this is a.
This is a fair way.
To.
To deal with a basic.
Human value of assisting those
who have a need at the level of
whatever their needs may be.
So I speak for it and I hope
that you all will too I look
forward to hearing you do pass
on thank you so much.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anyone else.
Thank you Marcella go ahead yes
ma'am.
Gary Williams from a a RP.
Good evening madam chair and
members of this committee my
name is Gary Williams I am a
member of the staff of A. R. P.
New Mexico and audio I am also a
veteran.
I am coming to you today to
express support of this bill on
the house I'm sore in this
resolution on behalf of ERP New
Mexico and I thank you for the
opportunity to speak today madam
chair.
Thank you very much Mr Williams
anyone else Marcella.
No ma'am all right and I'll ask
one more time if there are any
other wishing to speak we have
that Shannon Reynolds okay.
Thank you Mr chair misstatements
tear sorry I'm a veteran myself
and so is my wife one of the
things that many of the bills
overlook I think is the fact
that
one of us gets qualified for
services and the other one does
not so and like in the case of
taxes she gets a discount or I
get a discount on not both I
think this bill should take into
some consideration that we both
serve we both spent our time in
the service and we both are
entitled to some sort of.
The recognition for that so
anyway I'm just asking this
board just simple to simply
consider the fact that.
If we don't prefer going to
provide.
benefits for the service person
in the family consists of more
than one person in the family
then we should try to figure out
a way to consider that both of
them get recognized for the
service that's all thank you
very much and I am in favor of
this bill and thank you for your
consideration.
Anyone else no.
Okay last one last time anyone
else wishing to speak.
All right
Thank you for the public comment
and now we go to committee and I
see several hands raised in my
not sure Representative devices
your hands remained up since the
last discussion.
So it you you're not on this one
yet now the.
I can make a quick comment with
the and the dog I think it's a
beautiful thing for the VA madam
chair excuse me Representative I
think it's beautiful bill and
Representative about half of the
two hundred ten thousand that's
in my area sympathetic to those
widow that would benefit from
this and and those who have
proper country your self up
front or for this privilege so
I I believe that it's good that
it's going to go to the people.
Let the people decide but that's
my personal opinion I exported
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Representative losses we have on
next I saw Representative blacks
and.
Thank you madam chair I.
I'm.
Outcome.
I I your.
I'm sure I'm not sure that
you're the other members now
that I service digit deputy
chairman of your account.
so I'm.
The.
I think that there's good.
My there are some concerns by
the with that
Only because of my that my
background in tax you know what
you what your exam
then the rest of the population
the difference on that that
being said I am in full support
of veterans and I believe that
it should actually be that way
so
I just wanted to share those
comments that I do support this
and I think it's very important
for our veteran community I and
also Mr chairman.
Madam chair Mister chairman
You tell me when your birthday
is today or tomorrow.
Thank you and my birthday is on
Saturday you know we have that
equestrian thing going on so
that this call will oracle areas
of.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Representative.
I'm on the list we have
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair
And thank you are.
Chair not gone for free in this
for.
You know this legislation has
quite a history.
Yes start at the an effort in
nineteen ninety eight.
To do
Property tax exemption for
Veterans.
we kind of a zeroed in on the
hundred percent.
Time that was the more feasible
thing to do.
it took us five years to pass
that.
And
The A. R. P. this president
today was there at every
hearing.
And all veterans organizations
where there.
And they were there for the for
the full term of five years and
to get into the past.
And my experts were veterans.
Or where to.
The and Korea.
And some of them are pretty
banged up.
Mr Chavis
This is so he's passed away.
and so much
shrapnel in his body.
That doctors couldn't operate
because they were.
Centimeters from vital organs.
So what Mr Travis went through a
metal detector at the airport.
It always when not.
And he didn't have no gun or no
nice it was a strapped on his
body it so those are the
witnesses Mr chair and I
understood from you guys from
but at last.
I don't know how is the arm
still was also because you have
like five Bible known as arms
because you got to Vietnam and
the.
And you know Mr chair of some of
these witnesses were so elegant.
They come into the hearing.
Prior to our bills the tax
committee would pass legislation
giving oil and gas company's tax
break after tax break.
And for three years you know our
veterans in the audience we just
kinda swallow at.
And then on the fourth year.
After they saw a similar
scenarios in terms of of the tax
committee giving tax breaks to
big business
Our our our witnesses couldn't
tolerated after they tabled our
bill
they got up in the audience.
And just started cussing the
hell out of the committee.
And saying how dare you.
You know we've been here for
years now and every year you do
not S. but then you have these
corporations with highly paid
lobbyists that get their way you
know what is about to go to get
at we defended the honor of this
country in our you know we put
our lives on the line to defend
democracy and freedom and
justice.
What don't you get.
Well the next year they say they
want to put up with that kind of
a ordinary feedback from the
audience you know but it did
take us five years and at budget
Mr chair and I hope it really
goes through and that and that
we don't have that backlash from
the assessors and the treasures
coming fourth in the in the
prior committees because I think
some of these veterans that are
at ninety eighty five eighty are
just as deserving you know as a
hundred percent or so thank you
for bringing this for grant
street check.
Representative there any other
committee members with a
question.
Would you like to say anything.
In closing or okay what is the
the wish of the committee.
Our house.
Joint resolution to what the
best madam chair.
Thank you is there a second.
Second.
madam secretary we have of.
And and a second is there any
opposition to this bill.
Is there any opposition.
See now I'm Mr chair you have a
do pass.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you are you thinking about
this for a long long time and I
finally was able to put it on
paper.
The.
Mr chairman thank you I just
want let me real fast so you to
have president you see what that
is.
Scratchers.
So.
Are you.
And state president H. R. three
now yes.
Okay.
Madam chair before he goes the
next bill
all the are you Mr chair Hey.
What do.
I
time we see you in person you
know it's a custom in our.
As fun community to give you an
that got us.
First year so.
That we're going to give you a
us a spanking of seventeen
slots will allow
one.
Ninety kind of unity that we
gotta do that I've got us.
Definitely I inverted the
numbers.
Okay Mr chair you've got the
floor thank you madam chair of
the bill of course is how suing
addresses three and this one
proposes an amendment to the
same article second I do
increasing problem.
Property tax exemption for honor
really destroys members of the
armed forces and their widows
and widowers from four thousand
to ten thousand dollars.
Everybody who's backroom.
Yes a four thousand dollar
property tax property tax value
exemption of up to four thousand
dollars this four thousand
dollars.
Number was.
He is.
Two thousand
two thousand four.
And it has been raised since
then this is sixteen years later
almost seventeen years later and
if you're looking at a rate of
inflation it really should be
somewhere on the Gulf thousand
dollars around twenty to thirty
thousand dollars is what I'm
thinking by the way we have to
keep it within certain levels
asking for a raise to have this
go up from four to ten and help
our veterans and we will do more
than anything else both these
both of these bills but I'm
hoping to do more than anything
else is bring their instant New
Mexico.
We have some incentive for
veterans to come to the state
our by allowing them to have
some kind of the right on their
property taxes
Incentive for them to come here.
Well that Madam chair I will
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr.
I'm gonna go ahead and go to the
audience now and see if there's
there's no one signed up.
Okay okay.
Go ahead.
Yes ma'am.
Your bank go ahead and do it
yourself.
Okay is it working yes okay
don't think Missy.
You you're good to go and eight
twenty seat and you're good to
go.
That work yes okay
madam chair thank you for
recognizing me I have soldiered
on with you all afternoon to get
to this point.
I'm a retired veteran I'm also a
homeowner.
I'm.
Representative Dow Corning gave
a an eloquent summary and I
won't go over those points again
about inflation and what not
I was attracted to New Mexico
for various reasons one of them
being that I you'd New Mexico as
a veteran friendly place at one
time in my serving career I
served in New Mexico and then I
was transferred away but I came
back after I retired.
So I I'm very much in support of
this bill and very much
appreciative of the recognition.
Of how much property values have
changed over the years since
this was implemented and I'm
pretty sure if none of you got a
raise since two thousand and
four you'd be speaking up for
yourself so thank you for
allowing my comment and I A.
support built thank you.
And may I say thank you very
much for your patience and for
your understanding and first
name on as long as you have FY I
lost track of how many hours
that that was so I really truly
appreciate your dedication thank
you are there any other on yes
okay go head Marshall we have
Gary Williams from a a RP go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you also Mr chair for your
willingness to bringing this
legislation forward it has been
an honor for me to serve and our
U. S. military in the airforce
and equally an honor to serve
with the individuals at A. R. P.
I'm proud today to come to date
to support this amendment A. R.
P. is in favor of this amendment
nine courage to vote for it
thank you very much for the
opportunity and thank you also
representative Garcia.
Mr Williamson thank you also for
bearing with us all afternoon
until this point Preciado very
much anyone else myself.
No ma'am.
Last chance anyone else in the
audience at like to speak.
All right thank you and so on
we'll go to the committee and I
have Representative blacks and I
see her hand up.
Representative Black.
Thank you madam chair
Mr chairman so just
information purposes so that the
committee no
so the four thousand dollar
venture exemption and.
The last year that roughly
equate to about a hundred
dollars off the taxable value
that that would you yeah I mean
the one thousand dollar
exemption is applied to the
taxable value that equates to
about a hundred dollars a year
and.
For the veterans so I just want
to throw that out there to get
that kind of perspective that
we're not giving away the the
horse in the barn in the car I
mean.
One thousand dollars equates to
a hundred dollars so I I do
think that this is is that is a
good thing
Right yes chair that madam chair
that a you know it it hasn't
been changed in quite some time
so I I do believe that that
should that should have that I.
I forgot to mention on the I'm
the last one was I actually
My county assessor if you
actually read the log this is
something that we probably need
to address Mr chairman
is.
The the hundred percent veteran
exemption only it only applies
to your promised your your
present your resident so and
Otero County this as a person on
a house and eight five acres.
What my county assessor did this
year and I was very offended
with him about this was because
all the years I've been in
county government for fourteen
years it's always been a veteran
with a hundred percent disabled
so they got their total bill
they did not have to pay
property taxes.
Now Mr chairman and madam chair
this past year my assessor
decided well that's not what the
loss that.
The law actually says you can
have your home.
So what he did was he removed
the exemption for the the other
four acres of land that the
house was a not so now these
veterans for the first time in
fourteen years are now getting a
tax bill and they're having to
pay.
Tax property taxes on.
Four acres of land or a shed in
some instances.
one mention I actually I spoke
with his wife the other day they
got a bill for their pool.
But not for the house so I that
that is something we need to
keep in mind Mr chairman I'm
sure we probably need to tweak
that so that is if we're giving
these exemptions to these
veterans they should be kept
all.
So I just wanted to share that
with the committee and I
supported thank you.
Representative Black are there
any other questions or comments
from the committee.
Mr chair any final words.
Director.
Thanks.
Well it was a myself I only a a
a mobile home.
And for years and years after I
got my hundred percent
disability I had to fight
because they wanted to actually
on the lot that was on.
Then.
It is only like a hundred six
dollars a year but still and all
does being invested in being
together but finally I finally
got an assist with a listen to
me and there she took care of
that problem but it took a lot
of years to straighten that out
and I know what you're talking
about Representative Black.
That's all I have to and madam
chair.
I.
The idea that you presented
amount providing a pathway for
veterans to come in retiring New
Mexico is really important
because of the quality of living
that we have in healthy living
that we have and so it's a
strong incentives and attraction
hopefully that it will open the
door so what is the thank you Mr
chair what is the wish of the
committee.
Where are we.
Yes.
Representative me again and see
a made the motion to pass
Representative leader Sheryl
Williams stepped up to.
Thank you is there any
opposition.
Any opposition.
Thank you Mr chair you have a do
pass thank you thank you.
Many.
I wish life was always easy.
Anyway so with that in mind I
think we're finally done for the
day.
I hope you get over your
problems your shots
Representative Garcia I didn't
have any problems by.
I was really would.
And also will be meeting in
Tuesday's.
We scheduled on the golden rod
for twelve o'clock.
if for some reason we have a
problem let me know that the
committee members of the
committee secretary no we should
be good.
Anybody's.
We'll see you then to committee.
Happy birthday.
The some baby.
That will.
Mr chairman this white feedback
date with.
The.
This.
