All right, Representative
Chatfield, whenever you're
ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I had
a great speech lined out for you
all, but it looks like we're
kind of supposed to be on the
floor already, so I'm gonna skip
most of it. Y'all know that for
7 years, this is my 7th for 6
years and starting on 7, I have
been single minded in my mission
to have New Mexicans eat fresh
grown produce, New Mexico raised
beef, keep the jobs and the
money in the state and have the
best product possible for our.
Consumers we have passed the
in-state beef inspection, uh, we
have started a multitude of new
uh processing plants to bring
that very good same fresh
product to you. One of the
things that we need right now is
Some of the folks that are
starting these processing plants
need a place to go with the
byproduct that happens whenever
you process a beef, uh, the
best.
Most knowledgeable person to
help them be able to do that is
the secretary of agriculture,
and that's who came to me and
asked if I could help. And so my
bill,
House Bill 150 contains $3
million that would go directly
to the Secretary of Agriculture.
And it would give him the
ability to help people that want
to put in new plants or expand
their existing plant, uh,
With the problems, you know,
meet the, the Department of
Environment regs, uh, what are
we gonna do, uh, etc. etc.
Uh, and it gives broad authority
to the Secretary of A.
Put that on the ground. I have
with me today a couple of
experts.
Justin Romero owns Matthew's
Meats.
And
Melissa Dominguez works at
Matthew's Meats. So they're my
expert, uh, witnesses, Madam
Chair.
Uh, I stand.
Thank you, Representative
Chatfield. We're going to go to
the audience if you're in favor
of uh House Bill 150, Raise your
hand.
If you're opposed,
OK, um,
I'm gonna go to uh support.
We're gonna make this quick, 30
seconds.
If you want to speak, stand up
and speak. You got 30 seconds.
Madam Chair committee members
Tom Patterson, New Mexico cattle
growers, after the last session
when you approved state meat
inspection, we had a meeting
with uh Andres Romero, uh
represented Romero, house
education about how can we
extend meat inspection to uh the
rest of New Mexico to high
schools, public schools, so
they're talking to their
students about meat processing.
During the course of that
meeting, a number of the people
in this room heard for the first
time about the problems that our
state meat inspect or state
processors are in
honoring with technology. This
bill will address that issue. We
I implore you to uh act
favorably on HB 150 and thank
Representative Chatfield for
bringing it before you.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Eddie
Barnes. I'm with the New Mexico
Livestock Board, and I am the
director of State Meat and
poultry inspection, and I am
super excited for this program.
I'm, I am looking forward to
helping these guys out, the
processors, there's a wider
range of possibilities that are
out there, but they're, they
need some assistance and my hope
is that I have many plants that
I have to go inspect and that we
can we can produce this
homegrown product like
Representative Chatfield is, is,
is speaking of, but there's
going to have to
to be some things that they're
going to have to work on to be
able to come under inspection,
um, some of them have already
asked, what do we need to do to
renovate, to get up the code.
We're gonna have to follow the
same regulations as federal
regulations. So there's some
things as far as improvements
and everything that they're
gonna have to have some kind of
funding or help with and so this
this this bill is a is a great
step in that, in that direction.
So thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Y'all are hovering around 45
seconds, which I'm going to
allow.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Gillian Joyce,
Rocky Mountain Farmers Union, we
stand in a wholehearted and
enthusiastic support of this.
This is exactly what our state
needs. Uh, our producers are not
just enthusiastic for this, but
frankly desperate. Too much of
our meat is leaving our state
and we're paying to bring it
back in. If Representative
Chatfield had gotten this passed
before, Taus might have
processing right now, so thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name's
Larry Reagan. I'm president of
New Mexico Farming Livestock
Bureau and for all the reasons
already stated, we strongly
support this bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the soil and water
districts have a policy
supporting this. They want to
keep our ranchers on the land
and provide fresh beef.
Alright, I think that's all the
support in the room. Anyone on
Zoom?
Uh, any opposition on Zoom?
We're good.
OK, we're gonna go to, well,
Representative Chatfield, would
you like to say anything in
response to any of these
comments that you heard?
All right, let's go to
questions. Represent Zamora.
Madam Cha move would do passes.
OK.
All right, what's the pleasure
of the committee.
Represent.
We don't need to do roll call,
um, well, do we need to go? All
right, you have a unanimous
vote do pass on House Bill 150.
I wish you the best of luck in
the Chatfield thank all of you.
I appreciate it.
Madam Chair, we're gonna focus
on helping task get something,
uh, it, it tell me how I can do
it and I will. I'm right there.
I am.
meeting is adjourned.
