Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
education offered to us by the
gentle lady from Eddie
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Please pray with me.
Father god we praise you and
thank you for her you are.
We appreciate your great love
for us your grace your provision
in your loving kindness.
Thank you for the privilege that
we have of serving in the New
Mexico house of representatives
and working for the betterment
of our state.
Please guide us as we consider
legislation this afternoon and
into the evening may your wisdom
be upon us it's in the name of
Jesus Christ we pray amen.
The gentle lady with generating
Dona Ana representative Gallegos
please leave this in the pledge
of allegiance.
And with the Jennifer curry
please the distance alluding New
Mexico slide.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
Good afternoon.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objection it is so ordered.
Good afternoon everyone there
isn't enough for the gentleman
from.
That was a you know terrible
leader Townsend thank you Mr
speaker
I'm sure you have heard
but I think it's important for
the body to know.
That one another one of our
neighbors taxes will be
completely open next Wednesday
their kids are in school.
Their businesses are all
functioning at a hundred
percent.
And we should be proud of and I
look forward to New Mexico
joined joining them soon.
The speaker.
And McKinley thank you Mr
speaker here here's a good the
state would still have the
Dennis is doing what they're
doing.
And you know and the only reason
that I wanted to doing it
we are giving bids.
Of all those.
No one can we say.
They made a mistake and
everything works out what do we
say it worked out so try it
first and then will be mixed
thank you Mr speaker.
I'm sure we we hope everyone is
safe and healthy
no matter which state they live
and I do think that it is.
I hope that there is some.
Processor evidence to which the
state of Texas can point four
eliminating common sense things
like wearing a mask in a
confined public spaces and seems
rather foolhardy to me.
And incredible risk.
Heaven help.
Are there other announcements.
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports.
No objection it is so ordered.
Cllr to read.
Mr speaker.
Your house commerce and economic
development of economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill one thirty
four has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house of but the
health commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four
do passed and then referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
on twenty one I just checked.
Unanimous consent of the
committee point read other acted
upon a single vote and reflected
in the journal so they're acted
upon individually hearing no
objection it is so ordered clerk
to read.
House bill two seventy.
Do not pass house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy two passed.
House Bill three oh two.
Do passed as amended and thence
to the Education Committee.
House Bill three fifty two
passed and then to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted a twenty one my
sister.
Speaking of adoption of the
committee reports we are under
option of an unfavorable
committee report on house the
one thirty four but a favorable
committee report on commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
for an unfavorable committee for
Haskell to seventy but a
favorable committee report on
house and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy they will
commit for House with your two
is amended in house bill three
fifty all those in favor please
signify by saying hi I think.
Eight three point reduction.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill two ninety nine has
had it under consideration point
image recommendation that do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
Miguel P. Garcia chair.
Move adoption.
We are honest almost in addition
the report to the Clinton house
bill two ninety nine as amended
total and for the S. C. there is
a need their own content and
all.
report this has a tile.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee team is been referred
Senate bill sixty four has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do passed and that's
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
respectfully submitted together
PRC chair Mr speaker well but I
looked at a point the comment
that you sent us an adoption
those report they don't commit
day and Senate bill sixty four
total for the S. C. state.
on continental.
For the staff at the photo.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee
substitute for House Bill ten
has had it under consideration
report saying with
recommendation that a do not
passed the house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for House
Bill tend to pass respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair unanimous consent for the
committee reports read together
acted upon with the single vote
reflects in the journals of
their act on individually
hearing no objection it is so
ordered Cllr to read.
House agriculture water
resources committee substitute
for house bill thirty three to
pass.
House bill one eighty eight two
passed as amended.
House Bill to nineteen as
amended to pass as amended.
House Bill to twenty two do not
pass but house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty two do
path.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two fifty six do
pass respectfully submitted
Patricia A. Lundstrom chair.
Reduction Mr speaker.
We are adoption of a committee
appointed transportation public
works and capital improvements
Committee subsidy for House Bill
tentative favorable committee
report for appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House transportation of course
and capital improvements for the
Senate to press button.
Senator report on agriculture
water resources substitute for
house bill thirty three
favorable committee report for
hospitals one eighty eight is
amended to nineteen is amended
that I will continue for hassle
to twenty two was invented a
favorable committee for on
agriculture I'm sorry House
Appropriations if I ask the
secretary to possible to twenty
two and if able to report on
house commerce Economic
Development Committee subs to
frost of two fifty six all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Hi this was nay reports
reductive.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred Senate bill ninety two
as amended has had it under
consideration reports it was
recognition that it to pass and
it's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
submitted Elizabeth Liz Thomson
chair and is considered the
committee pursuant to gather I
want to single vote reflected in
the journals of their acted upon
individually hearing objection
disorder clerk to read.
House bill ninety four as
amended do passed and then to
the commerce and economic
development committee.
Senate bill one fourteen do pass
and thence to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill one forty five as
amended to pass and that's to
the state government elections
ending in Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Liz Thomson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're adoption of the state will
committee for incentives on
ninety two as amended Senate
bill ninety four submitted
Senate bill one fourteen
incentive a one forty five as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye hi.
All this was me.
Committee reports reductive.
Our that robin.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objection it is so ordered.
Members of the Senate the bills
for this third reading session.
Research Service item seven.
The next three would be twenty
one five and six seven twenty
one five and six.
gentlelady from tell us.
Are you ready on item number
seven.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
please get me to that point I'm
glad to.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House consumer
and public affairs the
substitute for house bill two
six is an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the body H. B. two oh six
provides debt relief for our
most vulnerable New Mexicans and
helped struggling families in
the future to be able to afford
their utility bills.
This is what we know is true
COVID nineteen is shining a big
bright light on the reality of
what low income New Mexicans in
every single district across the
state are experiencing.
We've debated as a body and how
we can best help for me.
We've all heard and maybe even
experienced ourselves great
economic hardship in this time
so many people in my district
have told me how they are
struggling.
Was all over the state are
struggling with their meager
unemployment sometimes no
unemployment all they're looking
into their bank account and they
have to make the toughest of
choices Hey your rent their
groceries or their utility
bills.
Our neighbors are going into
deeper debt and their suffering
and of great financial burden.
Possible to a six is a COVID
really feel that also also sets
into motion ups and to really
address utility affordability
for those essential household
services for all New Mexicans
especially those that are
struggling financially.
This get this bill gives us a
standard way across the state to
address debt that's been
encouraged by low income New
Mexicans who've not been able to
pay their utilities but it this
bill gets those customers the
opportunity to repay that debt
with dignity if you owe money
you get two months for everyone
every month to pay back if
you're low income half of those
arrears are forgiven.
I think it's important for this
body to understand this is
affecting how many families are
we talking about here without
the current moratorium in place
and what what we know right now
is that fifty seven thousand
families across the state would
have been disconnected it would
not have electricity.
Twenty seven thousand families
would have been connected
disconnect excuse me from guest
services these families these
hassles just don't have the
means to pay their bills for
their debt.
I know what it's like to grow up
in poverty I was raised by a
single mom who worked very hard
as a probation officer.
That's a good County job.
But it wasn't enough and when
she got sick with cancer she
herself had to make the toughest
of choices for her and us.
Whether to pay the rent for the
groceries the light bill.
If any of you in this body for
those watching know what it's
like to get an envelope with
that bright red print across the
top state elected disconnection
notice and you know what I'm
talking about now imagine that
notice if you or your family
were sick with COVID and
couldn't work we've got to act
right now.
This builds just isn't a COVID
relief bill it really sets us on
the path to bring down utility
costs for low income and New
Mexicans all around the state it
establishes a fund that will
empower look at the local
governments and tribal entities
to implement energy efficiency
programs in their communities
this is the community energy
efficiency development block
grant we hope that this will be
seated with the significant
federal funds that we think are
coming our way soon this bill
also establishes reporting
requirements for utilities so
that we can better understand in
the state has been disconnected.
My mom giving
and who has been reconnected.
This will help us set the stage
for utility affordability and
equity we worked with a number
of utilities and various
departments to reduce the
barriers for success of these
programs Mr speaker I now like
to yield my time to the gentle
lady from Dona Ana County
generally before I do that I
would like is to a caller text
your mom if you need lemon
honey.
Mail there I think there is any
I have twenty okay I just send
me a tax and we get your mom
there I know you don't want to
be distracted from your
presentation.
Okay nexant you're doing great
gentle lady next only thing you
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady from house.
This partial arrears forgiveness
program in the bill provides a
way to keep tens of thousands of
families connected while they
get back on their feet without
this legislation if customers
cannot make of their monthly and
arrears payments after the
moratorium utility must
disconnect the customer to
recover their bad debt this
could be to thousands of
disconnect I have a friend who's
living on the EDD's and every
once in a while she we get
disconnected and would reach out
for help to get caught up in
reaching acted it was expensive
and.
Didn't help her stay afloat or
to keep up with future payments
and to pay back what she was in
arrears can you imagine what is
going to be like for the fifty
seven thousand families that
could be eligible for
disconnection from electricity
service today if not for the P.
R. C. moratorium disconnection
moratorium or the twenty seven
thousand families eligible for
disconnection from natural gas
service after this past year
during the COVID nineteen these
families might from two hundred
fifty dollars to a thousand
depending on the utility these
large amounts will be difficult
to pay back in addition to their
current bills especially for
those who are still unemployed
or working reduced hours.
Last summer when we started to
realize the pandemic wasn't
going to be over any time soon I
was in a conversation with the
person utilities industry their
main concern was what was going
to happen when the automatic
moratorium was over and people
were going to be buried in death
for their utilities what do we
do then we'll H. B. two oh six
is exactly what we should be
doing as we near the close of
the COVID nineteen crisis more
broadly improved utility
affordability reduce energy
burden and increase utility
access of low income New
Mexicans.
I am honored to support H. B.
two oh six as a viable solution
to avoid a terrible situation
that would like into a train
wreck when the moratorium is and
families have to reckon with the
eventual accrued debt you're
from the pandemic so thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
task I yield back.
Generating to us.
Thank you Mr speaker I now yield
my time to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for using your times me and
thank you for involving me in
this process Mr speaker since
March and since we all
experience lockdowns I made a
commitment to my constituents
and to the people of New Mexico
that I would do everything I
possibly could for those who are
suffering there are job losses
for those that would be
suffering through the financial
instability that would come with
a lockdown in place that we
would make sure that we but
programs and
Set up funds and did everything
we possibly could as leaders in
the state to make sure that
folks were continually needful
and their homes are kept safe
so Mister speaker helpful to a
six helps with the crisis that
is yet to come but also with the
our reality what we have in
place anything to help us
structure something that not
just us and done the twenty
other states have done to pass
legislation to help those who
are in utility arrears.
Mr speaker when we started
looking at how we might be able
to make this process happen we
realized that there was this
wasn't just a few hundred people
this wasn't just one community
Mr speaker this is tens of
thousands of people get the
seven thousand families subject
to possible disconnection if we
did not have a moratorium in
place and of course twenty seven
thousand families eligible for
that disconnection of just gas
service.
I'm still be struggling families
Mr speaker already between two
hundred forty four and a
thousand dollars in your readers
who's going to pay for that Mr
speaker we're talking about how
we do this and this is why the
creativity of all of the folks
involved in this process have
been together a fund in a way of
making sure that utility
companies get paid and that
these families do not lose their
connection access to these
utilities you'll find that in
the bill Mr speaker I look
forward to the debate but the
point of this matter is to
ensure that folks
through no fault of their own
have had to really suffer the
consequences of this pandemic
financially and that we ensure
that they are kept safe even
after we're at beyond and a lock
down situation and the economy's
opened up actively but that
we're not putting our most
vulnerable and as we know you
know our state is still
currently tied with Louisiana
for the second highest poverty
rate in the country we're still
trying to make sure that we need
to from the families and our
communities so with that Mr
speaker I'm proud to support
house bill two oh six I hope my
colleagues will join us so that
we can ensure that the most
vulnerable across New Mexico are
able to pay their bills and that
we can help them with that
because of the situation that we
can put it on and the commitment
that we made to them to make
them thank you Mr speaker thank
you generated from house I.
Thank generate is generally
different house.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield my
time to the gentle other gentle
lady from Diana County.
there to gentle lady which was
at the it would be
Representative Rubio the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you the gentle lady from tells
for yielding some of your time I
won't reiterate too much of
what's already been said other
than I am incredibly grateful to
have been part of this process
and being able to work with you
on this legislation and and and
helping to get it to the next
step I think one of the stories
that you shared of receiving
that red bright red a letter in
the mail it is something that I
have grown I grew up
experiencing myself I'm not
because my parents were these an
adequate parents but because
like many New Mexicans they're
just trying to make ends meet
and I think one thing that we
have heard over the course of
the last year whether it's
through the special session or
even in the last few weeks is
that we minimized the issues
that so many of our families are
confronting by labeling them as
lazy or I'm able to do certain
things because they're just not
working hard enough and I want
to just be very clear that that
is absolutely false especially
when I'm talking about families
parents like my parents who
worked and continue to work my
dad continues to work at eighty
five years old and so these are
many of our families are super
respectable respectful
respectable and really do care
about their communities and
their families and sometimes
they just don't have enough
because sometimes because we all
know that our system is designed
to work against many of the
those who live within our
communities this legislation is
a piece of how we course correct
our state into moving into the
direction that we need to go to
help assist our communities.
You know right before COVID
I forgot to pay my electricity
bill and it got shut off and I
just remember freaking out first
first second but then it was
after I was able to take care of
it that it it was just so hard
to get done like just to turn my
with my mileage my utility back
on it was just so challenging to
do and and here I am the
sophisticated until intelligent
person who is able to navigate
the system and it just made me
wonder what.
Challenges other people must be
facing especially in the midst
of a global pandemic facing
unemployment facing evictions
and and having to deal with some
of the roadblocks that might
come with having to just turn on
your water and
and so when you asked me to sign
on to this legislation I
absolutely said yes because this
is those pieces of legislation
that is really why I decided to
run for office it's really wide
I decided to be in this place
because
it's people like you and I and
Representative Ferrary and
Representative role metal and
many others in this in this
house that we really do care
about the future of our
communities not just about me
and how this affects me but how
this affects my neighbor how
this affects my neighborhood and
how this affects my city my town
in my state and so with that
thank you so much for letting me
be part of this process and I
look forward to voting for this
legislation here tonight thank
you.
The gentle lady from PTA's.
Thank you Mr speaker I have my
expert with witness on the phone
with me Mr gapes an act as a
professor at UNM School of Law
and I stand for questions.
Debate the gentleman from Dona
Ana Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mister speaker gentlelady would
you yep.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Dona Ana.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady
you know the Mr speaker gentle
lady there are a number of
different parts of this
legislation so I want to briefly
ask questions with on a few of
them first Mr speaker gentle
lady knowing that we are still
in the midst of the COVID
nineteen pandemic fighting our
way out of that scene the
increased vaccine uptake
including and and really across
the state
Mr speaker gentle lady we're
gonna be facing these economic
challenges for a while we know
that we face significant
economic challenges before the
pandemic.
You propose in this legislation
setting out the authority for
public regulation commission to
specifically kind of help set a
low income right is that
accurate Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from an
incoming that that is correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
Are there other states that go
ahead and and have a vested I
guess we don't have this
authority that resides with our
PRC right now Mr speaker
generally briefly on that
we just passed a constitutional
amendment we're gonna see our
PRC become an appointed body
really focusing in on these
technical qualifications
Committee that's bipartisan to
help select nominees.
Will it do you think are PRC Mr
speaker gentle lady are you
think they're up to the task.
At close range.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
thing and I I I I missed that
last part
B. R. C. are you confident are
PRC will be able to to do the
technical work to help set these
low income rates that will
benefit New Mexicans especially
lowincome New Mexicans.
But thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman twenty and I think
that's an excellent question I I
think we we need to do the work
to fully fund the PRC I I know
that there have been some
challenges we need to we need to
fund this this regulatory agency
that came you that is
responsible for making lots of
these decisions I I have no
doubt I have a lot of confidence
and pride in our our agencies
and our commissions and I
imagine with full funding we can
make this happen.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I fully
agree with you I think the
elements you know to very
important Mr speaker gentle lady
we would be joining other states
if we give our PRC this
authority to set these lowincome
rates that benefit our lowest
income citizens is that
accurate.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Indiana but if we pass this
legislation we would be want me
would be the twenty first St
that would be able to set low
income rates twenty other states
across the nation to this
already to help they're at their
low income.
Students it's it's so incredibly
important our neighbors Colorado
and Arizona have already done
this as well.
That that's excellent that's
great Mr speaker gentle lady
actually two more fluent States
frankly the fact that they have
this the ability for their
utility commissions to do that
I think that's that's great Mr
speaker gentle lady that kind of
goes into another part of your
bill which is the focus on
energy efficiency and Mr speaker
gentle lady how does energy
efficiency factor in to helping
specially lowincome New Mexicans
manage their utility payments.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Diana that is an
excellent question I think it's
too the the heart of the problem
that we're in right now I have
learned so much about this in
the last at definitely the last
couple of months but I know that
that many low income families
that don't have access for the
capital to invest in energy
efficiency products and
processes programs you to for
for their homes.
Often and use their their
windows and their doors are you
know are are pretty old
appliances are are pretty old
and all of that use leakage you
know contributes to a high
energy burden so what this bill
does it sets up a program to
fund at and nerd that the
community energy efficiency
Development Glock Grant and what
that would do is allow local
governments communities all
across the state and tribal
entities to tap into this fund
to really focus that have a
targeted approach on energy
efficiency for low income
households in their communities
you know I I live in a small
town I think we think that we
know we know best our community
and what our community needs you
know so it could be that here
and tells us people who live in
affordable homes really need
better windows or in the case of
this winter insulation you know
so so this allows local
governments to say Hey you know
we we need X. amount of money to
get everyone in this housing
complex better insulated and
that's what this bill also
doesn't so if you have to take a
cozy home with energy efficient
products you know with
you with better refrigerators
you're you're you're gonna have
lower energy bills I think
that's really really important
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
couldn't agree more the fact
that those families will be
saving money that might have
otherwise been spent on that
utility bill that means Mr
speaker gentle lady they're
going to have more to put into
their education or Mr speaker
gentle lady more to put into
that small business that either
they go to or perhaps they
themselves are working on their
own or working on started Mr
speaker gentle lady it seems
like also a big benefit of that
is.
You're talking about
construction and and really
incredible job opportunities
that would be kind of a
the connectivity benefit to
doing some of this energy
efficiency work would you agree
with that Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman I I I would
agree and there's other
legislation which I will not
talk about now that would but
also support support that but we
we know that in the clean energy
economy retrofits and this kind
of energy efficiency works it is
really driving the job market so
I know I I I look at a program
like seed and I think this is
you know this is just a great
opportunity for local economic
development job training for you
know for young people and
there's there's so many benefits
I'm not only you know with with
young folks getting good jobs
and doing good things but you
know our community members
paying lower paying lower rates
absolutely Mr speaker gentleman
and you go in that seems to be
at the heart of this legislation
it's different features this is
all about saving New Mexicans
money on the on their utility
rates Mr speaker gentle lady so
just briefly then Mr speaker
gentle lady one of those areas
that it seems like is important
do we know all right now
what happens when it comes to
disconnections and re
connections can can we say can
we look at what's happening with
our utilities and see who's been
disconnected how many times
perhaps reconnected that sort of
thing.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that that is part of
the problem that we're facing
right now is that utilities that
will they they do record that
data but it's not necessarily
reported out so it's it's a real
challenge to you to be able to
determine whether a utility you
know even you know you can't can
even support a lower income
rates because the data isn't
there I run I run a nonprofit in
inTaos and.
You know we we we rely on data
to inform our planning and there
have absolutely been moments
when when we have done projects
that have you know gone off the
rails because we didn't have a
good plan good data.
Gives us a good plan and that's
an and that's why we need this
data that's why we need that
reporting data from the
utilities going to the PRC and
available so that we can we can
make a good plan it's really.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I think seeing the
investment that's gone into the
PRC see the cons amendment in
the choice of New Mexicans made
overwhelmingly this past
election making sure Mr speaker
gentle lady that that body has
this full suite of data that is
then going to help again save
New Mexicans money every single
month on their utility bills is
for some of these other economic
benefits.
The
enough Mr speaker gentle lady
for me to be really excited to
actually stand in support of
this to be excited how it will
connect in ways across our state
certainly in the communities
that I come from that will spur
construction investment.
and again help families coming
out of the worst public health.
Crisis I've ever seen it will
help them to save some of those
dollars to get reconnected we
haven't talked about that in to
put those dollars into local
communities to keep those
dollars locally supporting those
small businesses so I just
really appreciate you bringing a
comprehensive
look at something that comes
down to Mr speaker gentle lady
are we gonna try to save New
Mexicans money on their utility
bills and I'm excited to say yes
to that thank you Mr speaker
thing.
The gentleman there is for the
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from tells kindly yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I gladly
yield to the gentleman from sap.
Mr speaker my first question for
the gentle lady from palace's
whether she's drinking pearl
great or try.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan I am
drinking kava stress relief
team.
Thank you Mr speaker I hope to
not be the source of the need
for the stress relief tea here
the seating but I do have some
questions for you gentlelady.
And I did take a couple notes
with respect to your opening
remarks and appreciate those
and.
And one of those is unique you
described us as a COVID relief
bill.
And we've seen other efforts
both at the federal and state
level in trying to to tackle.
economic hardships it's been
that have been created as a
result of COVID you know I think
for example we're all familiar
with the.
The PPP the paycheck protection
program loan that was
distributed small businesses
many of whom were or because to
to shut down.
Some just temporarily.
Others more permanent and and
those funds are offered as
relief as a result of COVID and
even what this body did that
that second special session at
the end of twenty twenty again
was to provide some economic
relief for folks who had
suffered as a result of.
Of COVID nineteen and so Mister
speaker.
Ginnelly different house I'm
just trying to understand who
this bill is attempting to help
is it in fact.
People who have suffered
economic hardship as a result of
COVID nineteen.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
It is indeed you can listen back
here college eyes at this this
bill it helps people who have
experienced great economic
hardship and who are in debt
because of COVID nineteen and it
also helps us make sure that
that doesn't happen again you
know this is this is
unprecedented what we're
experiencing up all across the
world right we've we've we've
just we have experiences for a
hundred years and the global
economy is so complex and so
connected and so right now we do
we need to deal with the current
present very very difficult
situations that so many New
Mexicans are facing at this
moment and and we need to also
at the same time set some
measures in place that will
ensure that people who are low
income low income households
don't don't have to make that
tough choice again right because
we have a we have created
systems and investments in you
know in their homes so that
their youth their energy burden
is a lot lower you know what
what I have what I've heard is
that low income New Mexicans are
facing something like you ten to
thirty percent energy burning in
the state right my energy burden
is around you know one to six
percent depending on the time of
year right I in and that that is
I think unconscionable our our
low income families need to
support they need it right now
and they need it in the future.
And I want to be very very clear
here the the of a reader's part
of this bill Mr speaker and
gentleman is is is only for for
families that are households
that are experiencing hardship
under COVID for who you who are
eligible which are low income
households at the at the two
hundred fifty percent threshold.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and it with with that
the last.
Clarification that is so
important so those are families
that that have suffered because
of COVID nineteen is that
correct.
At eight Mr speaker and
gentleman at that that's not
that's not quite correct now
it's it's for those not for
those who have experienced COVID
but who are experiencing
hardship during at at this time.
Thank you Mr gently I didn't
mean to to articulate and that
in a way that meant that they
had to actually have tested
positive for COVID nineteen I
just meant that these are
families to for example I I
wasn't allowed to go to work
because the business is shut
down or those kind of scenarios
where where my family was
impacted because of COVID
nineteen is that correct.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for the clarification and I'd
like to draw your attention
gentle lady to page two.
And.
I'm looking at line nineteen
subparagraph B. as in Bravo.
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
let me know when you're out that
paragraphs of I'm not reading
something you don't have been
from the.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Maria and there.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so the way I understand the
subparagraph B. as this is one
of the ways that we can make
sure that that I have in fact
suffered economic hardship and
so what we it it's a definition
here and we're calling it a
certification of economic
hardship.
And the way that is defined as
it means a written declaration
signed by a customer under
penalty of perjury that is
submitted to a public utility.
To certify that the customer is
prevented from being able to
make payments on installment
agreement due to economic
hardship.
And Mr speaker generator
gentlelady from Tallis you know
we've we've had some initial
discussions about this building
this building promised on
providing economic release.
The folks who suffer economic
hardship as a result of COVID
nineteen.
But only twenty three there's no
reference to the comment
pandemic just simply says due to
economic hardship.
There's nothing that actually
ties the economic hardship to
having resulted from.
Or because buyer even just just
simply contributed to by.
COVID nineteen.
And so I'm I'm wondering why
there's no reference to the
economic hardship having been
caused by the COVID.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman I'd like to take just
a second and the income for if
you don't mind.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman but that is an
excellent question and and thank
you thank you for that on this
this definition on page two.
Can be.
Refers to that.
Section five C. which defines
the the ways in which you would
be you would qualify for for
hardship and also for that you
who who qualifies for the
program at two hundred fifty
percent of poverty.
So.
I hope that answers your
question Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker
I understand response but I
think what I'm getting at is
there will the overall theme of
this bill is to provide relief
to folks who have suffered.
Economic hardship as a result of
COVID nineteen and.
And you're right this this
definition what we're talking
about a certification of
economic hardship and that does.
Come into play later on the bill
we talk about how you qualified
for the utility bill relief
program.
But again there there's nothing
to tie it to a hardship having
suffered insult of COVID
nineteen.
And so I what I just what I
would do is.
What I would offer is maybe to
just insert a little bit of
language here I think to tighten
up.
That's consistent with the
purpose of the bill as I
understand so maybe let me move
to my.
Affirmative and and I think
that'll actually help facilitate
the discussion about what I'm
what I'm getting out so Mister
speaker.
I would move house floor
amendment number one to House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
house bill two oh six I'm happy
to read the to to number explain
then when you're ready Mr
speaker.
Let's make sure it's been passed
out.
Domino's you would read the two
oh two number thank you Mr
speaker it's point two two zero
three six zero point one moment
to explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker so on this
very page page two we've been
discussing it at the end of SB.
Just simply inserts the phrase
because buyer contributed to by
the corona virus disease two
thousand nineteen public health
emergency.
And again this just goes along
with our discussion so far this
afternoon which is.
We're talking about economic
hardships that have been caused
by or related to.
COVID nineteen and it's not some
other hardship we're focusing on
COVID release.
and in this doesn't
A change any of the other some
of the provisions other than the
section five but the gentle lady
reference which just means.
If your income level is at or
below two hundred fifty percent
of the poverty level then then
you submit the certification of
economic hardship.
And one of the things that she
would be declaring is that yes
I've suffered an economic
hardship.
And the economic hardship was
because of our contributed to
the COVID nineteen pandemic shin
so that's really all it is is
just to try to to to bring up
focus on to the type of economic
hardship thank you Mr speaker on
the C. this friendly amendment
go to the sponsor Representative
or yes.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan I am
very excited to say that this is
a friendly amendment.
let's have a moment.
Thank you Mr speaker the
regional at the I think it
really does improve the bill and
and keeps it in focus supports
designed to do.
Let's see if there is Act any
objection to adoption of the
amendment.
The amendment is adopted it is
so ordered.
Back on the bill gentleman from
San Juan you still have the
floor thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally appreciate.
Of your willingness to and and I
I will say this is this just for
me personally this is one of
the.
The beautiful things about
lawmaking is I I've never seen
this bill prior to it hitting
the floor I wasn't on in the
committees and so you know maybe
I I bring a just a fresh set of
eyes that may not otherwise be
there so I appreciate the gentle
lady being willing to to have
that dialogue with me
A couple of other things I
wanted I want to discuss Mr
speaker gentle lady.
if we can in fact turned to.
We find the page here.
It's page seven.
And this this Mr speaker is the
section five of the generated
from house.
Referenced previously.
And I'll I'll turn the body's
attention to paragraph B. as in
Bravo online one on page seven.
And this is this is defining how
a customer can become enrolled
in a utility bill relief program
and it sets out essentially Mr
speaker.
Gentlelady to ways that the
person can become rules.
The first is on line six and
it's if they meet the
qualifications of the federal
low income home energy
assistance program and I think
that that makes sense to me I
get that part.
I want to focus my question
though on the second prong.
Starting in line nine and so
what what this provision says is
a customer who has an annual U
income equal to or less than two
hundred fifty percent of the
federal prop poverty level those
persons become eligible
underneath this bill to be
enrolled in utility bill with
relief program.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady I'm wondering for a family
of four.
Do you know what the two hundred
fifty percent of the federal
poverty level is the annual
income.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
that transcend one at thank I do
know that.
It is six sixty five thousand
dollars a year.
Mr speaker gentle lady you've
done your homework I'm impressed
And I I'm sort of numbers good
to and so it helps me to have a
visual to break that down by
months.
And Mr speaker gentle lady did
you know that's about fifty five
hundred dollars a month five
thousand five hundred dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
the for taxes.
So that that would be gross not
net correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman at yes
Chris.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from two thousand.
And I do know that on page seven
that we're still on on line one
it uses the word shall.
And so a family of four that
earns fifty five hundred dollars
a month they are.
entitled to or shall be enrolled
in.
in this program without
discretion of the utility is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman
that is something I'm going to
confirm it with it with my my
expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
is.
This is for only those folks who
have you who have requested to
be in the program and have a
repairs during during the time
of COVID during the public
order.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
A family of four that makes
fifty five hundred
gross not net fifty five hundred
per month.
They they.
Have a right to be enrolled in
this program if they did in fact
suffer economic hardship result
to comment but there's no
discretion on the part of the
utility is that correct.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen but
there is discretion on the part
of the utility for the hardship
case but but not for the two
hundred fifty percent.
Mr speaker gentle lady with
where is the discretion in this
bill about the hardship case
because the way that I
understand it.
Is if if I make fifty five
hundred dollars a month and I am
a family of four on marriage of
two wonderful sons.
If I make fifty five hundred
dollars a month and I suffered
economic.
Hardship as a result of COVID I
I submit a certificate of
economic hardship.
And I swear into perjury that
the facts in that certificate or
true I I I'm missing where the
discretion pieces Mr speaker
generated from Travis.
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
the things.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that question it's it's
it's a complicated one and I and
I want to just start out by
saying that you know we we work
with the ylides to add to figure
out what would work best for for
their customers and that the
utilities did you did not want a
discussion programs as the
default but I also want want to
address the the income levels
are sometimes the income levels
don't you know catch up with a
program like this in time you
know there this is an
extraordinary time and folks who
may have made sixty five
thousand dollars a year
supporting a family of four you
know we may not be making that
that it right now and that's
what the challenges.
Mr speaker gentle lady but it
the numbers do come out to.
To fifty five hundred dollars a
month even.
well it would be presently so.
But again I I I just want to
emphasize that I don't think
there's a special part of
utility when you're talking
about this paragraph to be.
That if I was a family of four
submit a certification of
economic hardship there's no
basis for them to to deny that
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
I would like to point out that
on page on page seven line
twenty four is a public utility
me and Raul.
Into the utility bill relief
program
for it it's not shall it's it's
me.
Mr speaker gentle lady
actually paragraphs he goes on
to just to discuss.
Well that that have discretion
to get in with with no income
cap actually.
Representative C. is a totally
different part of the bill and
I'm happy to talk about of C..
Because there is an income cap
but we're talking occurred F. B.
as in Bravo.
And it does have an income cap
in it uses.
On line one on page seven of
public utility shall enroll is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman all you
you're correct the the
The utility.
It does not have a discretion
for under two hundred fifty if
you enroll in the program.
Thank you Mr chairman and and in
fairness to the joint from from
yes you don't just get in right
away you would you actually have
to submit a certificate of
economic hardship so you do have
to to swear under oath that I'm
saying I have an economic
hardship.
Because my comment but once
that's done it's it's no longer
discretionary.
and I do have some some concerns
about the two hundred fifty
percent of the federal poverty
level because as I said for a
family of four in New Mexico.
The next fifty five hundred
dollars a month gross that seems
like a very good salary to me.
And for those persons to be
automatically eligible to be
enrolled.
In this
Utility relief program I have
concerns generation you need
tell me why you pick such a high
number of two hundred fifty
percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that number me see high in in
some parts of the state but I
can tell you that in many others
Santa Fe House even you know
this it it.
It's not but that was a number
that you need we worked very
closely with the utilities on
this number to arrive at a place
that made sense for those New
Mexicans that that are suffering
and again I want to point out
that you know you have to enroll
in this program you have to have
over three years within the time
frame and and that's that's what
we're trying to do here and just
because you have made sixty five
thousand dollars in the past
doesn't mean that under COVID
you for folks who have you lost
their job which is what we're
talking about here you know
opioid that that's not the only
reason why you would qualify for
this program but but that's
what's happening to a number of
of households all around New
Mexico will they they may have
made sixty five thousand dollars
in in twenty nineteen but in
twenty twenty they they lost
their job and they no longer
have that so that's that's
that's the reasoning behind
this.
Mr speaker gentle lady in I
think actually we are trying to
people that they are currently
employed and make sixty five
thousand dollars a year those
are the people a family for the
that would be eligible for this
and and I I I do confess I don't
live in Santa Fe I don't live in
Albuquerque I I'm a I'm a small
town general kid and to me I'm
not saying fifty five hundred a
months makes you wealthy.
You're not in one percent of U.
S. earners but fifty five
hundred in Astor New Mexico is a
pretty good wage.
and I know lots of people to be
happy to next page five hundred
dollars a month I do want to
also just ask a question about
the paragraph C. Mr speaker that
the gentle lady from telus
referenced earlier.
Page seven online twenty four.
This does become discretionary
but I and I note that there is
no income cap whatsoever for
people to be able to apply.
And so can you explain Mister
speaker July from yes why
there's no income cap within
subparagraphs C..
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are many factors in qualifying
for hardship
and after discussions with the
utilities at this is this is
really what we come up came up
with that need the two of these
feel comfortable.
You know and I and I'd like to
take a moment here Mister
speaker and and gentleman to
into it to give an example you
know if you have been.
Out of work due to the COVID and
you have
experienced them the mounting
debt month after month of
utility payments that you have
not been able to make because
you are out of work
on you know it paying paying
back all of that is going to be
extremely challenging in
addition to you know once you
get back to work you you've got
to paid this debt back in this
really extraordinary timing
people lost jobs as we know all
over the state because of this
you know they had to stay home
because because I had to take
care of their children who
couldn't go to school that's
what happened to me I took two
days off a week at the with
which was very challenging for
for my household and for my the
organization I run because I was
taking care of my children I'm
grateful that we had support for
that and this what this does it
as the other layer of support I
I understand what you what
you're getting at I I really do
and we've we've outlined clearly
what the factors for hardship or
in the bill and with with great
collaboration with utilities.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for the response I do appreciate
you sharing part of your story
and.
And I hope my.
My of questioning doesn't make
you feel otherwise so I I do
appreciate that but I I do have
some I'm being honest I have
concerns that we don't have an
income cap here that you know if
if someone makes half a million
dollars a year and they happen
to suffer what what they would
describe as an economic impact
they're eligible to apply
another is discretion and I
would hope that a utility would
say no.
But as I said drafters of the
law.
we've got maybe a possibility to
where that scenario could
potentially happen.
The the last section I want to
call your attention to Mr
speaker gentle lady from house
if we could turn to page
fourteen in the bill.
Mr generator you're at the line
for on page fourteen.
Mr speaker gentleman I am.
Very good thank you so as I
understand this subparagraph B.
as in Bravo and then.
On page fifteen the next page
paragraph D. as in delta I think
they do a very similar.
US thing which is it authorizes
the utilities.
To pass on the cost the cost of
they've incurred as a result of
this bill to other repairs is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I they
will be able to pass that
pass that on to the right person
after a few very important
things.
Mr Jonathan I'm not trying to.
Tension corner so if you if
you'd like to describe what
those other very important
things are I'm very happy to
here with those are at thank you
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I think it might be
time for me to port has to do
for myself but I will our I will
go ahead and explain that first
the way this bill is written up
investor owned utilities and
smaller utilities and co ops and
in particular can it can recover
some of that debt that that has
been encouraged that has been
forgiven first from the the
federal the federal government
there's already been a fusion of
of funds from the cares Act five
point three million which was
passed along to customers and
and those programs are are
on going right now I I was
informed of one such program
today that has several hundred
thousand dollars and for
residential customers so that's
I think that's that's really
important to mention you can tap
into that to recover to me to
pay down some of your debt and
utilities will be able to tap
into those federal funds for co
ops it's a it's a it's a little
bit of a different story co ops
pay a fee to the PRC you depends
on how many members are in that
co op and this bill allows for
the co op to apply fifty percent
of their fee that they paid to
PRC to to the to the arrears
payments out for for those folks
who I know who have been in the
program and and lastly it at the
very last resort that should
right holders and shareholders
and and members
would possibly bear bear that
cost but but I'd like to point
out right now that that that
does happen already right right
now there you know there are
easy utilities go.
to the PRC to ask for you know
for you know for rate
adjustments
when there is that so this this
gives the utilities the
opportunity to tap into the
federal money and to really I
think importantly recover some
of that that those arrears from
the customers themselves and I
think that's really you know
really important you know if
you're making you know sixty
five thousand dollars or or less
a year you know for a family of
four but you haven't worked
you're covering this debt you
know you it doesn't feel good to
have that at all we know that
right I experience that they're
members of this body whose
experience that is why I surely
know you hundreds of people in
my district who are experiencing
this right now who need a little
relief and this allows them to
get that relief and the
utilities and co ops have an
opportunity to apply what's you
know what's come our way already
what's coming our way we hope
very soon and and apply that to
the bad debt.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
actually don't think the
utilities are currently doing
this they there certainly are
given fifty percent credits and
then passing those on of the
repairs and.
And it's not like they they go
to the PRC and say our our
accounts receivable has has
grown so much that we need to
have a rate increase I think
what happens is that you know
say the cost of providing you
know either literacy or gas
whatever that may be the the the
cost of increasing so that that
justifies a rate increase but
it's not result of.
customers not paying their bills
and and I want to be clear about
my comments to that you know
when we have these discussions
that the enemy if you want to
use the that kind of phraseology
it's not the folks who have
suffered as a result.
Of COVID nineteen I I totally
understand that these are real
people that have real hardships
and they are really suffering
and so it I I don't have any ill
will towards those people at all
and I love having a discussion
about how do we help these
people in a way that that brings
real aid.
but in a way that also doesn't
settle for the repairs and so.
the folks that have suffered
this economic hardship I don't
just use versions on them I
don't view this is their fault
and likewise with that I also
don't view it as the fault of
other ratepayers they did not
cause the COVID nineteen crisis
they did not cause the Economic
shutdowns.
Neither did the folks that would
qualify under this this program.
And yet we're asking our other
ratepayers are citizens of New
Mexico.
To cover the cost of these miss
utility payments even though the
due to no fault of their own.
We have this pandemic and we
have the shut downs that
resulted
I think the better discussion is
along the lines of what it what
it has been.
Over the last year which is you
know it's it's the federal and
state governments that have
ordered the shut downs that of
because this predicament.
And they ought to be the ones
that I in my opinion we ought to
be having a conversation about
how how do we get the state to
help cover these Mr Jordan came
is because I don't see ones
gasket shut off I don't see
electricity to shut off running
water waste water of course not.
I think the debate should be
around in the dialogue should be
around what can the state do to
remedy the situation instead I
feel like the dialogue as a
result of the language in this
bill is centered around what can
we do to get the other
ratepayers to resolve the
situation and again the repairs
are not at fault they did not do
anything wrong.
And here I am is that you know
as a citizen of New Mexico and I
look at what we've done to our
people.
We shut their businesses down
we've interrupted their ability
to go to work.
And now what we're gonna tell
them is you're also going to
have to pay increase utility
costs as a result of the
shutdowns.
And I don't think that's right.
I think the conversation needs
to be around what the state
ought to be doing to resolve
this problem not the other
ratepayers and I just wonder
when is enough enough for the
people of New Mexico thank you
Mr speaker I yield back.
For the day gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from tolls you.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from the.
Speaker.
This is
Cordery substantial.
Piece of work that has been.
Development is here before us
today.
It starts off with helping.
Low income people who will fall
behind.
Come up to.
With with the plan to to pay
your bills or have those bills
before given.
It follows with the community
energy efficiency development
block grant.
Program.
And then in the spirit.
Okay letting a crisis go to
waste.
We should ensure Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
With the program.
That is the enabling
legislation.
To subsidize.
And social is.
Utility rates.
In the process.
Over
all this.
We.
D. R. C.'s ability to manage the
crisis.
In a manner.
Just to not only.
The low income people.
What the utility use.
Calls.
And folks
have an interest in the very
complicated process.
Of providing electricity to our
constituents Mr speaker and
gentle lady I'd like to.
I'd like to ask you do you.
Mr what do you do you know what
your your children right is in
tall switch to proportion
electrical.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I actually don't.
But I could find it out I do
know what the utility rate is
the average utility rate is for
the state of New Mexico.
The twelve point nine five
cents.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is the information I have.
What is suppose you tomorrow.
Twelve point nine five sentences
about forty per cent higher.
Surrounding states.
Okay.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen I'm
not sure surprised is the right
word that it was not aware that
I I I would used at.
It is it is higher than I do
have my number from to house.
Mr.
Number from times please it is a
eighteen cents.
Mr speaker gentle lady The New
York Care questions what to call
the substantially above the
state average.
Which is thirty percent higher.
Then surrounding states.
The lady the helped so much of
our money the why are we in a
position of our constituents
having to pay.
So much more for electricity in
our neighbors could also
believe.
The public policy that this
legislature has developed.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
know that we pay we do pay less
than the average US right.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's an
actor.
According to the IEA the US
average rate is a little over
ten cents.
Speaker gentle lady I think I've
made that point.
I'd like to start going through.
A couple of provisions in the
bill.
And particularly with respect.
How the pandemic crisis and
utility rates are currently
being managed.
With this legislation Mr speaker
gentle lady or you.
Familiar with the PRC orders
that were issued January sixth
and February third of twenty
twenty one.
Mr speaker and gentleman at.
I if that's in reference to the
moratorium I am.
No Mr speaker is not the more
moratorium which let me.
Hello for a little bit has
anybody been disconnected from
electricity.
During the emergency health
orders.
Mr speaker and and gentleman the
moratorium that prevented that
from happening and I and I want
to take a moment here to thank
the PRC to for for making that
happen it it is truly what it
what was needed.
The Jews are you familiar with
the January six order and what
it constructed what mandated to
happen at the conclusion of the
moratorium.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think it would be best if you
could share that with me.
Mr ward staff PNM EP SPS and I'm
yes ma'am rural electric co ops
to fly transition plans.
In order to public workshop to
be held collaborative lady.
To work with utilities rate
payers and other stakeholders to
determine the parameters.
In the future.
Disconnection.
Moratoriums during the
transition period does that
sound like Mr speaker gentle
lady Hey collaborative process
that would take into account.
All not just.
Right here's what all of the
people involved with the
generation transportation.
Purchasing and selling
electricity in the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that deals with the news that
the moratorium for setting up
payment plans for for folks
who've suffered in careers what
what cannot happen at the PRC
without legislation is tackling
tackling that debt and forgiving
that debt what also can happen
without legislation is
establishing the ability for
local governments to you know to
provide energy efficiency
projects in their communities.
It also appears to be an actor.
As a consequence of the February
third twenty twenty one quarter.
Transition plan was forced to
employ going to the current
whether and to what extent the
would be a temporary
disconnection moratorium.
Who would be eligible.
For continuation of the
temporary disconnection
moratorium whether public
utilities and or rate payers
would be receiving state and
federal funds suggested
benchmarks for determining low
income customers and
economically disadvantaged
customers and then finally rules
for one zero which for forty
years.
Has dealt with us.
Termination of electric service
for enrollment payment of bills.
What it does that sound
suspiciously like.
Section one of your bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
this program is not inconsistent
with that February third order
the the order will and the
utilities commission moratorium
and establish a transition
period it's with with the
timeline
you for for large utilities and
small co ops and this bill is
silent on on the moratorium it
is really lease that up to the
PRC but I want to point out that
we've.
We've never been in a crisis
like this before so and and the
PRC at this moment can not help
those who are in most desperate
need and who are suffering
because of the lack of jobs or
lack of unemployment to it to
help him through this crisis
here we are it's not
inconsistent you know that the
PRC cannot forgive debt and
that's what this does.
That's what this bill does thank
you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady hard on
us have to respectfully disagree
what your bill does is eliminate
the flexibility of the PRC
to take into account a multitude
of factors.
Those factors.
Not just the folks that are
having difficulty paying their
bills but the cost to generate.
How do you build them.
The representative from San Juan
touched on this order like to
flush it out a little bit.
I believe your bill.
Then thanks folks.
With income levels up to two
hundred and fifty percent of the
poverty level.
Would be eligible for.
Is.
Correct.
Mr speaker and and that and
gentlemen I.
Really what what this bill does
it allows and see that the PRC
to implement that program for
for a low income right it
doesn't force them to and you
know I I think we.
We need to let the PRC collect
all the data that they need to
to be able to determine what
that looks like.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
But people with incomes up to
two hundred and fifty percent of
the poverty level would be
eligible for rate relief is that
correct.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen at
the.
I I want I want to just confirm
this just give me a minute.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
some information for you and
thank you I want to be clear
here that if you're at two
hundred fifty percent of the
poverty rate you are eligible
for forgiveness for debt
incurred occurring during the
this this comment time there is
nothing in this bill about.
Folks who are at two hundred
fifty percent that qualify for
the low income rate set by the
PRC.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
for that.
M. Mr speaker gentle lady I have
a couple of statistics.
From co ops in.
Area.
The detail.
The percentage of the rest
players in their systems.
That would qualify.
Do you have an idea about what
that percentage would be.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
has been one of the greatest
challenges is getting that data
and having that data I know for
some of the collapse.
But but not all.
Mr speaker gentle lady in the
prisoner to in my area.
That number is fifty percent.
The main.
The house of the corkscrew
streamers would be in some form
or fashion picking up
potentially.
The.
For given.
Utility bills.
For the.
The customer by.
Just waiting.
This.
Mr speaker in in gentleman I I
know that there are families
who.
Are having a really hard time.
Period and they haven't been
able to pay their bills because
of lack of job.
It and and that's and that's
what we're that's what we're
talking about here.
You know we we have talked to
the cops have a have a sort of a
different situation they can
they can cap entry into this
program this arrears forgiveness
program which I I need to remind
the body is
if you pay if you enter into
this program and you pay fifty
percent fifty percent is is
forgiven
it the cops can cap entry to
that program for people between
a hundred fifty and two hundred
fifty percent.
That's the section I H..
Mr speaker gentle lady to.
First.
Yes another one of these lower
income folks request forgiveness
of the bills we're gonna solve
their problem and create a
bigger ones for the people that
are currently paying your bills
do you see as a potential issue.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen of
what I see and what I'm
experiencing is a time of great
crisis that is on president it
and I I know somebody who has
experienced economic hardship
myself the last thing I want to
be in is in debt it doesn't feel
good it's not something I don't
want my neighbor to you know to
to pay my bills but what I want
is some support when things get
really bad and it's really bad
right now so you know what what
I will say is that we've crafted
a bill that gives it especially
the coops you some opportunity
to tap into that federal funding
to tap into the seat as they
would normally pay to the PRC
half of that fee to help those
households that are most in need
and for me I.
I want to help I want to do
everything I can to support my
community members who are
suffering in who are in pain and
hardship so.
That's that's that's how I feel
about this.
Mr
was heartfelt.
And I completely agree.
There are people out there.
In need of assistance.
Approach.
Is the transition.
J. shin and over time.
Allow these folks that are then
all over the COVID crisis and
back to work.
To to pay their bills.
Bills.
Bills.
As a consequence of a vault
full.
PRC rulemaking Mr speaker and
gentle lady offs of been on the
phone here for quite a long time
so I'm going to skip over the
seat portion.
Of your of legislation and skip
right to the selected the very
last section when.
We are completely over the COVID
crisis.
Looking.
Piece of legislation that would.
Probably.
Socialize the utility industry
in New Mexico.
Now Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
not a believer in the free
lunch.
So.
We'll have to pick up the tab Mr
speaker gentle lady and your
bill.
Is that somebody.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
I'm not sure exactly what you're
referring to what what tab
exactly.
Mr speaker Jim would repeat the
question.
Mr and Mr speaker and gentleman
up I'm not I'm not sure what tab
that you're referring to are you
referring to the arrears
of relief program were you
referring to of a low income
right no.
Completely over the COVID crisis
and now we have socialized
utilities will phone number of
low income right losses
potentially within what is now
one residential rate class.
The those folks will re.
Will be a
We'll have available to them
either free or low or very low
cost electricity.
Who will pay for those.
Budget.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
want to be clear that this bill
doesn't
doesn't require a low income
right it it authorizes that and
you know different rate classes
exist already industrial rates
economic development rates you
know we we give the PRC and
utilities given special rights
to to big businesses you know
this is no we have an
opportunity here to to provide
low income households with with
a with the lower rate so that
they can reduce their burden
their their utility burden their
energy burden you know I I said
in my you know in an earlier
response that new money is
somewhere between a one in six
depend one is six percent of my
income depending on the month
last month there was a it was
higher to this very cold you
know but low income folks have
much higher energy burdens ten
to thirty percent of their of
their salaries so you know I I
think of the of all the
opportunities that could exist
if there's and if there is an
allowance an opportunity for for
low income folks to to pay to
pay less you know they're folks
who qualify for like he and and
I think that that is very
helpful but still because of the
some of the of the issues with
capitalizing energy efficiency
in in your home to make a
because efficient home that's
really hard for low income
people so I this is the time
where we can we need to we have
needed to do this for years to
address the fact that low income
households paid more of their
salary to utilities as
especially electricity and gas
then you know then they should
and they have money for so
that's that's what this.
Is this that's what this is
addressing so let's you know
let's look at low income as a
you know as as as as a right
that scene that's reasonable and
and I think that we I don't want
to just come that the PRC here
really it's it's up to them to
to make sure that that the rates
are just and reasonable as they
do for for all of our rates you
know our our neighbors Arizona
Utah have lifeline rates for
people who you know who are are
low income that's that's
important and those folks who
have a lifeline Rader low income
right they don't is that they
don't get disconnected and if
you're disconnected.
You really at the you're having
a hard time here it's it's hard
to get back to work and get the
kids to school or just for
teacher kids at home which is
what's happening right now
that's not forever either but
it's hard to do those things
when you're disconnected you
it's incredibly demoralizing and
so this option that other states
twenty other states across the
nation have you know have
offered it it needs to happen
here and we need to do it now.
This
fully appreciate all the.
Only in New Mexico.
What we use public policy to
objective delivery rates up to
the point where people can't
afford to buy it anymore and
then subsidized.
Only in New Mexico the speaker.
To be clear.
Does this legislation requires
you.
The establishment the utilities
and co ops to establish low
income rates or will only be
option.
Mr speaker gentleman no it does
not require that.
The utilities and coal.
Decide that multiple residential
rate classes or not in the best
interest of their consumers
overall they would have no
obligation to establish these.
Lowincome right.
This bill authorizes them it
leaves it up to the PRC.
Mr speaker gentle lady could
anyone.
Go to the PRC and request.
Loan.
And rates that would soon become
the subject.
Over right making here in.
Or would this surely the
purview.
Of the utilities and coal.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
no it appears he's responsible
for making the rates just and
reasonable.
Mr Germany so no
thank sides attempted to re.
Income had disconnected proceed
group for example would have the
opportunity to sort of go
request these rate classes all
want to be clear about the.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
it is up to the pair say this is
a this is another tool in the
PRC took at.
Speaker gentle lady.
I didn't hear the answer to my
question.
Is it possible.
For a low income advocacy group.
To petition the PRC for a low
income.
Right.
At which point.
Process and ratemaking process
would proceed.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
rate making process at the PRC
will not change.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady concludes I want to
questions.
As for the debate gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Barreras.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
thank you gentlelady from from
tells
you do if you're doing a great
job I know that it's not it's
not easy to do this especially
in you know as a freshman.
Is one of the night I think
you're doing great
When I when I read this bill
into it immediately just.
Back to the so many situations
growing up.
this for you know it does what
one in particular I I remember
one time when I was in
elementary school and it was a
Friday and on Fridays we got to
take home all of our hard work
trade for the whole week so I
was prompted by I am
Representative ran to my house
and when I open the door
It was silent inside inside my
house and my mom was sitting
there and and I could tell she
had been crying.
And
that they're they're turned our
electricity off I'm I'm my mom
were to jobs at this at this
time
she would not lazy she didn't
have any alcohol or substance
abuse issues you just just try
your best and then it wasn't
that it wasn't enough to get us
through.
So when I feel legislation like
this.
Excuse me.
I guess the way other
legislators need which I I
totally respect totally respect
seeing like the the the details
of it but for me this is the
right for our community this is
really great for for the most
vulnerable people in our
community.
The date of my part Mandall will
will make fun of me because of
the lights flicker I I get
instant anxiety because I'm like
oh my god like to the elections
we get turned up
I think with those.
So are you know that this is a
lot to me
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
what I want to ask you is.
Why is this bill so important
for low income New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Bernalillo at your.
Your story is a story of of of
so many New Mexicans you know I.
At.
They're paying too much for
their electricity and other
utilities especially folks who
are who are low income so and
and this is bill this bill
starts to address that right
with the option for the PRC to
to look at collect the data that
we need to to look at the
possibility of a low income
right I think that's really
important for us you know the
the other ways that we can help
our communities you imagine if
you know I I think maybe things
could've been different in my
household and yours is you know
we had a refrigerator that
wasn't like forty years old and
you know took I don't know how
many kilowatt hours to to run
but but a lot you know there
there's there's opportunity here
to lower that earning you know
and to help you know low income
folks be part of the solution
you know to reducing energy use
in general and and helping with
with climate change.
But what we're really talking
about I think what you're really
talking about here is is that
the the forgiveness that is so
important a leg up.
It's a leg up in this really
difficult time.
Right that's that's what this is
this is you know a little bit of
relief you're so you're paying
your bills paying your bills
that you're not going to get
disconnected you're paying your
debt back and you get a little
bit of help so that you can put
that eighty dollars or sixty
dollars a you know extra that
you owe to your bill you thank
you for you to leave this is
something else like you know
groceries or you know for rents
you know or you know something
to help your family so that's
that's what this bill does it's
You know it it is both it's big
we need to we need to tackle
these problems right now I thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
the question.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
jolly that answer
I I do know what what it's like
and once you once you get behind
on anything it's it's really
really hard when you live
paycheck to paycheck it's really
really hard to
It get caught back up so I I
totally totally get that it was
mentioned earlier are bye bye
and another representative I
think we're you continue gentle
lady
The other states that are that
are already doing that I think I
heard our neighbors are
Arizona and Colorado Mr speaker
and generally are there any
other states better currently
back more.
I'm Mr speaker gentle lady from
from Bernalillo we drafted this
legislation on a program that is
exists right now in in Minnesota
for that for the debt
forgiveness in terms of the
lower the lower income right and
and sorry agency and you can you
talk in terms of the lower
income right but twenty states
we all offer that already.
And I can go through that Hey
there either they're they're all
you a geographic range of of
states that that that offer that
as well in particular Arizona
and Utah's rocky mountain power
provide this does lowincome we
which is really helpful for
communities.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and and generate the those are
the only questions I have I just
want to say again thank you for
bringing for this legislation
because I know that to bring a
bill like this on the floor your
heart is in it and you care
about our families and and so do
I and so I just want to say
thank you and the I yield my
time thank you Mr speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady up.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I want it you
know talk a little bit this
evening and ask a few questions
about kind of the the bigger
need for this bill and and how
it will directly impact the
lives of real people Mr speaker
and gentle lady I think you know
it's already been shared some of
the personal stories of some of
our members this evening and I
think it's significant and worth
taking a moment to to observe
that in a body in a state
legislative body such as ours
that a significant number of our
own elected officials have faced
at this very issue of losing
electricity we've seen housing
and security hunger and other
issues and Mr speaker gentle
lady I think that speaks to a
larger structural problem with
New Mexico's economy and it
speaks to Mr speaker and gentle
lady the fact The New Mexico is
filled with resilient
communities but people who
really struggle to make a living
and so Mister speaker and gentle
lady when we have economic
crises like we are currently
facing with this pandemic
because so many people in our
communities are already living
on the edge.
Even a slight disturbance to
people's economic livelihoods
can send them into homelessness
into dire economic situations
and lead them to lose the
fundamental things that they
need to survive.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady you know one of the things
that I think is really important
to highlight in this piece of
legislation is what what is that
what is electricity do for us in
our homes right Mr speaker and
gentle lady it's used to heat
our homes its use to refrigerate
the food that we eat it provides
the light so that we can you
know be awakened doing things in
the evenings so our children can
actually study their school work
so we can read.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
electricity is providing the
means through which most of us
tonight or actually
participating in the session.
Without access to electricity we
would not have the ability to
carry on with their lives and
that is why across the world
access to electricity is
universally viewed as a human
rights issue.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady I want to say first and
foremost thank you for bringing
this legislation forward like us
so many other people in this
body I also grew up in a family
that struggled I also grew up in
a family this struggle sometimes
to make it to the end of the
month and pay the bills and I
also grew up in a family where
my parents worked hard and in
spite of that in multiple jobs
still often could not pay the
bills because our economy is not
working for people.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
I want to ask you know can you
please share with us a little
bit more about.
The families that will benefit
from this legislation how many
families what kinds of
communities why is this
legislation so fundamental and
important to our communities.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
generally from.
you really you really hit on the
head on the head and articulated
this that are complete at
dependence on the electrical
grid electricity we we can't do
anything without it they're
people hearing house who are you
know who are different and are
are not are not connected to to
the grated and and do with a do
without electricity for
as their own decision and choice
but there are tens of thousands
of families all across the state
that during the COVID.
You are we should be
disconnected.
Fifty seven thousand that we
know of more because we don't
have all the data from the
collapse of that would be
disconnected without the
moratorium who have debt between
two hundred and fifty and a
thousand dollars just through
November because they lost their
jobs because they because
they're a single parent and and
and have to stay home with their
children who are not in school
that's that is the reality so
the fifty fifty seven thousand
plus.
Probably closer to seventy
thousand families are incurring
a recurring distant as we see
because they cannot afford to
pay their utility bills twenty
seven thousand households.
Would have been disconnected
from gas services if they at
without without that moratorium
which we're really grateful for
but they still have to pay that
back and you know if you're
getting back to work you know
you you you talked about that
struggle you know you've got the
debt and everything else is
mounting and it's it's just
unfathomable to you know how
you're going to make ends meet
with all you know because of
what's happened and what we're
experiencing with this public
health emergency it's it's a
crisis so thank you for that
question it's tens of thousands.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady you know zooming
back out you know looking at the
economy overall for New Mexico
and what happened in our state
after our last economic crisis
with the housing meltdown over a
decade ago what we saw at is
that families who were living on
the edge families who are
struggling to make ends meet
families who were unable to pay
their utility bills and their
rent.
That in the aftermath of that
crisis homeless rates in New
Mexico skyrocketed unemployment
rates in New Mexico skyrocketed
and it took our state a decade
to even begin to recover from
that last economic downturn and
in the process there's an entire
generation of people Mr speaker
and gentle lady who lost their
livelihoods.
And just the basic ability to
live dignified lives and so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
that's how I view this bill
that's the lens through which I
view this bill that in providing
just a little bit of relief we
can help families who are living
on the edge survive.
A generational economic crisis.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I
want to personalize this also by
saying that I'm sure every
single member in this body has
received the kinds of emails and
phone calls that I received
every single week and that is
every week I receive emails from
constituents who are unemployed
who have been laid off from
their jobs because it because of
COVID who are on the precipice
of losing their homes because
they do not have a source of
income right now during this
economic crisis and so
gentlelady Mr speaker I ask the
members of this body to think
about your constituents.
To think about for me the dozens
and dozens of people who have
written me over the last year
asking for help.
Asking for help to get access to
unemployment asking for help to
find a job asking for help to
get access to food and food
banks asking for help to get
relief from their utilities.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
This bill is about helping our
people get through this crisis
and I want to say thank you for
bringing it forward and I will
be voting in favor of this bill
and I strongly support
everything that you're trying to
do through this bill and thank
you for your leadership and for
bringing this bill forward
tonight thank you.
is further debate the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Sadako.
You Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from tell sealed.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm just I'm just kind of
curious because.
Just curious there's been a lot
of things that have been set up
on this this effort and just
wanna make sure my brain gets it
so what happens if I don't.
Hey what's already what what are
you back on what happens to
utility company if I can't pay
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe up wealth.
We we look at.
The.
Without this bill I can tell you
what what what will happen the
the utility will you know will
this if you haven't paid will
disconnect you
And will then try to collect
that debt and they'll do
whatever they can to collected
and.
And as they should and and then
State if they can't collected
they will
put that together they become
CEO that that bad debt is is
something that bill.
You know will
will be put into a regulatory
asset and then we'll go to the
PRC and I'll ask for a bit of a
rate increase yes it to cover
that to cover that so with this
bill what and and I want to be
clear as well that utilities to
offer you know payment plans and
they do a lot of work to help
folks.
Paid back their debt they they
really do which it sometimes it
just doesn't happen if you don't
do it you you get disconnected.
And then the and then that is
than that it's recovered.
Still under this bill up if you.
Mr speaker gentle lady and when
you say it's recovered what does
that mean my apologies thank
you.
the utilities will.
Will recover the accent through
through right writers as I
understand it I see I see thank
you Mr speaker only I'm sorry
continue what happened at this
thank you thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady at so under this
bill if you if you qualify and
if you apply to be in the
program for forgiveness you you
will need to ensure that program
the utility will cover half of
your debt if you qualify and
that's really really important
here and and then what the
utility does after to recover
that debt you to get that debt
back before they even before
it's
you know it's sort of taken care
of by by the rate payers is
they'll tap into the federal
funding that exists right now
and it is and it's there
you know and and that there is
funding right now the federal
level and there we hope that
there will be more utilities
will will tap into that funding
and co ops in particular will
we'll be able to tap into at
half of the fee that they paid
the PRC two to to recover some
of those losses and as a lack L.
as a last resort the utilities
will Representative covered
those rates in a rape case.
Thank you Mr speaker they
generally and so it is you know
obviously if if if usually get
turned off and more on that
there is there's a penalty Mr
speaker gentle lady that gets up
put on to the folks that when
you're utilities get turned off
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
they're often penalties late
fees you know it costs more
money to reconnect sometimes you
can't reconnect right away
sometimes you know customers
will
try to tap into their own funds
other funds lake are paid a lot
but you know that and that the
and that creates its own vicious
cycle to to be able to get the
lights back on.
Mr speaker gently on it so I so
the cash circulation within our
communities would would suffer
is what I'm kind of hearing if
folks are really hard pressed to
pay back on a year plus of of of
where they may be behind on and
I mean I my concern is if and
correct me if I'm completely off
base of this but wouldn't that
affect the cash situation in our
local economies the gentle Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe
You know.
But if if you're low income and
you're suffering lost your job
and you don't have
the money to pay your rent and
pay your bill under COVID your
you know your stuff you're
struggling in this time right
and so this gives the
opportunity to you know to
lessen that burden and to put
more money back into the economy
to put more money you know back
into you know supporting
families because this is really
what it's what it's about thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady and
and that's that's kind of what
I.
Was wondering how and that's
what I was just confused about
because we do as a body talked
significantly Mr speaker only
about COVID recovery and and
getting us back on track those
you know the first things that
said the state was it you know
Texas is open prematurely and
that look they'll be able to
open the economy might my
confusion is is that this seems
like an opportunity for the
people that are actually
spending money in our
communities and who are the
drivers of small businesses in
our communities we'll be able to
spend that money in Mr speaker
gentle lady if I may say this is
one of many who had to deal with
not with the utilities and I'll
say that was only the last thing
in my home with my parents they
got turned off on that Mr
speaker generally that was
always the thing that when that
got turned off everybody was
looking on the couches for point
everybody was digging around for
where we could provide the extra
amount to pay that bill and you
know Mr speaker gentle lady this
is something people of what so
if you know that there was also
the mention of on you know this
could help you know
millionaires or something along
those lines I guess my confusion
is is that you should this be
passed when would this go into
effect.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
our.
Four months after the the
legislation is designed.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I mean you know presuming
that sometime later this year so
you know these these.
Terrible Grinch like
millionaires that wanted just
take advantage of our coops into
these horrible things which I'm
not saying anyone's an innocent
person anywhere Mr speaker
gentle lady but they wouldn't
really have that time to then
stop paying their utilities to
then collect this opportunity to
the apply to this opportunity to
then start collecting it is is
that how you see it as well Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
neglected to mention that there
is an emergency clause on this
bill so if we're able to get a
two thirds of the vote then it
would go into effect immediately
but I I ate I think I I get what
you're saying here I think there
is concern that folks will
not pay the bill get into this
program.
And I want that.
I I believe in New Mexicans I
believe Mexicans are are
suffering and I believe that New
Mexicans are.
Want to do the right thing so
you know this this bill is you
know it's for folks who gotten
that gotten into debt from you
from March twenty twenty and had
been unable to pay their
utilities you know until this
public health order is is over
which you know with the vaccines
coming up and a new one on the
way seventeen thousand of
vaccines on the way to New
Mexico are you know I I'm hoping
that we can we can get out of
this of more quickly.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in and I I I to a degree share
your your good faith The New
Mexicans but I also know that in
you know the American market
there is an incentive to have
good credit and to pay your
debts because you get stuff a
lot cheaper if you have good
credit as I learned in my
twenties and I think was level
lessons for speaker gentle lady
so you know I don't think that
those are wealthier who may want
to try to correct the system or
however you say it or whatever
the term would be would would it
that that that that pay off
doesn't necessarily make sense
because then you lose out on a
lot of the other questions that
you might be making Mr speaker
gentle lady and and to your
point you know I know president
I had believed today said that
it looks like we'll have enough
vaccines for all adult Americans
by may which you know ideally
will get us moving out of this
faster and I think that is
really the goal of of of this
body in every each and every
person in this body I think has
that true hope that we will be
able to open our businesses and
get our kids back to school and
you know summer programs all
these all these lovely thoughts
we've been having so Mister
speaker gently I I I don't see
that
that fear for myself I guess I'm
so I don't think I just wanna
make sure so you know at the
time so.
So this would help make sure
there's money in New Mexico
pockets are for those that are
actually funding are small
businesses and this would then
the people that were trying to
get out of this really would
have that time span because
that's like a here that are past
where you're already backed up
you already been stressed and
all those other you know
included things that happen when
you're in debt I I get that too
so okay so then there was also a
conversation that that some
ratepayers have to pay for other
ratepayers of you know the PRC
accepted these different
different should raise a great
but Mr speaker gentle lady
currently there are two
different tree differentiated
rates farmer you saying that for
commercial for corporations for
others to is that correct.
Mr speaker generally yes that is
correct and so Mister speaker
generally and just I want to
understand that so that that
that's the bill that into the to
the pricing model ready but that
budget you know the commercial
so that Mr speaker generally if
we were to build this and for
the the the the people that are
are putting money into our local
economy that could also be built
in as well just like we've done
it already is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Of Mr speaker and gentle lady
yes there are if there are
additional rates economic
development rates and we hope
there will be low income rates.
Okay okay so thank you Mr
speaker gently so again I mean
you know we we talk about not
only recovery but then also
helping New Mexico New Mexicans
it had a little bit better after
this latest recession you know
which which we talk about a lot
on you know I really just feel
like this bill incentivizes the
right things it's interesting
when when you can pay a bill I
you can pay it something like
utilities you pay not not all
bills you know and Mr speaker
timely there others and you can
talk about incentives not to
paying student loans or things
like that and what have you on
but and and there is a bit of
bad debt that's kind of built
into that that structure I I
just I feel like this is part of
this recovery and it's
incentivizing people that maybe
a different tiers and and to be
quite Frank who have been
disproportionately impacted by
this shut down had specifically
been lower income New Mexicans
and and main street businesses
that have suffered through this
so you know it would also
support that as well so I mean
it seems like it's incentivizing
people to get back on track it
seems like it's stopping the
penalties on people who have
been already hard hit by this
cop but with this setback it
seems like on you know we're
able to use the money that's
coming to our state I I I don't
you know I I heard earlier
season Mr speaker gently that
you see this is a life got to be
quite Frank Mr speaker don't I
don't see the lead up if you the
knowledge meant that we all got
hit differently by by the
pandemic the pandemic and they
will some people got their
stimulus to check for the column
and put it in savings and you
know Gee golly now they're
saving up for something great
some people try to use it to pay
that correct and it's something
I said the other day Mr speaker
gentle lady is that in Santa Fe
the cost of living has risen
significantly and you know I
understand that that that we're
concerned about you know this
two hundred fifty percent a
number Mr speaker gentle lady
but I I do appreciate that that
it that it knowledge is that
there are people in my district
I live on the south side of
Santa Fe they're hard working
families out here that are the
ones that are hardest hit
because we work in the tourist
industry and and.
And and we are the ones that
that that are active in the
front lines of this my district
it's a five oh seven has
accounts for you know more than
half of the COVID cases in in in
Santa Fe County this is a very
big deal to me on these are not
rich people but to get by in
Santa Fe on a family of four
when it you know one of your
spouse or your significant other
Webber the other workers in your
household you know may not have
that that those funds you know I
I really do appreciate this and
you know I'll be honest with you
Mr speaker gentle lady as a
fellow freshman I really do
appreciate the the the amount of
thought that went into this you
know this is not an annual time
to be entering the the
legislature when there's so many
have burdens on our heads but I
will say that I appreciate this
goes so hard so I mean I I I I
really do think that it's not
only help our lowest income I
think it's a boost for our our
communities and this for for
small business before and so I'm
I I apologize that was repeating
for anybody but thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady from walking
through that I yield back to the
late princess.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from yes you'll place.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Chavis.
Flattery will get you very far
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
This bill really does.
Upset me I'll just put it mildly
Mr speaker gentle lady average
yield it says here Boller buddy
just discussing I looked at all
over because I had concerns
about it I was getting emails
regarding dance and Mr speaker
it seems to me like about the
first sixteen seventeen pages of
this bill.
The PRC is already doing just
about three quarters of
everything that you doctor lined
up to that point would you agree
or disagree.
Stands for the low income
heating.
Energy excuse me low income home
energy assistance program.
Hi there Mister speaker gentle
lady you got it right low income
home energy assistance program
and I'm sitting here with one of
the coupons.
And.
That's what it says a holder
that screens people can see it.
And did you also know that New
Mexicans cannot qualify for the
heat program.
And it I think he program helps
to pay for propane natural gas
would oil care Cinco or other
heating fuel.
If you're not if your home is
not.
Heated by electricity so there
are two different ways right now
this is federal money that
people can get assistance.
Mr speaker.
I have a fondness for electric
cooperatives located throughout
our state and the reason being
is because they were the ones
with the help of the federal
government that led up the rural
areas of our state.
Because at that time we were
less populated that obviously we
are now but they helped light up
our rural areas so I I do have a
fund this I know that whenever
my dad was twelve years old
that's whenever they got
electricity out to the farms.
Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
Whenever the first cares money
came out.
President trump.
Send a bunch of money to New
Mexico do you know what that
amount was.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
know the whole amount of what
was.
Out here to New Mexico.
Okay Mister speaker right now
because.
Of the money that was sent to
the state of New Mexico right
now in DFA there's four hundred
and fifty million dollars.
That was that I think fifty
million of that has already been
spent.
On this.
But why is that of the four
hundred and fifty million
dollars languishing their fire
we used to get Mr speaker gentle
lady if that money is not used
and this emergency order goes
away do you realize what will
happen to that money.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I think
you could tell me Mr speaker it
will revert back it will have to
go back to Washington.
Why are we not utilizing that.
Our system.
But for I'm going with this.
Is right now electric coops
every year have to every April
the first.
The co ops have an inspection
fee that is due to the state did
you realize that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
And usually that inspection fee
is two point seven million
dollars do you realize that that
they have to do it pay an
inspection fee.
Mr speaker generally yes.
Okay Mister speaker.
What happens.
Will this money be available
April the first of two thousand
twenty two do you have any idea
can you look into your crystal
ball and tell us will that money
be available April first of
twenty twenty two I don't think
you're gonna be able to do so I
will answer that question for
you I wish that we could see
into the future to see where
we're headed Mr speaker from
going with this is why are we
not using that money that was
sent in to help people that
needed assistance with their
utilities why are we not
utilized in the funds that are
set in DFA.
The question because I prefaced
it with fly.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady that that is that is
a good question I know that that
our state has has put that money
out into the community a lot of
that money out to the
communities local the local
economies already helping our
businesses and what we do know
now is that five point three
million dollars you know has
gone to to it supports folks a
utility payments are we there is
two hundred million dollars for
rents and for the utility
payments of renters that is in
that is that DFA right now and
and and that's what we know.
Then there will likely be more
to Mister speaker and and gentle
lady Mr speaker I guess that my
concern here is whenever you're
talking about businesses and
everything else.
Our state.
Went through some horrific with
all businesses being shut down
without so many.
Businesses being non essential
in my opinion every business is
essential because they just
paying for somebody to put
groceries on their table to be
able to pay their utility bills
to be able to provide for their
family so in my opinion every
business is essential it's not
just the big box stores that
were essential during the time
whenever everything else was
shut down whenever people were
still having to pay utilities
even though they had no income
coming again even though they
were having to pay for groceries
whenever they had no income
coming in Mr speaker.
I'll get off that subject we
have all been through for.
The most horrific time and
economy of the state of New
Mexico due to this shut down of
everything Mr speaker.
Are you aware of what our
electric coops in our utility
companies have done over the I
don't know since
golly fifteen years ago at least
they started weather is ation
program are you aware of that
program and that it is still in
effect Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
aware of many of the weather is
ation programs that utilities
all around the state have had
implemented and the weather is
ation programs that are at in
this state right now which are
oversubscribed I do generally.
Mr speaker gentle lady I know
that in my part of the world
anyway there are lots of people
that did make that make
application for the home weather
station program and.
Our utilities companies.
Set up appointments with these
people they went there to help
them with their homes to help
them with of whether Ising their
windows making sure the furnaces
right updating refrigerators by
the way note that you spoke
about that earlier taken back
the old ones in the going on was
that that Mr speaker gentle
lady.
My concern here is reciprocal I
ended up up so many marks in
this book right now it's not
even funny.
Of.
We are asking our electric
cooperatives who is membership
do you do you understand the
concept of how a cooperative
works its membership I don't
okay so whenever you're state
and we are going to ex we are
going to have the forgiveness
program for these people.
And so it's gonna be up to the
membership to pay for those that
also belong to this cooperative.
Or we're gonna extend their
payments out for two years.
Mr speaker.
What are we doing to these
people are we getting them are
we helping them dig that health
is going to get them in deeper
and deeper by X. didn't.
Their debt payment out that for
are we going to expect the
membership to step up and pay
for these people whenever in
fact we already have a program
in place that will do this very
thing I understand there are
people it needs been there done
that I don't like it.
That that program is already in
place and that is the lie he
program federally funded program
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Gentle lady hi I'm also reading.
About.
I can't find the place right now
and I've market and I cannot
find it.
This does this bill allow third
parties to decide which
customers qualify for these
programs that are explained in
your bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady that the
bill allows the utilities
investor owned utilities and co
ops the the smaller utilities to
to work with third party that
entities to to qualify but the
conditions for qualification are
are you know are in the bill on
traditions for hardship the
conditions for for our.
A new for for that two fifty
percent and and that's that's
what they can do they can work
with a third party was with the
third party entity the HSD is is
also
able to have a qualification
system and they're they're part
of this as well so they'll be
qualifying those folks
you know who who who have like
he already.
Mr speaker gentle lady ask
just.
I'm just very concerned about
what your bill's got going on
here whenever we do have these
programs already in place.
Mr speaker on page twenty eight
of your bill to to I'm assuming
you have your bill available
right there in front of you.
In on page twenty eight under
item two businesses and
identifies with that utility
rates are affordable to low
income customers and that's what
the first lines is in section
two on page twenty eight.
Mr speaker gentle lady please we
get to that point okay thank
you.
Section two.
Page twenty eight I'm looking at
that and.
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
please repeat your question.
Mr speaker thank you very much
yes ma'am I will if we're
talking about the language that
you have in section two on page
twenty eight it identifies with
that the utility rates are
affordable to low income
customers but I have a question
what will this to the other
customers who can pay their
monthly bills is this going to
raise their right if we're
trying to offset it.
To where it is more affordable
to that low income customer.
At.
I I thank Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I think I'm looking at
the the.
At the wrong page here I'm on
page twenty but I don't I don't
see that but what this bill does
is it you it it allows for the
PRC to collect the data to look
at the possibility of a low
income right joining all those
other states that do that
already and and and again to
point out here you know we've
got we've got different rates
for different customers already.
And mu that for industrial users
for economic development so this
bill allows for the PRC to do
that.
To look at the low income right
Mr speaker and.
Gentlelady.
Mr speaker I think that will I
know that there's different
rates you do have the entities
that you're talking about you
also have eight.
Irrigation rates you there's
also a whole different
categories here but I'm afraid
that that those customers.
That are able to pay their
monthly bills that we will see
an increased as of.
Representative to my left was
talking about earlier in the
debate with you Mr speaker
additional have a sunset clause
on.
Mr speaker and gentle lady up
for the arrears program that is
for you know for arrears
incurred during the time of the
public health order from March
until when it ends which is
hopefully very soon for the
other parts of the bill there's
there there's no real sunset you
know for for the seed program
you know we hope that that will
go on a potentially that will be
able to tap into funds from the
federal of at the federal level
or from plant to create to to
support those energy efficiency
programs that you had mentioned
earlier and with regard to
reporting to from the from the
PRC that that will continue.
And should continue.
Mr speaker that gives me concern
then that this does not have a
sunset clause on because right
now with the lie he program in
place that assistance is there
for those people that do need
help paying their energy bills
and that is federally funded is
been in place is been in place
for a long time I don't see it
going away that the issue said
once this public health order
does go away this could go on
into perpetuity unless there is
some sort of clause in there the
state it will end on this date
so Mister speaker that one gives
me concern of.
I'm just I'm having a hard time
with this bill I really am Mr
speaker of and don't get me
wrong I do realize your people
out there that do have the need
to be able to rely on something
like this to help them pay their
utility bills.
Okay Mister speaker at this time
I would like to introduce health
floor member button and for two.
To.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House consumer of
public affairs substitute for
house bill two oh six as amended
with emergency costs.
Did you leave the amendment
gentle lady have.
It has been done on the web.
delayed use cleaning at.
Mr speaker.
On page eleven of the bill.
I have to find a place again
excuse me just a moment.
I think there's a drug that can
turn the page real well Mr
speaker on page eleven of the
bill.
Line twenty three.
Mr speaker hold on here.
Eleven line twenty three.
On the website.
K. if the state of New Mexico
has any has any unencumbered
federal cares Act dollars
remaining as of March the third
two thousand twenty one or
receives additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars dollars from the
American rescue plan act of two
thousand twenty one these
federal stimulus dollars shall
be applied as necessary to
offset any and all costs
associated with the utility
affordability and relief act.
Originally the members she's
explained it will go to the
gentle lady from tell us is this
a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker I I have some
questions and I'm not exactly
sure if this is the right time
to ask them as you know I'm a
freshman.
No we do we we can do that to us
as a friendly amendment and you
may certainly ask questions of
the proponent of the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentle lady thank you for
for the men but I I do have some
questions about what what
federal code provides the
definitions that that you're
using here this ammendment.
Mr speaker I had a hard time
understanding her could you
repeat that please.
That Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm sorry I I think I need to
speak a little bit louder I'd
like to know what federal code
provides the definitions of
income unencumbered additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars
You know how who determines the
exit though those that's the
first question I have.
Mr speaker in my opinion this
ammendment speaks for itself it
is says cares dollars that will
be coming can if there is
federal still you stimulus
dollars for the American rescue
plan two thousand and twenty
fifth one and all we're asking
this what this man Michelle do
is to offset any and all costs
associated with the utility
affordability and relief act and
Mr speaker if I'm not mistaken I
believe that is the name of your
bill is not.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
the name of the bill but I your
amendment refers to unencumbered
funds and I want to know what
that means.
And if there is federal or state
statute that defines that.
Mr speaker that whenever we're
talking about the ending camber
funds it's money that has not
been specifically designated to
pay for a certain item these are
unencumbered funds.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
I I'm having a hard time
understanding is is there invite
by what agency what I I need I
think in order for me to
determine what this amendment is
like I'd like to know you know
are the ease.
Are these funds encumbered by
yeah what what agency
particularly.
Mr speaker gentle lady more than
likely these funds that will be
coming again probably very soon
will be go probably going to
DFA.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in the amendment
At.
I'd like to know who who
determines the what what is what
that birth what their criteria
are to determine what's
necessary.
That's what you're.
Amendment shows.
Mr speaker generally it is the
legislative body that does get
to determine for these dollars
are spent sometimes that hasn't
happened recently that more
often than not it is the
legislative body that does make
that determination these dollars
would go into DFA if which right
now they are sitting on a fund
in excess of a I think it's four
hundred and fifty million
dollars right now so we have
this money if any of the funds
come in point four we going to
be able to use that to actually.
Fund the utility affordability
and relief act.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
this bill already requires
federal funds that to be used
first it's and that's in section
seven AA and section three D. of
section three particular
requires the PRC to work with
the DFA to use the federal funds
to the maximum extent possible.
Mr speaker with the gentle lady
please repeat what she said.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
course and that the bill already
requires that federal funds be
used first in section three D.
it requires the bill requires
the PRC to work with the DFA to
use federal funds to the maximum
extent possible those federal
funds that have come in already
the five point three million the
two hundred million that is for
us you for renters and renters
and the utilities of renters
only for renters and any other
federal funds that come in the
bill already already says that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I this
amendment does is it is very
specific for utilities and
that's where I think that this
bill would this amendment to
your bill for these cares
dollars that will be coming in.
We'll go directly to the utility
affordability and rightly fact.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady are Mr speaker at I
have to request a point of order
for clarifying question here.
Yeah you can feel free to ask a
question.
Mr speaker I am I I I think this
is the point in which I say that
this is a not a friendly
amendment but I'm not entirely
sure if this is the right place
to say that.
That's just fine.
Okay Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Chavis Mr
speaker of.
I could not get any more
specific for my amendment is
trying to do.
Because what you're asking for
this particular bill is help for
utilities and what I'm trying to
do with these unencumbered
federal cares dollars.
Is making sure that they do go
to offset any and all costs
associated with utility
affordability entering the fact.
So Mister speaker I think I
cannot get any more specific
than that because of that would
be the funding of what you're
trying to get accomplished in
this thirty.
Thirty two page bill thirty
three page bill I don't know the
number thirty two page bill
that's what this ammendment is
striving to do Mr speaker is
making sure those dollars that
will be coming in those dollars
that are unencumbered.
Through the cares Act.
As any new as well as the
money's they will be used to
offset any and all costs
associated with utility
affordability and relief act.
The gentle lady there is to be
with the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia.
Presented McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
does that generally do you.
Mr speaker I yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm trying to understand the
amendment and and I had a few
questions
If you would help me out.
Mr speaker gentle lady what is
and what is unencumbered federal
cares Act dollars what what does
that mean what.
Mr speaker gentleman I've
already explained it once but it
is sending money that has not
been been designated for a
specific purpose at this point.
Mr speaker gentle lady doesn't
federal cares Act money come
designated for specific
purposes.
Mr speaker gentleman though it
does not.
Mr speaker gentle lady when you
say these funds should be
applied as necessary.
Determination.
Mr speaker of size as to explain
to the young lady before most
often than not it is up to the
legislative body to do that
sometimes it's up to the
governor.
Mr speaker generally it if you.
I ask you to repeat things I do
apologize
but I know the.
The we had an issue in this body
during the special.
Session we had after the
election.
And there was a desire to.
you some cares Act money to find
a sort of bonus to frontline
workers.
And testimony during debate on
that issue was that we could not
do that.
By the deadline which was your
aunt and so we're meeting in
November we that things that
separate thirtieth deadline.
Mr speaker gentle lady if the
legislature needs to make that
determination.
Which is that I can at are you
anticipating another special
session.
Mr speaker that it that deadline
has been extended Mr speaker we
do not need to impose another
special session on the taxpayers
of the state of New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady when has
that deadline been extended to.
Mr speaker the this just
reminded I'd forgotten of the
sponsor did put an emergency
clause on this particular bill
so that money I mean.
It is.
It will happen just the same as
the governor signs this
particular bill.
The Mr speaker jelly I I don't
mean.
I'm in the bill I mean that the
funding so the funding we had
previously we either had to use
it or return it to the Senate
because we had a year end
deadline time quick I'm I'm I'm
asking.
Deadline's been extended when is
the new deadline.
Mr speaker if memory serves me I
do believe that deadline has
been extended to the first of
July.
Mr speaker gentle lady so we
would have to make that
determination about those funds
before we left I would think
since we're not planning on
other special session.
Or Mr speaker gentle lady of
gentleman.
The governor would have the
authority to designate those
funds with this with the bill
including the emergency clause.
So Mr gentle lady I guess
When I asked previously at my
Anderson was your ending
indicated that there was a
legislature to determine as
necessary but you think it's the
governor.
Mr speaker in some cases
gentleman it is the governor
that USCIS.
And Mr speaker with emergency
clause on there she would have
the authority to.
Do what is necessary to retain
that money with the decided to
Mexico not having descended back
to DC.
You Mr speaker jelly I think
that's an excellent point of
with the emergency clause on
there and Mr speaker gentle lady
judging on how this debates
going I'm not sure that we're to
see cost is going to be on
there.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
think that's a fair statement.
Mr speaker I can't speak for the
rest of the body there in here
in the house or over the Senate
but I do know that takes a two
thirds vote of both houses to
get that done I do not know I
don't know how people are going
to be voting on that particular
issue.
It Mr speaker telling you know
but I appreciate that.
That's obviously accurate my
concern would be that we create
a situation where the we require
additional action to use that
money.
We don't anticipate the
legislature being in session
after March twentieth.
The bill may not have taken the
fact by the time the deadline
expires for the governor to.
so certainly that's a concern Mr
speaker tally.
The last line or less you know
the last line to offset any and
all costs associated with.
This this bill.
I guess kind of the same
question who determines what
costs are to be offset.
And Mr speaker gentleman.
The sponsor of the bill does not
specify in her bill what the
costs are going to be it is
setting up of the seams making
it the utility companies make
numerous reporting LESC a
collection of arrears for
customer who might default on
the storm I mean there's all
sorts of things in here but is
not specific in the bill what
the costs are and it's hard to
determine right now the number
I'm reading some of these pages
I think that there is a.
Let me see if I can find it
again.
Close to twenty thousand people
that are.
Twenty seven thousand people
right now that are behind in
their utility payments so the
cost is undetermined at this
point we do not know what those
Custer kind of be.
The requirements that are
spelled out in this bill of.
It's mandating in my opinion
what these people are going to
have to do the utility companies
to rural electric cooperative
state of P. Garcia of what are
the other ones that are in here
I can't remember for sure
because I was going through this
through this so fast but yes
that they are under the water
waste water water service waste
water companies they're all
named in here.
The entire cost of this is
undetermined so it's it's hard
to answer that question Mr
speaker.
Mr telling me I I appreciate the
answer to I guess my question
The question was improvements
that that termination there are
different because they could be
covered with cares Act funding.
Is it the government said
determination we making that
determination here in the
legislature.
Mr speaker gentleman it probably
the governor would make that
determination.
Mr speaker gentle lady
Thank you for your answers I
think the the cares Act funding
is incredibly important
the to the state and I think it
would be a problem to.
Hi the governor's hands
on ability maybe not get in
effect and in ways we haven't
fully insisted.
thank you Mr speaker generally.
Thank you gentlemen thank Jones
for the debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Stapleton thank you Mr speaker
with the let you know with the
with the gentle lady from Travis
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the lady
from Bernalillo thank you thank
you Mr speaker and
Some of my questions were axed
by the gentleman from Santa Fe
and I'm by the.
The.
Gentlelady from towels but.
A couple of questions for you
you mentioned a July first
deadline could you explain to me
what that that line is in
reference to stimulus dollars.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
the cares Act money.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
July first deadline relates to
the first line in the amendment
which talks about I'm income but
federal kia's Act dollars
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
answer is yes and then Mr
speaker and gentle lady
Do you know how much
unencumbered federal pias Act
dollars there is in the state of
New Mexico currently.
Mr speaker as of right now no I
do not I just know that right
now in DFA there is an amount of
four hundred and fifty million
dollars and Mr speaker and
gentle lady if there is four
hundred and fifty.
Million dollars.
DFA do you know what the
languages with those funds what
it's intended to do all what it
was intended to do.
Mr speaker could you repeat that
gentle lady you said Mr speaker
and gentle lady from Travis that
in DFA this four hundred and
fifty million dollars
of public questions on that four
hundred and fifty million
dollars in DFA.
Is that all of those funds.
We have language from the
federal government that is the
federal kids dollars and and do
you know what.
Those funds were intended to do
if they are not currently on
incumbent are you saying that
that quality I think I would go
back.
Mr speaker the money that any
money that has been appropriated
by the legislative body or that
has been of those designated by
the governor anything that would
be left would be used for this
but Mr speaker and gentle lady
we were told that when we came
in the special session those
funds that existed at that time
that will federal cares Act
dollars to have been expended by
December thirty first so.
This.
How is that there is four
hundred and fifty million now
that has not been expanded
wanted all should have been
expended by December thirty
first so that's the reason why
we have a special session.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
deadline has been extended it
has been extended to July the
first.
I think this is the right data I
think it is July the first.
So okay
but I understand the money that
was extended till July the first
but all those monies that we had
in state government we came in
we do the special session we
send money to unemployment for
lead up full NMFA.
House in from home just.
That money did not come back to
the state.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
That money has not been spent Mr
speaker what this amendment is
doing.
Is just the any ending
unencumbered federal cares
dollars remaining.
As of March the third two
thousand twenty one.
Or if there is additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars.
We can use that to offset any
and all costs associated with
utility affordability and relief
act that's what this amendment
is doing because there are
unencumbered funds at this time.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I I
we call in from memory when we
will hear in the special session
that it was three hundred and I
believe three hundred and fifty
million I could be wrong of the
total amount and that was kids I
want to start line by line with
you amendment that was federal
appears dollars at that time and
the state all have only.
Fifty million dollars left.
So.
You came from December when we
got rid of all the money and now
we have.
What amount of four hundred and
fifty million.
I just don't I don't see where
how we come up with the money as
being income but when we get all
three hundred and fifty million
that the state that.
So is this money that.
This for fifty is funds that
December.
Mr speaker gentle lady no it is
not it came in prior to December
we have not spent it all it has
not been did all of that has not
been designated as again what
this amendment stating is that
any in an encumbered Federal
cares dollars remaining as of
March the third.
That we can use that to offset
any and all costs associated
with what this bill is seeking
to do.
Okay
And so much is tomorrow.
Correct today's the second and
so much to Morrow and to Morrow
by to Morrow.
The state of New Mexico DFA
according to your amendment
must.
If this is passed to.
This has to go to the Senate and
has to go to committees one
committee and it has to pass on
the Senate floor.
But.
Are you saying.
DFA that if there's something
not happening if you put this
ammendment on does that mean
they can utilize all.
To send out the money if an
emergency was still part of the
state of New Mexico simply
because you have this amendment
that says remaining as of March
third.
Mr speaker at unless.
You have that crystal ball Mr
speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo of.
As of right now I don't know of
any emergency that may be coming
up that all we're asking for is
that money that is sitting in
that fund that is unencumbered
as of tomorrow that that could
be applied to offset any and all
costs associated with the
utility affordability in Ridley
fact.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Travis don't you think that
perhaps your date of March third
is rather.
to quickly in an application to
this bill since the bill has not
even passed out of this house
and the way the debate is going
nobody knows if this bill would
be to pass out of this house.
Mr speaker all we're saying is
as if this amendment is adopted
not hope that is that as of the
as of tomorrow.
Those unencumbered funds that
are sitting in DFA.
They can be used as necessary to
offset any and all costs
associated with what this bill
is striving to date.
Okay let's go to the second line
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
In addition to the I'm income
but federal cares Act dollars
remaining as of March third
twenty twenty one.
All receives additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars.
Discretionary federal stimulus
dollars do you believe Mr
speaker and gentle lady from
Chavis that the federal
government sent discretionary
federal dollars to New Mexico we
language of to what it should be
useful.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes they
do.
Can you give me an example
please Mr this Mister speaker
excuse me Mr speaker gentle lady
yes they did that in the first
cares money that we got.
It was Mr speaker gentle lady it
was over a billion dollars.
And you're telling me that the
federal government sent to New
Mexico a billion dollars and
said this is discretionary money
given to the state of New Mexico
used as you wish.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
What
do you have that language with
you right now.
Mr speaker gentle lady it was
COVID related.
So that's not just discretionary
because it specifically said
according to you Mr speaker and
gentle lady that it is called
with related correct.
Mister speaker whenever we're
talking about this discretionary
money that means there are no
strings attached whenever that
money comes into the state
because it was COVID related it
was at the discretion of the
legislative body with the
governors of help to make the
designation for these dollars
should be spent there were no
strings attached.
You know Mr speaker and gentle
lady that there can be no
strings attached to federal
dollars all.
It seems rather strange to me
that
Funds would be sent from the
federal government with no
explanation of what it should go
for and so in fact if the state
of New Mexico then have this
discretionary dollars then you
said all receive additional
discretionary dollars and you
also said that you do not want
us to come back for a special
session so some.
Those funds if there's no
language to the funds so then
what happens.
Speaker gentle lady of.
I don't know where I need to go
with this on you
These dollars that are can be
given because of the COVID
nineteen.
These monies that did come into
New Mexico.
There were no strings attached
to due to the COVID nineteen
virus any for further monies
that will be coming again.
They will probably be have the
designation all all their of
also being COVID replied.
And I I don't know how to make
that in a clear and then Mr
speaker governor can make that
decision on where they can be
excuse then Mr speaker gentle
lady all you all amendment
perhaps perhaps this should be
language in your amendment that.
Referred to these.
The money is not here yet it's
not in the state of New Mexico
I'm and we don't know what's
going to come out of the US
Senate we don't know what it's
going to say but according to
you you stated it's going to be
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars that's going to
additional money that's going to
come down and so we know
because.
I.
Representative Representative
from Lee mentioned.
That is.
So.
On.
Asking for this maybe maybe Mr
speaker gentle lady we should
therefore have language in this
ammendment that specifically
relates to call with as a result
of COVID as a result
the
wrist then also
costs associated with your.
Flexibility of relief.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
specifically what the federal
government wants to do because
we have not received those funds
is yes I'm here we wanted
languages.
Related to funds that is not
the U. S. Senate.
I'm just I'm just fine for you
it's questionable Mr speaker Mr
speaker I didn't mean to
interrupt I thought you were
through Mr speaker I think the
very first the first word of
this abandonment says that all.
And if you look at the amendment
is starts out K. in the first
word at that amendment says yes.
Are you reading that Mr speaker
and gentle lady yes the state of
New Mexico has any and
encumbered Federal K. and I also
that we're discretionary.
Of if it's not specified by the
federal government coming in to
our state then it is Mr speaker
I gentle lady also just found
out that there is one point nine
trillion dollars in the Biden
relief cares package.
So.
In Mr speaker gentleman the
gentle lady you said that this
is gentleman from Lake County
said the COVID is gone I have no
it's not we know that it just
never existed earlier on in our
big box stores that Mr speaker
No I don't believe that the
COVID is gone and we people do
still have to take care that we
need to get businesses rolling
again we need to be able to help
families we need to help them
pay their bills and this.
Godly.
Virus that has unfortunately
taken way too many lives that Mr
speaker I would rather see these
dollars I would rather take
advantage of these dollars
instead of putting this burden
on the backs of the hard working
taxpayers of the state of New
Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Chavis I wholeheartedly agree
with you on your last statement
in regards to us has been.
Businesses.
I'm not putting the burden on
them but we have to do it right.
And and.
In this legislature.
Session.
Legislation that is trying to
pass in this house and the
Senate that talks about this in
Washington that evening.
New Mexico and we're trying to
put legislation with and that's
one of the reason why I ask you
about your language in this
ammendment yes.
Is.
But it's a mighty big board.
And so I agree with you.
New Mexico has any income but
the federal kids dollars.
Okay.
If
we receive additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars.
Do you have any idea Mr speaker
and the lady from Chavis what is
in the American rescue plan out
of twenty twenty one.
Do you know what the language
but with that trillion dollars
says do you have any idea how
much of that trillion dollar New
Mexico will receive because the
sentence before that talks about
receive an additional
discretionary federal stimulus
dollars do you have any idea.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Travis Mr speaker gentle lady my
friend down there.
I would imagine that New Mexico
will probably get one point
around one point six billion
dollars is what my guess would
be Mr speaker is making the
determination that's why in my
opinion I really feel that this
whole bill right now as we are
discussing here here tonight is
a little bit premature that Mr
speaker again it is if the state
has in the and come prepared or
cares dollars Mr speaker gentle
lady as far as what.
Our congressional people in
Washington DC decide to do as
far as putting this whole
package together.
I wouldn't I have no idea of
what they're going to try to put
in there we have seen in the
past what they have tried to get
through you know the special
interest projects and all all of
that maybe they'll come up with
the.
A new invention to make pigs
really fly because sometimes
that's what a lot of this.
Seems like whenever big slide
that's what when things are
gonna happen that Mr speaker
gentle lady now I did not have a
clue what is going to be
included in this package when
and when it does come out but I
do know I've been told it's been
it will be one point nine
trillion dollars.
You know I I really like your
analogy full
of about the pigs flying I
remember when many years ago in
this in this very fertile I
walked around here with pictures
of pigs on me because it was
something we got an education
and I started saying okay when
pigs fly is what we going to get
it I'm so and so you're right
when I will probably know how
much money we get because we
never know how much really
language is that bills that we
could do that but.
You.
You're you're language in the of
things says.
These.
Dollars shall be applied as
necessary and I think correct me
if I'm wrong did you say that.
We'll have to determine what the
word as necessary means all.
We as the legislature the.
Funds will have to come back in
here to do this because these
people need.
To get this bill passed
they need to do.
So one of them later because.
The extensions that currently
exist full speed for rent is
so.
Areas that people need to have
is going to expire and then they
will not be able to get the
assistance they need so I'm.
As necessary state dollars.
It means that because we all of
us in the house of
representatives dissented now
determines what happens with
funds so what does it.
Mr speaker gentle lady more
often than not as I said earlier
it is the legislative body that
makes that determination also
the governor has the authority
to do that and she has done in
the past Mr speaker and other
governors have to whenever
ghement federal money does come
in but yes Mr speaker and gentle
lady of as a legislative body we
have we have the right to say we
want these dollar spent here and
we want to spend their to
benefit the people of our state.
And the governor does have the
authority to do so in as of yet
of you know this emergency order
that's in place of she has the
authority to ended at her own
discretion right there so if the
government I'm sorry gentlelady
from Chavis if the governor does
have that authority to apply
those moneys as necessary and
when we had three hundred fifty
million dollars why did we have
to come into the session twice
still special session to expand
those funds.
Mr speaker that's a very good
question maybe you could answer
that for me.
I just note that we came up here
and.
We
What in my opinion we didn't
have to be up here Mr speaker
that was another burden we put
on the taxpayers of our state we
did not have to come in for that
special second special session.
okay
You know Mr speaker and the
gentle lady from Chavis.
This bill talks about utility
affordability and relief act.
I know one company that
currently does that fall
That the customer is.
And there
And also for.
The business community to small
businesses we have many
other.
Companies for you it is across
the state and I don't know what
they do but I know as a customer
of P. and then they already do
this and so
I believe that it's going to be.
That detrimental as you are
saying in order for us to put
that language in there.
Companies can choose to do it as
well.
But
companies don't and so they have
people in need and businesses in
need both sides.
This time in the state of New
Mexico one because they have
been closed to.
Because because they have been
able to generate income to keep
the business is going I totally
agree with you on that but the
language and your bill is asking
us to come this language to
piece of legislation without the
money being in the state of New
Mexico and that is my concern
and that is why I questioned you
about this piece of amendment
and Mr speaker and gentle lady I
hear your concern and I
appreciate it but.
It needs for the study it needs
for the language like I
mentioned above Corona virus as
a result because some people who
has been.
The ability.
And it has nothing to do with
the issue of Corona virus so
Mister speaker gentle lady I
thank you very much for
responding to my questions I
appreciate it thank you Mr
speaker the gentle lady from
Dona thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker this matter but having
been debated for three hours I
move that debate sees no
objections order.
Mr speaker I table the
amendment.
The gentleman's motion is to
table the amendment.
Vote of yes the amendment will
be tabled would have no and.
Will be in that limbo position
talked about the other day.
The vote is now open.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative black.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Those close that it is forty
four in the affirmative twenty
four in the negative the
amendment is tabled.
Gentlelady from task to close on
her first bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
body.
Really proud of this bill and
what it can do for New Mexicans
you know this is this is really
weird it's a strange time I'm a
freshman this is really I think
it would have been awkward
anyway but it's especially
awkward on the other side of the
screen it's nerve wracking but I
I'm I'm I'm uplifted by the
support and the debate debate is
what makes our democracy such a
beautiful thing and something
that we have to protect and
celebrate.
And Mr speaker members of the
body if you would bear with me.
I would like to celebrate my
love for democracy in this
country.
With the song.
I had to change a few words here
because I I don't want to get
censured by the body after my
first bill but I I this is a
song that celebrates our nation
and our founding father and
debate.
How does custard orphan son of a
bore and the Scott's been
dropped in the middle of the
forgotten spot in the Caribbean
but profit by Providence
impoverishment squalor grow up
to be a hero and a scholar the
ten dollar founding father
without a father got a lot
farther by working a lot harder
but **** lot smaller by the self
starter by fourteen the place in
in charge of the trading charter
and every day while slaves are
being slaughtered and carted
away across the waves he
struggled and kept his guard up
inside he was longing for
something should be part of the
brother was ready to big steal
borrow or barter.
Hurricane came devastation rain
on man saws future trips
dripping down the drain the
pencil to his temple connected
to his brain he wrote his first
refrain a testament to his pain
well the word that around they
said this kid is in state match
collection just descended to the
mainland get your education
don't forget from whence you
came and the world's gonna know
your name what's your name man.
The interim ma'am.
Money.
In this million things I haven't
done but just you wait just you
wait.
And with that Sir gentleman Mr
speaker and members of the body
I do now move the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee set up for
the house consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
house bill two oh six do now
pass.
I think you're not gonna miss
your shot.
Yes this bill we are on final
passage of House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for us consumer public affairs
committee sets to Russell two
zero six is amended with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Representative closed by a vote
of thirty nine in the
affirmative thirty one in the
negative House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to a six is amended
without an emergency clause has
duly passed the house.
Congratulations gentlelady.
Exclude item number twenty one
gentlelady from you are you
ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker I'm ready can you
get me to that point
the record reflect on to
necessary for placing House Bill
to one four on final passage is
been taken the gentle lady to
explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
two fourteen removes an outdated
inequitable exemption from the
state's minimum wage statute
which allows employers to pay a
set up minimum wage to people
with disabilities the minimum
wage violates workers rights and
the bill enacts the
recommendations by the U. S.
commission on civil rights that
states should repeal the sub
minimum wage law.
It U. S. commission on civil
rights report that although
intended for hear them for
competitive working incentivize
employers to hire them sub
minimum wage laws disadvantage
or exploit people with
disabilities and the commission
recommends that states repeal or
based out six lost invested
other supported we're
opportunities for people with
disabilities and with that Mr
speaker I yield.
There is debate.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Just a minute Representative
Montoya the gentleman from
Chavis Eddie and Tero
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
will deal.
In late
In my district
I have or there is a facility.
that was of.
Thousand it by
A family that
How child that is disabled.
And that family has spent.
Millions of dollars.
Developing a.
The sale of the the the service.
All kids from all over the state
in the joining States.
That the so the does great
things.
It provides opportunities for
children.
And young adults and adults.
That would have no.
Opportunities.
Without facilities like this.
And I'm afraid from the reports
that they have.
Forwarded to me.
That your bill.
Is going to alleviate alleviate
their opportunity to provide
that service.
This is not about.
Those people being.
Mystery that.
This is not about those people
being taken advantage of.
This is about providing those
people.
With an opportunity to the
allied.
They are doing something of
value.
Do you understand gentle lady
that your bill will jeopardize
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman from a
county I just like to let you
know that New Mexico department
of health reports of the number
of individuals who make less
than minimum wage has dropped
significantly and the number of
agencies holding the fourteen C.
certificates that allow this
through the federal program
also has been reduced to only
one of disability we used to
have three and now we maybe have
one I think you're referring to
the facility in Carlstadt the
cart incorporated that is
absolutely correct okay and Mr
speaker and gentleman the air
fourteen C. certificates fire
January thirty first of this
year.
So they are no longer seeking to
have those certificates.
And the only other one
facilities in Gallup and their
certificate of submission
is pending and not likely to be
reviewed by the federal
government asked the FEC data
out at the national level.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
this is just repealing one
section.
Of lost that will align us with
the federal
Government to.
A gentle lady
I talked to the general manager
yesterday of that facility.
Personally.
He told me.
That this piece of legislation
and I think there's one other
one
like at it's going to the half.
And that it was going to crash
cause them great harm probably
about six hundred thousand
dollars a year and he said
what's going to happen.
Is that these young men and
women.
Our will not have that
opportunity to fill lack.
They are going to work.
That they're providing a service
that they have value.
That's going to go away.
And the.
Generally I think that's a huge
this service because of.
Mr Lee forty years ago now money
with more than that maybe fifty
years ago when it was just
starting.
A friend of mine.
I think was the first manager
out there with those those kids
I worked out there and help him
get a lot of things started
because it was important trying.
And the.
In late.
This is not my
I don't have life experiences
around this type of service it's
not what I did but I do know.
The family that started the.
I know that the man that manages
that.
And when he called me yesterday.
He said GM tell that's going to
devastate many lives.
That's going to cause those
people.
Great harm.
In many of those people who get
to go to work in the greenhouses
and do different things around
the state are State Farm.
Are not going to be able to do
that anymore because I won't.
You know it won't be affordable
so gentle lady would you be.
Which should be
Would you allow an amendment to
your bill that that exempted
that C. A. R. State Farm.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Eddy County
this would not affect their
ability to I mean they are not
able to do that because they do
not have
certificates through the federal
government their certificates
have expired and they are not
likely to be brief issued by the
federal government as they are
facing out in the certificates
and approvals.
but there are a hundred and
sixty nine thousand three
hundred and sixty nine three
hundred thousand working age
eighteen to sixty four year
olds.
And in New Mexico with
disabilities and approximately
thirty four percent or are
slightly over fifty seven
thousand our employee.
And there are other incentives
such as tax credits to employers
that would not negatively impact
the ability of individuals with
disabilities to receive the same
minimum wage as individuals
without disabilities.
the developmental disability
supports division or DDS di they
adopted and
employment first policy in
twenty sixteen and that endorses
supported employment waiver
services encourage and provide
supports for individuals to move
into competitive integrated
employment.
Well gentle lady and Mr speaker.
I'm not arguing I I will I am
not arguing that no.
no individual should be taken
advantage up.
But.
I just love.
I just got a note from an
individual that's associated
with that and he says damn
you're exactly right on point.
So I'm I'm just telling you
that.
This facility has been there for
More than forty years.
It does a great service to a
mini.
men and women with disabilities.
That would not have a would not
have an opportunity none.
Outside of being able to say
when they get up they live there
on the facility and they can get
up and they can go to work and
they can do something that
brings them value.
They don't make a lot of money.
But they know what they do at
least in their heart is
important.
And so I'd ask you one more
time.
Would you allow within here
piece of legislation an
exemption for that facility if
they can get it fine if they
can't they won't it won't be
afforded to arm it won't I don't
think it the it takes anything
away from your piece of
legislation that just affords
them the opportunity.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
any County it's important to
know that this program is
through the federal government
and they are do not have the
certificates and it's been of
other the.
Mental disabilities sheltered
workshops such as this have
figured out how to still
Help and work with individuals
with disabilities and not have
to Hey seven minimum wage so Mr
speaker and gentleman no I would
not support of an amendment to
this bill we are just aligning
with what the federal government
is doing in many other states
across the country that have
eliminated of of this our.
Review the minimum wage.
Well gentle lady and Mr speaker
I'm I'm upset here that for a
number of reasons.
I will tell you that there is an
opportunity for them to go
around the US and and that is
that they raise some of those
keep those people once they can.
And their Medicaid reimbursement
would raise.
To offset that which just takes
more money out of our budget
which is our Medicaid
expenditures are now like of
thirty.
Four five six percent I don't
remember off the top of my head
but it's significant but it's an
expanse those people they don't
care whether they make five
dollars an hour or ten dollars
an hour or fifteen dollars an
hour they just want to have
something to go to so I think
it's selfish on our part not to
consider.
Their feelings.
And their processes when we're
going through legislation like
this so
I a I'm sorry your take the
amendment I think it the I don't
think it take took anything away
from what you're trying to do Mr
speaker thank you.
From the debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
onto it.
Thank you Mr to the gentle lady
from Diana you.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Back we have the.
To
Well actually at one point three
coal mines going in San Juan
County there's an organization
in San Juan County that offered
the same type of work that
Was substance subsidized in this
way
but it was it was called shield
industry.
Yes children's trees
the the the folks that were
employed there were able to.
make what's called wire rope it
in reality what was it was a.
Weaving of great big.
ropes that could be used to
attach to big power cables I
mean really big power cables for
five inches a request across.
And they also made me laugh.
Spray painted on the very top.
just different colors to
designate different things for
different purposes.
Speaker gentle lady
It was afforded to people who
probably could do another type
of job.
And as the work reduced in
reality was just cheaper to
replace with.
With a.
automation.
Some of this.
And.
In reality the people who work
there
felt good about what they were
doing and the people who hire
them felt good about doing it it
to allow those the different
people who could not have had
another job.
To do that and so the speaker
gentle lady I from what I'm
hearing is that this federal
program is going away it did I
misunderstand you or is is that
what your statement must.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes it is
Being phased out in many states
or is already been eliminated
throughout the country and also
the I didn't inspiration has
made it a point to eliminate the
fourteen C. certificates that
allow.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I'm I'm wondering if I were
rushing ahead.
If this is going to be happening
on its own why in the world.
Do we want to put a nail in that
coffin Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
No one is using it in New Mexico
and we are just of.
The state law provision known as
using it so they would always
have to go to the federal
but since the federal is also
needing it and nothing is
happening right now in New
Mexico we feel that this of
alignment with
would be eight.
A good time to do this for New
Mexico so Mister speaker and
gentle lady it once again it
appears to be a necessary step
unless what we're worried about
is another administration
putting it back in place and
then it would remain and that's
the only reason I would see that
we would need to take any action
whatsoever.
M. M. I. A. incorrect.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan this is
A way to make sure that we show
our support for people with
disabilities and to also
encourage you know us words
twenty minutes that would
Help them
Gravitate to
better jobs.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I I guess the the reason
I'm.
That I disagree with you is
there are people with varying
degree of disability.
And there will be some.
When this.
Goes into effect that will never
be employed again I don't
believe this increases
employment twen ever we already
have.
Plus sixty over sixty thousand
people in New Mexico or
unemployed today.
If I'm gonna be finance lawyer
and I'm likely coming out of
COVID and coming out of the
governors
A restriction on the work when I
have a chance to hire someone
and we're going to increase the
burden was sick leave and other
things that we are placing on
businesses during this this
legislative session.
I think what we're doing is
we're making it to where the the
opportunities for for people who
have that developmental
disabilities we're we're just
making it impossible for them to
ever get work it doesn't it is
counterintuitive.
the taking way this program and
then saying giving them more
opportunities when those
opportunities are going to be.
Are competing with.
Who are out of work to pass
families are trying to support
the market's going to get
tougher not easier.
But the speaker and and gentle
lady I want to talk to just
briefly about Tommy that cold.
I coached a lot of sports I have
five four boys.
And at Tommy led by the the
baseball fields.
And
when when you come around I
would find something to allow
him to do with my teams because
he just wanted to be part he
wanted to he wanted to to.
I feel as if he said in
his his disabilities were were
fairly.
Dramatic.
It was good to see one one of
the local grocery stores hired
in.
Had him doing.
Work that really wasn't work I
mean it was very very minimal.
not not because he wasn't a good
person not because you didn't
try hard.
But because his disabilities
were advanced.
Unfortunately Tommy before he
passed a he.
She was able to work a long time
doing those.
Working for that that grocery
store.
Other baseball coaches like
myself would have him.
Go out there and talk to the
kids and stand at first base
and.
As a kids run through he would
wave his arm time to run
through.
Fortunately for Tommy these
protests programs in place.
They were able to take advantage
of that.
Future Tommy's are not gonna be
able to I don't I don't believe
this is compassion.
I think us we want to feel like
it's compassion but if what
we're gonna do is make it to
where.
Future Tommy's.
Can't.
Can't be justified can't be
justified to to to find a way to
get Tommy to come and do those
things.
When you're a business and and
and you're trying to survive
especially right now.
It just it is counterintuitive I
I I don't.
One minute.
Disparage what I think you're
trying to do in the name of
compassion.
But in reality we we don't live
with intentions.
We live with the reality of our
actions we live with the
reality.
Of the consequences of the
legislation that we pass and it
is
I know we would love every one
of the things that we intend our
legislation to do to to
accomplish that.
But I think in this instance is
going to have the exact opposite
effect and in reality we're
gonna have a whole group of of
Tommy's.
That are going to pay for our
good intentions I cannot support
legislation thank you Mr
speaker.
For the debate the gentle lady
from eighty Representative
Brown.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
will the gentle lady please
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I will be.
Thank you very.
I'm sorry.
Okay Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm just going to
Representative Townsend
expressed very well of the
concerns we have about the Kirk
farming in Carlsbad and I I
can't say it any better than he
did.
Gentle lady Mr speaker but.
I just believe that
This bill is going to hurt some
people that I care about.
I don't live very far from that
the current facility and it's
where for many many years my
family has gone to shop for
plants in the greenhouses we
purchased some wonderful New
Mexico pecans there locally
grown from from that facility
seven years ago gentle lady they
used to sell eggs to and I I
guess the breakage I just did a
bit more than they consisting
but
it's just been a great place and
when I go there to buy plants
for mulch or whatever.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I'm
usually greeted with a smile the
people who work there are full
of joy
they're very kind some of them
maybe the most they can do is
help we'll the the little
trolley of plants out to my car.
or the water the plants in the
greenhouses there are levels of
disability.
But what I always see in their
eyes is just the pride of having
a job.
End up doing something
productive.
And if they do take pride in
their work.
The supervisory staff is
fantastic.
And so I just a for the next
time thank I go there
they will be there doing doing
their jobs cause us
Representative Townsend pointed
out the cost of this bill on
that one.
Facility alone would be six
hundred thousand dollars and
they cannot afford to pay a
minimum wage of ten fifty.
And so I think.
It also just like to mention Mr
speaker gentle lady that this is
the place where is our children
were growing up my husband and I
would take them with us to shop
at the greenhouse or buy eggs.
And this is where our troops
children learned that you never
make fun of somebody who is
different than you.
some people have challenges in
life and that doesn't make him
any less of a person or any less
worthy.
So it's a very special place in
my heart for that reason as
well.
And I don't know that many of
our members have ever had the
privilege of visiting the the
Clarke farm it's an absolutely
beautiful campus
with residential homes and as
well as beautiful caught
orchards and just just a
wonderful wonderful place even
have a little thrift store.
So it's really important in our
community that this place exists
and that it operate and I'm just
so fearful Mr speaker gentle
lady that if this bill passes
this is going to take so much
away for people who are very
special and deserve every chance
in life they can get.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
to in some ways the timing of
this bill is just a little bit
off.
I have an email in front of me.
From the director of the program
the executive director.
And he is asking is imploring us
to please try to stop house bill
two fourteen.
there's there's information in
here that quite frankly I don't
really understand it to the
full.
he says that the the
certificates all system never
really been created and that
house bill two fourteen repeal
certain language.
And as you stated earlier gentle
lady
Mr speaker the certificates
expire just a few days ago
whatever they had they were from
the federal government.
In Europe but he's doing the
same please we find a way and he
says in encouraging the
department to institute the
certificates allowed by law so
so we're gentle lady apparently
there's been a disconnect.
And so what I'm asking is this
is rather unusual request Mr
speaker gentle lady but it's
that I would invite you to join
us on Thursday of this week at
eight AM for a phone call with
the director of the Clarke form
and the founder.
To try to work this out so that
we're not hurting these very
very special people.
And if you would be willing to
do that gentlelady we could have
that discussion and see what we
can do to make this work.
And do no harm.
And these are not statistics
these people are not statistics
they really count.
And so I'm just asking you madam
chair which madam madam
gentlelady would you consider
joining us for a phone call just
rolling this bill for a couple
days and what city are under at
least over the phone I guess
we've just talk it out and see
what we can do to redeem this.
Situation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Eddy County
I wouldn't mind having that call
that nothing we can do will
change their federal fourteen C.
certificate we do not have a
means of doing that in New
Mexico it has not yet done
they are supposed to have some
type of New Mexico or state
I'm.
Rueful or watching over the
fourteen C. certificates that
are rewarded by the federal but
if they do not have a federal
fourteen seed there is no
program in place in New Mexico
that would even be able to allow
that so Mr speaker and gentle
lady I would not be able to roll
this bill for something that
would not make any difference
and just to reiterate a little
bit
The into we were talking about
intentions a lot let me ask you
representatives and this
Bill or what the
Fourteen C. certificates the
intent was to prepare people for
competitive work and
incentivize employers to hire
them but the sub minimum wage
laws disadvantaged and exploited
people with disabilities and
that's what we continue to
happen if we do not pass this
bill the commission recommends
that states repeal were phased
out sexualized investing other
supportive.
Work opportunities for people
with disabilities and that is
the intent of this bill by
repealing the sub minimum wage
to make sure that we
allow people to work at minimum
wage and in
places of
Work work opportunities.
Integrated
integrated employment
competitive integrated
employment and that's
With this bill in what we hope
to happen for people with
disabilities.
Mr speaker in waiting so I I
understand why we want to get
away from some and and wage I I
do understand that but please
understand that I know the
people who founded this program
this wonderful facility I know
the people who who directed and
there is no exploitation of
people going on there I can
assure you of that this is
giving people a chance to have a
productive.
Life as whatever limits they
have they they work within.
and quite frankly some of them.
Will never graduate to any other
job.
there are some who I think do
well in the program and to
advance to do other work get
hired out by businesses in the
community.
So as far as the certificates go
again this is something I I do
not fully understand but I know
that
we can get this information I I
I wonder if COVID and the shut
down we've had for the last year
has somehow slowed or stop the
renewal of the certificate I I
don't understand the situation
but I believe that dialogue is
very important in this case and
I don't believe
It would do any hard to just the
way a little bit longer to try
to work out a resolution so
madam
Representative and and Mr
speaker I I heard your answer I.
I understand that that.
Maybe if you're not willing to
process just a little bit we
could have you join us Thursday
at eight o'clock on that phone
call and then work it should
this leave the house this
evening.
Work on the Senate side to get
this right.
I'm speaking up for these people
who who have no voice right now.
You Mr.
Mr speaker gentle lady committee
I would hope that cart Farm
could continue it sounds like
it's a wonderful place and
wonderful place for
people with disabilities to be
working but we need to make sure
that they're not having to earn
a sub minimum wage they deserve
the same
Respect for their work and to be
able to it advanced in in in in
integrated our competitive
workplace and that's what other
Programs throughout the state
that is basically out many years
ago have been able to do so I
would be glad to speak with them
but not to change or delayed is
that all so thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I I do
understand your position
I believe what this boils down
to is if this bill passes these
wonderful people won't work at
all.
the the wage would be far higher
that could be justified.
And afraid it's going to
Seriously affect them
they look forward to the
collegiality of of where they
are where they live and work.
They look forward to taking some
of what they earn and getting on
the van and going into town to
do some shopping that this is
their life and this is their
means to do things to buy things
for themselves and I just I just
wish that we could get everybody
just later on a field trip to
visit this place this park
important it's you would see it
we see it all for ourselves how
it really works and so I I guess
I've stated my case as best I
can and
gentlelady I'll be in touch with
you to make sure you have to
call the number for Thursday and
I haven't cleared that with
The founder and the director
that I'm sure they would welcome
the opportunity to to tell you
what they know
Mr speaker I yield my time.
So the gentleman from.
This Eddy and Otero I'm going to
go back to for one question but
he has promised me in return
that way and Representative
Ezzell the gentle lady from
Chavis brings cookies but he
will make sure I get cookies and
for that he gets one question.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker I object.
I think your point gentle and.
Thank you Mr speaker
with the gentle lady L. for one
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
any yes.
Can you identify your expert
witnesses.
Yes I would be glad to my I'm
sorry I feel to do that earlier
my expertise Jim Jackson.
With.
Disability rights New Mexico.
Thank you very much all right
that was totally worth the
cookies the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady you'll.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo iCloud and.
So.
There's someone earlier said Mr
speaker they don't have the
lived experience I have the
lived experience I have worked
with people with disabilities
nearly forty years I have a son
who was thirty years old with
significant disabilities and I
have heard a lot of things Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
have.
Broke my heart and made me angry
I'm you know that's kind of what
what does what does the minimum
wage mean that you are worst
left.
It tells the people who are
working for some minimum wage
that they are worth less it
tells the community it tells
their families that they are
worse left and I have.
One.
Yes because they make less than
the minimum wage they are work
with and that is completely and
totally not true we've heard a
lot of stories that pull that
your heartstrings I could tell
you just as many stories that
would pull at your heartstrings
for instance Tommy that was
discussed earlier his job at the
grocery store what is not a sub
minimum wage jobs I guarantee it
because it couldn't be because
they do not have the certificate
there are many programs like
Clarke throughout the state that
do not pay stub minimum wage
they are finding a way to make
it arca it used to be the
association of something
citizens of Albuquerque now it's
just dark Act I did their
evaluations in their group homes
for many many years they have a
wonderful farm in corral list
every year they grow poinsettia
is that they sell they do not
work force that minimum wage
they make minimum wage it is
possible to do part of the way
that it's possible to do is that
there are many state dollars
well there are many dollars that
flow into those programs they
flow into programs to pay for
the staff there they do not I
think they have the advantage of
getting contracts with the state
there's a lot of things that
happened and and Mr speaker
gentle lady I also thanked her
talk about kids we're not
talking about kids here because
someone has an intellectual
disability if they are twenty
five they're not a kid if they
are thirty seven they are not a
kid that that was kind of
It to to to act like they're
kids they're not kids kids do
not work in not in these kind of
situation
and I also heard and that's what
really those people don't care
if they make five dollars ten
dollars fifteen dollars those
people are people they are not
those people there are people
who happen to have a disability
and yes they do care they make
five dollars or ten dollars or
fifteen dollars someone Mr
speaker and gentle lady said
they go into town with some of
these minimum wages are fifty
cents an hour twenty five cents
an hour how much are you earning
to go into town and spent
spending money what is that what
you are worth what.
Any other agencies do it every
other agency every other
I've been in the state who who
hires people with disabilities
find a way to pay them minimum
wage and frequently more than
minimum wage I will tell you a
story it didn't happen in New
Mexico and it was some years ago
there was eight eight very
secret military site in Indiana
and they were looking for people
that that could pass the purity
clearance to get into this place
to do what was what was pretty
menial work it was peace work
but they needed to have very
high security clearance and so
what they discovered was that
they could provide people with
autism who were non verbal who
love this kind of work these
people were completely nonverbal
so obviously they needed help
with a lot of things they didn't
have they were not great
communicators the end so the
government higher be nonverbal
people who some people with the
funding what state were worse up
minimum wage at very high wages
because it took advantage of the
strings that they have their
their ability to focus and and
if it turned out there inability
to communicate what the plot in
this in this
situation and these people were
able to give up their government
services because they were paid
enough at this job that they
love to work so we give me yes
everybody has to steal some
people are very disabled but
they do have a deal of some sort
and.
The what I think that
And I will not mention her name
but there this kind of thing
eight out to people who who are
the people who have disabilities
I I know a woman she's she's
really get she got her degree in
chemistry and to me that that I
mean I struggled through
chemistry to get into PT school
so if you can get a degree in
chemistry but she is pretty
severely physically disabled she
uses a wheelchair she needs
support for all of her
activities of daily living
because of and she couldn't get
a job at doing anything because
of her physical disability
because we as a society have
that if you have a disability
you are worth less she does have
a job now she does have a job
that pays for a decent wage so
you know we look back with with
people with disabilities youth
and up institutions Mr speaker
and gentle lady and this is that
kind of thinking that they are
they are too fragile to be to
work there are two disk able to
be allowed to be in the general
community and that is not the
case at all I'm as I stated in
other.
Agencies I can't think of
another word other companies are
able to find a way to hire
people with the with
disabilities including
significant disabilities and
make it work I believe that the
agent that that car they were
talking about can also do it so
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is a matter of equality of
respect and human dignity and
and please I ask you if you are
going to debate on this remember
that these are people these are
not those people these are not
they are worth less these are
people this is my son.
With that I thank you gentle
lady Mr speaker.
There's further debate.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana please
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield my
other co sponsors thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I I just
wanted to take an opportunity to
just say a few words as many of
you know I was born and raised
in Roswell grew up just south of
there in lake or third and a
month before I was born my
sister started working at an
organization called table so
developmental services and
Russell she right now is the
current executive director of
this organization which has
provided services for people
with disabilities for one I'm
forty two hundred forty two this
year so much longer than I've
been around and I have grown up
in within the organization have
gone a chance to really be a
part of the community that is
table so
we first and I just want to
remind folks that in twenty
seventeen when Representative
Ferrary Nye we're first
we should when we first came
into this legislature we
introduce this legislation and
we've spoken to all of the
organizations who support people
and disabled descent
developmental disabilities with
especially with folks who might
have had concerns about this
issue folks like to boast a and
and other places around the
state they don't actually pay
some minimum wage they actually
pay a full minimum wage to the
individuals that they support
because they know that it's the
right thing and so I think that
it's really really important to
address the fact that the that
the previous legislator who was
talking about the Clarke
organization in Carlsbad we have
talked to the executive director
of that organization as far back
as twenty seventeen we have been
introducing this legislation
every single year since twenty
seventeen this is not something
that we just came out and
decided suddenly over the course
of the last few weeks to
introduce this is legislation
that we have been working on for
the last four years this is an
arcade piece alleges.
Asian and just to reiterate what
my fellow colleague from mark
Burnett Leo has mentioned this
in the same way that I talk
about dignified wages for
workers.
With disabilities are also human
beings who deserve a dignified
wage this is an archaic piece of
of of statute that should have
never existed in in the
legislature and in our in our in
our legal codes and I would
encourage every single person in
this chamber to vote yes tonight
to repeal this law because it's
archaic it doesn't need to to
live here in New Mexico anymore
people with disabilities deserve
to have a dignified wage and
many of the organizations who
already provide services with
people with disabilities no
longer even adhere to someone
with minimum wage so with that I
will yield back to my mic co
sponsor and my colleague from
Dona Ana County.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
We will come back to
Representative Scott I do see
the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
from doing in a place you.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from the county.
thank you Jill ADA from curry
county I'm sorry thank you thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady of
there is a wonderful
organization and my account in
my district as well it's eastern
New Mexico rehabilitative
services enrich and and
As I heard you and your co
sponsors speak you've done
research on all of these it is
interesting impacted by this
bill.
It.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry county they do not have
the certificate so they would
not be affected the most rate
are they must be paying minimum
wage.
Okay General how long has it
been since you have communicated
with in a very short done
research on that organization it
is it back in seventeen as your
as your co sponsor mentioned or
has it been fairly recently.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry county it's been quite a
few years and when we were
speaking to the difference
providers or you know players
around the state they have not
had certificates for quite a few
years.
Okay so gentle lady Mr speaker I
understand I think I heard you
say that they must be paying
minimum wage is is that.
Secretary of state mentality.
eight Mr speaker and gentleman
of the.
The if they're not in the are
paying just a minimum wage it
would be in the legal and
illegal Act because they as far
as we know do not have any
certificates fourteen C.
certificates that would from the
federal government that would
allow to do that.
Thank you John I appreciate that
gentlelady do you recall about
how many people they work with
or how many people had on staff
or or employed do you have any
idea or do you recall those
numbers gentle lady.
Yeah.
Times Mr speaker and gentleman
it's
I don't know how many people are
working here but it's a pretty
big operation.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's it's
a very large operation they
They have employees that that
take care of a lot of the rest
areas throughout the state of
New Mexico they they do
it's it's it's one of the.
Most impressive businesses and
in my district and in my
community of the work that they
do so I I I don't know that I
have a lot of more questions the
gentle lady I I just was trying
to gather data from you I
thought it appeared he had a lot
of research and I thought I can
learn a little bit from this
opportunity and so I thank you
for answer my questions
I am going to try to call home
here just a little bit and see
if I can find out
what their thoughts are on on
this bill and I'll go from there
so Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
is further debate the gentleman
from Lee welcome back
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
German lady from donors yield
please.
Mr speaker I'd be glad to be
here the gentleman hi Jim.
Speaker gentle lady have just
one question.
That is can you tell me.
What the minimum wage is.
right now in New Mexico I
believe it's a ten.
Ten dollars.
Gentle lady that's an accurate.
What may.
Let me tell you what the real.
Anymore is.
And that is zero.
Because that's what.
Folks in court.
May well be.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Selena.
is further debate John from San
Juan Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady.
Please yield.
Yes Mr speaker all I yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady
I have a little experience I
don't have as much spirit
experiences Liz Thomson but my
day at work in this field for
thirty years and and I'll never
forget the lessons he told me
taught me.
with the special kids are his
kids.
And they and they had some had
severe disability some had less
disability.
And I'll never forget
A mechanic friend of my dad.
Was that our our little form and
he was fixing the.
The tractor and broken down and
he brought his severely disabled
son with him.
And
This could favor because I
hardly at all.
he was amazing with with animals
the most fiercest animal would
melt in this the show man's hand
he had a gift.
He also was a great fisherman
his dad taught him how to do
that and he also assisted his
father and his mechanic duties
in my day had on their forget
this and my dad paid.
This mechanic a great compliment
he said I do this for a living I
take your kids like your son and
you're dead a hundred you're
done at
ten times better than it then we
could err ever accomplish what
you're doing with your your son.
And getting back to the minimum
wage it's a training wage and a
said then was a training wage we
have that on our books for young
students that are just starting
out and we have a train ride for
them we also have a a sub
minimum wage for farm workers so
this isn't out of disrespect.
For these young men and women
that have a disability
they need to start and they they
need to an opportunity and the
because our skills are
lacking there's there's several
in industry and and and and
businesses that can utilize
their talents and in four to
train them and give them a
chance in life so I thank you.
We we need to keep keep that
money
that it back home in Farmington
I have a friend that has a son
who's is down syndrome
Boy.
And he is developed into quite a
a restaurant worker with with a
local restaurant and he does
quite a bit in in fact they've
taught him well and and I I
don't know if he's making some
minimum wage or not I have
really asked that question but
he's been given an opportunity
to excel in that area and I
would hate to
that you know we might
Hurt these kids more than we
then when we help them minimum
wages is ten fifty an hour
gentle lady and and Mr speaker
and that's that's a pretty high
threshold I have I have
teenagers to come up to me
needing work and and it's just
it's just hard to find work at
that higher rate so we we need
to be be
Earful the the situation in
Carlsbad.
Mr speaker and gentle lady those
folks know that community pretty
well and they know what good
that that that particular
greenhouse
is is affording to those those
students so those kids of those
workers and the I would I just
would hate that this would hurt
them so
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlelady appreciate.
appreciate your your comments on
this I've learned a lot.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Sorry about that I just.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Of the Han are you out there
gentlelady from Santa Fe.
All right we will go to the
river.
Mr speaker.
Can you hear me.
We can hear you loud and clear.
I just want to thank the
sponsors that will that lady
from I Tonya yield.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Well I just want to thank you
and other sponsors for bringing
this piece of legislation
forward and for having worked on
this for so long.
what we are individuals with
exception allergies with us and
we work towards protecting them
and giving them the freedom to
the committee that there are
that is what is representative
and legislation I just want to
say.
You all my colleagues that I
this legislation for the
proposed
and putting our heart behind it
we we deserve to.
You know what's right why are
our brothers and sisters and
children with exception
allergies and that's really all
I have to say at the mother with
a child with exceptionally
helpful and worked with working
with others.
With the exception of state
thank you again and urge my
colleagues to vote for this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman thank you sponsors.
Thank the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker and our
will the general with the
please you.
Mr speaker gentleman from the I
will reply to you.
Thank you it was my first
question is Mr speaker.
I wrote a note that.
Fourteen C..
Has been limited by the Biden
and ministration well that was a
comment made obsolete.
Mr speaker gentle lady but you
and so can you explain that to
me.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
are you asking you to explain
the fourteen C. certificate
application process for just my
comment.
The thank you for clarifying
question
specifically how did the
fighting Administration limonite
fourteen C. thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Right Mr speaker and gentleman
from the I didn't mean to say
that they had already but they
were working on.
So in the process so you're
probably not issuing of the
fourteen C. certificates.
To renew.
Thank you for that response Mr
speaker and gentle lady so so.
I guess now yes I'm asking more
detailed questions.
They are working to define what
would you mean by they are
working on eliminating that and
in one effort is going to be
something Mr speaker and gentle
lady that it goes through the
legislative process at the at
the U. S. capitol we're just
gonna be another executive order
gentle lady Mr speaker.
Spots and so.
As I understand it we have the
federal statute the federal act.
That we have a governing agency
this chosen not to act comply
with the act in compliance with
the rules because they think
they want to change the rules.
Is that my and my tier on that
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the I don't want to speak for
the distribution.
Okay so thank you for that but
to to be clear this is this is
clearly something that is still
an act for what labor standards
act
this still in place.
as as we speak right now.
That correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Yes Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman from of the the
structure's still there.
Okay well I I appreciate that.
That remains confusing to me the
but we'll continue on
Mr speaker and gentle lady to.
To I think to close with want to
add to combat the Representative
Scott made with respect to
minimum wage is actually zero
will basically for that just to
be clear.
Wages then Hey reasonable.
Minimum wage.
Their command not to employed
individuals individuals unless
they are paid you madam.
So as we go through this process
with respect to the
Individuals should try this bill
or individuals Mr speaker and
gentle lady that are affected by
other bills are working its way
through our process New Mexico
right now.
It is very important that we all
understand at the end of the
day.
Those are decisions that that
are made from a business
perspective not from a personal
perspective.
And on whether or not something
and the business is is this true
for from that point forward
based off of the cost of goods
they can sell.
Verses.
versus the cost of doing
business and so that it's just
it's just a thought process
systems that have to do with
any.
One individual in any one.
Recommendation this is at the
end of the day whether or not
business come constructs and so
with that close Mr speaker I
yield back to you thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker.
We.
That's exactly what we're trying
to not make this business up
Way to exploit people this is
something that we need to
protect the rights of people to
at least make a minimum wage and
to value their work ethic there
were work after
we it's no longer being
considered best practice is
already be based out in New
Mexico and we want to encourage
employers to if this is not a
training the server not.
Young people these are people
who could be seniors and making
this wages import minimum wages
support which it minimum wage is
ten fifty
Mr speaker and gentleman who is
left already the we need to make
sure that
People are value in that we also
make sure that.
New Mexico shows that respect to
people with disabilities who are
trying to work in do need to be
Included in and the integrated
competitive integrated
workforce.
Mr speaker.
Gentle lady I'm waiting to make
sure that the gentleman is
indeed finished I got chastised
Alaska.
All right yes finished so we
will now moved to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please feel.
Up yes Mr speaker I will decide
to yield to
my friend from Bernalillo.
Thank you gentle lady you Mr
speaker.
It took a lot.
For me to
Come forward to say a few words
after hearing.
It's been a troubling last few
days having to hear a lot of
testimony on.
Around why we should not have.
paid sick leave why should we
should not have the minimum wage
why we should not have or
dignifying and and just go on
and on Mr speaker and.
Gentlelady it's been emotionally
draining for me and I know for
many others because every single
one of us I believe have a
experience
related to.
What we are standing up and
defending on behalf of.
Our populations are diverse
populations around the state.
And money goes back to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
I first
Got out of got my bachelor's
degree and when I started
working and it was working with.
Used children and children with
disabilities and I appreciate it
Representative Lujan.
talking about children with
exceptional of the State.
Because in my first experience
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Yes how we approached working
with our children.
We work with our children from
the panelists that they were
exceptional.
And.
And that they had what other
children did not have they
offered what other children did
not offer because of their
exceptional of these.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and.
And I was.
That.
One against the grain.
Then in the early seventies are
working with persons with
disabilities because we were
still operating off under
terminology and systems and
training.
How does believing what many of
our colleagues today we're
articulating.
That.
Persons with exception allergies
children with exception
allergies lack the skills.
They lacked.
Yes they lacked in that.
They failed in this they failed
in that.
Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
And even what we're trying to
repeal the language that that
we're using is from.
For minimum wage.
That.
Is where the repeal that
language we should not have
anything on our books that
refers to the dignity
and did not find and
elevating our populations by
referring to anything as sub.
We should be.
Optional and everything that we
do.
We should be taking exceptional
steps out of the ordinary skips
extraordinary steps to lift her
populations up.
To a fair just and equitable
world.
Where they are looked upon and
treat it.
You would look upon entry your
own family member yourself.
Mr speaker and
gentle lady and.
It really is bother someone we
talk about
Having to protect the the
business perspective.
Having to Representative the
business that we're not paying
attention to the business
perspective that somehow the
business is minimized or reduced
Stewart
ignored.
Has anybody thought about what
makes the business exceptional.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
makes the business exception all
of the people that work in the
business.
What service the business.
The people that are the
frontline of that business the
people that are offering
customer service the people that
are dealing with constituent
services whatever the business
is.
Mr speaker and gentle lady these
are the individuals that make
that business exceptional so why
would we want to minimize the
importance of the very
individuals that are making this
is what.
Why would we want to minimize
and given the minimum wage Mr
speaker and gentle lady why are
we not giving them exceptional
wage.
Them because after all they're
they're they're giving us our
wealth and our well being.
They're giving us our status
they're giving us our stature
they're providing us I ability
to expand and grow.
Without.
The employees workers frontline
essential.
Everything.
Would we have a business.
With the owners of a small
business who worked in their
business to build it up to the
point where they could employ
our workers.
With the also owners be willing
to go back.
To those twenty hour days.
When you're first starting a
business and building it up and
then you have the luxury of
being able to hire one worker to
workers three workers in your
funny relieving yourself of
certain hours so instead of
twenty hours your down to
fifteen hours and less and less
finally you're you're at the
point Mr speaker and gentle lady
of.
Being able to actually just
coordinate or check in whatever
the languages because after all
who's holding down the fort.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
not.
Those exceptional essential
workers.
Continuing to.
Position you so that you can
take your vacation so that you
can take your time off so that
you can pay for your children's
Education when in fact.
They have to work those hours Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
And they have to work two and
three times.
What you're getting on your
return.
Just to be able to pay.
There.
Essential expense.
The food on the table.
Clothing for their children.
Why because we're insisting on.
Not dignifying.
Or elevating what they are
contributing to more wealth and
my well being as a business
owner.
And insisting on continuing to
exploit what they're offering me
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
By.
The minimum wage and in this
case minimum wage.
I would argue Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
I would argue.
That.
The exception ality.
That Representative Lujan.
So didn't.
I in her description of of of
her exceptional child.
I would say that.
Persons with disabilities
exceptional.
Populations actually have more
skills.
More abilities.
More knowledge in waste Mr
speaker and gentle lady that we
have yet to fully comprehend.
Where we yet have fully
comprehend those children that I
was exposed to those belts with
that we're that we had
disabilities.
We're able to function and waste
and taught me how to function in
ways that I had not even
imagined possible.
Simply because.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
They were gifted in ways.
Give in ways.
That we.
We can't even imagine so they're
not lacking skills they're not
lacking intelligence they're not
lacking in abilities they're not
lacking in knowledge they're not
lacking in anything Mr speaker
and gentle lady these are
individuals that if we paid.
I had just one individual.
With us.
One twenty four hour day.
I would venture to say that
every single one of us would
walk away.
With a list of what we learned
from those individuals working
with us or walking with us for
that day.
If we just.
Broke away.
From those.
Traditional
Systems and ways in which we've
been taught.
To look at differences as a
weakness.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
differences are not a weakness
whether you're different in the
skin of the color of your skin
or your different no matter how
you're different.
This is.
The weakness different a lack of
skill or lack of anything.
This means.
Now we have something to offer
because of our differences to
each other that makes the other
person.
Much better.
On a different level Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
And so.
All of the arguments that we've
been hearing.
Why we should continue to have
keep people down.
Keep people limit.
Keep people lacking.
Keep people in Serb positions.
All of the arguments because
that's Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's exactly what we're
those arguments as to why we
should maintain.
Structures�.
Our.
This is twenty twenty one.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
And these are promises that that
just don't don't don't have a
place.
In.
Our discussions.
What I would have hoped would
have happened the last few days
that we've been going through
these difficult our debates.
It's not difficult for us the
debate not difficult for me to
debate because I know when I'm
standing strong on and I know we
are we know what we're standing
strong on the difficult to have
to listen.
I'm with Representative R.
Thompson when she talked about.
How she felt and I'm with
everyone who sits back and and
and knows and experiences on
these these experiences daily
and how it feels it saddens me
and angers me.
But it strengthens me.
It strengthens the resolve.
I and you and everyone else must
have in order to continue to
break down.
These barriers.
Break down these antiquated ways
of.
Speaking the language we use and
the praises we refer to in the
the notions that we're talking
about.
To do that.
It's time to do that I feel like
I'm reminiscing back in the
sixties.
When I first in this movie
social movements I feel and I'm
regressing and I'm having the
same kind of arguments Mr
speaker and gentle lady and
discussions.
Way back in nineteen sixty eight
sixty nine.
It so Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I I know.
I know that is just given that
opportunity and I welcome
justice you were invited gentle
lady.
Our tool called.
To understand how the business
owner of this.
I'm business.
Wants to express how detrimental
they would feel or how
devastating it would be for
their business.
For us the past this bill today.
That you have that imitation I
would welcome.
Every single colleague of mine
in this house to invite.
A child with exception allergies
in adults with exception
allergies.
Walk with us and work with us
and stand with us and spend the
day with us.
So that you can feel and so that
you can hear so that you can.
Express.
How that person wishes to be
seen heard.
And understood and valued.
This is a human life.
This is a human life that has
value.
Not minimal minimal value not
lacking value not so value this
person with exceptional value.
We stand to learn.
Hundred times more.
Then this person that we're
attempting.
To continue to be devalued.
And placed in a sub position in
our society.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I would invite.
Each and every one of us to
invite.
One of these children or adults
and we're talking about adults.
I personally have been walking
with a person.
With exceptional value.
Since we were in school
together.
In elementary.
In high school.
And then we separated in college
because she had to go on to
seek.
Special.
Specialized training in order to
be able to hold down the
position.
As a
what did they used to call on
the telephone operators you know
with those big old systems
I can't think of the name Mr
speaker and gentle lady but
those telephone systems remember
you'd plug it brought out.
And and because of her on
exceptional on the billet tease
it was determined in that time
period and then she elevated
recent technology you the term
and that this was the value that
she could be R. that could be
amplified and she could be
just.
So that she could maintain
because she wanted nothing more
than to earn a living.
To pay for her little apartment
so she could move out of our
home repairs home she wanted to
prove to her parents and her
parents did not have to worry
about her as she aged.
And she wanted to prove to them
that they did not have to put
all their savings in invested in
their in an interview teacher.
Because she had
Some some limitations that were
quoted pope not quite
limitations but things that just
needed to be strengthened in
order for her to be able to make
a living on her own she's now
The mid seventies actually her
parents are deceased.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
she became a mother.
She's a grandmother.
She's a great grandmother.
And she has been able to
maintain.
A live and the likelihood.
Not only that but she was able
to share.
exceptional skills and
abilities.
Because she.
Gabelein.
To a child that was also
exceptional.
And she had to nurture that
child.
But then she also then had to
nurture that child in her
school.
So her exceptional value.
She kept sharing it further and
further so Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I would hope.
That we would all
Support this legislation I would
hope that we would step back and
think about what we're saying.
How we're saying it.
Because these individuals with
exceptional service.
You'll exceptional everything
are listening to these debates.
They are hearing us talk about
them.
Not them.
As objects.
They are hearing our dialogue
our debates.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
would hate.
For those individuals.
To go to bed at night.
Reinforced with the very.
The very things that they've
spent their entire lives.
Struggling against and
struggling to build up in order
to self sustain themselves in
order to be independent in order
to be able to contribute.
As equal.
Equitably as we are for them
those opportunities to be able
to do.
In their lives I would hate for
them to go to bed at night.
Listening to what they're
lacking in their lives.
And listening.
To be considered sub minimum.
For less then.
Or not enough value or whatever
it is that we have been hearing
in these debates.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you so much I'm happy to join
you on on on this bill and in
the struggle
In the struggle it seems that
it's been not just a lifetime
but several lifetimes for many
of us.
In trying to break down these
horrible social on stigmas
institutional stigmas
and these
Morrible
Disparities and in in in our
systems and our society and I
wish that all of our.
Colleagues would really truly Mr
speaker and gentle lady
place ourselves.
In.
In the in the minds and bodies
and the souls.
Of these.
Exceptional.
Beauties of human beings that
have so much more to offer us.
An offer to us if we just.
Give them.
Open heart.
Open mind.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady am I so well
come on passage of this bill
today thank you so much.
Through the debate the gentleman
from Dona Ana granted Sierra
Representative sent us this.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind lady from going on up the
sealed.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from many towns.
Thank you very much this and
I've been as a new provided here
I've been up listen to all the
debate in.
And I listen to what what is
being expressed from both sides
and from everybody you know and
I hate to say sites but you know
that's what's happening here
tonight
You know.
I've hired a lot of people have
been had the opportunity to grow
up in a family that had a
business and and my dad started
up on his construction company
many years ago and I think
expressed a little bit of this
too and in committee that you
know I I've always well I always
try to help people along the way
and I used to support some of
these programs were some of the
people that needed work
Because of their disability they
would belong to a an
organization that would allow
them to come forward.
And be part of something and and
I would always try to make sure
that I did that for them because
I knew that was good for them
and I quote my talk to them and
enjoy you know they they did
pretty much just landscape work
and I would always take the time
to go talk to them and.
And get to know them.
And but you know what really
what we're hearing here is is is
I I try to be very practical
person and I think every person
here Mr speaker
gentle lady is trying to do the
right thing I don't think that
anyone's trying to we just see
it from different perspectives
and to see it from different
angles and you know.
I do agree with some of the
stuff if someone is taking
advantage of a of someone just
because they have a disability
that's wrong.
But you know my father had a a
gentleman the work from you had
a disability can here and he
works with my dad for many years
my dad didn't know sign language
the but they found a way to
communicate.
He would take care of them in
the Pam well in the he he he
worked with them for many many
years.
On the other hand start my own
business and had a small car
wash and I think I've explained
that when I started my business
and I would wash cars.
And so I know what it is to
start with nothing and start
with one employee and two and so
for but this employee that I had
a particular employee that he
wanted to be part of something
but as much as he tried he just
wasn't able to do much and you
sometimes because disability was
unreliable and I would I think I
would say that I pride rate in
better than.
R. the rest of our people were
making because he would only be
there for such a short time
sometimes it only work thirty
minutes fifteen minutes an hour
but I was treated unfair.
And so I guess what we're I'm
going with this Mr speaker and
and the gentle lady is that.
The truth though it is you know
it's not just about business
it's not just about you know
disrespecting people because I
think everyone should be
respective.
But again in committee I I did
bring up the point that I was
concerned that.
Would not be able to
participate.
And so not everyone this is
nothing to do with race this has
nothing to do with anything just
honest being honest and saying
you know what there are certain
individuals that are able to.
To be part of a company or part
of a process or whatever
whatever that is and there's
some that that unfortunately
aren't able to do that and they
have different business but they
have different skills.
and I I just I just really I
mean I've always tried to again
like I said support anyone I can
that is.
The struggles I truly have tried
to do that on my life and but
it's a at the same time I
believe if we just make it we
remove this tool.
It just gives it removes that
opportunity for that person the
just you know wanted to do a
little something.
Help.
Help in there
Weather was a restaurant was it
was something they don't have
the skill to be there very long
or maybe they just don't have
the skill to the skill to run a
cash register for simple things
like that but it gives an
opportunity for a for the small
business for a person to hire
them even for.
a few hours you know maybe it's
twenty hours a week maybe it's
forty I'm not sure I guess all
I'm saying ma'am
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
as much as I appreciate what
you're doing because I know I
think you're doing it out of the
goodness of your heart I believe
everyone hear that is expressed
that come from different season
from the different angles but I
I as much as I I like it I think
it just takes away that that
ability for a guy that says Hey
you know what.
All you know just come on in the
guy that wants to just
participate that that person
that just wants to be out of the
house and the long to something
and and the guy that maybe
doesn't have the money money
money or to even though the only
business thought all of them
have the ability to to have that
plus cash to spend on on on on
on a person because it's not
just the minimum wage the
guidance you got workman's comp
you've got to pay the five
attacks as you go to page other
things that go along with
payroll
and and so I just believe that
it it it could take away a tool
that could benefit.
Those individuals that will have
nowhere else to go and for that
small business that would like
to just give a little back to
the community maybe he'll still
give back but it's only going to
give a couple hours to that
person maybe it's good enough to
work only a couple hours a week
maybe the bills want to belong
to that.
Organizational little bit more
and it just give them something
to do and and be part of
something so I appreciate you
coming up and and and present in
this and and so that's just I
just wanted to share that with
you thank you very much for your
time I yield to no further
debate gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the time support for
this important issue and
and all the kind words that
people say that and with that I
do now with that house bill two
fourteen do now pass
Representative passage of house
bill two fourteen the vote is
now open.
Forty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those that
recorded the Representative
Anderson.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
The vote is now closed revenue
growth Representative Anderson's
yes Representative Anderson
votes yes.
Is now closed by a vote of forty
eight in the affirmative
nineteen and negative house bill
two fourteen is duly passed the
house.
Eight the more members we're
gonna take up the following were
items five and six.
Nine twelve thirteen fourteen
sixteen eighteen.
Mexico and I remember I has a
one twenty three gentlelady from
early are you ready on that
item.
I am Mr speaker if you can get
me to that point.
The record reflect on action
necessary for placing House Bill
one two three on final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker House Bill
one twenty three would allow
municipalities and counties in
consultation with and under the
guidelines issued by the
department of health to adopt
ordinances to establish and
operate overdose prevention
programs.
These overdose prevention
programs would provide a safe
space for individuals to consume
pre obtained substances under
supervision by trained staff
provide access to referrals for
substance use treatment or other
medical services and the monitor
individuals for overdose and
intervention to prevent
overdoses this of bills is this
is a cutting edge
approach to dealing with
overdose prevention to provide a
safe place for individuals who
would otherwise be on the street
and and our parks and alleyways
to have a safe place to
take their drugs where we can
prevent overdoses and our by
providing clean supplies and are
prevent of the spread of
It should be and hepatitis C.
and and other communicable
diseases as well as intervene in
signs of infection and while
there in a trusted space
hopefully try and encourage
people and referred to a
treatment programs and other
social support services and
this would be
we would be the first state if
we and access there are some
cities around the country that
I've tried it but this is really
an approach that has
Are we see in other countries
it's an approach that we have
talked about and the interim for
several years have presentations
from program a program in
Vancouver Canada
that we've
the interim committee F. L.
HHS's has shown great interest
in and we have interest
at the department of health and
so what we're would this is a
proposal to us that begin to set
up the framework that would
allow local community to
establish a program should they
choose and with that Mr speaker
I stand for questions here is
very the general from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker is
gentlelady from Bernalillo yield
I gladly able to the gentleman
from San Juan.
So the speaker and and gentle
lady I'm just wondering about
the.
Potential conflict of interest
for for.
Municipalities and in particular
I mean we're we're talking
about.
Controlled substances that.
Generally if a police officer.
Word to find someone with ease.
substances that they would be in
regular instances be.
B..
Incarcerating them correct the
speaker gentle lady and by the
way I think I forgot to ask you
a few yield.
I you did ask him I did so
you're you're good
Thank you thank you for the
question Mr speaker and
gentleman and I forgot to
mention that this bill also
provides some protection from
liability for for participating
in the program and being there
so some safety but the
individuals were talking about
if they were this is not drug
dealers that we're talking about
this is individual use are we've
got lots of initiatives where
we're trying to
decriminalize
and get into treatment instead
and and many of these folks
would not necessarily be picked
up and put in jail but be picked
up and taken to the ER and so Mr
speaker and gentleman some of
the positive
our results from programs that
are are seen
elsewhere is a far less use of
the E. R.
less overdose no doubt overdose
deaths related to the program
less infection and less
If the criminal activity the in
in the regard of of just being
on the street and then our parks
using
using drugs and
less.
Needles around and and so forth
so it there's a lot of positives
that have been shown out of
other programs.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm a little aware of the I
guess the Amsterdam model.
but what we're describing.
Would be a a location probably
some staff.
I mean it took to make sure that
it was safe to make sure that
that
if there's a needle exchange
program for or something like
that that that we would be
staffing that location I'm just
it it appears to me.
That that there is with our drug
laws that are currently in place
quite a quite a.
Paradox I guess is the word I'm
looking for
For municipalities who who
currently.
This illegal activity is
normally something that they
would be trying to keep from
happening at.
This would add too many in the
community appear to be as a four
perpetuating this behavior so
I'm just trying to figure out
how.
How is law enforcement house
House municipality has launched
higher law enforcement how do
they justify.
This.
Conflict.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for the for the question to
your first question yes there
staffed so that there is
appropriate supervision
it and this is
you know the the response and
many communities where this is
been tried is is very positive
because it's taking street drug
users.
Who are in the alleyways and in
the front doors of businesses
and in the parks and on your
sidewalks
and and.
Removing them from there if you
will because they have a safe
place to go.
And that safe place to go
it which makes everybody else
feel safer because that because
they're not not random drug use
out in public is also has the
positive public health are a
fact of
controlling overdoses spread of
infection and getting people
into treatment and less of
engagement with law enforcement
and transported picking up and
transporting these individuals
who have drug addiction
to the E. R. so if there are I
think there's a pretty positive
support that we have seen and
the studies and literature
around the programs that are
done and other places and
there's a few cities.
in in the United States that are
piloting these programs are we
would be the first state and you
are correct Mr speaker and
gentleman that most of these
drugs are illegal
but it is we hope I hope that
because of the effectiveness
that others are seeing in the US
that we can be at the cutting
edge of of the state the early
days of medical cannabis where
everyone was afraid to do it
because it was illegal but if
you have a structured and well
regulated state law and
appropriate programs that you're
left alone and I think the I
think it is
worst pursuing.
Thank you Mr speaker gently puts
puts cities in the United States
are doing this.
let me check with my at expert
and
and I should tell the the body
Mr speaker that my expert is
Emily Kaltenbach at with the
drug policy alliance you'll just
give me just a moment.
Mr speaker and gentleman city
ordinances have been passed in
New York Philadelphia San
Francisco and Seattle.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so just just for
cities.
In the United States so far
correct.
So the speaker and gentle lady
in those ordinances.
what
Interaction away from these
facilities
if the police
Come across someone in an alley
or in a park or.
Outside one of these facilities
hello what what happens in those
communities when the police
interact with with those folks
they still go to a hospital they
gonna treat this facility to
take them to this location.
What what are they doing in the
cities.
Mr speaker and gentleman is some
of this cities I don't know that
they've actually started the
program me out but the
ordinances have passed and
they're developing on but I
think they would treat them the
way they would ordinarily this
isn't a place for the police to
pick up pick them up and bring
them to I don't believe
but it is a place to have kind
of a hands off if someone is
going there
to be to use their their their
drugs that are there left alone
because they will be supervised
they won't overdose or if
there's been in the literature
no overdose deaths there have
been some overdoses that are
managed I just like the Law
Enforcement Kerry's
the appropriate medications to
reverse overdosed dust but
I I can't speak to what the the
police policies are in in all
those various US cities.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady how does your legislation
deal with that interaction.
how how are we to handle that in
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
would require guidelines for the
program to be set up by
department of health who would
done work with the municipality
that decides to they want to do
this and they're going to pass
their ordinance and have their
approach for how they interact
with of police or how they use
the how they used to program
within the guidelines so it's up
to the local government within
the guidelines of one
appropriate program is.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady there is a lot of addiction
in New Mexico and there's a lot
of that apprehension.
in in many of the communities a
of how we properly address
addiction.
so I'm wondering Mr speaker
gentle lady holes seeing how
there are.
Only four cities and they have
even relief implemented this
yet.
I fly would we go down the road
now of something that
Is this for us would be.
Fairly experimental
I find the world would we not.
Have gone the road of a memorial
in studying this this is a this
is pretty drastic change from
what we have currently.
I'm wondering why we would.
Why we would go down this road
without knowing.
without having any examples in
the United States to to look at.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
not an experimental program and
in many other countries aka said
the the the city and and country
we have
Investigated most extensively
have been Vancouver.
But
there's all of well over a
hundred evidence based studies
and peer reviewed journal
articles related to programs
around the world and
up we have in New Mexico we are
one of the highest in a drug
addiction and overdose deaths
and we have to try I believe
everything we can and there are
some people that are not going
to be
yeah and we did do a memorial
actually Mr speaker and
gentleman
a number of years ago but we we
did do a memorial and which is
why it's been taken up as I as a
topic for discussion and study
in the interim for a number of
years including we had
before we had to have zoom we
had a video conferencing with
the program in Vancouver
Department of Health
I believe under this
administration has sent staff to
Vancouver and to
observes a program there hi and
we think that this is and
approach there is evidence
and all of those other programs
is that there is not just last
overdose but there's also as I
said last communicable disease
such as HIV and Habsi less use
of the E. R. and
this more safety in that in the
area in which the US program
exists because people are off
the street with their drug use.
Thank you so much higher Mr
speaker and gentleman much
higher referral to treatment.
It is definitely a bridge and a
successful bridge to treatment
and recovery.
Thank you speaker gentle lady
the.
The example that I that I'm more
aware of and I wasn't even aware
that Matt Cooper had this in
place but Amsterdam.
Mr speaker and gentle lady has
the reputation I believe the
numbers to support that it is.
The Colorado of.
The year of the
people.
going to Amsterdam.
And higher rates of use.
that once again it's been awhile
since I looked at the numbers on
that but
people traveling.
Amsterdam's a a destination
location to
be able to partake because it
is.
Socially acceptable.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
at.
The the the the positive effects
that you talked about were.
We're.
Fewer overdoses.
just look more safety
but from what I understood or
understand at least a ****
Amsterdam I have no idea about
thank you for but higher
percentage of the population.
using illicit drugs.
I don't know if we would say.
Necessarily addiction but at
least the recreational use.
Is is very high and the.
Travel
to experiment in the income of
or the influx.
Of people going to Amsterdam.
I'm just worried about New
Mexico becoming a.
A destination location.
For those because.
we would be putting.
Law enforcement in a position
where.
Where we it's a bit of a mixed
message because we have a.
Safe space.
For use a non judgment.
Basically.
For choose I think you said
that.
eighty eight forget exactly the
term you use but that folks
could go there without fear of
repercussion from law
enforcement.
So
It seems to me that that's
something that we would need to
look into a lot more as are we
going to be attracting.
Travel to New Mexico from people
who want to have that similar to
what Colorado was at the
beginning of
them leading the legalization
effort
What's that do you have numbers
on that or if you.
Have any empirical data
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
specifically you know Amsterdam.
It has a different approach and
I think there's probably is
studies that you know and
different opinions about whether
it's
how successful it is or or is an
and and decreasing overdose dust
but they've they've do more
legalization of drugs as opposed
to a safe place for someone who
is essentially a street user
who we're talking about a
population who is probably
largely homeless or marginally
housed
otherwise you're safe places in
your home to to use your drugs
This Is this this is not a
travel destination kind of spot
I don't believe and it's not a
legalization like
legalizing cannabis as we've
been talking about for adult use
of cannabis and even that in
what we're doing is limiting
where it can be utilized
publicly but this is this is a
place for essentially for street
users
You don't have a safe place to
be
yeah and it is a form also Mr
speaker and gentleman an
extension if you will of of
needle exchange and trying get
getting clean supplies and
intervening with with
folks who are on the streets
using drugs to try and get them
medical care and referral to
treatment and
so that it's it's a different
approach than than an Amsterdam
which I think that's a totally
different thing said what we're
talking about here.
Mr speaker gentle lady it it's.
We're I think you made the
distinction of a not
legalization but in reality even
even if we pass.
Pod quote unquote legalization
really it's still illegal at the
national level so really all
we're doing is passing
decriminalization that's what
we're doing with pot in reality
and to some degree with this we
would be decriminalizing use.
Within this safe space whatever
whatever that is so so this
would be very similar to.
The legalization argument just
not widespread it would be.
Destination legalization so I do
think that it is not dissimilar
to legalizing pot so I I know
that communities
law enforcement.
I think there'd be some real
concerns over this
I'll listen to the to the rest
of the day but I'm.
I'm struggling with this myself
I I've had family members.
that had struggled with
addiction friends.
Who have struggled with
addiction and
Once again I appreciate what I
think is the effort here but I'm
not sure it gets us there if we
if we make it to.
Not the consequences are always
the answer Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I don't believe that
course iterations is is
necessarily the answer.
But this really would be to some
degree.
Decriminalizing.
Very strong illicit drugs.
In a community that would that
would X. that would be doing
this
Even an effort to to make sure
that we get people connected to
treatment it's still to some
degree would be.
A safe.
Zone.
From the standpoint of of
getting any trouble.
From from law enforcement so I.
All this the rest of the debate
but I'm gonna need some
convincing thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
The generally this further
debate the gentleman rather
there's further debate the
gentleman from the.
Thank you Mr speaker is the
Joni formerly of you.
Yes I'd gladly able to the John.
Thank you
Thank you for bringing this
legislation very interesting
I do have some questions similar
to the line of questions to.
The representative from San Juan
was talking about my first
question.
Generating would be Mr speaker
Work at the state to safe havens
these be government employees
for the P. wallop tears can you
can you walk me through that
please.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
Mr speaker and gentle and it
would be appropriately trained
the people it could be medical
professionals or or others who
are appropriately trained and
that that will be up to the
a governmental entity are
developing this whether they
contract that out to
an organization or staff it
directly.
Thank you for that answer and
So as we go through this and
Mister speaker gentle lady we
have trained.
Person there.
Is there if.
With the potential risk in my
mind the number does.
What is the reserves fall with
respect to
Nation if somebody does or does
that diet one of these
facilities.
Can you explain that generating.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman well we
have a good Samaritan law but we
they would be this actually it
shows because of the fast
response being able to give
naloxone having protocols
established for
for contacting transfer to
hospitals the studies show that
there there really is
not a decis associated with this
that because there is
intervention in the overdose.
I appreciate the response and
and
Thank you for that.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
the gets more laws understand it
is really relates around
somebody that might show up on a
I said general I see the most
impressive piece of performance
art I've ever seen or your kids
or your videos frozen.
The latter so we've actually
question Joe.
Yes I will not play with video
off so we don't have that issue
again
We'll just we'll just happens Mr
speaker and gentle lady do we.
Does the whole those people.
For attempt to hold those people
until the effects of their drugs
worn off and the reason Mr
Right internet is back up the
gentleman you can resume.
Thank you.
We have for more people speak.
And Jennifer Lee you may
continue.
Thank you Mr speaker also
additional laying my my my
question with respect to the
school.
Was was
My concern is is there an
additional.
Liability insurance that the
municipalities will have to
cover to ensure that
that the state will provide.
Or require.
To ensure that the concerns of
the the the you and I just
talked throughout Mr speaker and
gentle lady
Do not have a repercussion on
the New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
All.
Thank you for that answer and so
With this and and
similar to the to the.
To the COVID once again from the
gentleman from from San Juan I I
I see what you're trying to do
I think it's very admirable I
think the the there are some
concerns with this that.
Potentially places more harm
than good and and and that's not
the intent the intent is to
hopefully find a place where
people can come in and and and
Lou of continuing to do drugs.
we can find some way to get them
into some sort of rehabilitation
process and so with that Mr
speaker and gentle lady
maybe it is this is for
continues on the US that that
the we we make that a
conditional use that facility is
something that you may want to
consider and probably a half and
so with that I I do appreciate
your your responses I appreciate
bill it's it's open my eyes
again and so
thank you very much and Mister
speaker I yield back.
Thank you John for the debate
the gentleman curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo please you I
gladly able to the gentleman
from curry.
Thank you I just want to kind of
give the a clarification or
understanding of the structure
and process of this program as I
understand in section one that
deals with
the the municipality section two
deals with the county section
three is the limited immunity
and then section for I think
deals with the the rules that
are to be established by October
the the rules for this program
or not put together yet that
will come later and so I I just
want to understand.
On page two I believe it is.
In online to that says a
municipality shall require that
an approved overdose prevention
program and it goes on to list a
B. and C. of how they comply but
when it it says that I wondered
are the municipalities are the
counties liable for enforcement
of any activities of this
authorize program that they
create by ordinance or how is
that determined I didn't see it
anywhere in the bill I thought
it might be in the rules but I
don't know the rules is the
right place I'm just curious
about the structure of that
would there be any liability in
creating this program.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman I
don't believe there's liability
in creating this program
particularly as this is written
but they would enforce
ordinances the way they any
municipality enforces their
ordinances and they also have to
follow D. O. H. guidelines so D.
O. H. has a role as well.
Okay then let's say those
guidelines are critical yet to
come being no further down the
line under section three online.
Seven it talks about the
overdose prevention limited
liability online eight it says a
person who establishes provides
a premises for or provide
servants pursuant to but the the
the word to call my tension was
a person and as we've discussed
this I've heard you say at a
business or an entity that
creates this program but your
your actual language there is
always down to a person that
could receive this limited
liability.
I don't see anywhere in the
language that that the city or
the county.
Receive that live that limited
liability only the person that
actually operates the program is
that correct Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman person
is used a broadly in this
context that means an individual
or an entity and it includes
and the city may not or
municipality or county may not
staff this they may contract it
out or proven entity or to do
this and so this protects the
property owner Lieser and date
individuals organization that
runs it.
Thank you for the Juliet that's
that's kind of the conclusion I
came to the probably the the
city or the county is just going
to approve an ordinance and then
they're going to allow some
other entity five one C. three
someone else will actually run
the program
underneath the the umbrella of
the ordinance provided by the
city or the county.
And so as I begin to wonder
about that everyone had concerns
or questions about the liability
and and according to this it's
the person operating the program
that has the limited liability
not the city or the county
they're not covered under this
structure of this bill they're
covered otherwise.
My second question became.
Who is responsible for the
enforcement of the program we're
says the city or the county
shall deal with those three
items.
That indicates that that to me
on to that orders they are
liable for enforcement of the
program oversight of the program
unless they contractually
transfer the liability
responsibility to the person
running the program is that a
fair assessment Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
local governments like to state
government has tort
tore protection and they're not
waving their sovereign immunity
there is there is it's not
necessary to specifically say
that in here what we want to be
sure is that anyone that they
contract with or approved has
that unity for operating a
program.
Thank you Julia Mr speaker
So the city or the county I I
heard you mention earlier in
your comments that that the
community would be very excited
because the needles be picked up
off around the business
properties and Mr W. cleaned up
and and this program would help
clean up the mess so to speak
and and as I listen to that I I
begin to wonder if this program
can be administered by a person
could could they administer this
program out of their home
Mister speaker July.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
assume that that wouldn't
qualify under ordinances and
therefore would be and
appropriate under guidelines
developed by department of
health but again remember person
doesn't necessarily mean an
individual.
Mr speaker gentle lady I agree
person can be used to monitor
free could also meet a person.
so I I just.
We're to the point of thinking I
wonder if my next door neighbor
could open up a program in his
own next door to my home.
if the city wasn't are the
county wasn't careful and and
how they crafted their ordinance
I know that they have the
behind homes and other places
where they take care of the
elderly and and those are out of
residential area so I just began
to wonder Kandace program is
administered in and it as I read
your bill I believe it can.
But I do believe the cities and
counties would be cautious not
to allow that to happen
residential neighborhoods so
that I just had that concern and
then my final concern is just
trying to think how the city the
county which structure of this
ordinance in order to administer
this program
I begin to wonder would there be
a requirement it would have to
fall within the ordinance it
through this that the police be
notified of this location and so
so that they would just have
knowledge of the activities that
are taking their and if people
were calling and they would know
what was going on so I I just
was curious about that part of
it so I appreciate it I I think
I understand the structure in
the process of your language how
the rules will come later on we
want to go ahead and and try to
get this passed the.
I think in October of twenty one
or twenty two okay I have to I
mean again that in October the
the Department health would
actually create the rules is
that correct gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Thank you I appreciate you let
me.
Kind of figure out what I
thought the structure was and I
think we've confirmed the
discussed some options but the
cities and counties we manage it
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the gentleman next
to the gentleman from Colfax
cemetery from creative awkwardly
pay results and Nikhil
Representative Zamora.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
of I'd gladly yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties.
Mr speaker and thank you.
I'm trying to picture this safe
place
the visit the physical part of
it.
If.
Can you explain to me how an
overdose would kill a person.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
overdose can
I don't know if you want.
Overdoses of may or may not but
to much of a drug can absolutely
kill you.
Okay Mister speaker and.
And gentle lady so so I think
turnover does killing somebody
by maybe stopping their hard
problem in these are something
like that physically going on
with the body going wrong with
the body so then if we have this
facility.
How is it gonna have light heart
monitoring equipment is it gonna
have people qualified to run the
equipment or is it just going to
be a rural and somebody's gonna
do a visual if somebody falls
off a chair and and maybe.
Try to call an ambulance then or
something like that.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's a
room was observation of ability
to administer naloxone in on and
make a regency calls but it's
largely just observation.
Okay and and thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady for that
answer that that's kind of what
I was trying to picture of it
was it was just going to be an
observation of if the people
working in this safe place we're
actually going to help them
administer the drugs or anything
like that and to me yeah Mr
speaker now.
Okay thank you for that answer
that that concludes my questions
thank you.
Thank you gentleman next to the
gentleman from Clovis curry
heard include Roosevelt San
Miguel and you Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker does
gentlelady yields Mr speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from all those other counties.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm just
trying to understand kind of
understand what this how this
program would work would there
be
Counseling and availability of
programs to help these people
get rid of this terrible drug
addiction that they the running
their lives help them by coming
there with the have a
opportunity to turn their life
around somehow through other
programs into counseling and
what they it would that be
required or would that just be
available you can talk a little
bit about the sure Mr speaker
and gentleman available of these
programs are often set up
with either on site or nearby
programs to refer of folks to
one in Vancouver I know about
the safe site is safe
consumption site is downstairs
in the building and up stairs is
counseling treatment programs
are but I being in a safe place
that's the hope is that you can
get people connected to
treatment to counseling to other
social supports and then try and
address their addiction.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
what where would these people
eat and sleep with their recent
attempt made to provide any
saying I mean do they just walk
out and they would sleep on the
street out around that area
would there be an attempt to
find the place in this facility
to feed them we give them a
place to lay down occasionally I
I don't I can't picture.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's so
one it's not a residential
facility or anything for like a
twenty four hour you know with
budget and will whatever I would
imagine that many programs might
have snacks and access to some
food and again these are often
located in areas where they're
already trying to serve almost
populations and at inability to
stay around the facility long
enough that they're stable to
leave.
So that this work can walk in
walk out.
Largely yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady last
question and I know you are you
you bet ask it we've kind of
talked around it but just a help
me understand this.
How would you decide the this is
us where you're going to put
this I mean is is a because not
everybody's going to say likes
like was mentioned awhile ago
non my backyard a good idea but
not not over here so how would
you deal with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
going to be up to the the local
government but these are
generally placed in locations
where you have straight a lot of
homeless and street drug users
and so they are yes
I would think in partnership
with the neighborhood or
business community in the area
that is hopeful to clean up
their area and make it safer.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for your answers
tonight are you about the.
Next to the gentleman from the.
You Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from.
Right level yield to the
gentleman from early.
Please hold it represented.
Hi this evening that these
programs have been implemented
and for sure the Senate on it
states those New York.
Philadelphia.
Seattle.
And
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
I'm prone to do.
With searching for some
statistics.
On drug overdose deaths in
office.
Some pretty interesting.
And let me just go over this
with you in San Francisco.
Two hundred fifty nine drug
overdose deaths.
In two thousand and eighteen.
Four hundred and eleven.
In two thousand nineteen six
hundred and twenty one.
In twenty twenty in Seattle.
The deadline.
For the last two weeks.
The last week of December and
the first week of January twenty
twenty one.
Forty two deaths in just two
weeks page seven all time
record.
For the community now Mr speaker
gentle lady if these are the
programs were discretion about
implementing in this state we
need to have.
Reconsideration because whatever
those folks are doing.
Doing it desperately wrong.
Will the programs be different.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen you provide me the
opportunity to clear up
something that you might have
missed that I said earlier
there's ordinances that have
been passed in those cities but
the programs are established in
is because of those increasing
death rates that they're looking
to programs that are proven
effective in other cities around
the world that they're looking
to do those I do have some
statistics from there's a
published New England journal of
medicine there is a kind of an
underground if you will program
in California we're in a five
year period there was over ten
thousand injections thirty three
opioid involved overdoses all of
which were reversed with
naloxone administered by trained
staff and no transfers to
hospitals and no yes.
Mr speaker lady in none of these
four cities and is the actual
program that's been
Representative to hear that and
none of those places is actually
in effect is that thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct it's because of their
rising drug overdose and drug
use that they're looking to
establish these programs and
they've passed ordinances to
develop a program.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for your answers si no
further debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for the questions and I now move
that house bill one twenty three
do pass we're in final passage
of house bill one twenty three
the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those that a
recorded vote Representative
Chasey.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero those yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Madam clerk.
Yes ma'am this is Representative
Chasey.
How do you well yes
Representative Chasey yes
Representative Stansbury.
Representative closed by a vote
of forty seven in the
affirmative twenty in the
negative house bill one two
three has duly passed the house.
Thank you members.
Thank you gentlelady Mexico that
item number six.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker would you get me
to that point the record reflect
election necessary for placing
House one forty fours omitted on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain to the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this
evening I would like to present
house bill one forty four as
twice amended first I'd like to
introduce our knowledge my co
sponsors for the bill
Representative Maestas rename
Figueroa and remand us.
metals that.
I
see no debate.
Generated close.
Yes I Mr speaker I move that
house bill one forty four as
twice amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one forty four is amended
to vote is now open.
The residents close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Stansbury.
Close my lotus sixty five in the
affirmative zero to negative has
to one forty four submitted just
really passed the house.
I failed to mention earlier we
have item number two a
supplemental on the Santo
calendar this Representative
Gail Armstrong I think we'll be
able to get to that tonight.
I mentioned it's that the gentle
lady from Sapporo can be
prepared when we get to that
item.
Hi next what item number nine.
The gentleman from Rio Arriba.
San Miguel more in Colfax
Representative Roger Montoya are
you ready on that.
Mr speaker can you get me to
that point yes let the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House to one thirty
eight on final passage has been
taken the gentleman to explain
the bill.
Mr speaker house bill one thirty
eight restores funding that was
lost for the finest Education
Act by slightly increasing a
multiplier in the funding
formula.
I would like to remind you Mr
speaker and this body that house
bill one thirty eight is
identical to house bill two
thirty nine from last session
which passed the house
unanimously.
With that Mr speaker I stand for
questions C. noted John to
close.
Mr speaker I the make a motion
that we pass do pass house bill
one thirty eight.
Did I do that correctly you see
it was updating the electronic
board the chamber we have done
that now we are on final passage
of house bill one thirty eight.
The vote is not open.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell votes yes
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes.
Representative close viability
of.
Sixty one affirmative seven AM
negative house bill one thirty
eight has duly passed the house
next that item twelve the
gentleman from Santa Fe
Bernalillo Torrance Valencia are
you ready on that are.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that point for the record
reflect election necessary for
placing House one fifty three as
amended on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
explain it all.
Mr speaker members of the body
house bill one two two three
provides more relevant and
timely information to the public
about campaign finance by
aligning or reporting sure is
more closely with the election
cycle by simplifying
supplemental reports close to an
election.
Providing a new supplement a
session supplemental for any
donations received during the
prohibited.
No that'll stand for questions.
Seeing no debate gentleman
close.
Mr speaker I'm in the house bill
one two two three as amended do
not pass we're on final passage
of house bill one fifty three is
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote
Representative Chandler.
Representative closed by the
sixty seven in the affirmative
zero negative house bill one
fifty three is amended has duly
passed the house.
Next we have item thirteen.
Representative Johnson are you
ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker I'm ready the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House the
one seventy nine on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house house bill one
seventy nine will waive the fees
for certified person to fit kits
for homeless youth.
It will eliminate restrictions
on access to vital records to
ensure homeless youth can access
their own verse to tip the kids
without a parent's signature and
it allows school district
personnel and social workers to
obtain birth certificates for
you they are assisting.
Birth certificate is required in
order to secure housing social
security benefits healthcare and
public benefits this bill will
remove the barriers and four
easier access to a person to the
kids which could be a huge step
on the path to self sufficiency
for homeless youth and
individuals I stand for
questions see note eight gentle
lady to close thank you Mr
speaker and members of the house
I now move a do pass on house
bill one seventy nine final
passage of hassle once in the
United what is now open.
All the members of that a
recorded vote.
Representative Miguel P. Garcia.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Thomson both yes.
Yeah both yes
Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes those close by vote of
sixty eight in the affirmative
zero in the negative house bill
one seventy nine has duly passed
the house.
Next with item fourteen
gentlelady from Chavis are you
ready on that item.
Mr speaker I am will you give me
to that point place.
We at the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one ninety six as
amended.
A final passage has been taken
the gentle lady in her dress
mask.
To explain the bill.
Mr speaker thank you very much
house bill one ninety six as
amended proposes to remove
certain professions that require
oversight of the regional
housing authorities but the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority this training and
oversight for the R. eight
today's is already in place with
federal agencies they have to
follow federal housing
assistance program This bill
eliminates the need for state
funding for the oversight
purposes I stand for questions.
See no debate gentle lady to
close Mr speaker I now move that
house bill one ninety six as
amended to pass we are on final
passage of house bill one ninety
six as amended the vote is now
open.
Those are to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative eta yes
Representative is yes
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
The vote is now closed.
In the sixty seven in the
affirmative zero negative house
bill one eighty six as amended
has duly passed the house.
Mexico to either sixteen in
Germany at are you ready on that
item.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
match up for previous that the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
two twenty four on final passage
has been taken the gentleman to
explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
two twenty four I use of the
school removing a requirement
for community action agency
point to reduce number from
fifteen to a more manageable
number it will also remove the
restriction that a member not
served more than ten years of
this bill house bill two twenty
four will will online the New
Mexico community action act with
the federal community services
block grant requirements and
with that I sample questions
Mister speaker.
Seeing no debate gentleman
close.
Mr speaker I move a do pass on
house bill two twenty four.
We are on final passage of house
bill two twenty for the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed and sixty
nine in the affirmative zero
negative house bill two twenty
four has duly passed the house
thanks of item eighteen gentle
lady from McKinley are you ready
on that item I'm sorry generally
from Bernalillo
are you ready and items in blue
I am Mr speaker thank you will
you give me to that point the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
to thirty one as amended on
final passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker at this our
house bill two thirty one I am
present with my native American
colleagues it's really seeking
to ensure that there are
protections for native American
voters by specifying that a
polling place can be located on
Indian lands in the time of
public emergencies and with that
I stand for questions.
Seeing me gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that has many of the get a four
we get a foreman.
Yes.
House man and I'm sorry thank
you just
is I believe the to to number
gentle lady is two two zero
three nine seven point one.
Zacks.
Mr speaker generally to explain
the amendment.
So this adds an emergency clause
in the event that we have
elections that happened before
July one and it also adds to
language
that we changed with it in the
bill that reflects now what is
the title so that is simple
amendment.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment or objection to it.
Hearing none house floor
amendment number one to house
the two thirty one as amended
has adopted.
Now see no debate gentle lady to
close thank you and I apologize
for that.
Miss it's the late hour but I
now move that house bill two
thirty one as amended do now
pass we are on final passage of
house bill two thirty one is
amended the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato yes
Representative Serrato both yes
Representative closed by a vote
of sixty nine in the affirmative
zero to negative house bill two
thirty one is amended with an
emergency clause duly passed the
house last one item number two
in the supplemental calendar the
gentle lady from cash a score
influencia Representative Gail
Armstrong are you ready on that
item.
Yes Mr speaker would you get me
to that point the record reflect
all action necessary for placing
House Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for us
we'll to thirty eight on final
passage has been taken.
Gentlelady to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight is a bill
that would remove the cap
allowing the for the fire
protection grant Fund to access
a hundred percent of the money's
for the fire departments with
to meet up with all their needs
to meet their needs I'm tired
I'm sorry Mr speaker this was
done on any unencumbered money
would go back to the general
fund and with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions.
Seeing no debate gentle lady.
To close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill two thirty eight do
now pass me on final passage of
house appropriations and finance
committee says to wrestle to
thirty eight the vote is now
open.
There is a close by a vote of
sixty nine in the affirmative
zero to negative house
appropriations and finance
committee sets to for us to to
thirty eight has duly passed the
house gentlelady from Dona.
Thank you Mr speaker we can go
to announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection this order are there
now since the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker good
evening members house taxed
rebel we tomorrow at eight
thirty everybody have a great
night thank you members of the
gentleman from Dona ana and
Otero Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Thank you.
I'd like to take the body.
And tell you that wall appeared
you are my family.
And as a body.
The program first grandchild
Moores granddaughter.
Five o'clock.
So thank you.
This
an enjoyment pleasure.
The only through a great moment
of your life.
You.
In the program today thank you
Mr general what is your name.
Rice.
Seating right.
You may also see Happy Birthday
to Bryce Madrid.
They.
All that
was missing or happy birthday
came legislation Sir one two
three at
the.
At
came to.
Thank you.
Well.
Mr speaker we the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker
first I'm gonna advise all of
you don't quit your day job
that was pretty bad but Mr
speaker I'm I'm gonna take a
point of personal privilege
please.
State your point so I'm just
briefly talk about a concept or
movie called people first
language and the reason I want
to talk about it is the
discussion before this is been
around for over twenty years but
it it came to my attention
tonight that not everyone has
heard of it if we do not talk
about down syndrome people just
like we don't talk about
diabetic your dad diabetic
person or you're that far
sighted person or your dad that
are right person people with
disabilities are people first
they may be a person with
cerebral palsy a person with
down syndrome not down's
syndrome person that is
disrespectful and it puts the
disability in front of the
person thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlelady members
take note.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker so the
house state government elections
an Indian Affairs Committee will
not be meeting at eight AM
tomorrow instead we will be made
meeting at nine thirty AM so we
are affording our members to
catch a little sleep especially
because we've been having a
couple of late night so good
night everyone and I will see
you at nine thirty in the
morning thank you Mr speaker
members take note this
representative Ely self I want
breakfast even their city
starting later absolutely Mr
speaker thank you Hey Joe isn't
done yet Representative small
thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet tomorrow at
one thirty PM thank you Mr
speaker.
Members take note the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee will meet at
eight thirty tomorrow morning
thank you members take note.
Are there further announcements.
members I have not discussed
this with leader Townsend
actually we have a schedule for
next week we are gonna
contemplate next week starting
the floor session at.
At three o'clock.
I'm sorry to thirty that's right
yes sorry to thirty we're gonna
ask our morning committee
started eight go from eight to
eleven Lasser afternoon
committees to go from eleven
thirty to two thirty and they'll
start the floor will try to
started to thirty for
housekeeping in this our third
meeting around three.
said that the committees to
start racking up to thirty so
morning committees eleven next
week.
Quarter after new committees are
to start in the morning eleven
thirty will start the floor
session at two thirty for
housekeeping third reading at
three so that that'll be the
plan not this week this we will
continue for session starting at
four thirty and we're we're
