Representative Garcia.
Representative Harper yes
Representative Johnson here.
Senator Martinez your.
Right here.
Representative asks
Representative is here.
Representative or by your
results.
And chair of the funds.
Members of the crew of the
agreement you're in the hot seat
so when you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair we do have an
amendment to the bill and at I
would like you to be passed out
of.
Yes Representative.
In the middle of chairman Mr F.
thank you Mr chair Senator we
have amended house bill two two
seven in order to of.
To encompass the more.
How the performing.
And what we've done is speaking
the lines of stick to the
provisions that the part to
return to work provisions and
that as a result of removing
those two lines of rate design
lines twenty five to seventeen.
Then we also had
for so primarily the biggest
part of this is the removal of
the return to work please stay
because of the that was
originally prepare.
the.
The refers.
That is correct Mr chair.
That would be the first to the
return to work in the title
from sixteen to seventeen.
But we have also.
Okay.
Senator second.
Offices in the.
All members.
Over.
The book review.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee this is a bill
that I think you're going to be
highly excited.
And and yes the doctor making
sure that it becomes law in the
state of New Mexico the this
bill addresses shortages in our
law enforcement positions in New
Mexico by operate various
incentives to work up in the
profession and so they're to
specific areas that we are
focused on in this field the
first provision that we're
looking at is a manual retention
disbursement from the law
enforcement agents and fun that
will added provision to section
nine to the that will allow the
five percent five percent of the
offices salary after twenty
years four eight concurrently
said to occur in five year
intervals the second thing that
we do is we provide earned
Health Care credits to pay
premiums in full of for each
year after they reached
retirement but continue to stay
aboard and one of the things
that we thought and we after
consulting with many people
including you members community
members that this would be an
excellent way to continue to
make sure that we have enough
law enforcement individuals to
state in our communities to
help.
Us in every aspect of our work.
And Mr chair with that I stand
for questions I do have to it
experts today to my immediate
left into your ride is senior
policy advisor and former U. S.
attorney fees and other than
Daymon Martinez and to and to
lie in to my immediate right
into your lap is the executive
officer Mike Fernandes he's here
with us today.
Well.
I'm sorry your honor
is from Albuquerque's parties
act also she.
Your honor.
This doesn't really bother.
It so all the this is there
anybody here is of course
places.
The one of the things that I.
Thank you that would support the
speak of chair Mister chairman
of the committee sessions.
Just wanted to first thank the
sponsor of
some changes you mentioned
already in the building
district to the better they all
we would like to provisions
regarding health care.
But one healthcare of course
uses a lot of fun to help us
with retention and of course
some of the vision that you have
to figure that out for one of
six to increase the pension
asset to a hundred percent of
the bill to help us retain
officers of of prophecy
committee to support.
The other health yes Sir.
Posters Committee earning.
By the something else but
Division trophies are the Mexico
state police we stand in support
of this bill
as you all are aware of the
still the result after thirty
five the last year with the task
force together
the distance they.
Well that
passwords.
Here.
So we very much appreciate the
the sponsor bring forth this
bill as well as their several
other bills in decision making
matters all of that you senator
Munoz was on the bill
Representative Rehm so we really
appreciate the package of bills
that's come from the work of the
task force and the sense of
distrust for of the items in
this bill thank you for.
There was anybody feel better
leave and we want to the expert
witnesses to.
Also to the test screen here and
the face of.
Hello distinguished committee
members my name is Sean will be
the president of the Albuquerque
police officers association we
do support this bill vigorously
as amended I would like to thank
Representative turned in for
bringing this bill forward I am
often disappointed in the New
Mexico legislature for not
thinking outside the box and not
really addressing the problems
at hand in the state of New
Mexico this bill does everything
this is thinking outside the box
this is how we address this
problem not only does this
provide financial incentives for
a police officer to stay more
time it also provides an
insurance incentive this type of
bills will bring people back to
work it will keep people in
employment and I just can't say
enough good things about it I
hope that you support this
legislation this is the
direction that New Mexico should
go and again I think the sponsor
for bringing this forward we
can't say enough good things
about it we believe in this bill
and I hope that you do to thank
you so much.
Thank you.
You have read the public mood
Committee no Mr chairman members
of the committee we stand for
questions members of the
committee.
The market.
Mr chair representative thank
you for bringing this forward.
I appreciate I appreciate this I
just have one question.
Why why did you strike the
entire section.
Mr of Mr chairman of the
committee after talking to
several members of the union and
several veterans of the
committee of the community that
was a concern about the
difficulty of the poor Smith and
the at the and the fact that it
would take away from the
business and the other
incentives that was completed in
the deal so it was important to
have people to stay on and to
make sure there was two major
items that would therefore that
one being of course the
increase of five percent of this
out every single year and then
of course to have their health
insurance completely paid for we
thought we were doing a good
service and that is our.
Representative Mr chair
representative so can fieri
handle this amount of money
coming out.
Mr chair representative we the
answer is yes.
The.
Fund for the retention bonuses
we're.
Hard he was I intend.
Fifteen years so.
Both this each year has twenty
our paper that.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee Representative
your or third two things that
are going to happen one we don't
know how many offices will
actually stay on each year to
take advantage of this great
program but we're also going to
be looking for an appropriation
from the general fund for the
following years the current year
we're absolutely fine in future
years we we may well be looking
for an appropriation to if you
sent to this fund to make sure
that we can continue to offer
what we have indicated that we
would.
Thank you Mr chair phone
questions.
The.
Thank you Mr chair.
So
Mr chair representative.
I.
From through.
This is a members of the
committee representative and so
that was beyond the scope of the
health so our our our focus is
making sure that those who are
here state and the next step in
our process is to look at that
particular this marketing plan
to let people know how important
it is and the great work you can
do we have a law enforcement
officer.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative
when you talk about the people
they're gonna be here five ten
even fifteen years you don't
really know how many years in
the state.
And you're gonna get in our.
Appropriation through this.
State funds.
Is this going to be a real pain.
Is it going to be repairing all
the time so Mr chair members of
the committee one and
representatives and one of the
things we look at is how much
money is in the fund right now
and how it's continuing
developments investment and so
as we continue to look at the
growth of this fund after the
first year that will give us and
a good example of what may be
needed for future years in terms
of continuing to make sure that
the fund the main song.
K..
And Mr chair representative of
what is the estimated cost of
the state police to retain
officers.
Who have worked over twenty
years.
So this is chair members of the
committee I'm gonna turn it over
to my experts to share that
information with you Mr chair
the committee so our our.
Support for for state police in
particular
retention portion of the funding
for the next fiscal year.
Actually three thirty thousand.
Four hundred thirty one
thousand.
The year after.
So.
The and in a large party has the
pay out from this year
that just occurred so that's
seven hundred seventy thousand
for the next two years
projections thank you.
And Mr chair representative.
Just a state have you ever
thought about why I chose.
Why not long.
First responders in to a bill
instead of just one forced.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative Vincent
you just ask a very good
question one of the things that
we'd like to do is a step at a
time we want this to be
successful this is not been
tried before as we look at this
we have an opportunity to see
how successful it is we will
always remember first responders
because they are incredibly
important to our communities
thank you.
That's all of the research.
This you know that I support
stuff like this thank you for
bringing this up legislation
Representative might quick
question insolvency where we are
right now what if we're each
project.
When would that be as of now.
Mr chairman of the committee
representative arises under just
one I just experts to help with
that those members.
Mr chairman of the committee so
I remember correctly the
original funding for this will
confusing because there was two
different funds are set up last
year one D. F. eight and some
all our retention policy yes
that was funded at five million
dollars last year and it was
ongoing until it was expended
I do not have the numbers for
the exact because those are
currently being paid out of our
office I don't have the exact
amount for house of the Senate
this year and the only find out
after after this meeting
but the wording of the bill.
This to the the the funding is
only get paid out as long as
there it is money in the fund so
there's this initial five
million.
that's in there right now as a
representative mentioned it
would need additional funding
going forward because if there's
not enough funding to meet all
of the state agencies after out
of.
Have to submit their application
every year with their
personality eligible
so that if the application
requires more funding is in the
fund the bill of the current
bill calls for to be pro rated
among all eligible individuals
so there you know less I said
that would be would be depend on
what's what's in the fund
but as far as the amounts of
what there is right right now.
Exactly.
Mr chair of members of the
committee representative offices
so
There's three in a way that look
at this bill is three main areas
and we're changes from ninety
percent to one percent from the
fast
the FIR states that the
actuaries analysis the pair of
Force and importation R. C. will
have a small negative impact to
the pharmacists small so I would
emphasize that.
And then also looking at the
current one year credit for
Health Freeman's after twenty
years one of the things out I
would bring to your attention
Representative is entities such
as the Albuquerque police
department already providing
assistance for health care
benefits we can go into more
detail on that if you want so
that would reduce the cost
overall to the state because one
of the one of the reasons that
the City of Albuquerque's forces
because this is statewide and
the supports all officers
across.
Thank you Mr chair
representative right I think my
questions just so that I could
use my just my number's up
counting type.
Thought process just trying to
see how far we can go and I just
worry about that because
we we are talking about future
appropriations and so my
question was going to be the
next question was we need you
have answered it
was what would happen if we
didn't have
the the funds is to say we want
to of a back to school.
Here right you want to talk.
budget here and we don't have
the money for that my question
was gonna be what happens I
guess now what we you are if
this explained that right this
is going to be a pro rated once
all of the officers that's fine.
As long as you're aware that I
think it's fine with me.
Correct me if I'm wrong but my
next question is hat is that.
transparent to all of the new
officers when they come in
because I mean I also Mr chair
don't want them to sign up
thinking they're gonna have this
bonus and then also on old wait
a minute I don't know that that
those based on on budgetary or
funding availability.
Is a good bill is a good bill Mr
chair representative I'm not I'm
not putting it out those are
just some of the questions I had
and and I guess I'll leave it
with are you gonna dress Mr
chair representative that to how
are you Representative how are
you expressing that to your
employer.
Mr chairman of the committee so
first I want to clarify the
portion that I'm talking about I
use for the law enforcement to.
Of and yes for that
that is.
This is so devious is been
controlling.
Handling that fund the cabinet
secretaries and top a letter
basically telling people they
can put in for it with the finer
side with that information
I know it's early within state
police you know we are very
clear about the funding for
these retention stipends is
totally dependent on the
overall.
Of.
And I
think general information put
out the secretaries all these I
don't know exactly what those
particular agencies put out
internally as far as the
addition mission that they put
out on it but I mean we have
always been very clear that.
You know so it depends on the
funding
for the law enforcement agent
but portion access one of verify
that I'm just talking about that
particular piece of the.
Other questions.
Mr Chairman representative
Representative USCIS
so as I said an APD Albuquerque
police department is already
funding portion of the officers
in the state with this so if you
can just see what we're.
On the ground I would just the
executive officers and this
speaking thank you.
Representative offices in
numbers.
as we speak because of the the
status of Preston's in
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
officers and the department has
already started.
This is.
Four officers there is currently
a hundred and twenty six
options.
In two years well about that.
As well as medical rate that has
helped us tremendously
one of.
Has dropped the chairman right.
One of the for this we're
looking at about five to seven.
This actually helps but the
overall
of the benefits of the
department is one the experience
officers they're actually there
to mentor the young officers and
they're there to assist smaller
departments throughout New
Mexico Health.
Because they're they don't have
as many options as we do so once
they lose
it's very exhausted really
percent I think that will be
processed and a key the officers
continues all so I see that as
for myself how many teachers.
you know everyone of the
department uses word
disincentives for.
Nineteen.
The magnitude that they
that that that they do take part
also we're also doing some
incentives as well timed so all
states will for for helping with
the portion of them are also
popular that's what.
Every law enforcement agency in
the C. Mexico benefit.
Thank you Mr chair
representative that's really all
I have I just made a big deal
structures and to in officers
and and highlighting that
portion of some of the issues
and like like you said
Representative that's good thank
you very much.
Is the number one number one
question I have is where is the
funding come from.
Where do we get that money.
Mr chair of the regional funding
was funded appropriation from
house bill sixty eight last year
Sir.
The initial amount of five
million dollars.
Right.
The.
Representative I hope you don't
mind madam Lim Act somebody's
and you.
people from the are a.
We look at this bill and we look
at the whole issue of water I.
How does this work in
conjunction with each other.
Mr chairman members of graduate
with pair up of the provision Mr
Chairman is the same as a your
bill house bill one of six also
getting that cap for ninety two
percent of the exact same.
The.
This is Phyllis the million on
the to.
Two million dollars in the bank.
Yeah.
The right side but the this is
safe as far as the area.
Mr chairman and members of
similar to one oh six right now
the project Kathy pages ninety
percent so lifting it up to a
hundred percent our projections
is going to take that into
account that first year of in
theory people stayed longer
because there are several ways
to the longer those
contributions are account of it
turns it turns positive over
time that there is a slight
negative hits in the first year
of implementation.
Thank you thanks.
Okay no I have the most of the
committee.
Just a second that.
but what.
Four to seven.
Sir.
Okay and secondly that.
That anybody in opposition to
that to that.
So if you'd go to the the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the appropriation.
This is the.
Back in the order.
We will go to a high of the.
Representative Garrett.
Senator years.
Thank you Mr chair it's going to
be here.
I did the next slide.
Thank.
The.
My my other sponsors
Representative Chandler was
called to the governor's office
I think.
This.
He'll hopefully joining
so hopefully to.
So I am introducing house bill
three hundred the public
employees telework and I do have
a.
Of which is relevant to the bill
would you like to use that.
But it's
Two five one.
The fact that.
The state of the state.
One of the.
To understand.
There is.
That.
What's.
Thank you.
Okay.
Is.
Thank.
Is.
Okay
Representative if you will in a
moment.
Yes Mr chair this limit.
Legislation applies to
as it was written it seven point
policy made public employees
telework that could be a public
employee County city hired.
This limits set up to requiring
policy Maybelline of state
agency employees.
And so down to one nineteen
twenty not stand any statute or
rule to the contrary.
Legislative agencies shall be
eligible.
That is what it does.
I guess thank you.
The the.
Asked for the.
The a for the.
To the point of the movie.
We will have a motion in the.
Almost except the amendment why
Mrs.
As usual the second by
Representative that fast do I
have any opposition to that.
We have to speak up with you
about the two to five number of.
People in the Philippines please
the numbers two two five one
nine five point okay no you go
ahead Representative is the
general fund to make.
The amendment would
have.
For the second.
Okay Representative health that
move.
The.
Most of this you have an amended
bill Representative explained to
us how we're doing here today.
Okay I'm gonna look first at the
bill and then I'm gonna explain
so in men's
The public employee the section
chapter ten our article money on
page one of your bill section
one.
It says notwithstanding any
statute or rule to the contrary.
Voice of state agencies shall be
eligible to perform the
employees work duties be a
telework provided that specific
work tasks do not require the
employee's presence in a
specific worksite provided by
the agency of.
Floyd and the other amendments
on page three.
As states that the rules
promulgated by the board shall
be effective with wild is
required by law that we shall
find among other things for
section K. on page three of plan
for telework under which an
employee performs the duties and
responsibilities of the
employee's position from approve
work side other than the
employees assigned position
location during any part in the
regular rate hours including
from employees residents so that
embraces.
Hello work which could be part
time hybrid or telework and I
think you're probably aware that
the government did executive
order
a lot of state employees are
very upset.
On the caused a ripple.
This robust response in the
media probably you have friends
family members state employees
that you know yourself but but
this bill goes beyond that it
focuses on incredible issue of
teleworking recruitment and
retention of state employees and
and serving procreation the
first thing we look at the
vacancy rates of agencies it's a
big problem and then the larger
issue of society at this time
the work life balance the rural
frontier urban opportunities for
people in our state because of
Tel working people were hired I
have a friend eight employees
working for educational agency
within PED they work around the
state they're actually working
in the communities of the
schools who for teleworking and
no longer can't that that's an
example and people I've talked
to they're not against like
hybrid responsible and
accountable to come into agency
but this is opened up tremendous
opportunities.
You want to say is for comment
many international companies and
the federal government started
doing teleworking and I
understand that almost fifty
percent federal for the lower
you've done your social security
recently it may have been with
the telework or so COVID force
the issue but it also.
That we can successfully
collaborate beyond the specific
office
we've incredible state workers I
think they need to know that we
value then we value their input
but as I said this even this
focus is on state workers but
it's a larger issue that I think
we're all dealing with the
special since we have twelve
legislators with COVID telah
provided right now.
so how do we we recruit and then
how do we retain our calendar
worker one talented worker from
the north west corner of the
state was recently hired for an
agency I know personally super
person three months later he's
resigned because he was hired
with the condition that he would
be able to tell work and hybrid
work.
so.
A couple of other things again
we now have state workers not
just working in Santa Fe working
in other parts of the state so
this is Travis world here New
Mexico and not just start urban
areas I personally believe in
one reason I'm sponsoring bill
is I think you Mexico should
lead the way in this innovative
creative twenty first century
options we want to grow our
economy want to track folks to
work here we want to keep them
here so this is part of that I
believe state workers drives the
success of our state in every
category and all of this is
overweight to really recruit and
retain retain so that's really
all I have to say at this time
on I stand for questions from
the committee.
The this is there anyone here in
support of the.
But not the solution.
Okay I will go ahead and go to
the support of your raise your
hand again almost that anyone
wants to speak on the okay okay
good service.
Mr chairman committee health way
I am the executive secretary of
you
communication workers of America
local seventy seventy six
Representative some twenty six
hundred state agency employees.
Representative Garrett is can
you do this.
I'm gonna tell you that that is.
We don't stand behind our
employee.
They're going to do we.
To go we were twenty four
percent vacancy.
My agency my division.
As a thirty four percent that
is.
My bureau has three of the
positions staff people have left
for other jobs telework is.
The problem is going to be this
and give you a really good
example.
Process season standards for are
going to be to go right out the
window and everything's going to
be a work order.
In the PMO project management
office of deal which which is
part of I. T..
We have a meeting with our
leadership because there's so
much vacancy in the leadership
change they came to us and their
first question what's.
Contract.
Who are contractors and the
second question was where our
contracts they are lost without
the support.
HSD in our the O. H. can't
process contracts they don't
have the staff to follow through
and get a process we're going to
start having contractors who are
doing work stop work because
there won't be any contracts do
a lot of the minutes of it
you're logged.
At I think you get the idea
anybody here has something
important that they want
supported by an executive agency
to support this bill.
Thank you Mr chair committee
thank you for that are to speak
more in the second grade and
also was he W. is seventy
seventy six and a current state
employee as I mentioned we
represent approximately twenty
five decisions across thirteen
agencies in the executive branch
of state government.
And your ears to.
Ask for recently rescinded the
state's not mandatory telework
policy which convert.
It is not the place to address
the COVID nineteen pandemic or
other permanent policy that was
working with you after the
emergence tell over orders were
completed and also workers
return to the office on February
second twenty twenty three I
believe you have heard
remembers the email that this is
not a great experience I use the
term office Lucy those are
novels but some of our members
are looking at coming through
offices and spaces were able to
perform the job duties.
I believe you probably seen LFC
reports that indicate that
reducing the space your total
work can lead to significant
cost savings may not know that
the O. H. and yes you do have
recently as additional spaces
a result or
Representative parents stated
many other major employers in
New Mexico have higher rate.
If it's an opportune the working
options member states like
Colorado and Arizona are still
offering toward and we the state
of New Mexico working conditions
to the column so that we can
fill our agencies to.
In fact we were correcting LCS
you H. they are leaving to work
for the state of California
because their higher ups to work
if you chairman thank you for
taking
All right thanks.
The.
Members of the committee
realizes the state my name is a
Emma green have a master's
degree and I work for the peace.
has taken off work for to be
here today so thank you I am
here that you member as employee
as a taxpayer and those of other
I would like to express my
support house bill three hundred
thank you the Sanchez forward
this year I working is not
customer facing it is never
going to customer facing when we
return to the office that we
have right now we're still not
customer facing we we work with
our constituents we go to them
and their communities we speak
with them on the phone or a
whole virtual meetings there's
no reason for us the taxpayers
responsible for Centel
Representative always and I have
been on wealthy at least we got
mixed messages about are working
location for months as of
February second have replaced
with no windows no air purifiers
levels around our gas money to
health issues will prohibit me
from working in this environment
and I'm not alone in.
Those of us who are.
Endemic of an exclusively co
working and doing it well I'm
part of an amazing team or
educated highly qualified and
have people who also works at
the yield what is coming down
for many of us in order to honor
our mental health or physical
integrity to leave.
We have a great team of fifty
percent agency right out of here
right now and over the HSD is
working hard to course correct
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit and to
operators the equity and
inclusion this return office
order have that full.
Those of us who are in the
basement have had no say and be
there and I never would accept
any job if I knew that was the
working location thank you.
Next.
Good.
We are in this meeting my name
is Gregory I work for the state
currently.
I'm here is because I feel like
there's members of you know my
co workers that don't want to
speak out I'm not one who is to
be public so that's why I'm here
for them as well as myself
mother for I started state
twenty twenty
start with state right
intelligent have a laptop in
working at home the end teaching
my children well tell working.
Became pretty.
and that time was to the the
vision allowed me to spend more
time children the so busy
That job is significantly to the
point where everything that I
can do Peter lives is done
either of DocuSign email I
basically just.
Wait for the email.
Talk to workers so we can do you
know office to make it thanks
for all of us this is
significant to me because I work
Representative been a living
hell.
On the job
at that.
Whether things have changed my
mother is a member of active.
And I have to take on primary
responsibility of children so I
actually go to a different
school I have to use before
school after school programs
graph.
Anything I can to get here in
the mornings get home also ride
the rail runner to help guests
and maybe some might be able so
when we were able to tell work
full time which is two times a
week it was a big deal to me
because I was able to let my
children from parents you don't
have the time to themselves
retired retired and not have to
significantly Landon those two
days again.
My schedule around and do a do
well working getting everything
I needed done at work.
LFC.
That.
Chair of.
Hello I'm a retired state
worker.
And in the
what were the state I watched
HSD rate go from being a
deficiency in the problem to
right now with the state prices.
Work with a long way towards
helping.
in no way will this bill take
away a face to face time between
between this.
Is the word out we're.
Can be done.
It allows flexibility and like I
say it is a sport Committee
elsewhere tension and.
Thank you.
Support okay.
The support.
You raise your hand those of you
who are and so forth.
The.
The change.
Or.
Okay thanks very.
Right okay.
Okay good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name starting with
the young I am an employee of
the department of health and
developmental disability support
initiatives and this causes I am
in support of this bill before
coming into this department I
was in the COVID unit where I
was a hundred percent
teleworking for the last two
years when I transfer to this
department and Tober of twenty
twenty two I accepted this
position because I was told that
I will be teleworking at least
fifty percent of my time
personally I have been able and
continue to serve our
individuals who currently are on
the developmental disabilities
waiver and continue to attend so
meetings as needed per providers
request.
I am also not use my sick less
often if my children or I are
sick our children continue to
have random remote classes I
could be at peace knowing that
if I was at home with my
children to attend to if needed
since I commute to work is forty
miles eighty miles round trip in
addition we were allowed to go
to the office today said of the
week then I was spending thirty
dollars a week on grant versus
now is double as I must feel my
tank twice a week I agree that
in order to serve our
constituents and our individuals
to be available and working two
days a week from the office in
three days at home work for our
department thank you.
Of.
yes good afternoon can you all
hear me okay.
The.
Yes okay.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
and committee members
this is just a very such
coincidence some kind of it all
rural bit and I could not find a
better nobody got offended
better
as I sit here I'm up I'm also at
a state employee that must uses
but as I sit here I was just
notified that a recent higher
actually hers will be residing
she was offered a telework
position in the private sector.
Okay whether people believe in
telework or not the consequences
are very real.
And you know even even for those
that you know
are not necessarily you know
public facing or you know or
work in the in their offices to
workforce
you know is diminishing and
they're finding these telework
jobs elsewhere.
You know so I really want to
urge you to please continue to
support this
You know.
Every day we're left with a have
your work.
thank you for your time.
Experiences that I've ever had
have been during the COVID and
so we to be honest with you
it's just been really hard
Vince so I would please ask you
to consider letting.
State workers have flexibility
because.
Many of us are in this exact
situation where we were
performed so well these past
three years but.
This is really hard so thank you
so much sponsors of this bill
and thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Support to say thank you and
please.
You early off.
Further we have the folks.
Yes thank you hello thank you
chairman al cone and committee
members for the opportunity
opportunity to speak in support
of health bills three hundred
thank you Representative Garrett
and the other Sanchez for
listening to our concerns and
sponsoring this bill and Barbara
meeting twelve your state
employees state of employee of
state government mostly in the
education field
I want to to express my thanks
for everybody knows who speaks
in support of this bill because
what I learned in the two years
or so of telework is that my
constituents principals
administrators teachers they
want me to visit them they don't
come to the to Santa Fe find a
parking space go down to the
basement of the really Ortiz
building for my offices they
don't come down here to meet
with me they call me or they
basically schedule is doing
meeting or they invite me to
their schools to tell me about
the great things they're doing
or to have me come and help them
find a solution to an issue.
My job is not making widgets on
an assembly line that requires
me to then a workstation I have
worked nearly twelve years
supporting educators families
partners and especially the
students across New Mexico and
most times they want quick
answers for me to listen to the
good things are doing.
during telework they wanted me
to answer my phone sometimes as
early as seven AM as latest six
thirty PM because the school day
does not mean their day is over
and I was happy to do that I was
happy to deliver that type
service because this work is
fulfilling rewarding and
effective and it it it's
especially rewarding to me if I
can avoid and often terrifying
commute up Bob how to heal and
back each day on interstate
twenty five.
I think there are many concerns
that you've heard here about
recruiting and retaining good
state workers
and we the state workers who are
loyal right now should not have
to drag the state personnel
office thinking and screaming
into the twenty first century we
have proven that most of them
yes thank you thank you all for
supporting this I appreciate it.
Our rural.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I wanted to see about
recruitment and retention of our
employees.
Recently I lost a co worker with
twenty years in the state four
four
the Human Services department of
California where they were able
to hello work and work within
the state of New Mexico and I
see that we need to be as
aggressive as our surrounding
states and a new and advancing
our fellow work because.
Don't think people are able to
take their para we just had a
big conversation about what the
the police the police.
They're able to work for another
state make more money and
continue to so your honor of the
path so I I think we need to be
competitive and we need to
really
We really need to so the
comments of twenty twenty three
and not really being driven
solely by pandemic we have the
opportunity here who
failure on that thank you all.
Yes.
He added so you in opposition.
Want to speak.
The related stood up in the
back.
Good afternoon my chair members
of the board my name is yes it
would be a state personnel
director.
This issue
with the full.
Not as part of the state
personnel board act the state
personnel board act of yours
Services.
In the executive branch and it
doesn't cover the other branches
of government.
We.
Allowing the City of policy and
not part of the state personnel
board rule allows for the
executive for the state personal
office to cooperate with the
union partnerships on a policy
for rural centres not work rule
does not allow for that
rural which allows for.
There's no cooperation between
the union leadership.
Of the management staff.
there are also some other.
Our cabinet has here that would
like to.
To see.
While also.
This is go online okay you
did carriers and we'll take care
of the rest.
of one species of right there in
front.
The incident there.
Thank you Mr chair and Sanchez.
Were very.
Forty eight reviews of early the
secretary for the department of
transportation and I will share
that previously I was the
director for the state personnel
office and on behalf of the
administration of the state was
the principal negotiator with
both C. W. A. asked me on the
line calls.
And one of the things that are
going to bring up the the
company respected in India TV
employ over two thousand one
across the state of New Mexico
half of which are considered
essential employees their
maintenance workers the
mechanics that construction
workers there as the last two
years they haven't done anything
except work and in many
instances spoke about me on to
help the state really about
pandemic on a number of fronts
and after that it was fighting
fires and and and recovering
from floods.
And what's critical for the
representative on their behalf
rate is on average they make
less than on average what is
tell work eligible workers will
probably okay which means a
couple of things one is we have
to be mindful from an equity
perspective.
That is these entry level
essential workers and in many
agencies like you'll hear from a
little bit all this is a workers
what we do for them all through
the retention and recruitment of
those positions which are not
only in many instances.
Physically demanding pay less.
Be wonderful because you will
lose them to ourselves we will
lose the frontline to do work.
To tell repositions it's also
important to note that one of
the things that we're
experiencing during the pandemic
during caliber All Things
Considered when it came down to
a television to a television
another agency or another state
or federal agency was.
What they were gonna earn for
that other agency was the deal
so we do need that species are
more I think the executive is
made to do that you need to what
we really got into my positions
are going to.
Thank you
thank.
The legislative act thank you
members Mr chair members of the
committee my name is part of the
deal I cabinet secretaries
children youth and families
department I respective bills
being introduced but I stand in
opposition for the reasons
stated I I call these I think
it's important for the executive
as the primary policy
executive to for the state of
New Mexico to be able to
negotiate these matters I don't
think it's a question of whether
telework is beneficial or not
with respect to workers I think
it's whether you want to of
assume the policy making
Authority of these very complex
issues as my colleague of Mr
certainly mentioned the
frontline workers are impacted
by this tremendously we have to
have frontline workers and
children youth and families
department in our juvenile
justice facilities and those
folks don't get a choice of
whether to tell work or not so I
really to be very mindful of
allowing the executive as the
primary policy had of the state
of New Mexico to take this
matter to consider it all the
ramifications of it and to move
forward with with what she
believes is in the best
interests of the state of New
Mexico thank you for your
consideration.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee and
thank you Sanchez the plans I'm
a little bit Perkins V and
secretary for the early
childhood education and care
department we are a department
of about three hundred employees
our job every day just to make
sure that families can go to
work that people to go to work
that we have child care
providers in our communities who
did not shut down one day during
the entire two and a half years
and so as people who are
responsible for administering
and monitoring those programs
home visiting early intervention
pre K. those people are going.
they're serving our families and
we have to order to provide high
quality customer service to New
Mexicans have our staff there at
the workplace and also
collaborated together problem
solving together we set up our
entire department virtually and
having people back in the office
working together seeing each
other in all a building those
relationships because that's
what gets.
We can't build relationships and
we don't have our workforce in
the office working together and
providing them high quality
customer service so again thank
you for your time and.
It is.
Northern.
Thank you Mr chairman and
speaker Ryan's office on the
secretary designate Department
information technology.
Tell work has its place
especially in technology however
the frontline people who must be
there to touch the desktops to
fix the emergency of
communication delves up on
mountains secured federal who
are not.
It's not appropriate to tell
work I just people in mind the
function and a motion guidelines
yes and I asked him to do things
but I do not tell them how to do
those things and I think it
would be a mistake to just the
executive all of the executive
branch how do the job I think
that the that flexibility should
be afforded to our chief
executive and therefore I am
against this bill thank you very
much Mr chair.
The.
Chairman members of the
committee Sanchez thank you for
forty just I am Joburg RCA no
comments secretary for the New
Mexico department of public
affairs I have a four hundred
and ninety employees employed I
made.
During the pandemic a hundred
over a hundred of my employees
for reporting fake everyday full
time sensibilities and just like
my colleague secretary secretary
certificated those are often
employees to have medium jobs
the lower in the pay scale it
was for families.
However I'm also very proud of
the work of my staff to during a
public health emergency Intel
Environment the innovations or
maybe the programs were started
continue but as soon as the
mandatory of tower Policy last
weekend bringing people back to
my agency because we are a
public facing customer service
agency museums historic sites
wipers of forty CPO and an
initial analysis of my four
hundred and ninety one employees
forty one percent would be
ineligible for telework.
Under this particular
legislation however prior to the
rescinding of telework I have
precisely six individuals who
are on call work the rest of my
days need to be about workplace
collaborating providing services
for the citizens of New Mexico
and for that reason I have to
stand in opposition thank you.
Yes.
Members of the committee my name
is terra cotta approx.
Natural resources department
like a lot of my colleagues we
have a lot of the social workers
Department.
We're I have been working day in
and day out through it all hello
work through all the ups and
downs but fought fires they kept
parts of this dental those
important functions and I think
secretary bills actually
wellness it's important that the
executive be able to set this
level playing field across all
of the agencies had different
agencies that and all of these
we really struggle to fill some
of our our system is our
positions where people
constantly searching for a
better result around different
different for the state
governments of thank you for
your attention and I also Santa.
Sure.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of the committee my name is but
there's a there's a and the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
higher education department and
I'm here today with the the
agency that was one of the first
agencies that implement back to
work policies we started
integrating people back to the
office of the twenty twenty one
hybrid and then by the Joe by
June twenty twenty two we were
back at work a hundred percent
and as one of the smaller
agencies we would like to voice
that policy like this affects
different agencies in different
ways of being able to be face to
face as a small agency allows us
to build our teams to work
together need always
and we did learn from the
pandemic and so some of the
things that we have integrated
building block in the office are
family friendly work environment
committee where we can talk
about many of the issues that
were brought up to date about
mental health about how we
continue to take some of those
learned during this time and
implement them into the
workplace and so in person work
has re established a
collaborative atmosphere amongst
our team ensures that if there
is an immediate issue to handle
within our sector we can pull
together directors and staff
members in a fast and efficient
manner in which every single
person is available thank you
for your time today.
Mr chair
this opportunity money display
based on the deputy
superintendent RLD and is also a
director of CID you know with
all due respect Sanchez on stand
in opposition construction
industry is author or this
pandemic we stood strong we were
out there every single day
interface.
Then at home not being able to
use with constituents is a huge
economic impact and that's just
a for certain reasons of all the
the college said we do not.
Mr chair of the committee good
afternoon Mrs the W. secretary
for the Indian Affairs
Department as you know tribal
governments are I with support
of the governor have been
cautious about protecting our
constituents we support the
governor's decision to have all
employees return to work many
tribes nations and pueblos have
also returned to their pose
Evans pointed to ensure private
constituents are supported and
have access to governmental
services support from all levels
and government including state
level services are enhanced when
teams are working together in
person we do support all of our
constituents next we just we've
seen through the pandemic not
all of us have access to be in
and so in person services are
critical in many of our
communities when it comes to
state government thank you.
Mr Chairman representative is my
name is are to set and to have
some Kerry today and current
workers comp director and the
secretary designate for GST and
have that pertain half that.
He calls.
Representative workers costs for
last fourteen months we have a
policy we have six field offices
around the state for the first
time in our history we have
twelve every position which is
twenty seven FTEs are filled
agencies.
Being able to work together we
help mental health and
everything they said we also
started a portable turn it we
found ways just because a
finance person might might be
able to work at all but the
needle collaborate and talk to
the people that their service
health it's been very beneficial
so thank you for following
through by Representative in the
committees of the but I just
wanna give the perspective it is
marketing in our cities for the
last fourteen thank you for.
Those are.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
time today I'm here representing
the department of health and
cabinet secretary Alice my name
is a C. Hawkins on the HR
director for the department of
health we are standing in
opposition of this bill what
we've seen for our agency we
represent the largest F. T. E.
state government agency in state
government so we have
approximately four thousand FTE
of of those four thousand only
about thirty percent of them
would be eligible for telework
we have a lot of frontline
workers to take care facilities
across the state we have public
health workers nurses direct
care these are the areas with
the highest we can streets tell
word we do we played Mr Serna
indicated we have to equity
issues that we have to maintain
we have we're seeing super high
making see results other people
have talked about and now we're
gonna have training concerts
hiring and fill in all these new
vacancies having people in the
office in order to adequately
trained and to provide the
support to make sure they're not
feeling isolated so we need to
go on to that next opportunity
for thirty four cents an hour we
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you for your time.
Afternoon everyone engine shire
secretary of tourism I've been
here today to oppose this bill
you know we have to have to stay
open for tourists to come here
to New Mexico to enjoy our state
parks to enjoy all of our
historic buildings that we have
to offer well I'm deeply
appreciative that we were able
to work at home during a time of
crisis and we're able to still
serve the public we serve the
public better when we are in our
offices and providing customer
service to the answering the
phones and meeting people in
person we've also seen a
significant increase in
collaboration across different
divisions because we are back in
the office we can have those
conversations we ask those
questions and most importantly
we're able to celebrate those
wins together and so just having
those policies such an important
part of building a company that
also for employee retention so
while I think greatly
appreciative of the sponsoring
this before us I do stand in
opposition to help you go to
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my ex on the
directions partner gamefish
stand in opposition to the vote
today also surviving previous
colleagues we have more than
fifty percent of our employees
that have been working the
entire time whether that's how
Mr workers conservation officers
so it's not completely fair to
them that continue to do tell
Wirth
In addition we have as Amazon
just announced this week that
collaboration and innovation
occurs much better more rapidly
when we're out of the office
able to communicate able to work
together and so for those
reasons I stand against.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members should avoid was
sterilized the campus secretary
rex Department and throughout
the pandemic the vast majority
of our employees were at work
they don't have a choice you
cannot work from home and
supervising inmates or
supervised people on probation
and parole so while you're going
through the process of the
pandemic I do have some people
that administrative controls who
did have the eligibility to do
some of that work from home but
folks in the because of the fact
that the vast majority of our
staff cannot do that I felt that
it was the right thing to do to
make sure that those people were
in the office for the majority
of the time and then also your
ship was in the office even
throughout that time because we
need to build out of the to the
constituents that we work with
but to the people that we serve
or cursory disabilities more
often provision with us in the
field offices so
it was important to me to make
sure that we stood in solidarity
with our employees and that we
were there for them but I think
that some points have been made
by these folks and I want to go
back over them but I do think
that that the issue is that
telework can create a very
significant inequity in agencies
where the majority of the people
have to be at work in order to
serve the public and to serve
the people of New Mexico thank
you for your time.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name Mr Lovelace on
the operations manager for the
office broadband access
expansion.
After.
Just want to get my appreciation
response.
They do actual work earlier
stand in this bill one of the
things that we can.
Maybe slightly different from
the rest of teachers that were
offices six zero.
One challenge as part of my
office is being able to grow to
twenty six people potentially by
this next year and building a
culture from scratch is really
difficult to do
environment we actually
benefited last month's time over
the same office again culture.
Thank you.
Lefors then.
Mr chair members of the
committee is carriers.
Secretary of the Human Services
Department.
Like my colleagues and standing
in opposition to the bill states
relief for the same reasons that
were echoed by
as an agency a large about
fourteen hundred employees and
Human Services department you
find life saving benefits to New
Mexicans who need our help we
have been open for of the
pandemic with our front line
workers providing services
putting themselves service pack
risk every day during the
pandemic to make sure that we
continue to serve in the.
Like my colleagues at other
agencies those are the lowest
paid employees at the department
on we try it the Human Services
Department C. eight as one the
agency and that means that we
support WHYY and to do that we
don't believe in systems that
create inequities so
unfortunately this bill does do
that by sort of enhancing sort
of different discrepancies
between pay and circumstances
some of our employees the other
thing I'd like to echo before
wrap up here is that
collaboration we've been back in
the office for several weeks now
and there are some very real
differences on in terms of
problems.
Relationship just Kate through
virtual and for those reasons
have yes opposed.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Part seven of the office of the
natural resources Tracy I stand
in opposition to spell we are
small state there are five of us
were fully staffed
wear many hats we collaborate on
everything
and we're building a new team
and so at this point time is as
we all be in the same place I
stand in opposition thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee approval by via
on the surface and and secretary
designate FOR Department
Veterans Services and I stand in
opposition I appreciate all of
the bill of having served thirty
four years in the military I
understand that and within our
organization be successful it's
about to work as politician
management supervision I think
you take that away from those
folks to be able to do that law
versus a policy and everything
in support of our state
personnel director he can manage
things will policy I think there
are different leave that it's
advantageous efforts to be made
by the reasonable in the future
about how we progress which I'll
working I'm not sure that we're
going to for judges to
government that we're ready to
do all or not and I don't like
the separation between employees
for all one chief and if one
person should be there we should
all be there collectively
together serving focus our
agencies which is our
constituents are finance their
taxpayers there are ones that
are asking us to review will
there do their whole life of
service so all due respect I
stand in opposition thank you.
I did go to the screen about in
offices and.
Can you hear me OK.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is yes but
we have a cabinet secretary for
the department of public safety
of standing up and the Asian of
HB three hundred DPS we have
about eleven hundred employees
and as you can imagine it's very
difficult for us as the PS to
provide direct public server
this wall working remotely the
service that we provide our
sensual to New Mexico and the
we've never been a hundred
percent remote here as a result
we've always been more less than
a high risk.
Federal I've experienced some of
the collaboration hybrid verses
Representative person I can tell
you that since we've been are
present in person the internal
communicate missions better as
mentioned by my colleague their
collaboration is better as
mentioned we we are more of a
team that we are working remote
from our homes I think for me
will is funded.
Well issues and said when once
religious reemphasize is that
you know to have a bill are in a
sense the statue that would set
administrative policies for the
state of New Mexico is.
So that we can get behind your
incensed creating a guarantee
for employees of the they have
this administrative rights we're
at the end of the day I think we
leadership in New Mexico should
be able to.
Turman what is especially
necessary for us to probably run
state government I think that
right should strictly remain
with with the executive in this
particular case why we stand
strong.
Of HB three hundred thanks for
your time.
What what.
All right back to the sponsor.
May I say a few words of
chairman
from.
I'm a co sponsor our own state
together.
Once I wanted to make I'm sorry
for being late and.
Commitment.
This is the way of the future
all employers of choice are now
looking at telework policies.
State government is operating on
vacancy rate approaching thirty
percent in some departments
domino's Division Department had
mentioned that fact and the the
state government wants to be
competitive with other sectors
of government and the private
sector they're going to have to
adjust their attitude in terms
of power it is something that is
going to happen in this policy
will help I think create a work
environment that workers are now
looking for in terms of
returning to work we're seeing
that everywhere I used to work
at Los Alamos national level I
know you all know that they have
a very robust telework policy
they have technicians they have
scientists they're doing
experiments but some of them
work part time at home you know
crunching data you can do that
on a computer so there are all
over the state companies in
agencies that are proceeding
along this line this is very
backward I think to be hearing
these kinds of statements for
people who should be thinking
forward in terms of how they're
gonna recruiting and recruit
and.
Police in the state I would
point out not all department
heads were here I have heard
from department heads quietly
telling me this is a very
helpful and important policy
that helps them retain workers
during to comment and since many
were disappointed when the
governor revoke the policy very
promptly you know at the end of
last year on.
Another point I they made the
Department has made some of them
made the point that we should be
provided all this well if you
look at the law that is
currently in place we provided a
lot of things at least require
rulemaking on a lot of things
for example what how long
someone has to be on probation
if the theory is the executive
should be making all policies
this law is counter to that this
law as it exists without this
runs counter to that concept you
see many things in here telling
the executive what they have to
execute you know create rules on
so I just want to make that
point to you as well this is not
out of line with other elements
of this law and lastly.
they'll be rulemaking there will
be opportunities for the
agencies to develop their
policies consistent with their
work needs not everyone's gonna
qualify obviously for telework
there maybe fifty percent rules
there may be other kinds of
rules and those will be
developed through the rule
making that the department heads
will have plenty of opportunity
to provide input on and I helped
craft it will be a public
process I think it's very
important and so all the
concerns that were raised I
understand but we need to be
thinking forward state of New
Mexico not backwards and so
that's why I was very happy when
Representative Garratt asked me
to sign this bill thank you Mr
chair and I would like at two
points Mr chair and committee
first of all those who testified
and so we don't take it
personal.
We love everybody
The wages for our frontline
workers so when we talk about a
five percent raise some people
go I got the budgets getting
bigger I think you all made it
clear how important it is to
honor those who don't have the
highest position in the in the
system and the other thing is
we're not just talking about
negotiating full time telework
as I understand there's more
than sixteen thousand state
workers I think something like
five thousand six hundred works
hi Brett so we're talking about
hybrid to where people are
coming to the office but not
every day and then I think that
tell workers.
Madam Thea it was twelve hundred
over the word tell us time.
So.
So we're not talking about
everybody being eligible
but we're talking about creative
innovative forward looking
policies
I want to talk about a tax I got
I've no one girl she's thirty
three years old and others
accused three years all state
worker the cream of the crop she
went to the best school out of
state work in two states and
came back home to New Mexico and
took a job with the state agency
she left two weeks ago because
of this that kind of person is
who we want to keep and retain
and so that's why when I say
it's it's not just about COVID
it's not just what the governor
did or didn't do it's what is
going to move us forward sprout
Mexicans and with that.
Well we're open to the committee
questions which were very
excited it.
Thank you.
The
the various start with
Representative G. re.
Thank you Mr chair Sanchez I
want to talk a little bit about
just.
Some issues person not really
clear thank you very smart but
Under your bill who is going to
decide each agency who is going
to be eligible for telework at
this reserve pass Mr chair and
representative.
What what this says is there
will be rules promulgated by the
board so what I would anticipate
is.
Through the rule making process
station will propose how they
think it fast I would expect
that those rules will address.
That the agency has.
And provide some flexibility
obviously is not the one size
fits all approach this is public
safety.
I have very many people tell but
for other agencies the seems to
be about the opt in request
could be made part has to create
rules for their departments you
know that are specific to how
late from their operations okay
just.
Chair representative so to be by
the eighty might be there is an
you've got fourteen dust or all
gonna wanna run their offices
probably a little differently
and have their that said this.
And then.
Yes it is Mr chair
representative so let our
district attorney that I retire
new D. eight said does that do
you have to follow what I
decided to return back to this
process well I think it would be
through the a published person
rule so I think whatever was
decided at that time would apply
until such time some adjustment
was made through this will make.
Representative so Mr chair and
representative this is kind of
what I experience running my
office through all these years
of COVID
I felt that we were just at the
district attorney's office.
chair representative so we'll
see was everybody would be at
work this is with the public
wasn't like an everyday is
office you know somewhere hybrid
somewhere completely working you
know from home and do hear their
court hearings from home so it
was just just kind of all over
the place on however I was doing
it and Mr chair representative
these are the things I noticed
that
I felt didn't work really well
for one of their voices equity
that everybody's discussing I
mean I have my placing why do
they get to you know work from
home but you're making us all
come in and so I didn't lose of
ways to other DA's office room
or in a hybrid model or things
like that so I get that equity
because where you frontline
workers and essential workers
they do feel like they're not
being treated fair
Representative said Mr chair we
you know we were working officer
COVID you know what comfortable
with that but you know that's
what we signed up for and so
that was one issue that we
really had but I one thing I
notice Mr chair representative
there are people yes you can
work from home there are people
who where those lines blurred
between taking care of your
family and doing your job you
see it on soums where kids are
screaming in the background jobs
to park in the got a kid on
their lap if that's probably
eighty five percent of the time
you know that I noticed when I
was doing this this job and so
Representative I'm sure how do
you how do you deal with the
situation where where iris
respecting no someone who
testified said I'm taking care
of my kids and I'm working
overtaking your kitchen you're
not working a full time job and
so that's.
I saw it has so how do you
address that situation what I.
Someone said to me one this the
last the when the the telework
policy was your fault it's not
an employee problem it's a
management problem and I bet you
were really good chair
representative.
What
it is here where you know what
your folks are doing your
responsibility Mr chair and
representative to Madam folks so
if someone is not being as
productive as you might expect
and have maybe seen in the past
when that person was working in
the office Mr chair and
representative then that is B.
whose you to manage the
situation if you're seeing an
employee who's distracted with
children and that you know in
the background it behooves you
Mr chair representative to
manage that situation it it is a
harder situation to me I don't
disagree with you gonna have to
have a be very proactive and do
the work but the upshot is still
have a.
Your workforce of more loyal
workforce and have perhaps we
can chip away at some of these
high very high vacancy rates
that we're seeing across the
state Mr Chairman representative
Mr chair and representative
talked about the that they can
see your percentage of sense
I guess because I guess I would
say state employees have always
have high efficiency right I
can't think of a time when there
wasn't so you have some type of
research or something that is
showing you that people are
going to leave thank yes hello.
Or that these vacancies were
there prior to all this.
Mr chair and representative I'm
on probation and the first thing
we look at is the rate the
funded vacancy rate and they
range and there's people
audience who could speak for
their respective agencies they
run from twenty to forty nine
percent.
For all different reasons.
Sure and I know that they're
working on that.
But this is.
Something that's working against
it and departments you know
agencies very sure Mr Chairman
representative again it could
also be a just a product of
where we are in our state right
now there's I want to government
handouts but there's a lot of
government handouts of the which
is not to work and and I can
also be played into the vacancy
rates good.
Mr Chairman representative
there's been a lot of stuff
written about why people are.
And one of the things is during
the COVID they realize that they
had a work life balance just to
and one of the things that
frankly progressive thinking
employers have been doing is
recognizing they have to adjust
to that in offering telework
policies so.
Mr chair representative
companies with telework policies
are invoices that companies
without are not.
Okay Mr chair representative how
do you deal with the issue of
leave of because one another
problem I found that people
were.
You know thank you said the
answer their phone a lease and
our office sometimes they did
have court and I found out they
were in love it or they were you
know driving the kids around or
do whatever they need to do
their taking the required leave
and that lead just stacks up and
they get paid out later when
they leave how do you control
the.
Again that's something if you
knew somebody was madam chair Mr
chair and madam Representative
was.
Running errands during work
hours that this is something you
have to me
address and but yeah I will
point out to that the upside on
telework policies Mr chair and
representative some people work
more.
You know because when I'm home
and I'm working I'm working up
and down probably twelve hours
because there are breaks Mr
chair and representative but
people are putting the time in
and they're making a time when
they know they have to take your
child to play group or something
and then they work after dinner
Mr chairman.
The.
We're running right at three
o'clock.
The we were just thinking of a
lot of time.
Funds as yours.
And we have to be a workforce
the.
And we want to continue here
until four thirty on the ile
we're going to be coming back
after the floor shift.
So keep your question if.
So the size as possible and to
speak to a would I would really
appreciate that.
Yes Sir Mr chair
Change.
Of the only last thing I would
add Mr chairman is that I also
agree but a lot of people talk
with the collaboration
you don't get that type of
collaboration on that working
from home type environment and
so
that is an issue I also have
item but because we are short of
time Mr Chairman past passes
thank you for your questions
earlier answers Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair ugh to
questions on short.
earlier it was said Mr chair
representative spotted one of
the.
C. W. A. P. pull that.
they go she aided with the
executive and the group that if
this would be a permanent policy
I'd like to see if.
The state person has a comment
on.
I'm sorry.
The new look.
Repeat the question record
earlier this okay was fun trick
into that state.
Yeah I we if we have someone
answer the questions that.
earlier it was it was said by
somebody from the communication
workers union that they had
negotiated with the executive.
The the telework would be a
permanent.
Also.
I'm just curious why you now the
governor's going back on.
Chair representative there was a
policy that was negotiated
between the executive and the
I could.
Your.
But it was not ever negotiate a
permanent policy with the policy
the nasco sysco US is gonna be
implemented or rescinded at any
time.
Mr chair representative here you
representative this.
Egolf shaking their Mr chair can
he respond to the
non okay we need to have that
composed.
Oley with that Mr chair okay.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives.
I was super presiona cabinet
secretaries.
Press.
Is the they come in here the
first thing they did was look at
you to because they were
standing in solidarity they do
not like the bill but the US
economy respect and I appreciate
that.
So after listening to what I
what I heard from the cabinet
secretaries especially since
they do work for the governor
that kind of makes thank you so.
Why not why the state person one
not Municipal.
Mr chairman and representative
We specifically focused in on
state agencies many of the state
agencies do have telework not
these under the state personnel
office but the office then the
courts and even the legislative
branch we have people working
teleworking and hybrid working
thanks so yes elected to state
agencies thank you Mr chair
representative.
I'm trying to figure out how
does I think we're fiction open
up Pandora's box is what's
fixing to happen with this bill
because what is the T. look like
working from home.
Mr chair and representative this
is only if you read in section
one it's only eligible if their
specific work tasks do not
require their presence in a
specific worksite and finally
stress that many thousands of
these employees don't work in
office.
If you work for DOTA you're
working on a road you're working
on flood prevention if you're a
social worker here spending time
with people it's not you're not
necessarily at all in an office
efforts so very diverse jobs.
Mr Representative Mr chair
representative but if you think
outside the box a little bit if
I'm not there working for DOT
and I'm in the piece of
equipment sweat my tail off.
And then I see my other
colleague over here working from
home I don't sweat the more only
go to that position one works at
home how do I get there.
Gonna do for all the other
positions out there that
nobody's gonna want to do
because everybody wants to go
home from home and take care of
their children and.
You know not have to get up
early and take a shower and get
to work they just jump all
dressed from here to here.
I'm telling you this folks
because I've done it.
I'm.
And I'll do some this is a full
disclosure.
And I I think that I was
productive but I will act.
And my position was I taught
fire impairment improvements.
And how do I do that.
Working virtually from home.
so.
I have a text will go.
And it made me think out the box
again Mr chair representative
the people.
Like the the lady over here that
was working in the basement you
could contractor.
Maybe she goes under contract
she's not an employee because
we've been we've been handed out
a total of a parent.
This is a time of.
And we're trying to make jobs
really good for those people
that are going to work and maybe
we can take some things away add
some to the contracting side and
then we give people some
options.
That's another way to think
outside the box.
And.
Mr chair representative of what
I've been here and a lot lately
in the last thirty days and I'm
brand new freshman.
Legislator is.
A whole lot of equity and
fairness and I don't see a whole
lot of equity and fairness in
this building.
Because people are gonna want
that golden job where they can
stay home and take care kids if
I have the chance to stay home
and take care might stay with my
kids not even some people might
have grown kids were there just
they don't have to get some of
the baby Center something.
I appreciate.
I appreciate the fact that
people want to stay at home but
the other thing I started
thinking about is what about the
security so.
Let me let me go back what about
the the neck Network act connect
to the so where I live.
I have the I had a particular
Kerrier.
And my particular Kerrier
whenever I started to assume.
Before I knew it because I love
the middle of nowhere
before I knew it halfway through
the month I'd used up all my
data and they have you don't
have speed and then the talk in
like you own people can
understand what I'm doing so I
have to change carriers what
about Mr chair representative
what about the connectivity of
people internet and and office.
Printers and things like that
what we do Mr chair
representative of all the
questions that the work in this
capital you know you can't send
text messages and the computers
don't always work it's a problem
with our day and age and so some
of those things just have to be
addressed equities there's
various career paths question is
is first license he doesn't want
to work in the office he doesn't
want to lower he wants to be out
so supports personal choice what
people feel called to do
professionally.
Thank you Mr chair
representative if you need to
come.
Well Heidi's either
so I I wanted to make another
example with C. ID.
So C. ID I have
for the construction industry.
So I have a ton of calls
whenever the pandemic was going
because a lot of contractors are
not is and I'm gonna say this is
nice I can't they're not just
take you they don't want to get
on the computer they want to
take a day drive to Santa Fe see
lives in a nice restaurant and
go get their license renewed and
they want to talk to a person
they're still that level of
people and I know that everybody
you know a lot of people's want
to join the next century you're
you know get in to twenty twenty
three but they're still a lot of
people that there's a lot of the
one hold in touch of paper a
newspaper and read it but
there's a lot of people that
want to look at it on online so
The last thing I want to say Mr
chair representative is I think
that a state worker is a public
service we had to serve our
public and we have to do it face
to face and for that reason
unlike your cabinet secretaries
for that reason I respectfully
can support.
Yeah we're still friends.
Representative nobody's saying
that lawmakers there was no
question okay Representative
Tavis of the.
Mr chair Representative as I
think in this to the discussion
of the questions into my mind
and I think it's our.
was whether or not everybody
every single state worker would
be allowed to tell telework
right and as I understand K. E.
agencies.
To probably get their rules and
the terms for example the CPS
worker of work from home
obviously they can't whether or
not a nurse to work from home
obviously they can't some of
these other
job duties or or hi please who
work outside you know they're
not gonna be able to
to telework anything that that
that basically is almost a.
To use that kind of almost logic
right cannon who can't do it I
don't understand the the equity
question it's been brought up
some workers understand that
their jobs will allow for
telework and others.
I I Mr Mr chair of members of
the committee hi I have the and
we're for annexation we have a
small step during the COVID.
when I worked at home.
I did it stop working so I went
to the office because then there
was an intent to my work I think
the question about whether or
not workers are going to work
you got to trust your staff and
you know if they're being
productive and if they're not be
productive then you have
recourse for that
I think that you know telework
is good and I I I agree with the
statements that have been made
that we need to move forward and
basically allow state workers
also do that it could possibly
affect the number of workers
wanted to
state or state I do think that
we need to raise our wages thank
you.
They were gonna have a.
The Roland Mr chair thank you Mr
chair figure do I need to say
what I will say.
Eight.
Working in the program and if
you want to walk in the
classroom were this to this in
that we're going to allow my
collaboration with what can once
we start doing the work I
connecting with it may last time
maybe for Michael workers when
they when they first meetings I
could push my last I'm to the
point I think of their needs we
have so I committee perspective
on their word and it's where we
have to make up for some of the
maintenance work for me here is
flexibility.
And sure every work is going to
be the front if we compare to
one another there are there are
reports that I have to be in
person that is more than eight.
You can find and I think I A.
like technology very profitable
we need and I think we need to
start being all things to
different types of work I like
the flexibility part I came on
board from collaboration would
be very happy to see what I'm
going to put the fiscal right
someplace that doesn't happen to
see one of the if you hate when
you go through the qualifying.
Your job and I'm happy to see
one another so Public CD
Department prodigy like I'm and
there are different types of
jobs thank you thank you Mr
chair thank with the last half
thank you Mr chair
representative you know first of
all wanted state I appreciate
you guys bring this up and
listen to those people who want
that
and it would be deep respect for
many people on the you know
you're trying to do the right
thing I think
I think there's a couple tough
is a member.
Over the same things that
everybody else did I think the
word shall is a tough is a tough
word sort of can I think come in
and want to make some comments
because I want to kind of move
forward quickly but I I.
We.
Representative that we need to
be left to the executive branch
this is one of those things that
I will agree with.
On you know
because it gives us flexibility
and and and sometimes we put
things in statute I think
Representative Chandler has some
some of those correct and there
are some factors that are in
place that I think.
For me personally sometimes
The instructions of the concrete
and is difficult to change
doesn't make this is first water
feet
I also agree that that is some
of this is going to go to the
future Mr chair.
The problem with that is the
elephant in the room is the
hotel hello field communications
or whatever.
Virtual.
We're competing also with the
whole United States.
We're already having issues Mr
chair representative to retain
people when we go virtual
I mean I I would I was knocking
on doors I remember getting
really surprised one of my
constituents
he was a problem he was a from.
It was a of the native from New
Mexico he was living here and
sure some what are you doing is
it working for the state of
California.
And so being
right now and I don't want to
run off for invoices I want to
be here I want to answer the
phone of one of the following
three at Mr chair representative
I remember one of my
constituents timing yeah I can
get through this agency or that
agency I said I told unfortunate
I can't either and so it was
suggested that you know
something that we were dealing
with what what what I'm value is
right now somebody wants to go
work if that's your choice you
want.
Work virtual there's nothing
stopping them from working
virtual right now for the state
another agency in the and
possibly the
The possibly a of the work that
the desire to do I hate to say
it see and this is why it makes
it very complicated because we
don't want Mr Representative to
lose these people
but the same time I think it's
vital for us to to maintain that
of.
I think there's a lot of.
Right area that I think we saw
pros and cons on this whole
issue and a lot of them brought
up
I I I think this is a way to the
future but until we can really
compete the state I think it's
been reiterated here Mr chair
representative that the wages
and for New Mexico to be a
competing place have to be
raised for sure has to be based
I personally Mr chair
representative everybody's
talking about you know how do we
keep our our workers happy on
telehealth is just one tool in
the toolbox
I'm in a business where we have
to respond twenty four seven
Kelly K. fireman policeman
whatever Mr chair representative
for I understand.
But keep it short.
Shorter was going to.
Mr chair representative
This guy is one.
so what what I'm trying to tell
you.
Offered by increasing my my pay
roll.
Is to substantially and created
more positions to make our our
staff more flexible to take time
off and to be with their
families I find another way to
do that and so I don't have all
the answers I I really like what
you're doing but I can't
supported today.
But I appreciate you doing that
thank you Mr madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Clark for
bringing this forward all right
came in a little bit late I
question before I go there I
just want to go on record of
Stating a few things I I really
do appreciate receiving.
Question for from support and
opposition.
But what I appreciate even more
is hearing from constituents.
And I've heard.
hundreds of times either through
phone calls or emails from
constituents and that matters to
me and so that's that's really
important.
I also have and the belief that
need to be prepared for the
future the way the future is
here as.
The other co sponsors engine the
way the future is here I know my
son is in the in the field that
does all work from home because
it is work that's the way it
works and I've never seen thirty
four year old work harder than
the castle he's managing this
baby he's got two laptops are
and then when he has to for in
another way he goes another way
and so here is everything on the
phone this is moving along I
witness this.
Many of constituents multi
tasking but being extremely
effective.
Could that it is their ability
to one be respectful of their
employment.
which they're very proud and
happy to have and then also.
Being respectful of you know
what that they have that on
there in the workday
I think it's important to note
here comes my question that I
don't see anywhere in here that
States that.
Really it's still gonna be.
Mr chair representative at the
discretion of management and
supervision so the supervisors
and managers to.
Dean worries for hold on hold on
one page what shall be eligible
is that correct.
Yes.
Mr chair and and Representative
it's provided that specific work
cast do not require employees
presents some would be real
making it might be that they
have to have a performance level
you know I don't know what the
rules state that doesn't pertain
to the specific job duties so
that's the Mr chair and and so
that's my point is that we're
not asking for any of these
extreme scenarios to you know to
accord  or that we're given
still.
As per the job duties and dean
asked her how the legislative.
Forty four.
It just worked out for that.
For.
Wanted for thank you.
And then just one final point.
I also recognize that there's a
very fine line between what we
do statutory provided me and
what the executive office I
really did appreciate nineteen
of the twenty seven departments
coming out of the hall they were
nineteen present but there's a
total of I think twenty seven
excluding the governor and.
so that that to me was noted
well thank you Representative
infants important to note that
because we also have to
acknowledge and respect that you
know we don't want to step on
that through the school of.
Close.
But at the same time we're not
doing anything that's outside of
the realm of what can be
negotiated.
Workforce whatever that may be
and that was again the problem
and then the final point I want
to make is that.
I also want to honor the fact
that we have collective
bargaining around the state our
public employees are covered by
without party.
This is actually a matter that
should be included in my opinion
every collective bargaining
contracts
and I think.
Yes it's out there it needs to
be included in the bargaining
contract.
The meeting subset of employee
and for your.
role and responsibilities four
years ago.
Collective bargaining contracts
that's a perception for.
So I encourage them to be
included.
And I agree to.
Wages across the board thank
you.
Our employee partners place
productivity is not just based
on the budget but the wages most
important.
And the budget and if you can
increase the productivity and
the happiness of the employee.
Happiness they have to be happy.
Every one of us have to be
happy.
Do I was happy monitoring three
computers last two sessions
being able to have one for each
committee that are going to run
for the.
We're going back and forth it
was then and for some people
that were observing the
externally but.
I was happy.
because that's what so those are
all important points that can be
taken today hello I think I
think that
ultimately we have a
responsibility to on the force.
That's really the ultimate
decision we're not taking sides
and I don't want to heavy
handedness I support for the
opposition there's no room for
them we all have to do our job
and make the decisions to make
so that you clarify and make
Preciado thank you so much.
Mr chair question table.
That.
The the promotion movement one
of the things that I have is.
I think.
This needs to be looked at a lot
more.
I think this is something that
needs to happen but I don't
think it needs to happen this
way.
I see this as being to the next
book in the interim thanks to
the state because it includes a
lot of different movies things
we we had a listing for no more
than percent of the system we
don't have a system right now
for the question of board thank
you something like this
Who is the decision who face all
I mean the biggest explained I
love going to thirty days this
session from my house that feels
it was the low for that success
what is the as I did at all from
but I have to follow CDC
guidelines I'm not supposed to
be a live debate some.
They gave me that option might
not.
The
that I think.
But obviously I'm here today
because we don't have that
option I'm not say so I don't
believe
it but I really think the other
is willing to accept the motion
to table and the list.
Representative the growth yet
you want to speak after being
the service for me.
After you Mr chair of a state is
that I want to also Linden on
the debate before you left
systems okay well I would still
recent deal with that before I
think it is.
So go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative long
from the most of the table the
folks discussion just knowledge
to motion but it takes
precedence over the motion but
it meant.
So if they're still makes at the
discretion of the chair thank
you for your but it does not
stop.
That's correct Mr chair final
order you a table in motion.
Not being made to stifle debate
they're still debate.
But the you know Mr chair and
representative you know one
thing that wasn't raised in the
debate at all is the role of
private sector.
In terms of of unfolding these
hello or ships and and how that
might play into law.
What you're trying to Mr
Chairman representative
regarding the public's a.
and
so that kind of.
These are lingering thoughts in
my mind.
Any because that was never part
of the debate.
And I think it's important
because I don't have the answers
Mr chair.
You know in terms of whether we
have high quality telework
initiatives within the private
sector.
That would cause.
Federal of individuals in the
public sector two days
transition.
You're in or out.
You know and any other thing Mr
chair that kinda.
Came to my mind during the
debate was.
You know
there is a lot of.
So that tells us for the lottery
stuff.
No the twenty some years and
I've been up here.
and that some of the sectors and
up and up here that long.
But I do value was shared with
the committee.
and one thing that also didn't
come out Mr chair in the state
was this issue flexibility.
And of the secretaries that I
know that I have I respect for.
Really value their contributions
as a leader of a state
institution is that I can't see.
These individuals Mr chair
the rating.
The quality of an employee.
in terms of their contribution
to to their work and and and
their contribution to the
Department.
Because.
These individuals I know for a
fact would do everything in
their power to retain.
Quality workers.
In that that meant you know
bending over backwards.
To keep these people on board.
And but at the same time
addressing whatever scenario
situation there and Mr chair
that does not allow them to be
present at the work site.
You know and
and and Mr chair and what I
gather from your presentation
was that there is no
flexibility.
You know that is kind of our
region.
A region line that exists and I
I I can't see that.
You know I really I really can't
see that that there isn't that
flexibility in some of these
departments especially in some
of these departments for I know
that the leadership of the
department is highly sensitive
Mr chair.
You know to.
The needs of especially high
quality individuals at all
scales of the pay scale or at
all levels of the.
This is not the ideal Management
dies the also the rank and file
of the secretaries and janitors
and you name it.
You know and because Mr chair
there's there's there's value in
in the different.
Sectors of the workforce in our
the funds.
And and and you know when you
have a quality individual you
know and and it's one of these
individuals that is always.
Willing to contribute.
To participate in the process to
not put up with any kind of of
the type of situations that
does the hands of the integrity
of the work force or the
integrity of the institution you
know that in their own way Mr
chair offer constructive
criticism even to their boss.
You know and even if it's coming
from a janitor in window washer
your high level management you
know and
so you know for that reason
Mister chair I I I really agree
with you that.
That this bill is not has good
elements but I feel that they
need to really be fleshed out.
And be looked at holistically
and I think we didn't quite get
there is here to check.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
I have a motion to table.
Like if.
Our motion to stay level headed.
Second
the for the the second.
Okay tension.
Are ready so Representative
Chavis no.
Representative Figueroa noted.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Lara not to table
Representative Johnson yes the
table and I'd like to explain my
vote Representative Martinez
yes.
Representative right yes.
Representative at us.
Yes.
Representative Vincent yes to
table.
Vice chair of Roybal Caballero
no to table Representative chair
on Qantas yeah.
For.
Seventy four of the bill as we
gave all the Representative done
you get a minute thank you thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative bringing this
bill forward I
I went back and forth on this I
support tell work but I also was
concerned by the many
departments that came forward
and expressed their concern.
And especially the department of
Indian affairs you have to
support my communities in rural
New Mexico.
And my community is not have.
This is Chris's.
It's not Santa Fe so I think
that two eight to take those
communities.
And frankly I was a little.
I was a little.
You know we are not fact is some
just in rural New Mexico and I
took that personally so this
bill would have been going to
government elections fair and I
would I was going to ask that
you know very respectful in your
presentation because we are
concerned about our communities
and we are concerned about
taking them forward me may be a
little slow you know we may have
transportation broadband all of
those issues but it's not that
we're going backwards we're
going forward as well thank you
Mr chair was believe that was my
words but I totally understand
thank you everybody for your
questions thank you.
Thank you we'll go on bluemix
via.
The.
The case.
For.
Your record.
The the.
And students should read.
Is.
You have to.
Representative.
The sales.
That was enough for.
You Like It.
Thank you so.
This year.
We we got to go.
Thank you Mr chair reading a
are.
I do.
One witness available for
questions if you need.
We have a that is conflict but
by one enough of his current
times.
So Mr Chairman I have
read more I have two that are
still left for the educational
requirements for for money left
after to DO from here are eight
which is definitely some are is
here and she did a lot.
It looks zero eight one.
It would only take two days if
we had started with just where
we begin with allowing members
of your target create special
needs trusts for their from
Is your social security benefits
so she has suffered from chronic
illnesses for and so he really
needs to be able to provide for
economic ferry so the bill
remedies this dilemma and those
other state retirees like him
and.
There's some of the analysis by
our that would Services
Department brought up the issue
might not the federal
requirements if the field was
rafted so that has to.
Fireman's so that's not an issue
and
Revert to put any language
from federal law in this bill
because it federal life changes
we would have to amend so we
didn't address that particular
issue that HSD raised.
But touring some of the some of
the redress.
Supplemental trust to the
federal law allows you trust
requirements automatically
conform to federal law without
state legislative amendments so
I think
would you like to add anything
David or thank you for.
Mr Chairman representative.
Okay.
Okay we're ready for questions.
It is on to and he is the my
for recalling students.
The identity but here's part of
the deal.
Anybody in opposition.
Of those elements more in favor
of the bill.
The.
All the
yes the Emerald yeah.
Thousand.
I would invite self.
I'm not sure if that's me or not
yes yes.
Read through.
That's that's that's actually
not by.
I don't know what that is.
Of.
I'd like to speak in favor of
this bill.
I approach.
The use of course.
My name is Dan Haggard and I.
The one that Representative
Chasey referred to I have a
daughter who is unable to work
and I really thought that when I
retired in state government
several years ago that by taking
less of my yari retirement and
leaving Suzanne a my daughter at
the my beneficiaries that I was
doing the right thing for her
and for her well being and
future after I'm no longer able
to care for her
however what I learned at
Representative
Chasey referred to by I I
learned that when she picked
when I passed.
And she begins to recieve my P.
the R. a budget that will put
her over the threshold for her
social security benefits and she
will no longer receive medico or
limited very limited financial
benefits
So
the this this bill would allow
my budget that to be deposited
into for special needs trust
which now has not in it but
in the future it would serve as
the be helpful for
my retirement benefits in order
that she would be able to
continue receiving her social
security benefits as well.
So.
Chair.
Go to.
Thank you.
We're ready for questions Mr
Chairman okay committee members
Representative also thank you Mr
chair Representative so I think
that I think you hit on the last
point Mr chair representative.
I I know you're trying to make
that sort of make sure I
understand this so of this is
unbearable lost trying to create
is that right chair
representative.
dollars to.
To account for that.
I believe that the the version
was go back to.
This allows for go back Senator
am to cover that earns about
compliance with federal law.
Okay so Mr chair representative
of the reason I ask is because I
just want to understand I think
I got a grant with a thought
understood in the conflict at
the that I know between federal
and and and federal law is.
And I don't believe I understand
I think I understand this that's
why I'm rambling.
So Mr chair representative let's
go back here in order to to
qualify for some of these.
who's Medicaid.
For instance.
You can't have so many dollars
in liquid assets of this.
Representative income.
Well income Mr chair and also
the grasses are city more than
two thousand five if I
understand that rise I Mr all
right Mr chair representative Mr
chair representative I'm not
sure because of the rest okay
that's what I'm trying to
understand is expected
us all of the other Medicaid
requirements right.
Can you better informed me that
Mr chair representative so that
you can clarify that to give you
a very short answers and maybe
maybe educate.
Mr chair representative I this
bill just references the federal
law so it doesn't change any
kind of federal requirements for
the trust so we don't get into
this this of of what is required
because we don't want to have to
come back in amended if if
federal law changes and we don't
have any effect on on the
federal law.
Mr chair we stick should wait
trying to do anything with
Medicaid requirements or normal
eligibility maybe ask we might
my question long Mr chair
representative I guess what I
was trying to say is.
This is trying to keep someone
to keep their budget.
Eligible for.
With past with his income by re
organizing that so what we
rephrase that we've added a
better job of that you organize
it in a manner that they can
still receive those benefits
without disqualifying them from
another benefit.
That makes sense Mr chair
representative I think this or
to whatever distribution.
Yes.
Okay Sir.
Mr chair in these Google and
general counsel P. R. A. I just
real quickly these types costs
are regulated under federal law
which is why the bill says exist
sorry and and one of the
benefits of the stresses that.
Income goes into them are
counted against individual in
determining their
qualifications.
Public systems.
For.
so they're they're really
already raising federal law the
bill just references that those
types of vehicles are a new form
of of of of of events teacher
received the money from the.
sister.
It doesn't represent that is
because I work with you were
vocal trust to get to help
people
maintain the qualifications for
Medicaid so I was trying to it's
it's doubling its jumping I in
that round those trying to grasp
exactly what you were trying to
to to do it it gives you a
better understanding and I
wanted to just verify that
because it so if that mechanism
is still in place Representative
they would still be eligible to
use those liquid funds that
would be exempt from.
exempt from normal ordinary
income is that what I'm
understanding is Representative
tunes they're they're not in the
so I got it
I got it is because it that was
my where I went I'm sorry I
been asked that question so does
try and figure out of the can
get a hold of that and and
explain right so.
I guess this is been this would
only be for those disabled
of children that are disabled
from birth Mr chair
representative or could they
become disabled at the time of
the qualified for this sorry.
Mr Chairman representative from
anyone is eligible for a special
needs trust.
Okay maybe Mr chairman and
Representative us of this bill
he would only be for a pair of
retiree who selected a
beneficiary of that was disabled
to continue receiving their
benefit benefit upon their
passing.
Stand opposed to terrorism the
reason I asked that question is
because we have some sometimes
when I'm dealing with some of
federal agencies will says state
VA they have specific in
a specific requirement that they
must be Mr chair representative.
disabled from birth in order to
qualify so that was my question
or Kidega gave me enough the
is an automobile accident and
find themselves in a in a
disabled with the qualified if
they were disable later on in
life and and still that those
first my question was Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative Jim it
would have follows the federal
lawsuit whatever okay this
qualifies under the federal law
it really makes the.
Supplemented Trust Fund the
beneficiary of the retiree I'm
good thank you Mr chair
representative I'm good.
What.
Question for this thing that
we're doing here discovery in
the a person that would fall
under the supplemental needs
trust everything down to the
retirement plan to stay in state
my mic correct that's right it's
return because.
The others.
Every fund is.
Don't miss out of some.
Okay thank you so the only
question I had I'm ready for
most of.
What is that another question.
No I do have questions
little
the commotion going to do for us
and to the second level of the.
The.
You are available.
Thank you Sir.
Number CF what.
Really well I.
I.
There was ask about ten
questions which were nice to me
on the board.
Representative Lujan is.
Was here.
This.
Yes.
What was.
This is what happens.
This call.
Just.
The school.
Which is.
Since.
Of
some rare photos here earlier.
If you.
Okay.
They replace.
These.
Williams.
The Senators okay Senator.
Increases.
It is.
There's.
It's okay if.
You'll.
As
representative will one.
Visitors.
Chairman.
Today.
We are forced out house bill
three twenty nine.
Cation.
So.
With this bill those immense
section five two dash one one.
Workers compensation act in
order to provide the directors
of the Indian BCA with
discretion to impose a maximum
violation of the first from one
thousand dollars to twenty five
hundred dollars the amendment
only address the ability of the
direction to our accounts
pursuant to the act.
No.
The vision are being changed.
Well primary we apply to cases
where it is is required I.
Workers compensation insurance
but the business has failed to
attain the insurance.
And with that.
Mr chairman I think we can.
But with your members of the
committee my name is currently
assistant general counsel for
the company creation
I have.
In the
third quarter bill Miller
Representative.
The audience there anybody here
that's part of the funds.
If anyone and opposition.
To the one.
The on screen.
Thanks for our offices in.
See none.
Okay you handle it.
Right Hey can definitely.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Stephanie Welch I'm an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty in the
center supports this bill an
increase in this penalty amount
is important to ensure that
people are complying with the
workers compensation act and
it's providing the services that
it is intended to to workers to
ensure that they're cared for
when they're injured and also
that employers are all paying
into the fund and the
administration costs we thank
you for your time and urge your
support and passage of the bill.
Right remember the committee
representative at that thank you
Mr chair representative of what
was what's the rationale behind
going from a thousand five
hundred thank you Mr chair
Representative with the purposes
for
I was there two different finds
that we're looking at our and Mr
price for compliance and safety
cases are are using in general
fund risk administrative fines
for them forced me cases is
present workers compensation
Mr administrative fines what the
main purpose is to get that
compliancy in place we're
finding that with the basis of
their they're looking at it very
soon compliance my expert
witness what to add to that.
Mr chair.
She Peublo.
primarily is that we're talking
about and this is actually a
fairly small number of cases or
cases where the business owner
not complied with
okay for sure.
But we are finding often times.
But what happens is that the
businesses feel that paying the
fine is is easier than actually
getting workers comp insurance.
Hello so for instance in cases
thank you cases where importer
is required for.
provides the agency with that
they have the safety expense.
The final those cases could be
up to five thousand dollars and
that really is a deterrent to
failing to provide that safety
inspection whereas it's not
necessarily a deterrent for
these businesses we have has
businesses level is that
you know for sure stated by the
discovery so it is we want to.
work with the center to get the
insurance rather than we might
complied.
What we don't want I we Mr chair
representative as much as we
love to contribute to the
general fund this is our call
our goal is to get compliance so
that workers are protected and
also so that
employers are.
Thank you Mr chair
representative is there a
reserve the frequency of.
Of this going on of of.
Employers not caring workmen's
comp unemployment Mr chair
representative actually it's a
fairly small number of cases we
have our compliance bureau is
the first line of the
interaction with businesses and
they checked to see that the R.
five.
in twenty twenty two through
September they opened four
thousand two hundred ninety
eight cases of those they only
refers purchases to the force.
So for the most part our agency
can work with the businesses and
get them into compliance with
only those tough cases where the
really refuse to comply.
Mr chair and representative out
so that that that it doesn't
give the protections for workers
and into the industry as well so
hi this is needed.
Thank you and Mr chair
representative the reason I ask
that is because it's hard for a
lot of contractors give only at
level playing field because some
of the stew play by the rules
and a lot don't play by the
rules and nobody's there to
regulate them adult ever so I
know of I know of contractors
never was and never squeal on
but we are in competition and
sometimes I think that'd be way
easier for me just to you know
chemical road not not do what's
right because they're making a
whole lot more money than I am
but whose regulates who's gonna
regulate this.
Chair Mister chair
representative so you're
absolutely correct
the vast majority of these cases
the urge to important euro our
construction industry
businesses and often times they
get referred because there has
been a workplace accident and
there isn't insurance to cover
that work in those cases the the
uninsured.
Our son has to kick in and cover
that and then and then we
actually turned around the lack
of those businesses so that
money for reimbursement so it is
actually much cheaper
Representative.
Mr chair representative for them
to get the insurance that is to
have a workplace accident.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative of some of the
question
You know I can understand I
understand
The support
Violations of the provisions of
the workman's comp that but.
What does it mean
Where it says any person who
fails to file or.
What what what do you mean by
that sin and what is a report
related to.
And why is or.
It was not filed is faster.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair representative Garcia
in Mexico free inspections for
businesses who are offered to
cover
Appropriations.
A premium of a certain amount
are required to do a safety
inspection business for
businesses that are are high
risk are prepared to do a safety
inspection and are required to
report that to the workers
compensation research we
actually do the state inspection
for free for the.
Thank you Mr Jeff so at the.
Do I have a.
For the work.
Mr chair here very shortly.
Questions.
By the way was for I think
you're gonna give yourself up on
how much you enjoy the thirty
day session with.
I'm gonna give you up and all.
This law
more
chair representative.
you might might there's a I I
just looked it up because I
thought this was important.
And I said I wanted to know how
many businesses actually exist
in in New Mexico there's only
one hundred sixty one thousand
nine hundred twenty one
businesses as of of December so
out of those what I'm reading is
here twenty four out of
compliance with.
And your twenty twenty two is
that correct.
Mr chair representative you know
those are the ones that we
actually refer to the Ripper
Department euro for for the.
the cases through September of
twenty twenty two our compliance
bureau opened for those.
Those are present every single
case those are the ones that you
know we as an agency are aware
of and percent okay so Mister
chairman I think really my only
question was I mean some of this
that you're you're referring
that we do these free
inspections and all out I don't
think a lot of small businesses.
That was.
and I made.
To worry I think a lot of them
have well let me rephrase that
we we ask you questions chair
Representative of all those
violations that you gave four
thousand.
Our muscles technical violations
of what of not reporting or is
it non non that they haven't
purchased
the the the insurance.
Mr chair representative those
are from our compliance bureau
so those are cases where they
have not acquired the required
Fischer.
Sixty K. and a lot of businesses
Mr chair representative don't
have to do state inspections
it's just that this is the
richest surgeon Representative
threshold for the amount of
insurance.
okay so okay that's I just
wanted to to understand I mean
to me every I think it's
important for us to a lot of a
lot of businesses Here
Representative I just wanted to
kind of get clarification on
access all twenty four here on
my the F. I. R. that's why I
brought that.
and then I wanted to show you
know I think.
As a representative of this four
thousand
it's about two and a half
percent of businesses are not
compliant with.
I
I just I think I have some of
those.
The same concerns on some of
these
fines when it comes to some of
the the.
complies with maybe doing a
report or something I think.
It would be nice if they had a
of time offense Hey you know
what I realize I have to do this
and is there anything in this
bill or do you have anything in
place that helps a first time
offender so they can string
themselves out.
Sure Representative that's a
good question Mr Representative
yes absolutely our agency works
these businesses nobody goes
directly to.
our office works with them there
is full compliance K..
Sixty days that we're working
with that.
is that even when they do file
the fourth of your files charges
with the director we still
continue to try to work with
them to get them into compliance
so often times even when we file
a director's position
we will cancel that hearing
because the businesses come into
compliance so we really do work
with we would much rather focus
is coming to compliance the
pace.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Level four.
Yes.
It represents you through with
all of the second for
Representative Lujan.
Do I have any opposition to that
motion.
I'm gonna have to say yes you
have
to.
We'll
take the role of.
Yes.
Okay Representative this is.
Zero yes Representative Garcia
yes.
Representative yes
Representative Johnson.
Yes Representative Martinez yes
Representative three yes
Representative that us.
Here the.
Yes Representative sentences and
no for an explanation from vice
chair Roybal Caballero yes
share.
Yes.
The.
In the tenants just
a moment yes.
The committee wanted for the
proteas the reason I'm voting no
Mr chair is.
Mainly because I I do
Representative a lot of
businesses and I think that
there to be more of a of
prevention instead of the
punitive especially the twenty
five hundred.
And the thousand not you know
what I would have to re work
that and maybe maybe make it
progressive or something like
that but there's a lot of people
that do a lot of hard work they
really don't know how to get
governments come rather see
something happened where you're
teaching them how to get it or
there was some kind of
representation you know because
I'm telling you they just have a
hard time.
And I seem get behind on their
taxes and stuff not because they
don't want to pay their taxes
just because I know how to.
And we can't afford somebody of
spam so that's the reason thank
you Mr chair
The only way the thank you
thank.
Re hearing.
By the end of
This
is a.
Thank your.
What we're doing three twenty
thirty three.
Three.
Okay.
Some of the of the.
Okay.
The thirty for you every day
just let.
I remember reading I simply for
membership under the last thing
I would.
We would be a lot of it would
that would that.
We've we've.
Of here is that the.
The lady that.
The real.
This is admittedly if you get
my.
So the lead through the
questions you have.
Share with that we stand for
questions thank you Mr chair.
Me so I'd like to first CM.
Hands of anyone opposed to house
bill three thirty two in the
audience.
Anyone opposed online.
No position.
the committee or online so all
those that are here in support
of three thirty two right here.
Online anyone in support of
three thirty two House Bill
three.
Okay so there's no one online or
in the audience in support so
now to committee Representative
three you madam vice chair of Mr
chair of the question so what I
wanted somebody what I wanted to
live actually just one opt out
of tax.
For the purpose.
Of the chair representative
just a just a where I mean if
this truly is.
Clean up because stroke funds
that
if you look at the the reference
the bill includes section one in
reference to to another section
further in the act of course
we're not amending that's what
doesn't find itself in the bill
which meant I would be putting
language in that bill there is a
section allows for memberships
Ms Oakes if they become elected
officials have quest magistrates
in New Mexico.
however you look at what's in
section one of the bill in and
reset magistrates shop from
members and and what we've had
over the years is that direct
conflict saying elected
officials can exempt themselves
magistrates must become members
which is right.
and and for the last yeah it's
it's been years there's an.
That.
Chair representative six a it's
been years and there's been
confusion between
just see if Mr every now and
then but the way this ministry
has been to allow exemptions.
For
each of those magistrates of
the bill itself doesn't proposed
change the current practice of
law it just gets for the what
we've seen is something that
because the reason
here.
Madam last year Mr chair experts
so that led to facial can opt
out of receiving their
retirement receive retired well
opt out of the member of the act
all together that would need
the great success.
Representative.
Vice chair of that committee
elected official or just this is
just for me.
Madam chair representative the
only one that there's confusion
about is the magistrates because
of that other language in the
act but it does exist for every
elected official it's just
that's ever cost confusion
because there isn't a completely
which is currently in the okay
and and vice chair and Mr chair
and expert don't take this the
wrong way.
Is this is this going to affect
like is this something that you
will are you going to opt out of
this bill that would affect you
directly forces just cleaning up
language I don't know you're
taking a retirement that
districts.
well I mean there's no way that
I would not.
Interventions are well.
But what would happen if they
were convicted administrative
today and I had the let's say I
have the to be sure of state
the.
The members of the house and
we're for sure if I would be
of that before the game the
provided that.
It is not from.
T. R. A. so that I can not that
of the of our.
Okay so that is not a vice chair
Mister chair something you can
so you can collector tyrant as
from the share of but you will
be collecting retirement or.
The madam chair.
So it's kind of a way to allow
us elected officials continue
working and not quick retirement
but still came from your
previous retirement.
Madam chair members just after
that right right okay
It's.
Sure stand thank you.
Hi there any other questions
from the committee.
Scene and.
All Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman expert of I'm
confused by something in the
fiscal impact of course it says
cara indicates no fiscal impact
they interpret this law.
As district will continue to
make contributions.
If they opt out of being a
member of which I don't see how
that's possible but it says that
I have.
So why is that fusing to them
Madam chair representative the
the master retiring Act although
you opt out of membership it
doesn't say members made
contributions as magistrates
with contributions
contributions office and
contingent upon membership so
they want to come back
exemption they would still be a
magistrate but it is not a
member so madam chair and
experts so they still have to
pay it.
Madam chair representative yes
And I would also note yeah.
The the I. M. E. S. I. R. about
no fiscal impact
also has to do with the fact
that this is how we are the
administrators with such a
change.
Act as just like I language so
that the
Thank you madam vice chair that
was my only.
I have another question
Representative Thomson we do
pass a secular
state.
Once is.
The second.
Is there any opposition.
Any opposition.
Just.
Whether
To the.
The.
Ninety nine.
Four minutes here.
But.
Members of the.
I will let.
Mr scandal they let you guys
know what we're on.
Of house of.
House Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Of.
Chairman I think you have all
before you point four version of
there will be twenty five so
this will discuss that later but
Representative Figueroa had some
concerns so we fixed it but
they're not ready at that we
just thought for.
To brief the committee on.
This time
so
so starting
On page.
Questions the.
If the.
The New York Times.
Well this is a.
Section four we struck one of
the.
And you know what.
Stop.
On section four we struck the
what was in the Original Bill
and the department of the
department which was
that.
The C. IDE will enforce this.
Statute under the form licensing
act and then the CIA the will
itself.
In accordance with state rules
that that covers the CAP's
ability passed rules and enforce
this legislation and while we're
at on this page up on section
three definition Hey.
this is what caused the point
three and a point four version
I think some friends from the
Miami
community.
Had some.
Concern about the the openness
of of Kate and so in point four
we're gonna strike work furnace
and then add after that sentence
subject to the regulation of the
US department of labor's mine
safety and health
administration's more clarifying
thing.
then Representative I'm sorry
that's it for page for.
Team member rate to.
and again that's this
clarifying.
then.
Them on.
Okay so then so now let's
address Representative.
Rose concerns so in section six
the question was asked of.
What about inspectors
certifications where does that
come in and again I would just
point you back to the end of
section five I it says a person
shall not expect convictions
within the building unless the
person is inspectors certified
by the division pursuant to the
elevator safety XO PM the
inspector certification will be
covered by rule
and that includes public comment
things like that so again it
goes back to the C. ID's
according to to make rules.
So then moving forward and
section eight.
there what and and again this
was Representative Figueroa is
question today
registration insisting
conveyances we have we taken
care this bill of New conveying
what about existing ones and so
that the department came up with
language so after online
eighteen after the word requires
a new sentence that's that will
say the division shall inspect
and issue a certificate of
operation within ninety days of
operation
for I'm sorry.
Action or written inspection
report the tailing cove
violations property owners or
lessees shall have sixty days
from the date of the inspection
report to remedy any violations
for the inspection report so
again Representative Figueroa
thank you for bringing up those
concerns and I think the I think
the point five version will
we'll cover those those issues
and and in the same paragraph
After January first twenty
twenty six often they shall be
registered and then we'll answer
there and to to the server to
get operation so in that way we
take care of the existing
conveyances of will be yours
in the state of New Mexico we
also changed in this was Mr
Chairman your analyst brought
this to our attention
in that same section January
first.
In the original bill was twenty
twenty five.
State now to twenty six because
we moved up to the
implementation date.
that we here.
and then.
See Mr chairman rushing all the
giants
All and then in section nine
there's been a.
And actually this is this is got
fixed here but
again we're tying the elector
for that elevator mechanics do
will be consistent pursuant to
the construction industry
license.
At.
And that was all Division
language.
Also.
This.
So section.
Section thirteen in the state of
our all fees and Representative
Figueroa you brought those out
of where these and so we we
insert that section thirteen
The enforcement section in
fourteen
In goes back to rules that the
agency will
Will adopt in terms of appeals
and things like that and then
also some of that is also
covered by other states also
see.
typically.
To like this.
And Mr Chairman.
The changes and and again point
five feet probably
later on tonight or tomorrow and
so.
Sanchez thank Mr chairman I do
want to wait till senator was
and I I.
Your
patience.
Okay so everybody's got
you that whatever the questions
on what's happened so far
is rooted here this Thursday as
hopefully we can do all of that.
Given that the more than four
years.
The work from the with the
following one on four four
hundred four point five.
We will hear you Services for
photos and the she started a
strict with your with your
current.
This is what will be best for
you to give you guys the fibers.
Verges.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you.
Okay the.
