Here.
Representative Madrid.
Here.
Morning Representative
Pettigrew.
Let me just make sure not in
attendees.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Garcia.
Chair Rubio.
Here.
President.
I'm here are you.
Being there.
I think people are and we have a
quorum madam chair.
Okay great I'm.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started then I know that we have
a pretty full agenda but
What will start with right now
is house bill three as you all
are pretty familiar with the
whole group will have Tom give a
presentation and then we'll open
it up for questions Tom are are
you ready.
Thank you yes.
Right.
okay hi I'm sorry my
everything's changing here on my
screen.
Yeah it was probably Mario who's
sharing.
That all right okay thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee for a brief
introduction I was honored when
least McCutchen Ortiz McCutchen
the chief clerk call massive I
would fill in this year for
Charles Turk and
use band compels transportation
committee analyst as well as a
friend and my mentor for the
past twenty years I I hope that
he'll return next year and
continue as work for the
committee I hate I have the
ability to retire at some what
some would consider young age it
makes me very grateful to the
state of New Mexico I had a very
rewarding career I can now enjoy
the benefits of my hard work as
well as that of of the four
generations of my family of
lived worked and served New
Mexico subsets stated my prior
career was spent at the New
Mexico state highway and
transportation department and
I've been active with this
budgeting process the entire
time.
you know about twenty years ago
or so the committee determined
that a group of technical
financial staff Representative
the house transportation
committee the legislative
finance committee the executive
through DFA and the agency would
get together and iron out the
differences in the three request
recommendations that are made
earlier in the year I believe
around September this is similar
to the set up for the state
revenue consensus group in this
this committee our technical
group generally would make a
consensus recommendation to this
committee for the house the
transportation appropriations
act
I'd like to thank Connor
Torgerson for LFC Diego Jimenez
from the DFA secretary Santa his
management and financial staff
on the specially Mallory man's
in our minds are not as who is I
am real proud to have watch grow
from a budget analyst do I
believe now the administrative
services director for the
agency.
This year the difference
in the in the budget are are
pretty substantial the
differences are not between the
various recommendations but in
additional money that's
available for budgeting so today
I'm presenting those differences
not as a consensus
recommendation rather is
considerations for the committee
to evaluate for example in those
past years the variants and
Revenue projections was between
four and eight million dollars
this year due to comment on now
owns that differences over
twenty five million.
The past re budgeting a fund
balances generally averaged
about two to five million this
year they exceed thirty two
million and most significantly
our special appropriations that
are made to the Department.
Being retired I each and can now
say this every year I beg for
money only to be saddled with
two point two billion dollars of
debt and a one time
appropriation to rebuild sale
del Norte interchange times have
changed the rain gods are good
to the Department in laws of two
thousand nineteen special
appropriations equal two hundred
and twenty five million in state
local and maintenance projects
in the laws of twenty twenty an
additional hundred and thirty
five million was granted for
state roads and LESC volume
three LS States illustrates
these appropriations the
projects and probably an
outdated balance of about a
hundred forty million from those
combined appropriations and M.
D. O. T. can provide an update
to the committee at a later date
on that so there's there's more
clarity and not
the current proposal in the LFC
volume one laws of twenty twenty
one provides an additional two
hundred and fifty million for
state and local projects that
the committee needs to discuss
without madam chair I would
present the issues the request
that have been made by the
department through discovery by
the technical group and
afterwards secretary Santa and
his staff as well as the LFC DFA
it will be available for
questions madam chair I will
adjust this proposal at your
direction and the guidance from
the committee for the amendment
for House Bill three so starting
with the handout on page one
item number one.
You'll see that the original
NMDOT budget request
The LFC recommendation and the
DFA recommendation the bottom
lines were we're all the same
there were some minor minor
differences in the
recommendations in one case the
LFC moved one point three
million from salaries in the
highway operations program to
other costs the department felt
that they had sufficient salary
and benefit money in that
category to cover that
difference and there was also an
adjustment from the DFA
recommendation of six hundred
eighty one thousand from
salaries also to contracts in
the modal program both of those
because of the high levels of
vacancy the department agreed
that these adjustments where
appropriate and some of these
changes became the starting
point of the recommendation
do you what you in a place to
understand where I'm at if you
look at page five you don't need
to change as more right now but
if you look at page five and a
hand out you'll see a column
that says LESC at the top this
was the starting point because
all of the recommendations at
the same numbers for the
programs as well as the total
for the agency so we use that as
a starting point to that adjust
to adjust the budget to where
we're at today and so
What what happened is the state
road around road fund revenue it
gets revised every six months by
the chief economist and is
reviewed by the state revenue
consensus group in June of
twenty twenty the revenues were
considerably lower partially due
to no comment impact and then
during the during January these
revenues are revised to result
basically in an additional
twenty million five hundred and
seventy thousand dollars a
budget capacity and so you will
we'll deal with that that's a on
on another page which which I'll
get to in a minute
and then also on I'm budgeted
revenue
there are there was an
adjustment
And once again in the state road
fund balances of twenty six
point four million and this has
to do with basically balances
that were in the state road fund
that that can be re budgeted in
fiscal year is generally the
state road fund does not revert
to the general fund it reverts
back to itself or the department
budget I should say.
so all together these revise
revenues in fund balances
created an additional fifty four
million nine hundred ninety one
thousand dollars a budget
capacity from the original
recommendations so with that
more if you don't mind turning
the page for for the screen.
And and then I will go through
these differences
The department of transportation
is requesting the use of these
funds to supplement their
original budget request the
generally the.
The number are the first one to
go over as you know during the
presentations record mentioned
that five million dollars of
additional funding to purchase
heavy equipment
would be in order so that that's
one item in the in the budget
that's lines for you'll see then
they also put twelve million
dollars which is two million
dollars per district into
contract maintenance and fuel
supplies district four believe
they could they could get more
against some work done on their
own with fuel supply money
rather than just contract
maintenance and so that's the
five hundred thousand there are
basically making at and even
divide between the the districts
Let me move my screen here just
one second.
The next deference
that they have requests is for
rest area improvements they're
asking to put three million
dollars of of those new revenues
towards rest areas
The community they they've.
Ask for an additional million
dollars in communications this
funding will be used for new
external website and marketing
campaigns for and that's you'll
see that online line as well as
on line
nineteen and so that that total
is a million dollars they're
also asking for two hundred
fifty thousand for electrical
elector Chargers for an electric
vehicle pilot program.
The the next request is for a
hundred percent state grants of
five million that's on line
fourteen and there are
basically
Okay I'm sorry then and the next
I seem to have skipped one
there's a fourteen million
dollar request or hundred
present state construction
maintenance and federal land
projects
and so.
The next requests are for
planning division
of course seventeen fifty and
those will be used for.
Pedestrian hybrid beacons are
hawks on the road will roadways
statewide there also would like
to use my to prepare the way in
motion stations they've ordered
request a three million dollars
appropriation for lied are which
lacked the data throughout the
state for road conditions.
Let's say there's a two million
dollar request of state funds
for the traffic safety programs
and this funding will be used to
increase enforcement and
supports safety initiatives to
address increasing trends such
as except that's been speeding
distracted driving and seat belt
usage
they then another fund balance
exist I believe this is with tax
and Rav
which is the way distance
permanent permit identification
fund and they would like to move
this over with the approval of
of PRD for contract I mean
they've already got the approval
expensing for contract
agreements which which takes
care of you know the the port
permitting processes and also
for desperately needed
improvements on the port of
entries those those buildings
are all very very old and and
outdated the department is
collecting considerable new
revenues since they took over
this program and so so this is a
positive thing for the benefit
of the whole state road fund and
then there are also restricted
fund balances you're at the
bottom that you'll see and those
it restricted funds are funds
that are are legislatively
mandated for certain programs
and so those will be
Those are are for their own
purposes local government road
Fund which gets issued out to
local governments in the form of
contracts the highway
infrastructure fund which is
used to pay off debt
I believe that goes back to the
US to eighty five four lane
project which is many years old
now
the state aviation Division
there's additional money for
that for contracts and then
traffic safety funds that
there's some additional fund
balance R. restricted revenue
that will go to contracts with
the department is proposing
these uses for the additional
For for the additional four five
fifty four million nine hundred
ninety one thousand one hundred
dollars
this this takes the agency or
the LFC recommendation
recommended request from nine
hundred and fifty eight four
hundred and sixty one million
two billion
third of billion thirteen or
fifteen that in that in market.
Okay.
By Representative Powdrell
Culbert I got it.
Okay.
So the next page we'll go over
the.
we'll go over the programs
basically the department is
divided into four different
programs design and construction
with three hundred and fifty
eight FG
there are salaries and benefits
is figured at a of vacancy
factor of twelve percent
and there revenues are as shown
their their total request for
that to that division that
program is six hundred and
twenty three eight hundred and
thirty seven point nine million
with the additional new monies
the next program is highway
operations this is the largest
program and this is you know
literally wear the boots at the
root the road you have eighteen.
one thousand eight hundred and
forty employees in that program
they're factoring into vacancy
rate for salaries and benefits
of twelve percent and the revise
requests for that program is two
hundred sixty four million eight
hundred and eighty two thousand
point six.
The next program is the business
support program which is it all
of that.
Or appropriations throughout the
state date exist in the
districts of the job mostly the
general office and that includes
everything from general counsel
to do I. T. various
administrative financial
functions there's two hundred
forty nine point eight positions
in that they're factoring of
vacancy rate of ten percent
with revised total amount for
that program forty four million
eight hundred and fifty six
point seven million.
The next program is a model
program this includes all of the
public transportation requests
the rail and the it and the new
ports of entry program traffic
safety it will programs like
that their factory in of HSD of
ten percent for a total request
there are revised of seventy
nine million eight hundred and
seventy five point two thousand.
And then the agency total there
was no change in the number of
FTE requests their requests for
two thousand five hundred sixty
nine point five positions
and their total budget for the
agency that balances to all of
the revenue streams that that
are out there
started at five nine hundred
fifty eight or sixty one point
three it's been revised with the
new revenue and expenditures by
fifty four nine ninety one point
one for a total budget I should
say at historic budget of one
point zero three billion one
point four and fifty two
thousand point four
this is the largest budget that
I've ever seen and it is the
great.
So then additional language if
you'll move on to the next page
more if you don't mind
additional language in the
budget generally these are
languages language they get that
at throughout house bill two in
different places so that they it
covers different things like
budget adjustment request
keeping keeping things in line
with the five percent of forty
that's granted statewide
and and various other things for
example you know the the NMFA
working with them on on his bond
indebtedness and the fees they
get associated with that
and and then just the ability to
request additional budget
authority should more state I
mean more federal funds become
available so that the department
always has the advantage or the
ability to maximize of those
funds the federal funds
and the ability to match them as
well and so with that then the
next
the next section to look at is
the special appropriations
Yes.
It.
The department is it is very
clear that they they do not want
to earmark these funds
and another issue is is that
they they would like this
language of of the NMAA Mari I'm
sorry I'm on page
I believe a month instead on.
Yup
and and so they they've asked
for the language to stay similar
to what was in section nine laws
twenty twenty which which gives
them you have forty to move the
money around to various projects
and so that that that's the
language that you see they are
the opening paragraph what what
we asked of of the department
was if they could provide
several those to projects they
were not really sure our they
they thought that they they
provided two different lists one
one was for maintenance projects
that could get out within the
year these are projects that you
know could be delivered the
money could be expended all
within the year and so that's
that was the less that that you
see published year they also
have additional projects that
they've put out before called
major investment projects
roughly about six hundred
nineteen million dollars worth
of projects and so so right now
what what we're showing here are
the maintenance projects that
can get out quickly and expand
the money.
And then finally there is a and
and this appropriation was for a
hundred and fifty million with
with any earmarked for the air
service program should that
legislation passed
and and and the final amount is
there is a local government
special appropriation it's a
hundred million dollars plus
forty million dollars of.
A motor vehicle excise tax.
This right now the department
has been working on developing
rules for the use of local
government
funds there are there are
several categories there's a
local government road Fund
and and then there are also
local government appropriations
there there's a bill being
introduced to create a local
transportation Fund and and I'm
not sure of the exact title of
it but but but the point is is
the department is working on a
roll that will give a very clean
and clear process for for local
governments to submit
applications the requirements
for evaluation and and then the
basically how the projects get
awarded out and the projects get
close it out you know probably
several low to.
You know the capital outlay
process if you want to get look
at it in those terms
the eligible projects include
environmental and other studies
planning design construction and
acquisition of rights away and
it as well as building you know
actual construction of from
highways streets roadways
bridges and crossing structures
I believe there there also is a
part that will allow for trails
and and
and maybe beautification
projects but allows the
department to address that as we
finalize this language so anyway
what what they'll do is they'll
establish these rules that that
will make a very consistent
process throughout the state
getting the input from the
regional and metropolitan
planning organizations and their
ranking of feasibility and
project reading us with the
intent of these projects being
able to get out and closed out
in a timely manner making these
funds available are making these
funds.
Putting these funds to use for
the public instead of sitting
sitting stagnant in some account
and so with that madam chair I
will turn it over to you the
department the committee are we
had like to handle that.
Thanks Tom and thank you all of
I know that we have folks in
attendees that if there's
further questions that I can't
answer we can certainly bring
them on I have Representative
Lundstrom and Representative
Madrid.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Tom I do have some questions
and
Ardingly adjustments page if we
could put that back up for the
fifty four million.
As I Mario.
All right thanks for.
That that **** now madam chair
us
recommended adjustments I did
have some questions and maybe
all gotten into some detail on
this that this is in addition to
what would have been the base
the base for this upcoming year.
And what we're talking about
district contract maintenance is
that going to be distributed
equally among all the districts
toppers that specifically for
one area.
Madam chair madam chair I I'm I
told that that's to be divided
two billion dollars per district
there's the eleven point five
and then the five hundred
thousand which is one district
wanting to do a little bit of
their own work and so my
understanding is it's two
million dollars per district
okay and you know I asked last
year or better better
understanding of what
communications was when I looked
at their budget
last year and house
transportation.
At that time I can understand
why we had so many people that
work for a quote P. R. people I
still want to understand what
that is particularly sense
reading more money into that.
I'm looking at the state road
fund balances also
We're looking at will item
fourteen a hundred percent state
grants at five million is that
also something that's going to
be divided or is that something
that is already been identified
for specific project.
Madam chair on and madam chair
on both of those issues I I
would ask the D. O. T. to
address those
because I don't I don't have a
clear understanding as well
there's an issue with the the
federal lands up above the
hundred percent state
construction and what that means
either and I I need to have a
better understanding of this
before it gets to HSC okay I
just I I will let the secretary
and as a panelists so if the if
there's any questions that can
be answered he's he's on now.
Okay Mr Secretary you've heard
my questions on this page so far
do have a response.
Yes madam chair and Madam chair
Lundstrom a couple things on the
on the communication remember we
did have that conversation last
year we appreciated your
recommendation I'm trying to
improve our communication
program.
A big reason for the increase in
this is the same increase that
was provided last year and we
did not institutionalize this
into the communication budget
this year just because we
weren't sure what are revenue
was in a look like that we're
hoping that this will just be
part of our yearly budget going
forward and not be part of
what's brought into fund balance
but basically we brought all of
the District PO's and the
videographers under one roof and
so that's why.
Part of the reason that that
budget has gone up in addition
to just being more active and
more pro active on social media
so and then we are going to be
redoing our website and we are
doing upgrades to N. M. roads to
help notify people where
construction will be since
there's a lot of construction
going on so that's the main
reason for the increase on the
communication program and a lot
of that is we took the budget at
the districts and put it into
over overall one communications
drove a program or division if
you want to call it where
tourists amazes a communication
director as far as hundred
percent state construction
that's line thirteen and
fourteen so this is our hundred
percent state program we try and
put as much money in there when
we bring in fund balance as
possible these are for projects
that we're federal money is not
allowed to be used.
And so we have that Roquan down
into fourteen million kind of
for state roads and then five
million for local roads I know
it says state grants but that
really means local benefit and
just to give you an example we
had one community who receive
some capital outlay for a
hundred thousand this last year
costs went up they needed
another couple hundred thousand
two hundred thousand to make
sure that they're able to do the
project otherwise that project
would have stalled we work with
them it was adjacent to a a New
Mexico road that we
managed and storyboard to give
from that portion of money that
extra two hundred thousand to
make their project whole and
that money not sit there so
those projects are not currently
identified it's an area where we
see a need with the community we
get approached and we try and
help them make something whole
so that money is not sitting
around so when you add up that
nineteen million that's
basically what that is fourteen
for state road five for local
roads
and communications in here twice
you get communications on line
we got communications again on
nineteen.
Yeah my understanding madam
chair and maybe Mallory can help
me out but the total is one
million and so it's just it's
just it's the same total that we
provided last year it was one
million last year we moved in
from fund balance reduced doing
the same thing this year it's
just broken down into how we the
categories whether it's
contractual or person or those
type of thing so the total is
one million the five seventy
plus the four thirty but if
Mallory knows what those
categories are so you can that
you know that but it's it's just
broken down based on what how
that money will be used.
Contractual or something else.
Okay and then madam chair I need
to see that that next sheet
where it breaks it down by the.
By the different categories
appropriations business support
and so forth.
Yes my question on there is
wires are difference in vacancy
savings between each one of
those categories.
And not consistent among the
department.
The next street yes madam chair
we try engage based on you know
the availability and to be able
to hire people in those areas in
our districts and a lot of cases
it's a little bit higher vacancy
rate because maintenance workers
in those type of folks are just
harder to hire are to keep board
especially in the southeast part
of the state with the oil and
gas and so we're trying to just
be a little more accurate with
our
setting our vacancy rates
whereas a lot of the business
support that you see where the
ten percent is in the mobile
program those are positions in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque you're
able to hire people just there's
just more of a pool of people to
hire and so instead of just
doing something all the way
across the border just trying to
be a little more accurate with
the likelihood they will be able
to get down to that vacancy rate
in those particular areas.
My my concern about that is is
that what that does is it
changes what your fund balance
is going to be in each one of
the so I want to make sure that
we're billing positions that we
need to be filling so we just
don't have those cash balances
in their.
Let's go to the next sheet.
Well that's just the language I
did want to talk about the
language it was that regarding
you don't want.
You don't want projects
identified now maybe I'm I'm
writing this all down because I
don't have this paper in front
of me.
But that you don't want projects
in the special appropriation in
our section nine to be
identified.
Now I I wanted to explain to me
Mr secretary one not.
Madam chair I think it's page
seven I think it's a last page
that way you can see seven.
Yeah there you go
if you remember madam chair when
we in the first year and twenty
nineteen when we had some
surplus Department was awarded
four hundred million dollars
fifty of that was for the local
program we've already developed
a rule for that how that'll be
distributed to competitive
process the second piece was a
hundred million of for
maintenance projects similar to
the ones that are on this page
we did not identify projects
during that time you you had us
divided equally among six
districts but we did not in the
bill put specific projects for
that hundred.
I did on the house side we had a
committee that was made up of
people the house transportation
chair as well as people from HSC
representing each one of the
district so we have projects
that were put right in the bill
it was the Senate side that
didn't do that so so madam chair
that was for the next piece of
that which is the two hundred
and fifty million so that was
two hundred fifty million for
major investment projects and
that is correct the process that
we went through think about half
of that it was earmarked for
house projects and that was the
process that you set up that we
participated in that part was
earmarked but the smaller
maintenance projects the hundred
million we did not hear mark we
divided it among the districts
equally we did their mark that
so then last year when we had
the start off as a hundred
eighty million and then it got
reduced in the special session
two hundred thirty five million
we we there was some projects in
there but the the language that
may because they were smaller
projects you wanted us LFC
wanted us to spend that as
quickly as possible so there was
not specific earmarks it was
just a list of projects as are
kind of as a recommendations
well we're asking for is if
we're gonna do small projects
like the ones that are
identified in here that we
continue that same
process where the hundred
million in twenty nineteen
wasn't earmarked last year was
an earmarked in we don't believe
that the should be market with
the shell we're fine with the
may work fine if the projects
are in there but it does give us
a lot more flexibility some of
these projects that you know are
three million or two point two
million cost change you may go
up they may go down in if their
specific earmarks and says these
are the only projects you can do
then that really reduces the
flexibility when things change
so we're just asking for the
same precedent that was set when
you do the smaller projects to
understand that I understand
that Mr Secretary for these
maintenance type.
Projects here you've got
district one receiving twenty
million dollars district to
receiving forty five million
district three at twenty.
and they is this an example of
how this work is being or would
be distributed or is this
something that you're letting us
know what would be your plan for
this next fiscal year.
We when we asked the districts
to give us their priorities for
the smaller projects this is
what came to the top this is an
example of what we could do and
one of the reasons is that there
still the smaller projects can
get develop pretty quickly and
so we just want that flexibility
this is not even as you can tell
divided by six for each
district.
Flexibility that we want I mean
we could come up divided by six
but I think what we're trying to
do madam chair is use the data
through the new program we have
in wherever the need is is where
we want to but the the money and
so right now based on what we've
come up with in our system
pavement conditions in those
type of things on the smaller
projects this is where the need
is we just don't want to be
handcuffed in the sense as
something comes out in district
five or three emergency
something that you know that we
can help funds fund that need
and be stuck to these specific
projects that's all we're trying
to do yeah I know that in this
earlier presentation you're
gonna receive nineteen million
dollars that's basically a fund
created depend to thank based on
the adjustment of fifty four
million you get nineteen in the
previous sheet for the same
purpose.
I want to make sure that we're
protecting our appropriations
process here we're not just
handing out of all amount of
money I want to know where it's
going because you know I'm gonna
ask you all is when you get from
a majority of states we must
we'll talk about it now.
We'll talk about all these these
different these different issues
but
I'd like to go to the next page
I think there was one more okay.
The local government special
appropriation fund I know we
have and
necessarily there's and there's
another Fund in there for local
governments that we weren't able
to use I guess that great so you
we so I thought we had already
set up a new local government
fund last year was the year
before.
Yes madam chair so my
understanding of that hundred
forty million is the forty
million is already something
that's going to happen from
house bill six a couple years
ago so
where that forty million is my
understanding right now it's
supposed to go into the local
government road Fund which is a
seventy five twenty five match
and all those type of things it
already that frontier RD gets
twenty two million so this would
bump it up to sixty two million
we actually have a bill out
there that's proposing that
instead of putting that forty
million into the local
government road Fund we put it
into the new fund that you just
mentioned that's ninety five
five match that's already passed
one committee on the Senate side
so that forty million is going
to the locals one way or another
just Matt matter of where it
goes into the fund but it's it's
part of this I guess on that
they want to mention now that
the hundred million as part of
LFC budget for locals and I
guess the decision we need to be
made is how you want that to be
spent we would propose it goes
into the new fund
because it's a ninety five five
match we already have rules set
up we have a process
we have the the counties and
cities onboard that they think
that's where it should go as
well we have support for that so
I think that's what that hundred
forty million is it's all for
locals forty are you going from
house bill six a couple years
ago and a hundred in the LFC
budget one time funding and we
think it should go into the new
fund.
Well you know last.
Last year we had that listed
twenty two projects and only six
are actually in the expenditure
report what's that about Mr
Secretary.
Madam chair madam chair and
madam chair Lundstrom a can you
clarify that I'm not exactly
sure which expenditure report
you're referring to well I mean
what I've been looking at all
the documentation that's been
printed off this prevent them
provided to this committee but
my concern is is when we
identify projects because we're
putting big chunks of general
fund in the GA for this
department and we identify
projects I want to know where
we're at with those projects I
know that they've been reported
individually through districts
because I've got that report in
front of me.
But I want to know.
What in the you know what is
being done in this expenditure
report because if we only if
we've got these projects and
their and only six are actually
in the for you know in that
report are we moving those
projects what I'm trying to
avoid is the handing over a
spent special balances was new
money plus bonds where you guys
are set up a war chest for this
department and we don't have any
say on where that money is going
to be appropriated.
Madam chair we're we're happy to
provide you with how we spent
every every dollar I think that
first year of the hundred
million for the smaller projects
we've almost spent that entire
amount and I can give you a list
of every single project that was
divided six ways equally among
the districts this last year
through the special session it
was reduced but we got a hundred
and thirty five million that was
divided among the districts I'm
happy to share with you how that
was spent all that is due to be
expended as as requested by
September of this year will they
wanted that spend within the
year and try and pump some money
into the economy because of the
pandemic so we can certainly
give you that and a lot of
that's already been spent as
well the two hundred fifty
million major investment
projects all those projects are
as earmarked we're moving
forward the only projects that
are on hold is we got seventy
five million taken away and
bonding authority provided but
we don't have the bonding
authority till twenty twenty two
so the only projects haven't
started or the projects were
that seventy five million got
got taken away but all those
earmarks were met in provided so
I'm happy to provide that all to
have I'm not sure what
expenditure your report you're
looking at but we surely one of
them Mr Mr Secretary I I
probably need some time with
with madam chair on this and
maybe the vice chair yeah I
apologize for missing all the
transportation maintenance we
have this session but I need to
have some time here because we
want to make sure that things
small roll smoothly into the
appropriations process when this
bill comes in to H. AFC.
maybe with the technical staff
she has I mean there's there's
some things that we need to look
at here without madam chair all
also keep quiet and hopefully
you and I can get together thank
you.
Thank you madam chair next we
have Representative Madrid.
Thank you madam chair And
secretary.
Mike Santa I guess I'm with
Representative but bad loans
from I feel like we can move on
the budget so we got DFA in
those cities budget and the I
guess the other point of madam
chair is that
We're gonna get the new revenue
estimates Mr secretary Santa you
know.
can somebody answer.
Madam chair representative
Madrid you mean the new General
wrote fund revenue Michael my
disc in there about madam chair
Representative Madrid the the
handout that you have there now
is the is the reconciled LF LFC
and DFA requests so all on on
the the number with all the
programs with all the numbers
of that is the the original
request and so what what we're
we're working from now is just
adding in this new revenue
that's been identified and so
that's the starting point that
has been agreed on by both LFC
and DFA just just to give you a
starting point.
Thank you.
Mr I I would I would just say
again that I'm a little
uncomfortable along with Patty
Representative Lundstrom and
would just think that we need to
be having their chances
Committee madam chair to discuss
this a little more with each
other within this committee I
think it needs against
discussion and if I'm wrong
I think it's the the idea that
some of this money has an
opportunity to have its
allocations verses others object
have allocation direction so
just with us that to the
manager to Senate consideration
you're going forward thank you.
Thank you representative next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair
Thank you Mr church I have two
questions on the first is on
that special transportation
appropriation number nine on
page three
what is the bill can you give us
the bill numbers it says that.
Recommending an allocation of
two hundred fifty million for
state and local road projects
including five million for
central air services services
contingent on it enactment of a
bill establishing the program
can you just give us the Bill
number and that is that well I
think it was mentioned briefly
Matt Matt madam chair
representative Garrett
absolutely this language comes
from the LFC volume one which is
in the LFC recommendation and so
essentially there is not a bill
at this point for the the two
hundred and fifty million it
would get added into House Bill
three from this committee again
to or in the House
appropriations and finance and
so it would become language in
the general appropriations act
we're just doing some
preliminary work before it goes
to H. A. F. C. on it.
Okay thank you and and madam
chair woman this is a question
that if secretary Santa can
review at the January
transportation commission
meeting Mr secretary you talked
about federal funding coming out
I.
I remember It is ninety one
million I'm not sure if that's
accurate but could you just
review is that money coming from
the federal government is that
included in this project
where is that money.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garrett that
money was part of the latest
comment recovery bill
it is the totals about ninety
two million I think is ninety
one point eight million I
believe the Albuquerque area by
formulas and get about eight
million the el Paso NPOs to get
a couple hundred thousand and
then the rest goes to the
department is to be about eighty
million so we're still working
with FHWA to figure out exactly
what that money can be spent on
how we would spend that and so
it's not included in this budget
but since it is federal money we
can bar that in at a later time
but we're just still working
with average every to go through
all those logistics since the
bill was just signed right
around Christmas
so is it hopefully that answers
your question.
Yes so Madam chairwoman and
secretary I would just want to
see that
report once it's ready since
it's not.
Existing and any of this budget
thank you very much that's my of
my questions madam secretary of
Madam chairwoman.
Thank you Representative next we
have a vice chair CF.
Thank you madam chair all.
Senator Santa the.
Provencher **** my question but
on page four.
You said that those are two
million dollars going to each
district except for one district
is going to get the two million
five hundred thousand could you
explain that to me please.
Madam chair and
Mr vice chair each district is
getting the two million I think
the difference was on one was
getting one point five in one
area five hundred thousand and
field supplies so it was just
how it's broken up in the areas
that they wanted but I don't
think any one district is
getting more it's just how they
divided it up I think if you go
back to that first page you'll
see
that is just to a different a
line item in which they wanted
five hundred thousand to go into
instead of the full two million.
Thank you Mr secretary of madam
chair one more question on I
think it's page for like twenty
two hundred twenty three you had
the.
One point two million a one line
in the same thing would be
lowered you had eight hundred
thousand what what what were the
diff wise for them up that way
over the purpose.
That madam chair Mike if I could
just grab this real quick
Representative Garcia will what
it what it is is those going to
different categories in the
budget one is for contractual
service the other is for the
other costs category and so just
for the purposes of how these
get spread into the budget we
separated essentially it's two
million dollars going to traffic
safety just in two different
categories similar to what you
saw up in contract maintenance
and fuel supplies.
Thank you Mr.
Mr church
S. R. Madam chair of Secretary I
look forward to all the way to
work Representative I mean not
German love from should to have
a meeting to sit down between
all of us to see what's going on
tour by nose with a webpage
rockets golf full of hard to so
policy and and not be on the
same page so I look forward to
it thank you madam chair.
Matt madam chair if I could just
do a brief response to that if
you let me.
I had secretary.
So thank you madam chair and and
Mr vice chair and I just want to
point out just a couple things
you know the the way that this
is always work is in three parts
I think the first party
operation operational budget
that original nine hundred fifty
eight million I think we've all
come to an agreement on that we
work out those differences the
way that fund balance at fifty
four million has always been
brought in as through the
technical committee which is
represented by this committee
house transportation as well as
LESC DFA and and D. O. T. and so
that's the way how we work
through the fifty four million
in the past and I appreciate
that we went through that
process again and then the only
real difference on the back and
for the third part which is that
special appropriation one time
appropriation is we did in the
past have meetings about
projects and which projects
people wanted or thought were
important so if we need to do
that you know perfectly open to
that I think that was a good
process I think that was a good
discussion as a process that was
spearheaded by madam chair
Lundstrom and so if there's
anything that people are feeling
uncomfortable about those are
discussions we had in the past I
think it's been a little bit
harder because we can get
together and meet but I'm
certainly willing to do that
talk about that so that we can
get into more detail but the we
really fall this the process the
same way that we always have up
to this point other than than
that one meeting and so I just
want to point that out madam
chair thank you.
Madam chair.
I share about I'm sure you know
the Mr Secretary on on the
wording on the on the bill of
may insured.
I'm glad it went to may because
I don't want to tie up all of
funds on project we're going to
start up on a we're not quite
sure what we're walking into and
if we have a delay for a year
two years and that money sucked
under at that's a good thing
what the what I'm on my concern
is is that it's a job for
everybody that as we go along
well these projects that the
department transportation of.
Stand up and and and you know.
Everybody will be a run our
state you will not pick and
choose the district will be
easier more other district
because the data Dave we all
need the same thing but just a
concern of mine.
And madam chair Mr vice chair I
agree with you and I think
You know we've we've done I
think everything that's been
asked of us and you know we got
this money there is times when
we are asked to invested in
major investment projects we did
that we're times we've assets
money we need you this way
and we've done that to put it
out in the economy I think
pumping this much money into the
economy has been helpful to not
only to keep the road fund
revenue good but also the
general fund revenue good is
jobs have been created in part
of the reason that we've been
able to do that is because you
trusted us and given us that
leeway to spend this in a
thoughtful way and we've been
able to do that I hope we've
earned some trust in some
credibility over the last two
years in doing that I think
we've been equitable I think
when any of the hundred twelve
legislators of called us we
haven't said no we've been able
to help people help your
community health care
constituents we've never said no
and we've met I think everything
that you've asked us to do and
so I'm fine going over projects
and doing all those things but
we don't have money sitting out
there like capital outlay does
and some of these other places
do we are asked to spend money
when we're asked to do things
it's gotten done and I just
wanted to point that out madam
chair and Mr vice chair
madam chair Mr Secretary.
I know you have been more than
fair to everybody and the reason
I just brought that up is to
just reassure everybody in the
committee and everybody is this
need to this conversation right
now that you are for then I'd
work for you since you started
and you are very fair out.
All your all your staff is more
than fair sometimes you know you
guys are out there are always
the trying to help communities
in our state we really
appreciate that but I just want
to reassure everybody that where
your rat and I and I know we are
at and I want to make sure that
everybody this committee and
this additional conversation are
aware of what's going on thank
you Mr chairman thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr chair on next we
have Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr secretary this is kind of a
strange question but I really am
curious about.
What about the S. in the earlier
Reports.
I'm one of the district reported
that they had assisted do not
hide the comment and
transporting.
A deceased individuals.
And I'm curious as to how that
was paid for was it out of the
scare of money.
And that's number one and then
number two.
Did you all do any kind of
special sanitizing.
After the transport and also was
that an extra cost indeed that
come out of the cares dollars.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and representative
yes I need any time we did
something outside the normal
scope scope of our duties for
comment we requested
reimbursement from the federal
government so we've already gone
through I think three or four
reimbursement cycles we've
recouped over a couple million
dollars already so if we got
asked to do the type of services
that you mention if well when
Gallup which shut down there for
a couple weeks in our folks had
to go out and set up barrels
into those type of things and
all the in different entry and
exit points we kept track of all
that and we in turn build the
federal government as part of
the COVID really funding so we
are continuing to get reimbursed
for that and anytime we do
something we keep track of that
separately so Senator question.
I'm partially how much did it
cost I'm just I'm just really
curious.
Madam chair representative if I
can get you that information
I think we received over a
couple million dollars already
but we keep pretty detailed
costs and I can share that with
you I don't know you know
exactly what the total is now
it's just always accumulating
so we do that and I think the
other part of your question was
a sanitizing so yes when we had
to sanitizing do those other
things we've tried to pass as
much of that cost on to the
federal government as we could
in what's eligible and not take
it out of our operating budget.
Okay then madam chair and Mr
secretary.
I'm.
Since you don't know since you
have you said you have somewhere
around.
Ninety one ninety two million
left.
I they can not call back any of
that is my understanding and if
so.
Then with those dollars.
Will that always be available
just for COVID or can you use it
for other related.
needs.
So madam chair representative
the direct funding to DOT's
which was part of the last
comment relief bill
was was the intent was to back
fill any revenue lost in so just
give you an example like
Washington state is eighty five
percent say fifteen percent
federal agency
and so when the gas prices when
people are driving they really
got hit hard on the state side
and lost a lot of the revenue
and so what happened is
are that relief packages they
put nine point eight billion
dollars to the states and then
the distributed by formula so we
got our formula apportionment it
goes straight to the DOT which
is a ninety two million we want
to make sure that we had
backfield anything that we did
not receive as plan like gas tax
and other things locally in New
Mexico we weren't hit as hard
and so we have some of that
money it cannot be recalled
we're still figuring it you can
go for more than just COVID
related costs and we're just
trying to figure out with wait
for some final guidance from
FHWA as to what that can be used
for so can we use it for another
project could we use it for
maintenance on those are the
kind of questions that we're
still getting clarification on
but it can go more for COVID and
no it cannot be rolled back okay
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr secretary I think
you do a great job.
Thank you representative next we
have Representative Pettigrew.
Try to make sure up for stronger
but Mr thank you for your thank
you Secretary and the
I just.
I respectfully ask the this if.
Meeting the the share Lundstrom
has requested does occur madam
chair that I'm I'd like to make
sure that part of that
I I have.
Thanks.
In our department and but I do
have a lot of questions and and
this is a large budget and and
there's not enough detail in
here for me to see how were.
How we're cautiously planning
for twenty twenty two twenty
three and twenty three twenty
four inside of this and so
there's more depth to this I'm
not used and I and I understand
the budgeting process is gonna
work we don't get to see the
depth of the.
Of each of these line items
anymore madam chair but
Right now under this I would
love to have that information.
Consistent with our conversation
the other day so thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative
Representative Representative
Crowder I've seen your hand go
up a couple times but and to
just confirm and make sure that
You are talk I thank you madam
chair and I had mixed emotions
out and in the interest of time
I I chose to put my hand back
down but I do find myself in
agreement with the chair
Lundstrom that the
appropriations members need to
be very careful not to give away
their authority appropriation.
and and watch that closely I am
troubled by the word mate.
Somewhat I I know that.
I do have great confidence in
the sector transportation.
And not I would like to have a
another conversation when we
look at projects I thought was
perhaps we could take a hundred
and forty five million to break
it into two separate categories
some of the projects on there
were over ten million dollars in
in we could identify some that
can be attached to the word
shall in the in the very small
ones I agree the word may maybe
appropriate but.
I'm still wrestling with the
word may thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative is
there anyone else that has any
questions before we proceed.
secretary I just had a couple
questions and and honestly I
think chair Lundstrom raised of
of quite a few of the questions
that I had I did want to go back
to the the state road fund
balance just because I I do need
more clarity on the federal
lands piece if you can be more
specific on on that and then
also
Towards the bottom where they're
talking about traffic safety
fund contracts if you can also
provide some clarity on what
that means as well.
Thank you madam chair of course
I'd be happy to so madam chair
every year if we do have a fund
balance that we can bring in
LFC has always agreed that we
should try and put as much as we
can into that line thirteen
which is a hundred percent state
funds and what that frontier
does is it allows us to work on
projects that are federally
eight eligible so we do have
some New Mexico routes that we
we that need improvement that we
cannot use federal funds for and
so what that forty million does
is it gives us flexibility to be
able to do that when we need it
and so this is always been that
that case so you know a road
that you know may not be high
priority in terms of overall
state needs but in a particular
community appreciates the gets
washed out something that
happens it's not federally
eligible we have some money that
can help in that situation so
that's what that money is yours
for
it and when it says federal land
these are more forest roads and
some other things where we're
not able to some of our FHWA
money for so we're just trying
to make sure that we always put
as much as we can in there for
those situations where even if
we had federal money we wouldn't
be able to use it in those
particular areas as far as
traffic safety goes traffic
safety it's the same amount that
was incorporated last year and
then the year before there was
also an amount that was included
in twenty nineteen so basically
traffic safety is a grant mostly
federally funded agency
and they provide grants to local
communities to law enforcement
agencies among other things to
try and increase safety within
their community so can be on
many different items but it has
to be safety related and go
towards preventing crashes and
fatalities in that particular
area and so they're always the
much.
The money they get is related
specific to the W. line so out
of their you know eleven twelve
million dollar budget by sixty
seventy percent of that goes to
D. W. isolated usually don't
have a lot of money to work in
other areas such as distracted
driving pedestrian bicycle all
of those things they don't have
money federally to do that and
so we try and give them some
flexibility to go out and search
for those projects that were
received proposals for those
projects from communities to
help in those particular areas
so that's with the extra if you
want to call it that two million
dollars goes for it's great it's
not something that's stays
within the department it's
grants that go out to local
communities.
And do you and I don't know just
to clarify does it pay for
law enforcement salaries and
things like that once I know
that you mentioned you do you
eyes and you W. I. program but
do you know the specificity
around that those requests yes
so that doesn't pay madam chair
for salaries that can pay for
overtime I'll give you another
example we help fund drug courts
in particular areas trying to
expand that process for the drug
courts and we think they're a
good way to to take care of some
issues in communities so it it
helps supply that maybe pace of
a couple staff members to help
run that in that particular area
but if we do issue a grant to
law enforcement it's for
overtime above and beyond what
they're already doing it's not
these are very tight knit cap so
there's no obviously supplanting
or anything like that allowed
but those are the types of
safety initiatives that can be
funded we provide you amendment
with some money for their
pedestrian program there in
Albuquerque so just those are
just a few examples of what we
try and do with that particular
money to get out into the into
the communities.
Thank you Secretary I'm yes I I
I think I'm in agreement with
Senator who have raised the the
questions around having some
doing some research before
Finalizing the vote what we're
scheduled for Tuesday so I think
there several days that we can
certainly
get together over the course of
the next couple days and and
need so I I certainly welcome
that I'm is there any other
questions from from folks in the
committee before we.
Before we move on to the next
agenda item.
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank thank you madam chair just
wanted to let the committee
know.
This.
Budget isn't did HA of state is
not on our schedule until looks
Wednesday February seventeenth I
can double check with our chief
of staff for or Tom church can
but it doesn't mean it's not
like it has to happen tomorrow.
Just wanted to let you all know
that according to the schedule I
just look at thank you.
Thank you representative.
It is this this have one
question for whoever maybe could
answer are you planning to put
in the special appropriations
into house bill three because I
noticed usually what we have is
our operating budget and then of
course the fund balance that was
brought in I just wasn't sure if
you're gonna have projects and
whatever languages finally
decided in house bill three year
that system to be put into the
house bill two special
appropriations areas so I wasn't
sure how that if we needed to
have all that figured out before
we moved.
No and I'd miss madam chair of
Mr Secretary it's it's not going
to be and three but we want to
make sure that the
transportation committee is
aware and has participation in
anything that we might do with
the major investment projects I
mean because this transportation
committee house oversight to
this I want to make sure that
they're they're clear that we're
working together between the two
committees on what on what would
go into that.
Thank you madam chair and and
madam chair last minute and I I
I appreciate that and I think
you you know we had a good
process that you set up when we
kind of worked on this for the
two hundred fifty million from
twenty nineteen when you brought
people into rural we talked
about projects talk about
priorities I think that was a
good process and certainly one
that we would be happy to
participate in and give you our
feedback but I I also know that
if we don't come to some
agreement are you still want to
have those conversations I don't
I don't necessarily know that it
has to hold up House Bill three
that that was my only point is I
know when I want to have you
know I I don't know chair Rubio
very well we're just getting to
know each other and so on of
course and anybody that wants to
to have comments and all that
but I'm I was just making sure
wasn't and we actually part of
house bill three so that was my
questions I appreciate that
settlement.
The only changes that I would
anticipate Mr Secretary out of
house transportation might be
the way that that these
adjustments may be made change I
mean this is coming from a
technical staff committee
the the actual members of house
trance may decide you know what
we maybe we don't want something
care or we what we have more
questions about some of these
adjustments I mean generally we
we get we generally taken but we
you've got a new group care and
and want to make sure
everybody's clear on what we're
doing with this because this
does go into the general
appropriations act at the end of
the day and what we don't want
to do is get.
To the point where.
People on HFC you're starting to
get through this and ask a bunch
of questions I I I think we'll
be looking forward to making
sure that this committee agrees
with all these adjustments
understands why the money is
going where it is again these
are staff recommendations the
end of the day that members have
to choose but we'll put together
a I think I I I need to talk to
the chairman about this.
And and the staff and certainly.
I just want to make sure you all
know that you don't have to have
this to us by tomorrow thank
you.
Thank you madam chair I'm I I do
want to yeah I I think I
appreciate that Representative
Lundstrom and secretary we will
certainly
being touch and and and talk
through a lot of this so thank
you for joining us Tom thank you
for the presentation
and all the work that the
technical committee has done I
know as Representative Lundstrom
has mentioned yes a lot of us
are new including myself and I
do feel like there is a fire
hose that I'm drinking out of
well water a fire hose so but I
appreciate everyone's patience
and willingness to to make sure
that I mean this is a huge
budget and it is it is a lot of
money and we want to just make
sure that if this is an
opportunity to do good things
than than we should and so I'm
I'm looking forward to those
conversations moving forward us
with that we can certainly move
on Representative Madrid are you
ready to present on house bill
one ninety eight.
Yes madam chair I do the the.
Another person come in and
expert witnesses Franklin
Garcia.
Okay great Mario he didn't let
them and and and just for folks
to know I talked to
Representative Madrid last night
let him know that we would hear
the his bill today but we
wouldn't address the amendment
since we didn't get it on time
so right now what we will be
hearing is just the house bill
one ninety eight as introduced
so that's what we'll be doing
and then we'll handle the
amendment move moving forward if
if we move forward so just
wanted to give you all a heads
up on that Representative Madrid
when you're ready and and I
believe your
your expertise on as well.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee this is
house bill one ninety eight and
I'm gonna take a few minutes to
give you us this concise and
then expanded a little bit on
some points this is a transfer
of certain department of
transportation authority to New
Mexico department of
transportation related to the
trip tax act weight distance and
tax act and the motor
transportation act including
administrative rulemaking
authority and it clarifies the
safety and enforcement features
tags and Revenue Department
retains administrative tax
authority so coming back to this
to help us out the description
is a little better said we put
this whether this bill will
transfer the department of
transportation authority under
the trip Tax and the weight
distance and tax act in a motor
transportation act to do Mexico
department of transportation
this is all administrative.
The department of transportation
will continue law enforcement
rules clearly rules related to
safety and commercial vehicle
inspection.
The tax and revenue maintains a
tax collection and
administration to distributed
functions.
It also allows New Mexico
department transportation
director size in rulemaking
authority related to permit fees
and requirements.
This also very far sections
dealing with the liquid weight
distance and paschalis
collections it also addresses
issues related to special fuel
uses permits and border special
fuel use for it's.
All rights DO department
transportation authority over
designation of port of entry
locations or establish of of his
facilities this also allows to
reconcile sections of the law
regarding the providers of
credit card services payments
and fees of accepted of payments
under the tax act's listed
above.
So in summation the background
of this is that since two
thousand and sixteen department
transportation has been working
under the memorandum of
agreement.
To the to provide staffing at
the point of entry for
collection of oversize and
overweight permits prior to the
Himalayan department
transportation.
Inspectors and law enforcement
officers were offered asked with
revenue collections instead of
vehicle inspections or
enforcement of traffic laws this
bill will eliminate the need for
the MLA and will allow New
Mexico department of
transportation to manage
administrative processes for the
permit for the permanent revenue
collections this bill also
allows administrative companion
to the bill US Senate joint
resolution thirteen the transfer
of DOT real property to Senate
joint resolution searching the
consolidates the ownerships and
the operations of the state
point of entry so in closing
this is strictly just
administrative changing of what
once used to be under department
of transportation that's coming
back under part of
transportation department of
public safety in initiatives
at this time madam chair open
for questions.
And.
Great thank you Representative
are there any questions for
Representative Madrid.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
I guess just present a quick
question
Are you planning to go to the.
Audience for those.
For S. thank you.
Yeah let me let me go ahead and
do that representative thank you
for reminding me and then we'll
we'll want to do are there any
is there anyone in the audience
on the virtual audience who
would like to support this
legislation.
Raise your hand.
Go ahead yes we have a couple
folks.
I'm.
For folks with their hands
raised right now which I believe
is is just Franklin from DOT
I'm gonna on mute you unless you
don't want to talk
It doesn't look like thank you
is there any opposition.
No it doesn't look like there's
any opposition Franklin you've
been moved to panelist for some
reason but did you want to say
anything.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee appreciate the
Representative Madrid presenting
the bill and the background on
that a couple things I want to
highlight it is a thirty page
bill and as Representative
mentioned it's more of
administrative change changing
items from the department of.
The safety department
transportation we presented a
few times at the department of
two different interim committees
in different legislative
committees on the current
successes of our ports of entry
management oversight
currently as mentioned all the
activities that are allowed
through the existing ammo a
memorandum of agreement
will be changing with this
provided so we are currently
functions the twenty sixteen as
mentioned DPS will maintain
enforcement duties and so we
didn't address or touch any of
those areas we did provide a
summary hopefully you got
electronic some reasons it is
such a large bill there was
electronic summary that was
provided to the committee that
gives a breakdown of what the
previous duties were were and
what the proposed to forty would
become if the bill were to pass
and with that will stand for
questions.
Great Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Madrid thanks for
bringing this bill forward
have a couple questions couple
comments and then maybe a
suggestion or two.
So.
I think first all the others
mention I think this change that
we made
what almost about five years
ago.
was a great change.
I'm moving.
This model program really under
the department of public safety
is not a lost sense because and
M. D. O. T. is not really a law
enforcement agency.
and they were doing law
enforcement activities and so.
That was one reason they're so
great reasons why made this
change.
But looks like maybe we
transferred
too many duties from DOT to DPS.
Madam chair representative right
and that's why the bills before
us today would would you agree
with that.
I guess I think this is
something that's been been to
under DOT's operation just
wasn't administrative overall
they've they've they've handled
it exceptionally well even when
you say it wasn't area of their
their expertise dealing with the
police you know the the
enforcement aspect but they've
made this this process over a
hundred million dollars a year
profit.
I mean so given the fact of
who's been running and how it's
been run it's been a cooperative
and I think given this bill
services that they recognize and
acknowledge this and that
they're just doing what makes
good sense and that's to put it
back completely with DOT DPS as
it has a vital function to this
port of entry so no way of the
building out of New as much as
it's just a group a good
relationship of of a harmonious
result budgets equity renewable
to generate I'll leave it to a
my expert witness also common as
well secretary or.
Franklin.
Madam chair and thank you
Representative Harper I think
the main thing to remember is
all of these functions that were
changing we've already been
doing and so for example when we
first took over R. D. O. T.
staff is one actually issuing
the permit and collecting the
money but the authority in
statute to do that is with DPS
so technically DO two doesn't
have the authority to issue a
permanent collect money and so
we've been operating this way
through an animal you with GPS
so this is kind of the final
piece of the puzzle the two
final pieces is formalizing all
this and statutes we no longer
need and away and and then the
last piece is the set Senate
joint resolution were officially
transferring all of the ports of
entry from DPS are GSD to DO T.
so it's the last two piece of
the puzzle puzzle we're not
really changing anything that
we've been doing it says we just
want the authority in statute to
formalize it and not have to
rely on them for you to be able
to do that.
Thank you madam chair
representative and secretary
yeah and and my my question was
not you know don't misconstrue
that to be a criticism.
I just know that know for
example going through the
process of transferring the
Authority to collect pretty sure
it's tax and the ministration
of.
Of that Graham from the office
of the the the state office of
insurance to New Mexico tax road
Department.
That that that that was a big
effort it took some some time
and some changes to the original
legislation and so I just see a
parallel here where we no big
change moving a lot of the model
program and to DPS but now
looking back saying well if
what was said secretary you know
it makes sense for the
department transportation to
take care of this name which
highways and you know we're semi
trailers can exceed sixty five
feet you know should be a and
I'm D. O. T. responsibly noted
APS responsibility
issuing excessive size weight
permits and rules should be a
DOT responsibility not a DH DPS
responsibilities so I really see
the wisdom in in what's being
proposed here
and clearly the department of
transportation and DPS have been
agreeing that you all should be
performing these activities
because you've had and and I'm
away place right so so that.
I guess what I'm trying make
your is
When we make these big changes.
They're often times in the
legislation things we have to
come back and revisit.
And that doesn't mean there was
a problem it just means it makes
more sense now that we've been
through this past four five
years we know what needs to be
done hello you've been
effectively doing it this way
so coming for this legislation I
think it's great.
I do have a a couple concerns
still just mention
You know we we.
I have some information from D.
O. T. but we do haven't received
any comment from the PS.
we have received any comment
from TRD there's questions that
I'd like to ask.
Why are yet
So I.
And I know that we have an
amendment or to that we also
need to consider so
I think I would just ask maybe
the foregoing my couple other
questions
madam chair if I know the past
we've we've kind of made it a
policy that we can discuss bills
and and and work on them but we
don't necessarily take action
until we've had a in FY are
and maybe no comments from other
parties that are please madam
chair if you consider that so we
you have a good discussion here
and then the way for next time
for the the amendments and FIR
before taking action.
So you're free to consider madam
chair.
Thank you representative.
Okay so the the last four
questions I have
regarding
the change
these are this is in section
four and five of the all.
Chapter seven of of our our laws
are all tax revenue department
your call all taxation
Laws it looks like here what
we're doing is we're
transitioning.
The.
You know the department in those
in those statutes references TRD
but here we're changing it to
the department transportation.
for these.
For these two.
taxes and.
I guess my my question is no
generally we're we've been move
kind of going in the opposite
direction removing programs that
have been administered tax
programs administered by other
reference back to tax and here
we're we're moving these from
tax to transportation I just
wanted to understand the reason
behind that and if.
I want from charities
in the attendees that can
comment as to whether.
Three this Changin and.
Such.
Expert witness.
Madam chair representative
you have a page number that
you're referring to what I can
tell you is that
The things that we're we're add
being added to be able to
collect these taxes I I don't
think we're taking anything away
from TRD the tax collection but
we're just trying to get around
in the statutory problem if one
of our compliance officers at a
port of entry find someone that
has a delinquent tax are ready
to pay that tax there's not a
TRD employee at the port and so
our folks are collecting that
money that we have that
authority to collect that money
then goes into the system and
ultimately to TRD if for their
distribution that's what we're
really trying to do.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary yeah I understood so
sections four and five of the
bill so if you go to.
Yes page for.
There are two changes here to.
The special fuel user permit.
We're inserting online sorry and
on line twenty.
Department transportation so
we're we're now changing your
story for.
in these two areas from.
The department.
Of tax and revenue.
To the department
transportation.
and then also in section I just
page five winds fourteen and
nineteen again we're changing
for the border crossing special
fuel users permit.
Approved by the department of
tax and revenue to now
department transportation.
and Amanda tax revenue
establishing rule to the
department of transportation so
I just wanted to understand
The rationale behind those
changes in this sector start
charging for parking aware and
her staff aware and supportive
of watching.
That.
Madam chair in the.
Members committee Representative
Harper the definition under this
parents built department of
public safety so we are changing
taxed Representative department
the the description is actually
we're we're changing it from
department of public safety to
department transportation enough
not TRD so we're very careful to
ensure that we were going to
affect any taxed Rav of
functions not taking over any of
their infrastructure not taking
over any of their collection
ability but we just want to make
sure any permit activity that we
were doing within the point we
have the authority and that's
what this bill is due.
Awesome that that's exactly what
I was looking for thank you
madam chair and this I I've I
appreciate that.
And then the.
The last question
I had
Yes again is in.
I guess it's not before us yet I
guess is the amendment
which madam chair not talking
about today is that that.
Correct yes yes Representative
that's correct okay so I I will
I will save that question for
when we.
We talk about the amendment I I
just want to
I'm not sure Representative
which right thank you for
bringing this this legislation
for this is
something I think we can all get
behind in support of of
I know that.
When this for program first
started as some some questions
of us the the PS secretary.
And it was fascinating to see
how
For example may extend the hours
in a particular border point how
they collected a ton of extra
revenue
because folks knew that the port
close in a particular time and
they can just run it.
And and not have to pay the fees
are the taxes and so it's been
awesome to see.
the the compliance increasing
with the loss the extra revenue
has come up
and
I'm just really pleased with was
how this program is in full that
so
thank you madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank you representative next we
have Representative Gary.
You madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill
I really want to compliment D.
O. T. for making such a
significant increase in revenue
that totally rocks my I just
have a brief question madam
chair and this is for Franklin
Franklin I can't tell you how
much I love comparison charts
never saw it I don't know what
it is but if you could send that
to the committee so that we can
all see that comparison chart on
it would be a terrific
As weight when we follow up our
discussion that's my only
request.
Madam chair and there's a
committee in Representative
Garrett we we sent that item
late last night after we do to
the survey was probably a pretty
extensive bill thirty pages we
want to really try to highlight
that so we will definitely get
that sent over to the the madam
chair and she can share and the
staff and share with the
committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so much Frank and for preparing
and we'll look forward to seeing
it thank you.
Thank thank you Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair right I
think we're going to make a
request
For those of us that are in the
capital would it be possible for
us to this and pick up a hard
copy of these documents some of
them of getting two three times
all right inside of a ship.
Go and vote that is what I got
Senator Wirth would it be
possible for us to pick up
copies of all of these documents
in your office here in the
capital.
Representative yes I I think we
can make that we we can make
that accommodation okay thank
you madam chair appreciate that
very very much more through my
screen and seeing if they'll
understand my eyes when I say it
has been.
Thank you madam chair my second
question is has to do with
employees are FTEs that are
within the PS is there any
transition he's from DPS to
department transportation.
Or otherwise.
That.
By the passage of this bill.
expert witness.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee in Representative
Crowder and there is no no.
Cation of the employees are
transfer of employees in DPS in
last year's legislative session
we did receive funding to hire
fifty full time staff at the
point of entry prior to that we
were utilizing temporary staff
so we received the the staffing
numbers and support that we need
to manage this.
Thank you for the response great
Sir I I just thought this some
of the DPS folks to have to to
move over to DOT and I'm hear
you saying hello.
It.
Madam chair representative that
transfer did happen about three
years ago we did receive I think
it was seventeen FTEs from DPS
but that happened three years
ago when we first took over and
those involved in re located in
two DOT working at that point no
one lost their job so that it
happens not part of this bill
but it had previously already
happened and like I said this is
kind of the there's a few things
have happened you know for us
getting more positions last year
that transfer a few years ago
these are kind of the final
pieces so.
It did happen but just not this
not part of this bill.
Thank you Mr secretary thank you
madam chair.
After my last question and that
I'd like to make Madam is a page
eight.
All online six I think there's
some grammatical errors.
It talks about the department of
transportation except.
Credit card.
For motor carriers the tax
these.
Motor carriers with all taxes
and fees are.
It's just a little bit
cumbersome language a little a
little goofy I think you're
right that the payment by credit
card of the taxes and fees at
and.
The from motor carriers would be
maybe tacked on the end of the
service perhaps Representative
you heard or saw can help with.
Thanks committee if we're
if we're gonna.
One.
Would you please which.
All right I think there's a
couple places where the language
is just a little bit so.
Thank you.
It's.
Chair in the more of the
committee.
And the router and that language
is actually moved over from it's
a duplicate of previous language
that allows taxed Representative
to collect used utilize credit
card payments so really it's a
it's pretty much copied from the
previous language we just didn't
want to alter or take away any
authority that taxed
Representative had and wanted to
give us the authority ability to
collect credit card payments so
we will look at that but I think
it was already an existing
statute and it was just
duplicated and included our name
as a new section.
And I appreciate that Frank I I
assumed it was kind of a cut
paste
response time box but if we have
an opportunity to make it right
of course I understand what they
should take advantage of the
opportunity so.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative next we
have okay this Representative
Pettigrew I thought he wanted to
ask questions representative
Adam one I want to offer that up
if you're around otherwise
I I having heard from the major
from a few of you and then I
know that chair woman
Under the blue I think it's it's
will what what I would suggest
then Representative Madrid is
that if we can get some of the
details some of the the
comparisons that was suggests
that was sent out from Franklin
and others and then we can
rehear the bill and vote on it
on Tuesday once we have that
information since
it's it's better to just have
this bill cleaned up and ready
to go before we it goes over to
a representative Lewis's
Committee
is there any questions for from
folks about that Representative
Derrick.
I'm no questions but I do I need
to make a motion to roll it
over.
I'm.
Degree.
We just need to make that this
yeah we just have to decide that
we need to to roll it over to
Tuesday so Tom and make a note
of it and then we'll added to
the agenda to review first thing
on Tuesday.
So.
In the documentation attachments
any supplemental information you
want to send over bill free to
send it and then to
Representative Crowder's point
we can certainly certainly make
it available with hard copies so
what would be helpful I think
for staff is if you can email us
and let us know who would have
preference for hard copies and
then we can make sure to have
those for you all
at our office I know
Representative Crowder for sure
Representative Pettigrew and
and I think and representative
Garcia and Garrett so
as well okay sounds good
so yeah so we'll have that and
then you can just let your
assistance reach out to our
office and we'll get that ready
for you all.
Thank you all thank you
representative thank you for
reading.
Thank you.
Next we have
Representative Chatfield is is
he here.
Madam chair representative chat
films presenting on another bill
at this point in time.
Let me check with him real quick
and see if she's almost done
okay.
And for folks regarding house
memorial three
We don't have Authority on this
issue we can we can move it on
absolutely we can do that but I
just wanted to let you all know
That we really don't have
Authority on on a naming roads
so just.
FY I.
So in the meantime I guess what
we can do is we can move on to
the next item which is a as a
presentation so today for folks
today's transit equity day and
we have a presentation from an
organization called together for
brothers and and we can spend
that time for the rest of the
time on that
I think it's a really important
issue to address especially when
we're talking about some of the
work that we're doing and so
I I want to go ahead and and how
that presentation for you all
Representative Crowder
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair could you
give us a little bit of guidance
that we may be able to pass
along Representative Chatfield
if we don't have any authority
or.
Guidance on the naming replaced
the secretary or or Mr charger
someone somebody guidance over.
Yes I mean we certainly can but
I'd prefer Mr chap
Representative Chatfield to be
here but I know he's as
Representative Pettigrew said
he's presenting on another bill.
Representative madam chair a
Representative Chatfield us to
present this for for for him so
and and I am happy to do that
but with that I would I would go
back to Representative Crowder
first quest okay I'm since you
made that clear Representative
Pettigrew that you're presenting
that's fine Representative
Crowder
Did you want to add to that.
The madam chair I I was just
curious if Mr church could give
us a little bit of direction
your your comment caught me off
guard and in.
It I don't want to waste the
committee's time it is asking
bill is of no value
what is the right direction
forced to take.
Time did you want to address
that.
Madam chair passing which bill
Representative Crowder I'm.
Morial three
it is essentially madam chair
the the transportation
commission has the authority
you choose and dedicate roads
your passage of this bill would
be a memorial that would be
transmitted to the
transportation commission for
their deliberation process it
doesn't it doesn't guarantee
it'll pass the transportation
commission or not I have no idea
what their will is on this issue
but they do have the authority
for the state for naming and
dedicating roadways so
essentially our food you would
be just and endorsement for
their consideration are their
deliberation.
Thank you madam chair.
Search.
Yes thank you madam chair of
the.
Group that's going to present.
Can you said the name again and
and kind of give us a little bit
more information so there.
So they're going they're going
to make the presentation I've
provided them an opportunity to
do that because today is transit
equity day and so we're gonna
have they're going to share some
information about who they are.
But before we move forward to
that presentation I wanted to
just clarify with the folks on
committee that
that there's this memorial for
the naming of a road that we
don't have authority over so I'm
opening it up to committee on
how they would like to proceed
do they want to hear the bill
the memorial or should we just
proceed to the presentation.
okay the madam chair.
Madam chair I had if I may are
you Dr dedicated a regency in
New Mexico the process I did
what I did
I went to a the committee
regional Morial.
The committee gives a blessing
and then I and then it goes into
the district got commissioners
this is six commissioner in the
state they would have the final
say so I'm trying to make things
the battle but easier but that
was a process that I did and I
don't to be brave for bridges
now in this is a process I took
first to the committee with a
memorial then from there on
madam chair that the presented
to the hi would commission
district commissioners to the
whole state and they have the
final say so if you want to do
thank you madam chair.
Thank you bye chair and
it is on the agenda so we can
hear it and we will hear it we
were just under the impression
that the representative was not
going to be able to
it testify on it because he's on
and he's hearing another bill so
we've been have confirmation now
that Representative Pettigrew is
going to present on the bill so
we will move forward with that
before going on to the
presentation Representative Gary
did you have a question.
I was just going to say that I
would like to hear the bill yes
before we hear the presentation
thank you so Mr better
Representative Pettigrew since
you will be presenting on the on
the bill can you go ahead and
proceed.
Chair thank you very much
members of the committee the the
house memorial three in front of
you today is requested ability
to
Name portion frontage road along
interstate forty from on twenty
two can carry somewhere in that
area and and that's going to be
devised at some point time
should this continue all the way
through and in honor of the
hundred family this is a family
and and I can read the whole
thing but I'm relatively
confident everybody on this
committee has done that this is
a family that has been.
In New Mexico before New Mexico.
Existed was part of the
territory.
Members of this family have
supported war efforts for more
work to for and
The father a Houston hindering
provided pastoral leadership
services are required Bernalillo
county's.
This is done the significant
amount for.
Making Mexico part of New Mexico
through.
In the beginning during the
territory dates all the way
through its statehood and
continues our communities all
along.
With that been said and once
again I I don't want to do need
dishonor to the to the memorial
but also.
Want to want to go with the
basic assumption that the
majority of the members of read
this bill
this is this is something
extremely important to to the
community.
And
Mr Chaffin representative
chancellor's been asked by the
community to bring this for in
honor of this family so with
that I stand for any questions.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew we have Representative
Madrid.
Thank you madam chair I guess
the question I have is a in my
experience.
Legislation up to this point
madam chair whenever we're doing
an immoral to to a person it has
to be a person not to a family
only the premise on that is
affected Norman more would have
to coincide with somebody that
has passed
so I mean in his description
Representative.
I've heard you say family and
all the good things of families
done so that's my reservation
about this more right up on the
top is that it needs to be one
person and one person is no
longer existing when you say
family and all the on all
they've done madam chair person
that's like you know given an
ongoing legacy of living like to
see if you will so that's my
concern maybe
The representative of.
If you have comment open here
but that's just from my
experience in these years with
legislation and in particular
here
in our community thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Madam chair and and
Representative
I am unaware that that we had
had specific rules with respect
to memorials and that they have
to be specific to any family to
a specific person.
That is something that I would
have to carry to Representative
Chatfield and then bring back to
that in the and then also deal
with the
I guess go back to.
It takes that question too but
I'm happy to I'm happy to do a
deep dive into that verify the
the that that that is the
baseline rule in the and it is
written as such.
Thank you representative on next
we have Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair if if
all possible I'd like to ask
Miss cabinet secretary with
policy is on the specifically.
Thank you.
Madam chair yeah we do have a
policy that I'd be happy to
share with the committee but
basically we do take into
consideration any house
memorials in the resolutions
passed by counties it really is
up to this hi we commission the
the state transportation
commission we generally do not
name the person that is still
alive we're going to
some of this with the former
senator Pete though in a road
naming and so it's not that the
committee can consider or the
the transportation commission
can consider but that's
generally the rule in a
generally is assigned to a
person so those two are correct
so just wanted to share that
with the committee it is a
memorial and and you know you
can move forward as you wish but
ultimately it will be will be
decided at the transportation
commission level are not madam
chair transportation
commissioner for that district.
Sure where exactly is this in
what district Chattfield
district and be able to the
southeast corner of the state I
mean northeast corner yes so
that would be Committee district
four that would be commissioner
of Walter Adams who is the
chairman of the committee.
Okay the other question I had
madam chair as I know that to
it's not unusual for DOT to
have.
Signage in certain areas along
more there roadways recognizing
our special tribute to.
Two people and I'm wondering if
there is a problem with naming
the road after a family or
particularly because the people
are still living that there
could be some type of a highway
sign set up along the roadway
that Representative Chatfield is
asking for.
Madam chair
The question you know whether or
not we leave legally can do that
I'd have to check we don't
normally do that now the only
sign that we put up our in
memorial if someone had a a
crash there or they had a family
member who died in a crash there
we have done that before did
they issue I think with this
particular stretch of roadway it
is already been officially named
through the process okay what
Representative named what is the
current name there's like three
or four different names right
now so certainly this is
something that could be added to
that I can get those names for
you but it already is currently
named and so it's not vacant are
blank right now okay that's kind
of the problem we're having with
Sander Pinto and then the one
that he what his family wants
them to thirty currently named
but I mean we could work with
the family to figure something
out madam chair at I know this
is really important to folks and
municipalities I just want to
make sure that we're doing
things right and when we set a
precedent that we have to
understand this could happen in
the future some happy to work
with the family talk to them
figure out something but there
are there are some complicating
factors to to the request at
this point.
Okay I just wanted to find out
what the policy was on that I
have seen in memorial signs are
highway signs in certain areas
of the state but again it's
always folks passed and there's
some recognition given their
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I was
done.
Kind of go along this the same
direction that I Representative
Lundstrom but also in this this
memorial I'm in his name maybe
three or four people that have
passed away and so by namely it
by according to the father the
Lucy in New Britain would serve
the same purpose.
So just take that out of Family
and namely one individual is
services same purpose and so I
just want to make that comment
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Garrett did you
want to say anything.
Madam chair I I just want to
echo what Representative
Powdrell Culbert said at least
two of the three people have
passed away and and the one who
is a Vietnam veteran it's not
clear you know so we would have
to check that thank you madam
chairwoman.
Thank you representative
Representative better.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you each of brought forward some
and and Mr secretary.
You reach you brought forward
some some really good points and
and I do want to take this back
to Representative Chatfield
going to be able to go through
that
if I could please ask the
secretary to send me what.
What you have for your general
rules of funds so that I can
provide that to Mr chat
Representative Chatfield as well
I do know for based on my
conversations with
Representative Chatfield that
that the.
There the structural there are
portions of the structure of
that are named and he is
potentially pick out an area
near well one of the girls
towners of host.
C. K..
William saying that wrong but
and and is willing to work with
with
the transportation committee on
on exactly where that stretch
could be it is not currently are
adding.
And so with that
I I would prefer.
The committee give me role this
let me have that discussion get
the document from from secretary
Santa and then we can set up a
time where Representative
Chatfield finishes the The
presentation and has had a
chance to discuss the the issue
of family verses individual.
Great thank you so much
Representative Pettigrew yeah we
can certainly address that when
when he's ready and when folks
have been able to
to help and support to make sure
that that's the languages as
clean as possible so we can we
can certainly added to the
agenda later on.
Thank you very much madam chair.
President of federal so we are
down to about twenty minutes
which is around the time it's
going to take for our transit
equity day which is
of going to be presented here
I'm I'm glad that we have this
opportunity today is Rosa Parks
is birthday and so a lot of the
presentation there's transit
equity days based on this very
day and so I wanted to to
provide an opportunity for folks
to speak on that so whenever
you're ready please proceed.
Thank you so much thank you all
for having me I try not to take
too much of your time I want to
respect everybody's time today
so hi everyone my name is rich
or value with pronunciations are
completely fine with me but yes
I'm here today to talk to you
and share a little bit about
myself little bit about my story
and why transit important to me
and also around the work that
together for brothers is doing
so really quickly at an overview
of our organization together for
brothers believe that our young
men of color can and should be
leaders at all levels in our
community so I just want to make
that really clear we work with
and for young men of color that
means our organization is use in
farm top bottom bottom down
right all of that good stuff and
I do want to just really quickly
because we do do this for every
space that we are part of the
space that we selected and I do
just want to acknowledge the
land that we're on
right we know for most of us
were in Albuquerque Santa Fe
Arnor everybody's okay but I
know that for myself and for
most of us were in Albuquerque
and this issue will land.
Which includes right yes pueblos
the setting up of those and you
know I also included a lot of
other photos that fortunately no
longer exists today I'm so I did
want to just open up the space
with that
let me introduce myself I'm a
program coordinator with
together for brothers I've been
with together for brothers for
roughly I want to say for years
now five years yes five years I
started as a young person as a
as a youth participate in the
program throughout the years my
role has changed and involved
And I've also been very heavily
involved in our transit equity
work since the year I want to
say two thousand seventeen the
summer of two thousand seventeen
by one of the stories that I
wanted to share with you right
is that I
I've always been I've always
relied on public transportation
right so it's it's been a really
it's been really great to see
here in just here now
here you all you know do the
amazing work that you do but
I've always lived in the low
income right single parent
households and I've always
really relied on public
transportation since the age of
thirteen right to get to and
from school so transportation
has always really been a
challenge for me often times
having to sacrifice you know
time outdoors right to hang out
with my friends I need to be by
neighborhood I've had sacrifice
implement opportunities I'm even
there were there were even times
where you know out I had to miss
school or had to be really late
to school because I had to wait
for a ride if I ever get have or
lost my bus pass why didn't have
money to buy a bus pass that
month or that week right so
that's always been a challenge
so this work really resonates
with me and we're trying to
equity really resonates with me
right because I know that so
many of our young people and a
lot of the young men that I work
with are experiencing the same
situation
or have experience the same
situation right since we started
this work
unfortunately at the age of
eighteen and nineteen I did
start taking courses at CNM
which you know I'm sure we're
all aware that part of the
tuition includes a free bus pass
and that really allowed me right
to attend school beyond time and
also
Also finding keep a job for the
very first time at the age of
nineteen I believe
right employment in our
neighborhoods where very
you know available to young
people that's another
conversation so I I did have to
rely on you know getting myself
to the downtown area very often
and so that's kind of when I
realized
how important it is and how
impacts would is for young
people to be able to have that
access right access to
transportation
Specially in our low income
communities with that we can
move the slide over little bay
down
transit equity so I just wanted
to right this work has been
thrown around a lot
and you know one of the ways
that we at together for brothers
talk about ten to equity is just
to remind us right that what we
talk but we we were talking
about the people most impacted
right so in the transit equity
sense we're talking about those
who are Moores most transit
dependent right get the
transportation that they need.
And I look different for for a
lot of people in a lot of
different communities we know
that the people most impacted
are deftly young people right
who rely on on buses.
live with single single car
household some of some of our
young men don't even have cars
at home we know that that
includes
our families who don't have
vehicles at home we know that
includes our elderly communities
as well right so it just wanted
to remind is about what we mean
when we talk about transit
equity and if we can move the
slide over a little bit new we
go we're not gonna show the
video today but I do want to
encourage everyone your time off
today if you have like a couple
of minutes only five minutes
long you can go to PBS dot org
search of Rosa Parks is a really
great interview right and I do
want to remind us that I can't
speak for everyone and
like all the school districts
right but I know that when I
talked about we talked about
supports my at my school we
always for not to mention that
she was actually a community
organizer.
Right she was trained by that
NAACP the national association
of the advancement of colored
people and she was also trained
at the Highlander center right
in her actions at the Montgomery
vice we're very well planning
very intentional right it's a
really powerful story it's
really powerful you know Rosa
Parks birthday is today like we
mentioned so it's really
powerful for us to remind
ourselves that we need to be
very intentional when it comes
to our organizing in our social
justice work and now are trying
to equity work it is transit
equity day today so we're I'm
very excited to be here again
with you all just reminding us
at a faster on at February
fourth every year it's and it's
in a nation and a nation it's
it's
It's a day that celebrated
around
the different states and so it
is recognized not just in
Albuquerque but even outside of
Albuquerque and I want to talk a
little bit about some of the
work that together for brothers
has done in the last couple of
years there's a couple of photos
and that you can see it's a
little hard to see.
but we do want to mention right
for the last four three years
we've been organizing with young
men of color courts that have
been trying to dependent who
have you know shared experiences
knowledge and who are experts
right I'm on right the bison in
knowing how that system works
and so in the last couple years
we've been you know lifting up
those stories we've been sharing
the stories with decision makers
are we talk to our state
representatives and gone up to
that to Santa Fe and we've
actually talked to decision
makers there as well for transit
equity day in the past right we
know that this year was a little
different so we were able to do
that we had at we've been
advocating for free bus
ridership for young men young
men and young people right ages
eighteen and under.
We have also
with our friends in the city we
were also able to get more
resolution for transit equity
day in Albuquerque and we have
that strange at our director's
house somewhere
and so we've yeah we've been
we've been really grateful
to have you know having all the
voices of different voices from
all the young people that we
work with and very grateful for
all the work that you all do
When it comes to trying to
equity I know I'm running a
little bit of time here so we
move forward we also wanted to
recognize right that you for B.
is not the only organization
working towards transit equity
right we have organizations like
the chain breakers collective in
Santa Fe Dona ana community
United agency crusades
Silverstein bicycles in coffee
in Gallup and I'm sure other
organizations that are not being
mentioned here but I do want to
recognize all those great people
who have been doing this work
for even before.
I started my community
organizing as a young person
right and that it's really
important that we continue
having these conversations we
continue having community being
involved in these conversations
that's extremely important I
really appreciate that that
option is that has gone into the
conversation this morning right
I feel like more more more of us
need to be present and we need
to be here and listen to these
conversations making sure where
our voices are being heard and
lastly I also wanted to thank
read the department of
transportation because well all
the wonderful work that you do
but also right we're very we're
looking forward to address the
pain point to continuing to work
around pedestrian safety in
planning which has included
compensation right in resources
to have young men of color most
impacted to be part of part of
this and also be able to share
their stories and not be
overlooked
So yeah with that I kind of
wanted to wrap up the
presentation if you guys have
any questions for me or around
together for brothers or
organization I'm more than happy
to take questions thank you
thank you so much but okay and I
really appreciate you taking the
time and being patient with all
of us as we try to navigate all
of this and and of course handle
a lot of the the legislative
business so thank you so much
for that I want to open it up to
folks on the committee are there
any questions for baroque.
Me make sure I see everyone.
Great no no questions well one
thing that I did want to say
Brooke is one again I appreciate
you all participating on today
for me
transsexuals really really
excuse me important
I I I.
It's it's kind of I'm weird how
I ended up getting here to this
transportation committee because
I had absolutely no idea that
this would be my role in this
upcoming session Blake over the
course of the summer I was
really
not only because of my my my
riding my bike up to Santa Fe
and just being this Avid avid
cyclist but I've really seen my
bike as a tool to address a lot
of issues related to equity
around legislation both from a
transit perspective but also
just from a number of different
issues and I I started this ad
hoc transportation equity
committee which together for
brothers has been a part of and
we just been thinking about what
this work could look like not
necessarily just statewide but
in many of the communities where
we feel that there's really
opportunities for how we can
address transportation issues
that aren't necessarily center
just on personal vehicles but in
a and then and and a plethora of
other ways that New Mexico can
actually demonstrate some really
strong leadership and so I'm
really excited that I get to
play this role because I feel
like I can help amplify a lot of
the work that's happening with
many of these organizations that
are doing a lot of this
transportation equity work and
so but look I'm I'm thank you so
much for joining us today for
all of the efforts that you all
are making and and I know that a
lot of the issues that you all
deal with in Albuquerque are
very much different than what we
deal with here in Los crucis or
even in places that are much
more isolated in rural but very
much I think what's up at at the
center is that how do we not
only promote transportation
outside a personal vehicle use
in a way that is in I'm just
focused on people who can't who
have issues with the portability
or things like that that it
shouldn't be that stereo type
that it's only certain people
who who utilize public transit
and all of that.
At that this is actually
something we can all be part of
and
And and that you all are are
leading a lot of these
conversations is is really
exciting so thank you for
joining us.
All right well thank you all so
much for today we will be in
touch the for Tuesday I'm sure
and if there's any questions
between now and then on any of
the upcoming pieces of it of the
agenda including house bill
three please feel free to reach
out to Tom and I will certainly
be readily available to to help
out so with that we'll adjourn
and we'll talk to you all soon.
Thank you everybody.
